

GULF CRISIS
There were few dramatic new developments during October in the Gulf crisis as such, the continuing build-up of the United States-dominated military response taking place against a background of diplomatic activity, of which the most notable feature was an apparently unsuccessful Soviet attempt to find some basis for a peace initiative.
Attention was shifted for much of the month to consideration of the repercussions of the heightened Israeli-Palestinian conflict following the killing of 17 Arabs in Jerusalem on Oct. 8 [see pp. 37759-60 below].
Oil prices fluctuated significantly during October; having begun the month well below the Sept. 26 peak of US$40.30 for North Sea Brent crude, the price rose to $40.75 on Oct. 10.
By Oct. 24 it had fallen to $29.10, only to turn upwards again (following the apparent failure of the Soviet initiative) and reach $34.95 as of Nov.1.
Statements by US and UK leaders
The tone adopted by US President Bush in his speech to the UN General Assembly in New York on Oct. 1 indicated the desire for a peaceful resolution of both the Gulf crisis and the Arab-Israeli dispute.
Commentators noted similarities with French President Mitterrand's speech on Sept. 24 (regarded by the Iraqi regime as marking France out as more flexible than other Western powers — see p. 37696).
Subsequent comments during October, however, by Bush and US Secretary of State James Baker, and also by the United Kingdom Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd emphasized the growing likelihood of a Western military offensive unless Iraqi forces withdrew from Kuwait.
Bush told the General Assembly that an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait would open the way "for Iraq and Kuwait to settle their differences permanently, for the Gulf states to build new arrangements for stability, and for all the states and peoples of the region to settle the conflict that divides the Arabs from Israel" .
On Oct. 2 the US aircraft carrier Independence entered the Gulf, the first to do so for 16 years, in a move placing its aircraft within range of Kuwait and Iraq without refuelling.
Defence Secretary Dick Cheney left on Oct. 15 for a trip including London and Paris as well as a four-day visit to Moscow on Oct. 16-19.
Baker restated on Oct. 16 the US position that no settlement would be acceptable which involved any Iraqi material gain from its Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait.
This emphasis, repeated by UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher on Oct. 23 following a meeting in London with the Amir of Kuwait, was seen as an attempt to counteract the perception of a softening in the Saudi attitude [see below].
In late October US administration attitudes conveyed perceptibly growing impatience.
Bush repeated on Oct. 24 the comparison of Iraqi President Saddam Hussain with Hitler and denounced the "rape of Kuwait" and Iraqi "crimes against humanity" , while at a rally on Oct. 30 (campaigning in support of Republicans in the mid-term congressional elections on Nov. 6) he gave warnings of the possibility of a US military offensive, urging the US public to "stay together in support of our kids halfway around the world" .
Condemning the treatment of US hostages in Kuwait (an aspect of the crisis which Western leaders were generally at pains to insist would not determine their policy), he added: "And what am I going to do about it?
Let's just wait and see.
Because I have had it with that kind of treatment of Americans."
The Iraqi armed forces were placed on full alert on Oct. 30.
Meanwhile Hurd, who on Oct. 4 had sketched out the idea that an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait could be followed by a Middle East peace conference involving all five permanent members of the UN Security Council, switched the emphasis of UK public policy towards a more threatening posture on Oct. 14, asserting that Saddam Hussein's "only choice is whether he leaves of his own free will or at the point of a gun" .
This comment was made in Cairo at the beginning of a visit to the region which also involved tense discussions in Israel [see p. 37760].
After his return he made a statement to the UK House of Commons on Oct. 24, warning that the decision on the use of force was "not one which can be indefinitely shirked" if sanctions were proving ineffectual.
Kaifu's Middle East visit — Attempted legislation to allow use of Self-Defence Force personnel abroad
Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu began on Oct. 3 in Cairo a brief tour of the Gulf region.
In Amman on Oct. 4 he met not only King Hussain but also Iraqi First Deputy Premier Taha Yassin Ramadhan.
No major Western head of government had had such direct contact with an Iraqi leader since the crisis began on Aug. 2.
The principal matter discussed by Kaifu during his tour of the region was the apportionment of Japanese financial support to those states worst affected by the crisis, the scale of which was intended to demonstrate Japan's commitment to opposing the Iraqi action, even though the country was debarred by its Constitution from any overseas military involvement.
Following his return to Japan, Kaifu on Oct. 12 addressed the Japanese parliament at the beginning of a special 30-day session, called to discuss the issue of whether Japanese Self-Defence Force personnel could be sent as a "peace corps" of civilians and soldiers to participate in UN peacekeeping missions to the Gulf.
Such missions could offer "transportation, telecommunications, repairs and maintenance" ; they would not be involved, however, in the "use or threat of force" .
(The "United Nations Peace Co-operation Bill" was introduced on Oct. 16.)
Soviet diplomacy
President Gorbachev's special envoy Yevgeny Primakov visited Iraq twice in October, but suggestions that he might elicit a change in the Iraqi stance proved unfounded.
His first visit on Oct. 4-5, including talks with Saddam Hussain on Oct. 5, had been preceded by a stop in Amman on Oct. 3, where he met both King Hussain (reportedly proposing to the latter the convening of an Arab conference on the Gulf crisis), and the PLO leader Yassir Arafat (who, like Primakov, travelled on to Baghdad).
He then went to Rome, Paris, Washington (where he met Bush on Oct. 19) and London, indicating that there were new signs of Iraqi flexibility.
In Cairo on Oct. 24, he then went for one day to Damascus, meeting President Assad of Syria, and returned unexpectedly to Egypt on Oct. 26.
The UN Security Council delayed considering the resolution on the occupation of Kuwait [see box]to allow time for Primakov's diplomacy on a second visit to Baghdad.
However, after a further round of talks with Saddam Hussain on Oct. 28, he left for Moscow the following day, his only apparent success being the Iraqi agreement to allow the return in the coming weeks of some 1,000 Soviet nationals who had been working in Iraq.
Gorbachev himself, visiting France on Oct. 28-29 [see also p. 37789], renewed his appeal for an inter-Arab conference, although in Egypt President Mubarak made clear the view that there was currently no basis for such a meeting.
Asserting that "the military option is unacceptable" , and that Primakov's talks had suggested that "the position of Saddam Hussain is not the same as before" , Gorbachev nevertheless warned in Paris on Oct. 29: "If…
[Saddam Hussain]hopes to produce splits or cracks in the position of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, he is making a mistake."
Two days beforehand, on a Soviet initiative, the Security Council Military Staff Committee had its most senior-level meeting.
The Soviet Union had sent a memorandum on Oct. 11 to UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuellar, urging that this committee should meet at the level of chiefs of staff [see p. 37640 for its reactivation in August].
Release of French hostages — Heath mission — Other hostage developments
In moves explicitly intended to encourage a French diplomatic posture more flexible than that of the USA and the UK, the Iraqi authorities (i) released nine French hostages on Oct. 1; and (ii) approved on Oct. 23 the release of all remaining French nationals, 267 of whom arrived in Paris early on Oct. 30.
The seven-strong French diplomatic contingent left Kuwait at the same time, thus reducing the Western diplomatic corps there to two British and 10 US staff.
The French government welcomed the Iraqi "unilateral decision" of Oct. 23 (which took the form of the Iraqi parliament's approving Saddam Hussein's proposal).
It stressed, however, that no deal had been done, that the move would not divide the coalition ranged against Iraq, and that all remaining hostages should be released forthwith.
(The aircraft to Paris on Oct. 30 also carried four British nationals, nine Greeks, one Dutch and one Spanish national and two Filipinos.)
Mitterrand had visited the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia on Oct. 3-4, holding talks on Oct. 4 with King Fahd before travelling on to Yanbu to see French troops there; an announcement on Oct. 17 that the French contingent was to be supplemented by the dispatch of a further 500 troops would bring its total strength to 750 air and 5,700 ground troops.
The former UK Prime Minister Edward Heath, conducting a humanitarian mission for which he was much criticized at home on the grounds of the possible propaganda opportunities which it might afford to the Iraqi leadership, secured the release of some 40 British nationals who arrived at Gatwick airport early on Oct. 24 (two children, several women, and some of the men on the list of the elderly and sick which he had presented to Saddam Hussein at lengthy talks on Oct. 21).
Three UK members of parliament from the opposition Labour Party had visited Iraq the previous month in one of a number of other attempts by prominent Westerners, generally acting in an unofficial capacity, to persuade Iraq to release foreign nationals.
Austrian President Waldheim's visit in August had secured the release of some 80 Austrian nationals; other developments of this nature included the release of the last 82 of some 500 Brazilians, who arrived home from Baghdad on Oct. 8; the release in mid-October of small groups of Spaniards, Finns and Swedes, and a visit to Iraq by a delegation from the American-Iraqi Association, resulting in the release of 14 elderly or sick men of US nationality who flew out to Amman on Oct. 23.
(Earlier, on Oct. 10, a plane carrying 328 passengers mostly of US nationality, mainly women and children, had arrived in London en route for the USA on a US-organized evacuation flight; see p. 37697 for evacuation in September of other Western women and children.)
Suggestion of conciliation in statements by Saudi leaders
Statements by Saudi Defence Minister Prince Sultan ibn Abdel Aziz on Oct. 20, and by King Fahd on Oct. 23, caused some concern to the US government in particular because of the apparent suggestion that Iraq might be allowed to negotiate an advantageous realignment of its border with Kuwait if it were to abandon its occupation.
Prince Sultan attempted on Oct. 22 to clarify the impression that he had suggested territorial concessions, reaffirming Saudi Arabia's "full comitment to Arab and international resolutions" on the full and unconditional withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait and the reinstatement of the legitimate government there.
King Fahd's comments, made during a visit to Saudi Arabia by Mubarak, suggested that "if President Saddam were to reconsider the matter seriously he would find that it is in Iraq's interest, and in his interest personally, and in the interest of the Arab nation that he withdraw from Kuwait" , and that "if something wrong was done, we should not try to redress it by another wrong" .
Meeting in Kuwait of royal family and dissidents
More than 1,000 Kuwaitis, including members of the government-in-exile and prominent opposition figures led by Ahmed al-Khatib and the former parliamentary Speaker, Ahmed Abdul-Aziz al-Saadoun, gathered in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, on Oct. 13-15 to attend a "popular congress" .
Convened by the Crown Prince and Prime Minister, Shaikh Saad al- Abdullah as-Salim as-Sabah, and with the Amir, Shaikh Jabir al-Ahmad al-Jabir as-Sabah, as its joint president, the conference was the first of its kind since the Iraqi invasion.
Delegates concentrated on the need for national unity and the restoration of the 1962 constitution [see pp. 34767-68], based on an elected parliament with more substantial powers than those accorded to the reconstituted Council elected in June [see p.37549].
Shaikh Jabir called for a united front, adding that Iraq had sought wrongfully to exploit the differences arising from "the endeavours and efforts of some Kuwaiti activists to organise the Kuwaiti state" .
Shaikh Saad urged Kuwaitis to overcome their political differences and promised, in what was widely believed to be a reference to the restoration of the 1962 constitution, that "the people of Kuwait can only be rewarded for their trust and loyalty by further trust" .
During a series of pre-conference meetings between members of the government-in-exile and its critics, the government reportedly agreed to restore the original 1962 constitution in return for an undertaking by the opposition to affirm its loyalty to the ruling dynasty.
While the pro-democracy movement which crystallized during street protests in December 1989 and January 1990 [see pp.37428-29], was expected to press later for more extensive political reforms, its members pronounced themselves "satisfied" with the terms of the agreement.
Some government ministers maintained, however, that no new concessions had been made.
A communiqué stressed that there would be no bargaining over Kuwait's sovereignty.
It added that after liberation "the Kuwaiti people would be governed by" the legitimate regime which they chose and are satisfied with".
Reports continued to emerge sporadically from Kuwait confirming brutality by occupying Iraqi forces.
The human rights organization Amnesty International was quoted as condemning "widespread arrests, torture under interrogation, summary executions and mass extra-judicial killings" of Kuwaitis.
Amid discussion of a possible UN resolution to condemn Iraq for war crimes, Bush said on Oct. 16 that the Iraqi leadership would be called to account for what he described as its "unprecedented brutality" .
(The Iraqis had themselves declared on Sept. 24 that Bush was to be put on trial in mid-October for war crimes against Palestinians through US co-operation with the "Zionist entity" and for killings in Panama and Grenada.)
The eventual UN resolution passed on Oct. 29, however, made only a veiled reference to the war crimes issue, in calling for information on breaches of international law.
Its wording on financial compensation, moreover, fell well short of UK suggestions that frozen Iraqi assets could be used to compensate for loss or damage suffered by Kuwaitis (the Kuwaiti central bank governor having estimated on Oct. 17 that a restored Kuwaiti government would seek $12,000 million in compensation for looting, theft or damage).
UN Security Council Resolution
Resolution 674.
Oct. 29.
Passed 13-0 with Cuba and Yemen abstaining.
Condemned Iraqi occupation of Kuwait, hostage-taking and mistreatment of the Kuwaiti population.
Reminded Iraq that it would be liable for "restitution or financial compensation" .
Also invited members to collate "substantial information" on breaches of international law and warned that, in the event of continued Iraqi disregard of UN Security Council resolutions, further enforcement measures would be taken.
Dismissal of Iraqi Oil Minister
The Oil Minister, Issam Abdel Rahim al-Chalabi, was dismissed on Oct. 28.
His responsibilities were taken on, by the Industry and Military Industries Minister, Brig. -Gen.
Hussein Kamil.
Petrol rationing, announced by the Oil Ministry on Oct. 19 and effective Oct. 23, was lifted by President Saddam Hussein's order on the day of Al-Chalabi's dismissal.
Reports suggested that rationing had been necessitated by the effects of UN sanctions [see p.37639-40]which had depleted stocks of chemicals required to produce lubricants and refine petrol.
The official Iraqi News Agency (INA) said, however, that the Oil Ministry had "made miscalculations in the availability of the solutions used in the processing of oil" , and that supplies of the necessary additives were "enough for double the period estimated by the oil ministry" .
Intensified Israeli-Palestinian confrontation
The killing of 17 unarmed Arabs in Jerusalem by Israeli paramilitary police made Oct. 8 the bloodiest day of the three-year intifada.
The bloodshed had the effect of reviving the flagging intifada and also of highlighting in international terms the plight of the Palestinian people.
It thus fuelled the argument for a possible "linkage" between resolving the Palestinian issue and the Gulf crisis.
The feeling grew in many Arab states that international reaction to the Kuwaiti crisis was hypocritical, given that the West, and in particular the USA, had largely acquiesced for 23 years in Israel's occupation of Arab lands.
Haram al-Sharif massacre
The killings occurred in the Arab quarter of Jerusalem's Old City at the Haram al-Sharif or Temple Mount, sacred to Jews as the site of the Temple of Solomon, destroyed some 1900 years ago, and also currently accommodating the Dome of the Rock and the Al-Aqsa mosque, both sacred to Islam.
There had been press reports in early October that a group of fanatical Jewish extremists, the Temple Mount Faithful, planned to mark the Jewish festival of Succoth (Tabernacles) on Oct. 8 by attempting to lay a cornerstone for a new Temple.
Moslem leaders urged people to assemble on the site to prevent them.
The Jerusalem police force successfully applied on Oct. 7 for a Supreme Court order, which, however, received little publicity, restraining the Temple Mount Faithful from entering the site.
Accounts of what actually occurred during the morning of Oct. 8 were contradictory.
The Temple Mount Faithful were prevented from entering the site, but there was nevertheless unrest among the 3,000 or so Arabs congregated there.
Paramilitary border police patrolling the area fired tear gas into the crowds and stones were thrown in return; some stones were thrown at Jews worshipping at the Western — or "Wailing" — Wall situated at the foot of the Temple Mount.
As the situation worsened more border police entered the area and began firing live ammunition into the crowd.
According to the police 19 Arabs were killed, but hospital sources spoke of 21 deaths.
Towards the end of October Palestinian human rights groups revised the casualty figures to 17 dead and well over 100 injured.
The reaction to the shootings within Israel and the occupied territories was rapid.
Widespread curfews were imposed and Israeli security forces began arresting large numbers of Palestinians, including prominent leaders such as Faisal al-Husseini who was eventually released, uncharged, on Oct. 24.
At the same time, serious unrest erupted in the territories; three people were killed in rioting in the West Bank and Gaza Strip on Oct. 8.
Israeli Arabs also took to the streets, and riots were reported in Nazareth, Israel's largest Arab town.
Israeli reaction
Within hours of the killings Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir had accused Palestinians of provoking the police into the shootings by carrying out a planned attack on Jewish worshippers in an attempt to divert world attention from the Gulf crisis.
The Police Minister Ronni Milo claimed that the police had acted with "great restraint" and had only resorted to live fire when their lives were in "grave danger" .
On Oct. 10 the Israeli government launched its own inquiry into the shootings, headed by former Mossad chief Tzvi Zamir.
The inquiry report, published on Oct. 26, blamed Palestinians for planning a confrontation, and largely defended the use of live ammunition by the police, conceding only that the shooting was "unsupervised" .
Nevertheless, the report did criticize the police for not preventing the incident and in particular for not acting on a wide range of warnings that unrest had been planned.
The report was denounced by Palestinian leaders, but was formally accepted by the Israeli government on Oct. 28.
Arab reaction
The Israeli reaction contrasted sharply with the widespread international condemnation of the shootings, especially from Arab states.
Egypt and Saudi Arabia, which had supplied the main Arab components of the multinational anti-Iraqi forces congregated in the Saudi desert, both issued denunciations of the killings.
The PLO immediately called for a UN Security Council session to discuss "the Zionist crimes" and urged Pérez de Cuellar to intervene to protect the Palestinian people.
The PLO Central Council convened in Tunis on Oct. 11-12 and issued a statement calling on the UN Security Council (already in session on the issue — see below) to "move vigorously and promptly to contain the Israeli sequence of terror against our Palestinian people" .
The statement held the US administration "fully responsible" because of its "blatant bias towards Israel" .
The Council also called for an emergency Arab League meeting to discuss the killings.
The killings provided ammunition to Iraq in support of its contention that a solution to the Gulf crisis had to be linked to Israel's withdrawal from Arab lands.
Soon afterwards Saddam Hussein restated his Aug. 12 initiative, which proposed that all Middle Eastern occupation issues should be resolved according to one set of UN Security Council principles [see p. 37635].
Saddam also reiterated his threat to launch a direct military attack on Israel, announcing the existence of a new Iraqi missile, the al-Hijara ( "stone" ), which could reach "the target of evil, when the day of reckoning comes, from any place on Iraqi soil" .
US and international reaction — Unanimous approval of UN Security Council resolution
The UN Security Council convened on Oct. 8 to discuss the shootings and the next day the USA proposed a draft resolution condemning the Israeli action and welcoming a decision taken by Pérez de Cuellar to send an investigative mission to Jerusalem.
The US resolution was not supported by the PLO which had pressed for the dispatch of a mission reporting directly to the Security Council (i.e. not to the UN Secretary-General).
The USA had been under great pressure not to veto the sending of a UN mission, as it had done in May following the Rishon Le Zion massacre of Palestinian labourers [see p. 37443].
It was intimated that future UN Security Council unanimity over action against Iraq would be in peril if the USA was seen to be protecting Israel.
The Soviet Union, for example, had called on the Security Council on Oct. 9 to "display the same unanimity and consistence in the approach to the situation on the occupied territories as was effectively demonstrated by the Security Council with respect to Iraqi aggression against Kuwait" .
Eventually, on Oct. 12, the Security Council unanimously adopted Resolution 672, which essentially followed the US draft, condemned the shootings and welcomed Pérez de Cuellar's decision to send a mission to the area to "recommend ways and means of ensuring the safety and protection of the Palestinian civilians under Israeli occupation" .
Israeli refusal to co-operate with UN mission — Hurd visit to Israel
The Israeli Cabinet met on Oct. 14 to discuss Resolution 672 and unanimously voted not to co-operate with Pérez de Cuellar's mission.
In a statement issued after the meeting the resolution was described as "totally unacceptable" on the grounds that it failed to condemn Palestinian violence and questioned Israel's sovereignty over Jerusalem.
Foreign Minister David Levy stated after the meeting that the USA had been "held captive by the very coalition it [had]formed against Saddam Hussein" .
As part of the international effort to persuade Israel to allow the entry of the UN mission, Hurd visited Israel on Oct. 15-17.
However, despite meetings with Levy and Shamir, he failed to persuade the Israelis to change their policy.
His visit ended in controversy when a group of senior Palestinians cancelled a meeting with Hurd on Oct. 17, after Israeli journalists had reported him as giving private assurances to Israeli politicians that he did not favour the creation of a Palestinian state.
The British consul in Israel maintained that Hurd's statements to the politicians had been misunderstood, that the UK remained committed to Palestinian self-determination, and that the question of whether or not this led to an independent state was a Palestinian issue.
Pérez de Cuellar informed the Security Council on Oct. 19 that he would be unable to send a commission to Jerusalem without the co-operation of the Israeli government.
The UN Security Council unanimously reiterated Resolution 672 on Oct. 24.
However, Israel again refused to co-operate with the commission.
Palestinian attack on Israelis in West Jerusalem
Amr Sa'id Salah Abu Sirhan, a Palestinian labourer, stabbed three Israelis to death in West Jerusalem on Oct. 21.
Sirhan was immediately arrested, and apparently confessed to his interrogators that he had been acting on his own to avenge the Haram al-Sharif massacre.
Following the killings Israeli mobs took to the streets of Jerusalem where they attacked Arab workers and cars.
The next day clashes broke out in the occupied territories and Arab workers were prevented from entering Jerusalem.
The unrest continued on Oct. 23, with numerous random attacks on Israelis and Palestinians.
That day Moshe Arens, the Defence Minister, ordered the whole of the occupied territories to be sealed off, effectively preventing over 100,000 Palestinians from gaining access to their jobs.
Access to Israel from the occupied territories was re-opened on Oct. 28, but when Arabs returned to their jobs many found that they had been dismissed.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Unification
On Oct. 3 the German Democratic Republic (GDR or East Germany) ceased to exist when the five Länder (states) which had been re-established on its territory in July 1990 [see p. 37661]became part of the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG, hitherto referred to as West Germany).
This unification of Germany took place as provided for under Article 23 of the FRG Basic Law or constitution and in the state treaty on unification signed on Aug. 31, 1990 [see pp. 37661; 37832-33].
Simultaneously a four-power declaration signed on Oct. 1, 1990, in New York by France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States conferred full sovereignty on the new unified Germany (pending formal ratification of the Treaty on the Final Settlement with respect to Germany signed on Sept. 12 — see pp. 37717-18; 37834).
At midnight on Oct. 2-3 the FRG flag was raised at a ceremony held outside the Reichstag (the former German parliament) in Berlin.
Helmut Kohl, the Federal Chancellor, described the day as "one of the happiest moments of my life" and declared that "Germany is our fatherland, the united Europe our future" .
Lothar de Maizière, the outgoing East German Prime Minister, stated: "We are one people, we become one state.
It is an hour of great joy.
It is the end of some illusions.
It is a farewell without tears."
Peaceful celebrations followed on the streets of Berlin and in many other German cities and towns.
There were some counter-demonstrations, however, notably in Berlin, where up to 10,000 people protested against unification and 150-250 anarchists were reportedly arrested.
No service was held at the Nikolai Kirche in Leipzig, where the city's massive weekly demonstrations had started in the autumn of 1989, and instead a notice was pinned up outside the church saying: "With 2,000,000 unemployed we see little cause for celebrating" .
(As announced shortly after unification, unemployment at end-September stood at 444,825 or 5 per cent of the workforce, compared with 272,000 in July.
A further 1,770,000 were on short-time work, i.e. in most cases not working.)
Mikhail Gorbachev, the Soviet President, said that unification "occurs at the watershed of two epochs" .
A joint European Community statement described unification as heralding "a new age for Germany and all of Europe" .
It continued: "A people which has so enriched our common civilization is recovering its rightful place in Europe and in the world." 
Krzystof Skubiszewski, the Polish Foreign Minister, declared: "Unification of Germany will become, we hope, a powerful factor of European stability and unification." 
In Israel, however, a statement made during a ceremony at the Yad Vashem national shrine to Jewish victims of the Nazi holocaust declared: "We are filled with deep anxiety since it was a united Germany, under the Nazi rule, which brought upon the Jewish people the most horrendous tragedy of this generation." 
Dissolution of old order
On Oct. 2 the Volkskammer (unicameral GDR parliament) had held its final session.
On the same day a ceremony was held in Berlin at which the three Western generals at the Allied Kommandatura (the Soviet union having withdrawn from the four-power control commission in 1948) relinquished their responsibility for the city, while the four powers held a joint ceremony at the Glienecke Bridge between East and West Berlin.
The East German National People's Army (NVA) was dissolved on Oct. 3.
Of the remaining 90,000 soldiers in the NVA some 50,000 would join the Bundeswehr of the FRG (the reduction reflecting Germany's commitment to reduce its overall troop numbers to 370,000 — see pp. 37659; 37829).
A new grouping within the Bundeswehr, the Bundeswehr (Ost), was established, commanded by Lt.-Gen.
Jörg Schönbohm.
Merger of Christian Democrat parties
On Oct. 1 the East and West German Christian Democratic Union (CDU) parties merged at a congress in Hamburg.
Kohl was elected chair by 98.5 per cent of the vote and de Maizière deputy chair by 97.4 per cent of the vote.
Volker Rühe was re-elected general secretary [for his election in September 1989 see p. 36902]and an enlarged 10-member presidium was elected, including three GDR politicians.
First session of new Bundestag
On Oct. 4 the first session of the enlarged (from 519 to 663 members) Bundestag (lower house of federal parliament) was held in the Reichstag building.
Existing members New members Governing coalition Christian Democratic Union (CDU) 185 63 Christian Social Union (CSU) 49 German Social Union (DSU)— 8 Free Democratic Party (FDP) 48 9 Opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD) 193 33 Greens/Alliance 90 42 7 Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS)— 24 Other* 2 0 *Former Green members who did not now belong to any group.
Enlarged Bundestag
At the session five new members of the Cabinet were sworn in as Ministers without portfolio.
They were de Maizière, Sabine Bergmann-Pohl, erstwhile (CDU) president of the Volkskammer and acting East German head of state, Günther Krause, also of the CDU, who had been de Maizière's state secretary and a key negotiator of the terms of unification, Rainer Ortleb, vice-president of the unified FDP, and Hansjoachim Walther of the DSU.
External aspects of unification
The Treaty on the Final Settlement with respect to Germany covering the external aspects of unification was ratified by the new Bundestag on Oct. 5 and by the Bundesrat (upper house of German parliament) on Oct. 8.
The US Senate also approved the treaty on Oct. 10 when a motion was passed that the ratification should not be construed as tacit US acceptance of the Soviet annexation of the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
Two of the four German-Soviet agreements initialled on Sept. 13 [see p. 37718]were signed during October.
On Oct. 9 the agreement on the financial arrangements for the stationing and until their final withdrawal by December 1994 of Soviet troops in Germany was signed.
The Treaty on the Conditions of the Limited Stay and Procedures for the Planned Withdrawal of Soviet Troops from the Federal Republic of Germany was signed on Oct. 12.
Land elections
Elections were held on Oct. 14 in the five recreated eastern Länder.
The CDU won control of four Land parliaments — Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt and Thuringia.
Only in Brandenburg did the SPD become the largest party.
Many of the campaigns were dominated by politicians from West Germany, including, in two out of five cases, the CDU and SPD candidates themselves.
As compared with regional showings in the GDR general election on March 13, 1990 [see pp. 37300-03], the CDU share of the vote overall went up, due to an increase of over 10 per cent in support in Saxony (where support for the DSU, however, dropped by a corresponding amount).
The SPD polled an average of 26.64 per cent(21.88 per cent in March 1990), but apparently only made real inroads on CDU support in Brandenburg, with the respected East Berlin lay Protestant leader and lawyer Manfred Stolpe heading its campaign against the CDU's Peter-Michael Diestel (who had been criticized for his handling of the dissolution of the Stasi secret police — see p. 37828).
The PDS campaigned jointly with a Left List (Linke Liste) in Brandenburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Saxony and Thuringia, finishing third in each case, and came fourth in Saxony-Anhalt, where the FDP recorded its best result.
The Greens/Alliance 90 won representation in every Land except Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania where the two parties had not presented a joint list.
The DSU made a poor showing throughout, polling between 3.58 per cent(Saxony) and 0,8 per cent (Mecklenburg).
The turnout averaged 68.77 per cent.
In the tables figures for each of the five Länder parties polling less than 1 per cent of the vote are incorporated into the "Others" figure.
Figures are provisional official final results.
(Elections in Berlin, which was not part of Brandenburg, would be held on Dec. 2, 1990.)
SPD 38.3 36 CDU 29.4 27 PDS 13.4 13 FDP 6.63 6 Alliance 90 6.4 6 Greens 2.84 0 Republicans 1.15 0 Others 1.88 0 Minister President: Manfred Stolpe (SPD).
Land government: SPD-FDP-Alliance 90.
CDU 38.3 29 SPD 27.0 21 PDS 15.7 12 FDP 5.5 4 Greens 4.2 0 New Forum 2.9 0 Alliance 90 2.2 0 CSU* 1.1 0 Others 3.1 0 *Christian Social Union, which before unification stood only in Bavaria.
Minister President: Alfred Gomolka (CDU scientist from Greifswald).
Land government: CDU-FDP coalition depending on support of independent deputy Wolfgang Schulz, who originally stood as an SPD candidate but then as an independent because of alleged Stasi connections.
CDU 53.8 92 SPD 19.09 32 PDS 10.22 17 Alliance 90/Greens 5.6 10 FDP 5.26 9 DSU 3.58 0 Others 2.45 0 Minister President: Kurt Biedenkopf (FRG CDU general secretary in 1973-77).
Land government: CDU.
CDU 38.99 48 SPD 26.0 27 FDP 13.51 14 PDS 11.98 12 Greens/New Forum 5.29 5 DSU 1.71 0 Democratic Women's Federation (Demokratischer Frauenbund) 1.11 0 Others 1.41 0 Minister President: Gerd Gies (veterinary surgeon from GDR who became Land CDU leader in February 1990).
Land government: CDU-FDP coalition.
CDU 45.4 44 SPD 22.8 21 PDS 9.7 9 FDP 9.3 9 Greens/New Forum/Democracy Now 6.5 6 DSU 3.3 0 Others 3.0 0 Minister President: Josef Duchac (GDR industrial and chemicals engineer and member of the GDR CDU since 1957).
Land government: CDU-FDP coalition.
Brandenburg Percentage of vote Seats
Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Percentage of vote Seats
Saxony Percentage of vote Seats
Saxony-Anhalt Percentage of vote Seats
Thuringia Percentage of vote Seats
Elections in Bavaria
In the Land elections in Bavaria on Oct. 14, the first since the death on Oct. 3, 1988, of the CSU's charismatic leader Franz-Josef Strauss [see p. 36496], the CSU maintained its absolute majority.
The SPD's position was further weakened while the Republicans managed to improve their position despite leadership problems in mid-1990 [see p. 37676].
[For October 1986 Land election see p. 34828.]1990 1986 1990 1986 CSU 127 128 54.9 55.8 SPD 58 61 26.0 27.5 Greens 12 15 6.4 7.5 FDP 7 0 5.2 3.8 Republicans 0 0 4.9 3.0 Others* 0 0 2.6 2.4 *Included in 1990 the Ecological Democratic Party (Ökologisch-Demokratische Partei)— 1.7 per cent; the Bavaria Party (Bayernpartei)— 0.8 per cent ; Christian League (Christliche Liga)— 0.1 per cent .
Results in Bavaria Seats Percentage of vote
As a result of these Land elections, the federal CDU-CSU-FDP coalition in the Bundesrat regained its majority (which it had lost to the SPD after Land elections in May 1990 — see p. 37467), with 35 seats out of the new total of 68.
Attack on Interior Minister
On Oct. 12 Interior Minister Wolfgang Schäuble, a key architect of the unification treaty and close confidant of Kohl, was shot twice and seriously wounded after a political rally in the town of Oppenau in Baden-Württemberg.
Dieter Kaufmann, 37, a drug addict with a prison record who was reportedly undergoing treatment for schizophrenia, was arrested at the scene although two others ran away.
Schäuble was released from hospital on Oct. 31 after two operations to remove a bullet lodged near his spine.
It was not clear whether he would fully regain the use of his legs.
[For April 1990 attempted stabbing of Oskar Lafontaine, the SPD candidate for Chancellor see p. 37388.]
ASIA-PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
PPP election defeat
Elections to the national and provincial assemblies, held on Oct. 24 and 27, resulted in a massive electoral defeat for the Pakistan People's Party (PPP).
Official estimates put the turnout at 47.7 per cent of the electorate (5 percentage points higher than for the 1988 elections — see pp. 36347-48), but independent observers claimed that the turnout was unusually low, with reports of as little as 10 per cent in some rural areas.
Despite the deployment of 100,000 paramilitary troops and police, to forestall what Army Chief of Staff General Mirza Aslam Beg had claimed on Oct.1 was "an extremely dangerous" plot to disrupt the elections, 39 people were reported killed in separate incidents during the two days of polling.
The 217-seat National Assembly comprised 207 Moslem seats and 10 reserved for non-Moslems.
The PPP won 45 of the Moslem seats (93 in 1988), while its main rival, the Islamic Democratic Alliance (IDA) led by Mian Nawaz Sharif, won 105, the Mohajir Qaumi Movement (MQM) won 15, the Awami National Party (ANP) six, the Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam (JUI) six, the Jamhoori Watan Party (JWP) two, other parties six, and independents 21.
Polling for one Moslem seat was postponed after a candidate was shot dead before the vote.
Results were still awaited for the 10 non-Moslem seats.
Preliminary results for elections to a total of 483 seats in the four provincial assemblies were announced on Oct. 29.
In Punjab the PPP won only 10 out 240 seats, while the IDA won 228.
In Sind, traditionally regarded as its stronghold, the PPP won 43 out of 100 seats while its chief opponent, the MQM, won 47.
Results for the North West Frontier Province (NWFP) and Baluchistan had not been finalized, but it was expected that the IDA would be in a position to form coalition governments in both provinces.
Allegations of vote-rigging — Reports by independent observers
Hours after the polls closed the former Prime Minister, Benazir Bhutto, accused the interim government of having "stolen" the elections by widespread vote-rigging.
Bhutto, who lost one of the seats she was contesting in the north-western city of Peshawar, alleged on Oct. 25 that there had been "massive fraud across the country" .
Among those she held responsible for her party's defeat was the President, Ghulam Ishaq Khan who, she claimed, had "wanted to keep the PPP out" .
The exchanges between Bhutto and Ishaq Khan had grown sharper in the few last days of the electoral campaign.
On Oct. 3, Bhutto told a press conference in Islamabad that if she was returned to power, she would use constitutional and political means to force the President to resign.
On Oct. 9, shortly after appearing before a special tribunal [see below], she accused him of "naked aggression" against the judiciary, and added that she regarded him as her main opponent.
Earlier that week, he had attacked the PPP for its "fascist tendencies" .
In a speech broadcast on television on Oct. 23, shortly before polls opened, he called on voters to refrain from voting for parties not committed to Islamic values — a suggestion taken to be directed against the PPP.
On Oct. 22, the President had promulgated an order banning individual MPs from defecting to other parties — a move interpreted as designed to hamper a post-election attempt by Bhutto to form a coalition government.
On Oct. 26 a 40 member-international observer group from the Washington-based National Democratic Institute (NDI) headed by a former Turkish Foreign Minister, Vahit Halefoglu, said that it had found no evidence to substantiate Bhutto's allegations of large-scale electoral fraud.
On Oct. 30, on the other hand, a report by observers from the Paris-based International League of Human Rights claimed that "an extremely sophisticated method of fraud" had been partly responsible for the IDA getting twice as many National Assembly seats as the PPP with virtually the same share of the popular vote.
The NDI observer group, claiming that the elections were "generally open, orderly and well-administered" , had nevertheless pointed out that "the caretaker government's use of the perquisites of incumbency" had seemed "to have given an advantage to one of the contesting parties" — presumed to be a reference to the IDA.
During the election campaign in September, the PPP had objected to government measures such as a grant of Rs6,000,000 (US$276,250) to each of the IDA candidates in Punjab for development and welfare work in their constituencies.
Selection of Prime Minister-elect
On Nov. 1 the IDA, as the party with the greatest number of seats in the National Assembly, unanimously endorsed Sharif as Prime Minister, the first Punjabi to hold this office.
In a statement Sharif said that he would work for "clean and undiluted democracy" and added that although he had "no control" over the cases already filed against Bhutto, he "would not initiate any new cases" .
Sharif, a former protegé of President Zia ul-Haq and Chief Minister of Punjab until the Aug. 6 dissolution order [see pp. 37652-53], was (contrary to expectations) not challenged for the post of Prime Minister either by Mohammad Khan Junejo (Prime Minister from 1985-88) or by the interim Prime Minister, Ghulam Mustapha Jatoi [see p. 37652].
Sharif's candidacy was reported to have received strong backing from some sections of the army, including nine corps commanders, among them Gen. Hamid Gul, known for his links to the fundamentalist religious party, the Jamaat-i-Islami, which was also one of Sharif's most committed allies.
It was suggested that other generals, most notably, the Army Chief of Staff, Gen. Mirza Aslam Beg, had favoured Jatoi, a Sindhi, as Prime Minister "in the interests of national unity" .
Corruption charges against Bhutto, her husband, and former ministers
On Oct. 23 a case filed in Lahore charged Bhutto with having made up to 10,000 illegal government appointments during her 20 months in office.
It brought to seven the total number of charges filed against her.
Two charges filed in Lahore on Oct. 17 had related to the misuse of secret service funds and the use of the Pakistan Air Force and Pakistan International Airlines aircraft to transport National Assembly members "in an unauthorised manner" in the period preceding a no confidence vote against her government on Nov. 1, 1989 [see p. 37043].
Four other cases, brought on Sept. 10 and 12, involved the improper grant of a contract to oversee a power scheme, the export of Pakistani cotton at below market rates, the sale of property in Islamabad worth £150,000,000 for a mere £500,000 to a foreign company managed by associates of her husband, Asif Ali Zardari, and the improper granting of permits to a close relation and to a friend enabling them to distribute liquified gas.
All the cases were filed in one of the 11 special courts empowered to try politicians and bar them from politics for up to seven years.
Responding to some of the charges on Sept. 10, Bhutto claimed that she was "honest" and dismissed the allegations against her as "an act of desperation" on the part of the President.
She said that she would not appear before specially constituted courts, but was nevertheless present for a hearing before a tribunal in Karachi on Sept. 31, which granted her exemption from future court appearances until after the elections.
On Oct. 9 a special court in Lahore adjourned a hearing against her, at which she had again been present, reportedly to avoid making a ruling before the Oct. 24 elections.
On Oct. 11 Bhutto's husband, Asif Ali Zardari, was arrested on charges of kidnapping, extortion and loan fraud.
He was released briefly on Nov. 2 to be sworn in as MP, having won election in a Karachi constituency.
The first cases heard by the special courts had been on Sept. 6, involving charges of financial irregularities against three former ministers, Jehangir Badar (whose case was dismissed on Sept. 12 on grounds of insufficient evidence), Khwaja Ahmed Tariq Rahim, and Ahmed Khan Maneka.
Another former minister, Faisal Saleh Hayat, was charged on Oct. 21 and 23 with fraudulently obtaining bank loans and misdirecting public funds.
On Oct. 1 five election candidates from Sind and a former MP, Qurban Ali Shah, all members of the PPP, were arrested on charges of printing counterfeit notes.
On Oct. 5 it was reported that a former Minister of State, Ghulam Akbar Lasi, had been given a one-year prison sentence for overspending during the 1988 election campaign.
Court rulings on dismissal of Bhutto government
On Oct. 19 the Sind High Court ruled that the President's decision to dismiss the Bhutto government on Aug. 6 had been constitutionally valid.
In its ruling on Oct. 14 the Lahore High Court had also unanimously upheld the Aug. 6 order as validly passed.
On Sept 26, a High Court in Peshawar had declared illegal the dismissal of the provincial government of the North West Frontier Province (NWFP).
This judgment, implicitly criticizing the Aug. 6 order, found that whereas the President had allowed the Punjab and Baluchistan assemblies (controlled by opponents of the PPP) to dissolve themselves, those of Sind and the NWFP (both dominated by the PPP) were summarily dismissed [see p. 37652].
A stay order issued by the Supreme Court after the ruling forbade the NWFP assembly from convening before the government's appeal was heard.
Suspension of US aid
On Oct. 1 the United States cut off economic and military aid, worth between US$564 million and $578 million in 1991, following renewed fears that Pakistan had developed a nuclear weapon.
The decision came after Congress failed to receive a presidential certification testifying that Pakistan's nuclear programme was being designed exclusively for peaceful purposes.
Under the 1985 Pressler Amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act, US aid to Pakistan was dependent on the President certifying that Pakistan did not possess a "nuclear explosive device" .
Although both the Reagan and the Bush administrations had previously waived this provision, it was expected that senior Democratic senators would oppose another suspension of the certification requirement.
On Oct. 9 the US Secretary of State, James Baker, informed Pakistan's Foreign Minister, Sahibzada Yaqub Khan, that further aid would be impossible unless convincing new evidence was provided that no "nuclear device" existed.
The caretaker Prime Minister, Jatoi, said on Oct. 8 that he had given Bush written assurances that "Pakistan had no intention of producing nuclear weapons" .
On Oct. 10 documents leaked to the Washington Post revealed that Pakistan had sought to obtain through its embassy in France and intermediaries in Canada and Switzerland high temperature furnaces used for the manufacture of nuclear weapons.
A Foreign Office spokesman denied the reports as "baseless and mischievous" .
Controversy surrounding US assistance was heightened on Oct. 29 after Interior Minister Zahid Sarfraz suggested that Pakistan would stop paying interest on US loans if the US failed to resume economic and military aid.
On Oct. 30 the Finance Minister, Sartaj Aziz, stressed that "there is no question of Pakistan…not honouring its international financial obligations" .
Relations had deteriorated in September following reports of a speech on Sept. 11 by the US ambassador, Robert Oakley, to the Asia Society in Washington, in which Oakley had suggested that governments between 1985 and 1988 be subjected to the same process of "accountability" as that applied to members of Benazir Bhutto's 1988-90 government.
On Sept. 15 the Pakistani Foreign Office condemned Oakley's remarks as "an unwarranted interference in Pakistan's internal political process" , while Sarfraz demanded that the ambassador be recalled.
Relations were strained further after reports on Oct. 4 that US Congressmen, led by a Democratic senator, Stephen Solarz, had called for US aid to be suspended unless the PPP was allowed to contest the elections.
A letter written to Bush in early October by a group of 53 US senators, urging him to suspend economic assistance until the restoration of representative government in Pakistan, led an official Pakistani government spokesman on Oct. 22 to describe the senators as "a group opposed to the national interests of Pakistan" .
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Lifting of state of emergency in Natal
President F. W. de Klerk on Oct. 18 announced the lifting of the state of emergency in Natal, declaring that conditions in the troubled province had "sufficiently stabilized" .
Thus were removed the last measures remaining of the state of emergency first imposed in June 1986 and partially lifted in June 1990 [see pp. 34663; 37522].
De Klerk's Oct. 18 statement was overshadowed by an upsurge of violent protest as 13 town councils in the Transvaal, Orange Free State and eastern Cape cut off essential services to black townships ostensibly because of unpaid bills.
The unrest particularly affected industrial areas of the Transvaal, and a night-time curfew was imposed in Toekomsrus (near Randfontein).
The timing of the cuts closely corresponded with the formal repeal of the Separate Amenities Act on Oct. 15 [see p. 37567].
Some conservative councils were reportedly attempting to circumvent the non-racial regulations by charging high entrance fees for facilities including libraries and swimming pools, or by declaring township dwellers to be non-residents and therefore ineligible.
The government had earlier made known its intention to repeal in the course of 1991 the 1913 and 1936 Land Acts which reserved more than 80 per cent of South Africa's land for whites.
ANC-government meeting on violence — Indemnity allowing return of exiles
African National Congress (ANC) and government delegations, including respectively Nelson Mandela, the ANC deputy president, and de Klerk, met on Oct. 8 to discuss continuing violence which had particularly affected the Transvaal in recent weeks.
Some 800 people had died since August in this violence, involving clashes particularly in workers' hostels between mainly Xhosa-speaking pro-ANC workers and the almost exclusively Zulu-based Inkatha movement (now the Inkatha Freedom Party) led by Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi.
Overall, operation "Iron Fist" , which had begun in September [see p. 37698], was considered to have been successful in reducing violence.
The curfew was lifted in Soweto on Oct. 5.
A joint communiqué after the Oct. 8 meeting reported only that "note was taken of the different current perceptions concerning the causes and handling of this violence" , adding that "both sides reaffirmed the need to keep the negotiation process on course" .
The ANC, however, released on Oct. 11 its own separate version of the discussions at the meeting, suggesting that tensions between the two sides remained, particularly over the level of violence and over alleged "double standards" in the government's treatment of ANC activists and that of members of the far right.
Progress was made, however, on the question of indemnity from prosecution for those convicted or charged with "political offences" ; the principle, but not the detail of such indemnity had been agreed in the course of previous ANC-government talks.
De Klerk announced that the granting of indemnity would be discretionary, and would apply only to "political offences" committed before noon on Oct. 8, neither would any pending or current legal process be suspended by the announcement.
Nonetheless this was expected to facilitate the readmission of up to 20,000 exiled members of the ANC and other groups.
Their return was a precondition of the anticipated full-scale constitutional negotiations.
The ANC subsequently announced the postponement until June 1991 of a national congress initially planned for December, when a new leadership was to have been elected, on the grounds that delays in agreeing the conditions for the return of the exiles meant that a large proportion of ANC membership would still be out of the country at that time.
The December meeting would now take the form of a consultative congress.
The freeing of "political" prisoners continued with the release on Oct 10 of a further 21 people, the majority of whom were ANC members, bringing to 60 the total released since August.
ANC national executive member Mac Maharaj, whose detention in July had strained ANC-government relations, was charged on Oct. 29 along with eight others with planning to overthrow the government [see p. 37601].
Proposed ANC-Inkatha meeting envisaged
The ANC announced on Oct. 22 that a high-level meeting had been arranged with the leadership of Inkatha on an unspecified date.
The ANC had previously resisted calls for such a meeting.
Buthelezi, as Chief Minister of KwaZulu homeland, had refused an invitation to attend an Oct. 5 meeting organized by the ANC with five other homeland leaders on ways of ending the violence, for which elements of both rival organizations were held responsible.
Buthelezi had repeatedly insisted on a meeting with Mandela on an equal footing and in his capacity as head of Inkatha.
Participants at the Oct. 5 meeting agreed that the violence did not originate in tribal conflict between Xhosa and Zulu, as had been widely reported, but was "orchestrated by certain faceless forces" (later named by Mandela as state security organs, specifically the National Intelligence Service and the Civil Co-operation Bureau).
Sixteen people were killed by unidentified gunmen in apparent reprisal attacks in Soweto and nearby townships on Oct. 28 after an Inkatha supporter was killed by a mob.
The killings followed a rally to relaunch the ANC Youth League and a protest rally in Johannesburg by Inkatha supporters.
Transvaal NP congress
The opening of the ruling National Party (NP) to all races became official policy with the unanimous adoption of the proposal by the Transvaal provincial party congress on Oct. 19.
A recruitment drive amongst blacks was however considered unlikely.
De Klerk announced at the congress that the minority white population would be consulted by referendum on a new constitution once reforms had been negotiated.
Death of PAC leader
Zephania Mothopeng, the leader of the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), died of cancer-related pneumonia on Oct. 23.
A militant who believed that South Africa, and indeed the continent of Africa, belonged to the black population, he was instrumental in founding the PAC in 1959.
He was imprisoned three times for his activities, serving 12 years of a 15-year sentence on terrorism charges before being released in November 1988 on health grounds [see p. 36913]; he was elected PAC president in 1986 while a prisoner [see p. 35365].
The PAC had been unbanned in February [see p. 37232].
Mothopeng argued that only armed force could end minority rule in South Africa and condemned the ANC for entering into exploratory talks with a regime which the PAC refused to recognize.
His death came at a time when the movement was split over whether to join in the negotiations or to maintain its principles and risk being marginalized.
Foreign visits by Mandela and de Klerk
Mandela undertook in October a six-country tour of Asia, including India, Indonesia and Japan, one of the primary aims of which was fund-raising.
De Klerk held talks with United Kingdom Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher on Oct. 14.
On Oct. 23-24 he visited the Netherlands, the EC's strongest opponent of apartheid; this was the first visit by a South African head of state to the Netherlands since 1948.
Here he reiterated pledges to remove all remaining apartheid legislation and to release all political prisoners by April 1991, declaring that constitutional reforms leading to universal suffrage would be introduced by 1994 at the latest.
He also held brief stop-over talks with King Hassan of Morocco and Senegalese President Abdou Diouf.
AFRICA
RWANDA
Rebel invasion
An invasion by Uganda-based rebels, launched on the night of Sept. 30-Oct. 1, threatened the 17-year regime of President Juvenal Habyarimana, who cut short a visit to North America on hearing that his country was under attack.
Calling itself both the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) and Ikontanyi, the rebel force consisted of several thousand Rwandan refugees based in Uganda, led by Maj.-Gen.
Fred Rwigyema, a senior officer in Uganda's National Resistance Army (NRA).
Hitherto considered a close aid of President Yoweri Museveni, Rwigyema had been dropped as Uganda's deputy Minister of Defence in late 1989 [see also p. 37034].
The majority of the rebels were of the Tutsi ethnic group, who had ruled Rwanda until a bloody revolt by the majority Hutu in 1959 forced thousands to take refuge in neighbouring states.
Successive governments had refused to acknowledge the refugees as Rwandan nationals, or adequately to address the problem of the burden placed on Rwanda's neighbours by their presence.
There were an estimated 100,000 Rwandan refugees in Africa (over 70,000 in Uganda alone), and some 1,000,000 worldwide.
[For bloodshed resulting from ethnic power struggles in 1963 and 1973 see pp. 20085-86; 25814; for massacres in Burundi in 1988, where the Tutsi-dominated government had since embarked on a power-sharing experiment with the Hutu, see pp. 36328-29.]
The demands of the rebel RPF included the return home of all Rwandan refugees and the overthrow of the Habyarimana regime, which it described as "corrupt and incompetent" .
In a statement on Oct. 8, the government implied that the RPF in fact sought to re-establish Tutsi domination.
The presence of Rwigyema at the head of the rebellion, and the desertion from the NRA to the rebels of large numbers of Rwandan nationals, including about 40 officers, was embarrassing for the Ugandan government, which denied knowledge of an invasion plan, and moved quickly to close the border.
Relations between the two states were severely strained.
The rebels launched their invasion into the Mutara region in the north, quickly occupying the towns of Nyakatale and Gabiro.
On the night of Oct. 4-5 small-scale fighting occurred in the capital, Kigali, but the RPF failed to consolidate its position beyond the north-eastern area.
The Rwandan armed forces numbered only 5,000, and the containment of the rebellion was largely attributed to the presence of 300 French and 535 Belgian troops dispatched by their governments on Oct. 4, ostensibly to protect their citizens.
Additionally Zaïre sent some 1,000 troops under a mutual defence agreement with Rwanda (these were withdrawn on Oct. 17).
Reports from rebel-held territory that some 1,000 civilians had been killed by government troops were strongly denied; however the number of dead in fighting was thought to have reached several hundred.
Foreign Minister Casimir Bizimungu, denying reports of a much higher death toll, admitted that 300-500 rebels "wearing civilian clothes" had been killed in Army operations early in the second week of October.
The overall number of deaths in the conflict was difficult to ascertain.
Arrests of alleged rebel supporters
A night-time curfew was imposed throughout the country on Oct. 2; this was extended for a time to 24 hours on Oct. 5 when it appeared that the rebels had reached the capital.
Some 3,000 people were arrested in a security crackdown, including many civilians.
The majority of these, according to reports, were Tutsi.
About two-thirds were eventually released, but not before the Belgian and United States governments, among others, had expressed concern over the Rwandan government's measures.
Peace talks
Diplomatic efforts to end the fighting began on Oct. 15, when Habyarimana met Belgian Prime Minister Wilfried Martens in Nairobi and Museveni (currently Chairman of the Organization of African Unity — OAU) in Tanzania.
After further meetings Habyarimana, who refused to negotiate directly with the rebels, agreed to a ceasefire beginning on Oct. 24, but this quickly collapsed.
On Oct. 26, however, at a regional summit in Gbadolite (Zaïre), the presidents of Rwanda, Burundi, Uganda and Zaïre agreed on the creation of a joint monitoring group, to include representatives of the RPF, to supervise a renewed ceasefire.
On Oct. 17 Habyarimana had agreed to allow all refugees to return to Rwanda, but argued for a regional conference to discuss reintegration problems.
The Belgians had led a diplomatic initiative urging the creation of an African intervention force to supervise an eventual ceasefire, which Belgium offered to support logistically and financially.
(The Belgian forces, whose use had caused controversy at home, were withdrawn on Nov. 1.)
In late October there was an upsurge in fighting in the area between Kakitumba, just south of the Rwanda-Uganda border, and Gabiro, with several thousand people fleeing into Uganda.
Following a 36-hour offensive, the government claimed on Nov. 1 to have routed the rebels, but it was unclear whether they had returned to Uganda or had dispersed within Rwanda.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Offensive by ECOWAS force
The peacekeeping forces of the ECOWAS monitoring group ECOMOG moved onto the offensive on Oct. 1 with the aim of creating a buffer zone between the three warring factions in the capital — namely Charles Taylor's rebel NPFL, what remained of the former government forces now commanded by Brig. -Gen.
David Nimley, and the rebel splinter faction led by Prince Yormie Johnson.
ECOMOG sought also to establish a 20-km "security perimeter" around the capital, Monrovia, and to cut off rebel supply routes with the ultimate aim of installing the interim government currently based in Freetown (Sierra Leone).
A precarious ceasefire agreed earlier [see p. 37700]had collapsed on Sept. 28 when fierce fighting broke out between Johnson's men and the government forces.
On Oct. 5 the ECOMOG commander, Maj.-Gen.
Joshua Dogonyaro, reported that Monrovia free port was now open for the delivery of urgently needed relief supplies, but he warned relief organizations not to use Buchanan port, 75 km to the south-east.
Five days later ECOMOG took control of Monrovia's James Spriggs Payne Airport.
Famine was now the major cause of civilian death in the Liberian conflict, with some 50 deaths each day, according to the humanitarian organization Médecins sans frontières.
Taylor was forced to retreat to the eastern outskirts of Monrovia on Oct. 12 following aerial bombardment of his positions.
Johnson's forces had pulled back from the centre at the request of Dogonyaro.
Soon afterwards the regional force was increased to 6,000 by reinforcements of 2,000 Nigerian and Ghanaian troops.
Regional split over conflict — Further failure to secure ceasefire
The 16 members of ECOWAS were divided between the supporters of the various factions in the conflict and on the presence of ECOMOG.
A summit called for mid-October by Ivoirian President Félix Houphouët-Boigny, who supported Taylor, was called off after the heads of state of the five states contributing to ECOMOG — Nigeria, Ghana, Guinea, The Gambia and Sierra Leone — had declined to attend; reports indicated a split along linguistic lines, with the minority anglophone states being the principal upholders of ECOMOG's role.
Rebel NPFL-led interim government
On Oct. 21 Taylor named his own 24-member interim government, with himself as president, at Gbargna, the NPFL headquarters 150 km north-east of Monrovia.
This body consisted of five members of the NPFL, plus representatives of the 13 counties and six political parties.
Three seats were reportedly left vacant for representatives of Johnson's faction.
The military defeat of Taylor appeared increasingly to be the only option for an end to the conflict.
An ECOWAS mediation committee meeting in Banjul (Gambia) on Oct. 22-24 ended in failure when, of the three factions represented, only the NPFL delegation refused to agree to a ceasefire proposal.
The leader of the government-in-exile, Amos Sawyer, claimed on Oct. 7 to have received promises of support from rebel leader Johnson and from Brig. -Gen.
Nimley.
AFRICA
TANZANIA
Presidential and legislative elections
Ali Hassan Mwinyi was returned unopposed for a second five-year term as President on Oct. 28.
Nominated by the ruling and sole legal party, the Chama cha Mapinduzi (CCM), Mwinyi obtained 95.5 per cent of the vote in a turnout of 75 per cent.
Mwinyi was expected to continue the reversal of the socialist policies pursued by his predecessor Julius Nyerere [for whose retirement as CCM chairman in August see p. 37644].
Elections were held on the same day for the 216 elective seats in the (enlarged) National Assembly, with voters choosing between two candidates in most constituencies; eight candidates were returned unopposed, among them six serving Cabinet ministers.
Voters on the islands of Zanzibar and Pemba on Oct. 21 elected Salmin Amour, a former minister, as President of Zanzibar in succession to Idris Abdul-Wakil, who was not seeking re-election.
AFRICA
GABON
Conclusion of elections
Two further rounds of voting in the multiparty elections to the National Assembly took place on Oct. 21 and 28 following the suspension and partial annulment of the first round on Sept. 21 [p. 37701], which had been characterized by disorder and irregularities.
A joint government and opposition commission had been set up in late September with the aim of preventing a repeat of the first-round chaos; however, two opposition parties withdrew from the commission on Oct. 11.
Results showed an overall majority for the ruling Parti démocratique gabonais (PDG), with 62 seats (of which three were won by independents allied to the PDG).
Opposition candidates from six parties legalized after the reforming national conference in April won 55 seats in all, distributed as follows: Mouvement de redressement national — Bûcherons (Morena — Bûcherons)— 19; Parti gabonais du progrès (PGP)— 18; Morena-Original — seven; Association pour le socialisme au Gabon (APSG)— six; Union socialiste gabonaise (USG)— four; Cercle pour le renouveau et le progrès (CRP)— one.
Balloting was due to take place in early November for three of the 120 elective seats where the third round had been delayed.
Fr Paul Mba Abessolo, leader of Morena — Bûcherons, accusing the authorities of cheating, announced after the Oct. 21 polling the withdrawal of his party, thus raising doubts over whether the party would take up its seats in the Assembly.
AFRICA
TOGO
Pro-democracy demonstrations — Announcement of reforms
Four people died and 34 were injured on Oct. 5 in rioting in Lomé, described as the worst disturbances in 23 years of one-party rule.
The army was deployed against demonstrators calling for an end to one-party rule and the release of detainees.
Some 170 arrests were made, including of about 90 non-Togolese.
The protests began at the law courts when two men convicted of distributing anti-government leaflets each received the maximum five-year sentence.
Angry supporters were forcibly ejected from the court, after which some 6,000 protesters attacked government buildings and official cars in the city centre.
The country's lawyers began a 72-hour protest strike on Oct. 8.
In a communiqué on Oct. 8 the authorities linked the rioting to a destabilization plot, the existence of which was allegedly revealed by a Beninese citizen held in Cote d'Ivoire in connection with a death threat against Pope John-Paul II [see p. 37700].
The head of the Bar Association, who was also president of Togo's Human Rights League, Kokou Koffigoh, denouncing this "plot" as a fabrication, said that troops had fired on demonstators in a "premeditated" act.
The two men convicted, a number of detainees held in connection with the same case, and all those involved in the Oct. 5 events, were subsequently pardoned and released by presidential decree.
New constitution to incorporate pluralism
On Oct. 10 it was announced that the central committee of the ruling party, the Rassemblement du peuple togolais (RPT), had approved a proposal for the drafting of a new constitution by a special commission which was to include representatives of "all socio-professional groups" ; the draft would be put to a referendum in late 1991.
President Gnassingbe Eyadema, inaugurating the commission on Oct. 30, unexpectedly declared that the country's "apprenticeship in democracy" was "advanced enough" to make the transition to a multiparty system, and urged the drafting commission to proceed accordingly.
AFRICA
COTE D'IVOIRE
Presidential elections
President Félix Houphouët-Boigny, 85, formally the candidate of the ruling Parti démocratique de Côte d'Ivoire (PDCI), survived a challenge by Laurent Gbagbo, 45, leader of the opposition Front populaire ivoirien (FPI), to win a seventh term of office on Oct. 28.
There were widespread allegations of cheating on the part of the regime.
These were the first contested presidential election since independence in 1960.
Hitherto a de facto one-party regime, the government had in May reluctantly allowed opposition parties to operate [p. 37445].
Houphouët-Boigny had previously made it known that, if elected, this would be his last term of office, but gave no indication as to a possible successor.
Results showed that the President obtained slightly less than 82 per cent of the vote (in 1985 he claimed to have received 100 per cent— p. 33963), with his strongest constituency in rural areas.
Gbagbo won support in middle-class areas of the capital, and in the north-east of the country.
Turnout was described as low.
The conduct of the elections attracted considerable interest, being the one of the first to be held in a traditionally single-party state since the recent adoption of pluralist systems by a number of sub-Saharan African states [for Gabon elections see this page].
However, voting took place in an atmosphere of tension; in Abidjan, angry FPI supporters attacked polling booths and clashed with police, alleging blatant ballot-rigging; polling was suspended in several stations, notably where support for the FPI was high, and about 100 FPI supporters were arrested in subsequent days.
Meanwhile, FPI leaders announced that they would challenge the results in court.
PDCI reforms
As expected, Houphouët-Boigny's candidacy had been approved without debate in the course of the ninth PDCI congress, held in early October.
The congress procedures reportedly revealed deep divisions within the party between the "old guard" and pro-reform members.
However a structural reform was undertaken in an attempt to decentralize the workings of the party.
Measures adopted included the creation of the post of Prime Minister; in addition the political bureau was now to consist of 400 members and would be a deliberative rather than an executive body; the executive role would be assumed by an 80-member central committee; and the party would henceforth have an elected secretary-general.
The new officers were to be elected at a special congress in December.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
New constitution — Shooting of protesters
An official government on Oct. 7 stated that a nationwide referendum would be held within 12 months "if conditions in the country permit" to approve a new constitution and multiparty elections.
In the meantime the People's Assembly on Oct. 8 overwhelmingly approved the implementation of the new constitution as a temporary measure from Oct. 11 onwards.
The formation of political parties was allowed, and fundamental rights, including freedom of speech and the press, were guaranteed, but the propagation of any religion other than Islam was prohibited.
The National Security Court was abolished and President Mohammed Siyad Barre was obliged to stand down as chairman of the ruling Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (SRSP), the constitution preventing him from holding both posts.
He was replaced by his brother-in-law Ahmad Sulayman Abdullah.
Opposition groups dismissed the constitutional changes as a device to gain Western aid and approval at a time of economic crisis.
They also claimed that a national referendum would be impossible when so much of the country was under rebel control.
On Oct. 23, during a demonstration in Mogadishu calling for the release of political prisoners and protesting against high food prices, two civilians and one policeman were killed and 36 civilians wounded following violent clashes between protesters and police.
On July 15 the regime had released 46 prominent citizens, including the country's first President, Aden Abulla Osman, and prominent business and religious leaders, following the dismissal of charges of treason and sedition against them.
The detainees had been among 115 signatories of an open letter to Siyad Barre which called for a negotiated end to civil war, respect for human and civil rights, and multiparty elections.
Their release came 10 days after over 100 civilians had died in a crowded stadium in the capital, Mogadishu, when hecklers interrupted an address by Barre and called for his resignation; his presidential guard reportedly fired shots into the air, then fired into the crowd, and a number of people were trampled to death during the subsequent melee.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Approval of federal budget
On Oct. 5 the government was thrown into turmoil following the defeat in the House of Representatives of a budget agreement for the financial year beginning Oct. 1.
The agreement, reached on Sept. 30 after weeks of protracted negotiation between the administration and the Democratic-dominated Congress, had aimed to reduce the budget deficit by $40,000 million by increasing excise taxes and reducing benefits, particularly in the Medicare health programmes for the elderly.
President George Bush had appealed for support for the agreement in a national television broadcast on Oct. 2 in which he described the deficit as "a cancer gnawing away at our nation's health" .
The measure was nevertheless defeated by 254 votes [not 362 as given on p. 37704]to 179.
Its opponents included 105 Republicans led by the House Minority Whip, Newt Gingrich, most of whom opposed any increases in taxation, while the Democrats opposed cuts in benefits and services.
On Oct. 6 the House of Representatives approved a stop-gap spending bill to enable the government to continue to function in the absence of a budget agreement.
Bush vetoed the measure, and said he refused "to be part of business as usual when we have one deficit after another piling up" .
In a subsequent vote to overturn the veto, the House fell six votes short of the necessary two-thirds majority, with 260 votes for and 138 votes against.
As a result, non-essential government services were immediately ordered to close, and a number of museums, parks, and public places, including the Statue of Liberty and the White House, were closed to the public on Oct. 7 and 8, the Columbus holiday weekend.
New budget proposals were discussed in the House and Senate on Oct. 8, and a new measure to provide temporary financing for government until Oct. 20 was passed in the House by 305 votes to 105.
The President approved this measure, but made it clear that he would not sign further legislation to keep government going unless a satisfactory agreement was reached on the budget.
However, Bush created some confusion on Oct. 9 when he indicated in the morning that he might accept increases in income tax in return for cuts in capital gains tax, but in a meeting with Republican Senators later that day declared that both were "off the table" .
Asked to clarify his position while in Florida on Oct. 10, Bush replied: "Let Congress clear it up." 
The President's public changes of mind led to accusations of indecision and weakness, and public opinion polls showed a fall in his popularity from a high of 75 to 80 per cent at the start of the year to 56 per cent in October.
Complex negotiations continued between the White House, the Senate, and the House of Representatives.
The Bush administration indicated support for a bipartisan Senate proposal which included a limit on tax deductible items on incomes over $100,000, increased Medicare charges, and higher excise taxes.
However, Democrats in the House, led by the chairman of the Ways and Means committee, Dan Rostenkowski, drew up a plan to raise from 28 per cent to 33 per cent taxes on the most wealthy and to impose a 10 per cent surtax on incomes of more than $100,000.
The divided Republicans were unable to produce an alternative measure.
On Oct. 18 the House approved, by 379 votes to 37, another stop-gap funding measure to enable the government to keep operating for another week.
President Bush signed the measure the following day.
Bush indicated a willingness to approve an increase in taxation of the wealthy and to defer a cut in capital gains tax, but said that he would not accept the House budget proposals.
Lengthy discussions took place to reconcile the House and Senate proposals, and to meet conflicting political demands.
At several points it appeared that the discussions between congressmen and Budget Director Richard G. Darman and White House Chief of Staff John Sununu, had broken down.
However, on Oct. 24 Democrats in the House appeared willing to compromise when they abandoned their demands for the inclusion of surtax, in favour of phasing out personal tax exemptions for those with incomes in excess of $100,000.
On Oct. 25 Bush signed another emergency funding bill, the fourth in a month, to enable discussion to continue until Oct. 27.
Not since the Second World War had Congress remained in session so close to election day, and with mid-term elections on Nov. 6 rapidly approaching, a compromise budget was at last finally agreed.
The new proposal was passed by the House of Representatives on Oct. 27 and by the Senate on Oct. 28.
In the House the voting was 228 (181 Democrats and 47 Republicans) to 200 (126 Republicans and 74 Democrats).
The Senate vote was 54 to 45.
Bush said that although "there are some things in it I had to gag and digest" , he would sign it "because for the first time it makes significant and long-term cuts in federal spending that should have a positive impact on America's economic future" .
The final measure aimed to reduce the budget deficit by $41,400 million.
The main differences between the final version and the original agreement in September were an increase in the top rate of tax, a smaller reduction in the Medicare budget, and a smaller increase in petrol tax.
The agreed bill levelled out the tax "bubble" , an anomaly created by the 1986 Tax Reform Act.
This had meant that couples with incomes in excess of $186,000 paid tax at a rate of 28 per cent, while those in the lower income band, $78,000 to $186,000, were taxed at 33 per cent .
The new bill provided for a rate of 31 per cent for both groups, and as a result established three income tax rates of 15, 28, and 31 per cent.
The $2,050 personal exemption was to be gradually eliminated for an individual earning more than $100,000, and deductions claimed by individual tax payers in those brackets, and by couples earning more than $150,000, were to be limited.
Cuts totalling $42,400 million over five years were made in Medicare through reduced reimbursements to doctors and hospitals.
Monthly premiums for beneficiaries was to be gradually increased from $28.60 to $46.50 by 1995.
The amount patients were required to pay before receiving benefits was also raised, from $75 to $100.
The income level subject to the 1.45 per cent Medicare payroll tax was increased from $51,300 to $125,000.
The increases in excise tax included increasing the federal gasoline tax from 9 to 14 cents per gallon, the renewal of the tax on airline tickets, increased from 8 to 10 per cent, the doubling of taxes on a six-pack of beer from 16 to 32 cents, increased taxes on wines and spirits, and a tax increase (from 16 cents a pack to 20 cents) on cigarettes.
In addition, a 10 per cent tax was to be charged on purchases of new private aircraft over $250,000, boats above $100,000, automobiles above $30,000, and furs and jewellery above $10,000.
Additional measures included cuts of $11,900 million over five years in farm commodity programmes, and reductions of $3,700 million over five years in veterans' benefits.
Student loan requirements and regulations were tightened to limit defaults on payments.
Military spending was cut by $67,200 million.
The bill also increased the amount of earned income exempt from tax for workers in the lowest income brackets, and established a $500 tax credit for taxpayers with children under one year old.
Tax concessions were provided for oil and gas developers and for small businesses.
With business at an end, the 101st Congress adjourned on Oct. 28, and many congressmen went to meet the voters.
Presidential veto of civil rights legislation
The House of Representatives passed an omnibus civil rights bill on Oct. 17, which was designed to reinforce federal protection against job discrimination.
The bill was specifically designed to amend or overturn several Supreme Court rulings which had curtailed the ability of minorities to challenge employment bias through the courts.
The bill was passed by the House by 273 votes to 154; the Senate had approved it on the previous day by 62 votes to 34.
In April 1990, shortly after the civil rights bill had been introduced in the legislature, the Attorney General, Dick Thornburgh, objected to six of its key provisions.
There followed seven months of negotiation between the bill's supporters and the Administration.
Although each side made significant compromises — the bill's proponents rewrote at least four of its sections whilst the Administration withdrew its objections to at least two provisions — they remained divided.
A key area of dispute involved the wording of the bill's provisions on "unintentional discrimination" , particularly the degree to which economic considerations could justify practices which, whilst not overtly discriminatory, had the effect of being disadvantageous towards minorities.
Other areas of difference included the degree of damages open to a victim of discrimination and the extent to which court-ordered affirmative action plans were open to further legal challenge.
Although revised, in its final form the bill did not assuage White House misgivings that it would make it too easy for plaintiffs to prove discrimination, and would force employers to impose hiring and promotion quotas based on race and sex in order to avoid expensive law suits.
Accordingly, on Oct. 22, Bush carried out his threat to veto the bill.
In a three-page veto message Bush stated that "despite the use of the term" civil rights' ", the legislation" actually employs a maze of highly legalistic language to introduce the destructive force of quotas"into the workplace.
It was the 16th veto of Bush's presidency, all of which had been sustained.
Some observers had felt that the President, having already suffered considerable political damage from his role in the protracted budget dispute [see pp. 37767], would not risk further injury by vetoing a civil rights measure on the eve of the mid-term elections.
Opinion surveys suggested, however, that a majority of US citizens felt that reverse discrimination, even on the basis of making up for past wrongs, was unfair, and was a concept associated with the Democrats rather than the Republicans.
Bush's veto was vociferously condemned both within Congress and by interest groups representing women, trade unions, blacks and other minorities.
According to Senator Edward Kennedy it demonstrated "that he is more interested in appeasing extremists in his party than in providing simple justice for the millions of working women and minorities who face bias on the job" .
Ralph Neas, executive director of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, stated that "the rhetoric may be gentler and kinder, but the policies of George Bush are no less dangerous than those of Ronald Reagan and Ed Meese [Attorney General under Reagan]" .
On Oct. 24 the Senate narrowly failed to override the veto, voting by 66 to 34 in favour of the bill, one vote short of the two-thirds majority necessary to enact it over the objections of the President.
Presidential veto of textile bill
On Oct. 10, the House of Representatives narrowly failed to achieve the two-thirds majority necessary to override Bush's veto of a bill which would have limited imports of textiles, clothing and shoes.
The House vote in favour of the bill was 275 to 152, 10 votes short of the requisite majority for an override.
The bill would have limited textile imports to a 1 per cent annual increase, and set quotas for most shoe imports at 1989 levels.
Its main targets were imports from Asian countries including China, Taiwan, Hong Kong and South Korea, although it also related to other developing countries.
Supporters of the bill claimed that it was necessary to protect the 2,000,000 US jobs which remained within these industries.
Over the past decade it was estimated that the US had lost some 400,000 textile and clothing jobs, including 66,000 in the last year.
The country's trade deficit in textiles and clothing grew from $4,700 million in 1980 to $26,500 million in 1989, making it third only to oil and motor vehicles as the biggest component of the country's overall trade deficit.
The bill was the textile lobby's third attempt within the last five years to mandate trade restrictions.
Similar measures were passed in 1985 and 1988 but were vetoed by the then President Ronald Reagan.
The administration strongly opposed the bill, arguing that it would violate existing textile agreements with 38 countries, would undermine two multinational agreements, and would severely damage the current "Uruguay Round" of trade talks being held under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
Nevertheless, the bill was passed by the Senate in July 1990 by 68 votes to 32 and approved by the House on Sept. 18 by 271 votes to 149.
Bush vetoed the bill on Oct. 5, claiming that it would "pick the pockets of US consumers" through higher clothing prices.
Resignation of Elizabeth Dole and Donald Lukens
Elizabeth Dole, the only female member of the Cabinet, on Oct. 24 announced her resignation as Labour Secretary, effective from late November, in order to become president of the American Red Cross in January 1991.
The first Cabinet member to resign since President George Bush took office in January 1989, Dole denied that she had felt excluded from the administration's innermost policy-making circles.
Although she stated that after 25 years in government she was keen to seek new challenges, there was widespread speculation that she would resume her political career in 1992 by contesting either the governorship or a Senate seat in her native North Carolina.
On the same day as the announcement of Dole's departure, an Ohio Republican, Donald E. "Buzz" Lukens, resigned from the House of Representatives with immediate effect.
The third member of the 101st Congress to resign over an issue of personal ethics, Lukens had been accused of sexually fondling a female congressional elevator operator.
He had already been convicted, in 1989, on a misdemeanour charge of having sexual relations with a teenage girl [see p. 37406]— a case currently under appeal.
He had been defeated in the 1990 primaries.
Sentencing of Marion Barry
Marion Barry, the mayor of Washington DC, received a six-month prison sentence and a $5,000 fine on Oct. 26 following his conviction in August on one count of cocaine possession.
Although the charge carried a maximum penalty of one year's imprisonment and a $100,000 fine, Barry's sentence was widely considered to be harsh for a first offence.
The judge rejected pleas for leniency, ruling that Barry's position as mayor and his "breach of public trust" warranted an "enhanced sentence" .
He also stated that "having failed as the good example he might have been, the defendant must now become an example of another kind" .
In a letter to Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson on the eve of sentencing, Barry requested a sentence comprising community service.
He also publicly acknowledged for the first time that he was a recovering "drug addict" who had behaved in a "degrading and outrageous" way.
Following his arrest, but prior to his conviction, Barry had decided not to seek a fourth consecutive term of office as mayor.
The sentence had no effect on Barry's eligibility to complete his current term (due to expire on Jan. 2, 1991) or to fulfil his stated intention of standing for the city council elections on Nov. 6.
The mayor remained at liberty pending a decision as to his place of confinement, and an anticipated appeal against the severity of the sentence.
AMERICAS
CUBA
Restructuring of Communist Party — Rationing
The ruling Communist Party (PCC) announced on Oct. 5 reductions in excess of 50 per cent in the number of national and provincial party posts.
The decision, taken in advance of the fourth party congress scheduled for the first half of 1991, was thought to be primarily a cost-cutting exercise in response to the deepening economic crisis, as the country's preferential trading terms with the Soviet Union and other COMECON countries were about to expire; commentators also viewed the changes as concentrating power within the party in fewer hands.
It was officially stated, however, that the reforms had the aim of ending "hypertrophy" in the government and the party.
The number of advisory departments to the PCC central committee was to be cut from 19 to nine.
The hitherto important military department was to be dissolved completely and replaced by an advisory committee subject to the direct control of the politburo.
At municipal and provincial levels party committees were to be reduced from seven to five members who would, for the first time, be selected from lists of multiple candidates and elected by secret ballot.
Jorge Risquet Valdés-Saldaña, a seasoned diplomat hitherto seen as a rising star in the party, was removed from the seven-strong PCC secretariat as part of the changes but retained his seat on the politburo which advised the secretariat.
Carlos Rafael Rodríguez Rodríguez, Vice-President of the Council of State and a politburo member, in an interview given to Radio Havana on Oct. 23, denied rumours that Risquet and another prominent politburo member, Juan Almeida Bosque, had differences with President Fidel Castro.
Rationing of basic food products had been extended on Sept. 25 to cover 63 items to ensure fair distribution and to prevent hoarding and black marketeering.
There were 180 items already on the rationed list, including articles of clothing, shoes, basic household and consumer goods and domestic electrical appliances.
Only luxury items beyond the reach of the average household remained on open sale.
AMERICAS
MARTINIQUE
Separatist election success
In elections held on Oct. 14, parties advocating Martinique's independence from France polled 22 per cent of the vote and won nine of the 41 seats on the Regional Council, including seven seats won by the Independent Movement of Martinique (MIM).
The separatists had won no seats at the last elections, in 1986.
The Council was generally elected for a six-year term, but the 1990 elections were called after those of 1986 were annulled on a technicality.
The left-wing Progressive Party of Martinique (PPM) lost its overall majority, the number of its seats falling from 21 to 14, but the PPM secretary general Camille Darsieres was re-elected president of the Council.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Debt for equity auction
A second government debt-for-equity auction, held on Oct. 9, attracted bids for a total nominal debt of US$2,500 million, with the effect of reducing the foreign debt by $1,800 million.
Of the accepted bids, 85.8 per cent included bonds which were issued at a 35 per cent discount in exchange for bank loans.
Having already auctioned off $1,000 million of debt in July, the government thus reached its $3,500 million limit for debt for equity exchanges, initially envisaged as being spread over three years in the Feb. 4 debt reduction and re-financing agreement with creditor banks [for which see p. 37243].
Dismissal of anti-drugs official
Javier Coello Trejo, 42, deputy attorney general with responsibility for the enforcement of antidrug laws, was removed from his post on Oct. 15 and redeployed to the post of head of federal consumer affairs.
During Coello's tenure a record 75 tonnes of cocaine had been seized and a major cocaine trafficker to the United States, Miguel Angel Felix Gallardo, had been arrested.
However, politicians and human rights groups in Mexico, supported by a detailed June 1990 report by the US-based human rights group Americas Watch and by criticism from the US Congress, had accused the Federal Judicial police of over 800 cases of murder, torture, extortion and robbery during their anti-drug operations.
AMERICAS
COSTA RICA
Resignation of Labour Minister — Strikes — GATT membership
Labour Minister Erick Thompson Piñeres, resigned on Oct. 30, stating that his decision reflected "the crisis that currently afflicts President Calderón's Cabinet, a rift between economic and social groups" .
Between 70,000 and 100,000 public- and private-sector workers staged a 24-hour strike on Oct. 5 partly in continued protest at the government's economic austerity policy [see p. 37527]and partly for higher wages to keep pace with spiralling inflation.
The action came in the wake of a strike on Oct. 1 by 10,000 health workers and those employed by the state oil sector and other state agencies, along with workers from the National Centre of Production (CNP).
Similar protests had taken place in April and July.
In spite of the protests, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) publicly endorsed the government's economic programme.
USAID granted a loan of US$27,000,000 to help support the balance of payments and also endorsed a government plan announced in late October under which 7,000 public employees would be dismissed over the following year.
On Oct. 25 Costa Rica was ratified as the 100th member of the General Treaty on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Reduction in US military aid
The United States Senate voted by 75 to 25 on Oct. 19 to withhold half a US$85,000,000 military aid allocation for El Salvador in fiscal year 1991, until the government of President Alfredo Cristiani (i) demonstrated its "good faith" in pursuing peace talks with the guerrillas of the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN);(ii) stopped the military or security forces abducting or assassinating civilians; and (iii) effected a professional investigation into and prosecution of those responsible for the murders of six Jesuits, including the rector of the University of Central America, Ignacio Ellauria, their housekeeper and her daughter on Nov. 16, 1989 [see p. 37038].
The decision allowed for the funds to be released in full if the FMLN (i) refused to participate or show "good faith" in peace negotiations;(ii) jeopardized the constitutional government by a military offensive;(iii) assassinated or abducted civilians; or (iv) continued to receive substantial military assistance from abroad.
The International Herald Tribune of Oct. 30 reported that documents supplied to the court handling the case of the murdered Jesuits showed that Maj. Eric Buckland, a US military adviser, and others had had prior knowledge of the proposed attack on the Jesuits.
He had informed the FBI on Jan. 11, 1990 that his source of information, Salvadorean Col. Armando Aviles, had told him that Col. Guillermo Alfredo Benavides was planning to murder the Jesuits.
Joint US-Soviet peace call
The US and Soviet governments issued a joint statement simultaneously in Washington and Moscow on Oct. 20, calling on the government and the FMLN to intensify negotiations, to reach a political settlement and to conclude a ceasefire as soon as possible.
They also called on both sides to refrain from military actions which could threaten the prospects for peace.
The announcement led to speculation that the Soviet government was intending to restore diplomatic relations with El Salvador.
The latest round of UN-mediated peace talks reportedly began in Mexico City on Oct. 28.
Amnesty International report
A report issued by the human rights group Amnesty International on Oct. 24 linked the armed forces with increased activity by right-wing death squads.
Amnesty had recorded 45 death-squad murders in the first eight months of 1990, compared with 40 for the whole of 1989, and said that killings, torture and disappearances were continuing despite the human rights agreement signed by the government and the FMLN on July 26 [see p. 37707].
The circumstances, it said, left "little doubt of official complicity" .
It also condemned illegal executions carried out by soldiers and police as well as those by the FMLN, whose targets were mainly off-duty military personnel.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Dismissal of Central Bank president — National dialogue
The government's Oct. 30 dismissal of Francisco Mayorga, president of the Central Bank and architect of the government's free-market economic austerity plan, was denounced by the conservative High Council of Private Enterprise business organization (Cosep) as a betrayal of election pledges and a major concession to the Sandinista (FSLN) opposition.
Mayorga was replaced by the Bank's vice-president, Raul Lacayo.
Cosep also refused to recognize an agreement signed by the government and the Sandinista National Workers' Federation (FNT) on Oct. 26 during a resumption of "national dialogue" talks.
These talks, boycotted or disrupted by the employers and unions since their initiation, had been set up by the government on Sept. 20 following widespread unrest in May and July [see pp. 37450; 37607].
The FNT agreed to a six-month no-strike deal in return for a government undertaking that it would suspend plans to dismiss 25,000 state-sector workers, stabilize the currency and adopt a "realistic" view on questions of economic regeneration, privatization and title to property seized under Sandinista rule.
The government also stated that it would implement an agrarian reform law immediately [see below], improve tax collection, and reduce public spending, including that on the military.
The FSLN and FNT had called for a nationwide campaign of civil disobedience against the austerity measures, urging the population to refuse to pay increased electricity and water prices, to occupy state companies targeted for privatization, and to support a 24-hour general strike on Oct. 1.
The strike call drew only a modest response, with an estimated 6,000 stopping work instead of the 60,000 projected by the Sandinista media (whose radio station Radio Primerísima was destroyed by dynamite on Sept. 30).
The FNT leadership then agreed to talks with the government.
The FSLN decided to call an end to the civil disobedience campaign, and to join in the national dialogue, following the negotiations on Oct. 2 between Daniel Ortega Saavedra, the Sandinista leader, and Antonio Lacayo, a close adviser to President Violeta Chamorro.
National Agrarian Commission — Renewed contra attacks
On Oct. 15 the government announced the formation of a National Agrarian Commission.
Its directorate of 12, chaired by Lacayo, would include members from trade unions, former contras, two government ministers and the Commander in Chief of the Sandinista Peoples Army (EPS).
Its brief was to study the land distribution problems and tensions in rural areas in the wake of widespread illegal land takeovers.
The government had reportedly reached an agreement on Oct. 4 with 200 armed former contras who had seized land belonging to Sandinista co-operatives, and whose occupation of the northern town of Waslala had resulted in five deaths and seven people reported wounded.
The contras claimed that their action was intended to focus attention on the government's failure to provide funds for the resettlement of former contras and their dependents.
Further disturbances were reported on Oct. 26 in the north-west of the country, with one contra reported killed and several others wounded in El Jicaro following clashes with Sandinistas.
AMERICAS
PANAMA
Alleged coup attempt
A coup attempt against the coalition government of President Guillermo Endara Galimany, allegedly masterminded by Eduardo Herrera, a former national police chief retired the previous August, was reported to have been "frustrated" by loyalist police officers on Oct. 16.
The coup was to start, it was claimed, with a takeover by rebel police units of the north-western province of Chiriqui.
Government officials subsequently referred to the plot merely as a plan to "destabilize" the government; Herrera, arrested in Panama City on Oct. 25, described the whole incident as a "circus act" designed to distract public attention from the country's true problems.
The arrest of three police officers and two military captains who had been members of the elite UESAT unit of the Panamanian Defence Forces commanded by the former dictator Gen. Manuel Noriega, led to suggestions that a serious coup attempt had been intended, and that it had enjoyed wide support from the police.
A report emanating from Argentina referred to the alleged involvement of Eliecer Gaitán, Noriega's ex-security chief, thought to be in hiding in Argentina following his escape from the papal nunciature in Panama on Sept. 16 [see pp. 37706-07].
Protest demonstration
The largest demonstration faced to date by the current government, involving an estimated 50,000 government employees in Panama City on Oct. 16, demanded the cancellation of the economic austerity plan [see p. 37706], the reversal of large-scale job losses in the public sector, and the ending of bonus payments on top salaries.
Rejection of changes to banking secrecy
Leading bankers, in a meeting with the government on Oct. 11, rejected an aid-tied "Legal Assistance Accord" with the US government, which would have allowed access to information on people suspected of involvement in drug-related activities, in an effort to control "money laundering" in Panama City's "offshore" International Finance Centre.
The bankers insisted on an alternative agreement which safeguarded Panama's "judicial sovereignty" , claiming that the real US objective was to stop US tax evasion.
AMERICAS
ECUADOR
Congressional crisis
At an emergency congressional session on Oct. 18 pro-government deputies voted for the dismissal of the right-wing opposition Congress president (Speaker), Averroes Bucaram Ortiz, and his replacement by Edelberto Bonilla Oleas.
They blamed Bucaram for Congress's controversial impeachment on Oct. 2 of Juan Neira, the Public Works and Conmmunications Minister, who was replaced on Oct. 5 by Raúl Carrasco Zamora, and earlier of an agriculture minister Mario Jalil.
Bucaram's supporters, who boycotted the session, refused to accept Bonilla's appointment and were forcibly removed from the Congress building on Oct. 20 by the police.
Political, cultural and labour organizations had reportedly demanded that the conflict between the executive and the legislature be settled by a national referendum.
This option was rejected, however, by President Rodrigo Borja Cevallos, who claimed that a referendum would disrupt the economy, hold back investments and "interrupt the country's productive process" .
Other controversial congressional decisions had included the granting of an amnesty to Bucaram's brother, former presidential candidate Abdalá Bucaram Ortiz [see p. 36343], who had been accused of corruption when mayor of Guayaquil; and the dismissal of 16 Supreme Court judges on Oct. 5.
The judges declared the decision unconstitutional and Borja refused to accept it.
In response Bucaram announced that the President himself would be impeached.
A "legislative coup" was narrowly averted when three opposition deputies crossed the floor, giving Borja a majority of 38 out of a total of 72 deputies.
A congressional vote of censure on Oct. 25 on Borja's first Government and on Justice Minister, Andrés Vallejo Arco and his subsequent resignation as President of the Monetary Board, was thought to have consolidated support for Bonilla.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
Guerrilla attacks
Two guerrilla attacks carried out in La Paz, the capital, on Oct. 10 and early on Oct. 11 resulted respectively in an explosion at a United States Marines residence and the destruction of a monument to United States President John F. Kennedy.
In the first attack a Bolivian guard was killed and another injured and six US Marines sustained slight injuries.
It was reported that one of the two attackers had been wounded while escaping.
Subsequent speculation linked the attacks to the Comisión Néstor Paz Zamora (CNPZ), named after the late brother of President Jaime Paz Zamora, who had been a militant in the National Liberation Army (ELN), a left-wing guerrilla group which had launched an unsuccessful guerrilla movement in 1970.
Alleged assassination plot
Gen. Lucio Añez Rivera, commander of a special force combating drug trafficking, told a congressional hearing on Oct. 8 that he was investigating a plot to assassinate himself, the President, US ambassador Robert S. Gelbard, and three other prominent figures.
Gelbard was reported to have warned US officials in September that he would be the target of an assassination attempt, which Bolivian officials believed was due to take place on Dec. 10 to coincide with the anniversary of the extradition of former Interior Minister Luis Arce Gómez to the US on drug trafficking charges [see pp. 37487-8].
Former president Gen. Luis García Meza Tejada, whose whereabouts were unknown, was being sought in connection with the plot.
New chiefs of armed forces
An unexpected announcemt on Oct. 6 confirmed Gen. Guido Sandóval Zambrana as the new C-in-C of the Army; Gen. Victor Guzmán Bruno as new Chief of General Staff; and Gen. Alejandro Camponovo Ulloa as new C-in-C of the Air Force.
Adml.
Anibal Gutiérrez Chávez was retained as C-in-C of the Navy and Gen. Jorge Moreira Rojas as C-in-C of the Armed forces; Moreira claimed that the changes had not produced ill feeling or unrest within the armed forces.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Concessions to drug cartels
A government decree issued on Oct. 8 offered drug traffickers a guarantee that they would not be extradited to the United States to face drug charges if they surrendered to the authorities.
In addition, all charges against self-confessed drug traffickers would in future be heard by the same judge.
The judge would be empowered to grant immediate bail to the defendant if the crimes were those of illegal possession of arms and criminal conspiracy, or to free him or her a year after the start of a trial if sentence had yet to be passed.
Reduced sentences could also be given to those who confessed to any subsequent crimes.
On Oct. 9 the government refused a US extradition request for Salomom Shourter Benitez, and on Oct. 19 Gonzalo de Jesus Rincon Perez was the first drug trafficker wanted in the USA to surrender under these conditions.
The new law was widely interpreted as a concession to the Medellín drug cartel.
In recent weeks the cartel had used seven kidnapped journalists and a diplomat's sister it claimed to be holding as bargaining counters to force the government into negotiations.
It sought to improve the conditions of a Sept. 5 decree law, which had offered lenient sentencing to some traffickers and a more "discretionary" attitude to extradition.
This had not prevented the government signing orders for the extradition of two cartel members on Sept. 11.
A telephone call received by the Bogotá newspaper El Tiempo on Sept. 20 allegedly from the Medellín cartel had confirmed the kidnappings and included a demand that the government offer the cartel the same "political treatment" as that given to left-wing guerrillas in past peace agreements [see below].
In a further message on Oct. 30. they threatened to kill the hostages if the government launched a new offensive against the cartel.
On Aug. 30 six journalists (including Diana Turbay Quintero, daughter of former President Julio César Turbay Ayala, and a West German, Hero Buss) had disappeared while on an assignment to interview Manuel Pérez, the commander of the left-wing National Liberation Army (ELN).
Francisco Santos, El Tiempo's editor in chief, and Marina Montoya, sister of Germán Montoya Vélez, a former general secretary of the Presidency [see also p. 37372]and current ambassador to Canada, were kidnapped in separate incidents in Bogotá on Sept. 19.
The government rejected an offer from the alleged Cali drug cartel leader Jorge Luis Ochoa to mediate their release, but an unofficial "Committee of Leading Citizens" led by former President Alfonso Lopez was reported to be trying to arrange talks between the cartels and the government.
Efforts by the government and the judiciary to combat the cartels had been further damaged by two recent incidents.
Julio Eduardo Rueda Rocha, chief suspect in the murder of the Liberal Party (PL) presidential candidate Luis Carlos Galán Sarmiento in August 1989 [see p. 36844], had escaped with ease from the La Picot penitentiary in Bogotá on Sept. 19, bribery being suspected.
Two days beforehand, a judgment set free 13 prisoners captured in the headquarters of Medellín cartel chief Pablo Escobar Gaviria; subsequent investigations indicated that a bribe of $US850,000 had been paid.
Such setbacks were counterbalanced by the killing of leading cartel member Luis Hernando Gaviria Gómez, Escobar's cousin (the second to have been killed — see also p. 37650) in a gunbattle with the elite DAS anti-drug police 35 km from Medellín on Oct. 23.
In other earlier reverses Humberto de Jesus Parra Salinas, the MedellíË cartel's alleged organizer of 100 groups of paid assassins, had been captured on Aug. 22.
A feud between the Medellín and Cali cartels was thought responsible for the massacre of 22 workers on a ranch near Cali on Sept. 25.
Cabinet resignation
Camilo Gonzalez Pozo was appointed as the new Health Minister on Oct. 26 to replace Antonio Navarro Wolff who had resigned to head the left-wing April 19 Movement (M-19) list of candidates for the new 70-seat Constituent Assembly due to be elected in December [see p. 37650].
Peace offer
The two principal left-wing guerrilla groups, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the ELN, reportedly accepted on Oct. 9 the government's Sept. 25 offer to enter into peace dialogues.
A later communiqué from the guerrillas called for immediate peace talks and for their representation in the Constituent Assembly.
AMERICAS
PERU
Debt compromise and loan
Commercial creditor banks, headed by the United States Citibank and the Bank of Tokyo, agreed on Oct. 19 to withdraw a demand for the repayment of US$2,000 million in unpaid commercial debt, in return for a government undertaking to restructure its external debt before March 30, 1991.
The government had announced earlier in the month that it would resume repayments on its external debts to multilateral institutions (frozen since 1986) from Oct. 15.
This followed an agreement by Japan, the USA and seven European Community (EC) countries headed by Spain, to give Peru a US$2,000 million bridging loan.
The Andean Reserve Fund was expected to contribute US$370,000,000, and US$450,000,000 would come from accrued borrowing rights within the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Cabinet resignation
The Minister of Agriculture, Carlos Amat y Léon, a member of the moderate Socialist Left Party (IS), resigned from the "national unity" government on Oct. 18.
His resignation followed reports of clashes with the Prime Minster and Finance Minister, Juan Carlos Hurtado Miller, who had rejected his request for increased agricultural credits of US$300,000,000 until the end of the year to deal with an acute agricultural crisis and serious food shortages.
He was replaced by Enrique Rossl Link, an agronomist, appointed on Oct. 22.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Privatization plan
On Oct. 3 President Carlos Saúl Menem signed into law a comprehensive programme to privatize state-owned companies covering power supply, oil, drinking water, important railways, airports, major ports, and the underground rail system of the capital Buenos Aires.
The Ministry of Works and Public Services was authorized to sell them or arrange concessions in them within 90 to 180 days.
The sale of 60 per cent of the state-owned telecommunications company Entel, and its division into two separate companies, Entelnor and Entelsur, agreed in principle on June 28, was delayed until Oct. 26 when two private consortiums finally reached agreement with the government on new telephone tariff rates.
On Oct. 5 the consortium led by the US Bell Atlantic Telephone Company had withdrawn from the purchase of Entelnor, which was eventually bought by a consortium formed by the Italian state telecommunications company STET SpA, France Cable and Radio (part of French Telcomm), Perez Co (a local oil, fishing and banking group) and the US bankers J.P.
Morgan and Co.
A consortium led by Spanish state airline Iberia had reportedly deposited US$130,000,000 in a New York bank on Sept. 28 as part of a July 16 agreement whereby it would come up with $260,000,000 in cash and $2,100 million in debt-for-equity swaps to buy 85 per cent of the state airline Aerolíneas Argentinas [see p. 37608].
The government had yet to receive permission for this sale from creditor banks holding part of the airline's assets as guarantees of earlier debts.
Loans
The government announced in early October that the World Bank had agreed a US$4,980 million loan (to be disbursed in annual tranches of US$1,000 million) to assist reforms and restructuring in public administration, state companies and provincial treasuries as well as providing funds for social emergencies.
On Aug. 10 the World Bank had unblocked a second tranche of the $1,250 million loan granted in October 1988 [see p.36613]without insisting on a previous condition that the government lower import duties on manufactures goods.
Strike curb
A decree law of Oct. 17 which introduced strict limits on the right of workers in essential services to strike, provoked a strong protest from the anti-Menem faction of the main CGT union confederation.
On the same day its leader Raúl Ubalbini addressed a rally of an estimated 30,000 workers in Buenos Aires and called for a general strike on Nov. 15.
A rally organized by the pro-government CGT faction reportedly attracted 10,000 workers.
The decree was made against a background of strikes which had paralysed public adminstration in five provinces, in protest against the government's latest austerity policies [see p. 37710].
A mutiny of 600 police officers in pursuit of higher salaries was reported to have taken place in police districts in the southern province of Santa Cruz and there were also reports of growing discontent among the military.
Visits to Soviet Union and USA
On Oct. 25 Menem met Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev in Moscow.
Bilateral co-operation agreements were signed to promote the peaceful use of atomic energy and space research and to combat the illegal drugs trade.
In a meeting with Menem in New York on Oct. 1 the US President George Bush had welcomed the Argentine decision to send troops to assist in the blockade of Iraq in the Gulf [see p. 37694], stating that Argentina had "rejoined the international community after many years of frustration and isolation that led the country to a critical situation" .
Bush was scheduled to visit Argentina on Dec. 5.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Resignation of Justice Minister
The Justice Minister, Bernardo Cabral, resigned on Oct. 13 following press disclosures of his affair with Economy Minister Zelia Cardoso de Mello.
Cabral, who was married, was replaced by Jarbas Passarinho, 70, a retired Army colonel and leader of the right-wing Social Democratic Party (PDS).
Cardoso de Mello retained her post.
As an Education and Labour Minister under the previous military regimes, Passarinho had overseen the expulsion of left-wing lecturers and students from universities and the closure of trade unions.
Resignation of Petrobrás president
Luis Otavio da Motta Veiga, president of the Brazilian Petroleum Corporation (Petrobrás), resigned on Oct. 19 following disagreements with Cardoso de Mello over current petrol pricing policy.
He claimed that the government was forcing Petrobrás to run at a loss in order to keep petrol prices and thus inflation down.
Cardoso in turn accused him of "excessive corporatism" and "poor management" in granting wage increases of 98 per cent to end a strike in September [see p. 37710].
Chico Mendes trial
The trial began on Oct. 25 of Darli Alves da Silva and his son Darci Alves Pereira, in the Amazonian town of Xapuri.
They were charged with the murder of Francisco "Chico" Mendes Filho, the leader of the rubber tapper's union and environmental campaigner, on Dec. 22, 1988 [see p. 36459].
Elections
Voter apathy dominated the Oct. 3 elections of 23 state governors, the governors of three territories, the governor of the Federal District of Brasília, 32 senators, 503 federal deputies and 969 state deputies.
The Superior Electoral Court (TSE) issued the results of a survey on Oct. 6 which claimed that 60 per cent of the 84,000,000 people legally obliged to vote had made a "mistake" with their ballot papers or had not voted.
In many states the number of blank and spoilt votes exceeded the number of valid votes cast.
A second round of voting was scheduled for Nov. 25 for state governors in 14 states where no candidate achieved 50 per cent of the valid votes cast.
Chief among these would be the contest for the key governorship of the state of Sao Paulo.
The following state governorship contests were resolved: Rio de Janeiro was won by the veteran politician Leonel Brízola, leader of the Democratic Labour Party (PDT), Amazonas by Gilberto Mestrino of the Party of the Brazilain Democratic Movement (PMDB), Goias by Iris Rezende (PMDB), Ceará by Ciro Gomes Partido da Social Domocracia Brasileira (PSDB), Bahia by Antonio Carlos Magalhaes of the Liberal Front Party (PFL); Mato Grosso by Pedro Pedrossian of the Brazilian Labour Party (PTB), Santa Catarina by Vilson Kleinubing (PFL), Sergipe by Joao Alves (PFL), Federal District of Brasília by Joaquím Roriz, a nominee of President Fernando Collor de Mello.
The Workers Party (PT), whose candidate Luis Inácio da Silva had been narrowly defeated in the December 1989 presidential elections [see pp. 37117-18], failed to win state governorships in Acre and Amapá.
These results were predicted to reflect those for the Congress.
Preliminary results indicated that right-wing parties had won a clear majority of seats, underlining a shift in power to the right in favour of the government, and marking a heavy defeat for the left, in particular the PT.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA REGIONAL
Group of Rio summit
A fourth summit meeting of the Group of Rio countries, held in the Venezuelan capital, Caracas, on Oct. 11-12, was attended by the presidents of Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, Uruguay and Venezuela.
Peru's President Alberto Keinya Fujimori was represented by his wife, the Peruvian Congress having refused him permission to attend.
Chile and Ecuador, invited to attended by the other seven countries, were elected as members at the meeting.
The Group of Rio originated from the Contadora group seeking a Central American peace formula in 1984-85 [see pp. 34032-33], subsequently evolving into a permanent forum to discuss inter-regional affairs.
The election of Paraguay and Bolivia to membership, along with "area presidents" to represent Central American countries and the Caribbean, brought membership to 13.
The Rio Group's relationship with Cuba had yet to be resolved.
Panama was not invited to resume membership.
The closing declaration welcomed the "Enterprise for the Americas Initiative" to promote regional trade and investments, launched by United States President Bush in June 1990 [see p. 37526], but considered the terms initially offered to be "insufficient" .
It called also for the promotion of closer ties with the European Communities (EC), and for a complete restructuring of the Organization of American States (OAS) and the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), both of which were seen as ineffective.
The group called for the establishment of a policy of regional energy self-sufficiency, and for a "strategic investment fund" to finance priority projects and to ease economic problems caused by the current Gulf crisis.
It also urged that the ongoing "Uruguay Round" of multilateral trade negotiations [see pp. 37227-29; 37476]should conclude an agreement which recognized the basic interests of developing countries.
The co-operation of Western creditor government and private banks was sought in providing a global solution to foreign debt burdens, and thus to allow scope for realistic economic and social development strategies which also protected the environment and controlled the production of drugs.
The meeting came in the wake of recent bilateral trade and energy agreements between Mexico and Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela, Chile and Venezuela, and Chile and Argentina, and the trilateral agreement between Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay.
Mexico was also involved in preliminary free trade negotiations with the United States and Canada.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Withdrawal of BJP support for government — Reservations issue — Events in Karnataka and Punjab
Increase in communal tension over Ayodhya shrine dispute — Arrest of Advani and withdrawal of BJP support for National Front government — Resignation of Maneka Gandhi
Communal tensions rose throughout India in October, prompted by a complex dispute over a religious shrine at Ayodhya in Uttar Pradesh.
This long-running affair had led to outbreaks of serious violence in the past, most recently in late 1989 [see p. 36977].
In late September L. K. Advani, the president of the Hindu-revivalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), had begun a Rath Yatra, or religious pilgrimage, through India to mobilize Hindu support for his efforts to build a temple at Ayodhya on the site of the disused Babri Masjid mosque.
Advani planned to join supporters of the radical Vishwa Hindi Parishad (VHP) at Ayodhya in late October to begin constructing the temple.
His procession left behind it a trail of communal violence and death.
Advani threatened on Oct. 17 to withdraw BJP support from Prime Minister V. P. Singh's minority National Front government if the Rath Yatra was halted.
Singh responded on Oct. 19 with a compromise plan, whereby the central government would purchase the disputed area and allow the construction of a temple alongside the mosque.
Singh's proposal was rejected by both Hindus and Moslems.
The tension increased on Oct. 21 when Mulayem Singh Yadav, Janata Dal Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, threatened to arrest Advani if the Rath Yatra crossed from Bihar into Uttar Pradesh.
At the same time security forces moved into position along the Uttar Pradesh-Bihar border and around Ayodhya and large numbers of Hindu militants were placed in detention.
On Oct. 23 V. P. Singh ordered Advani to be arrested under the Internal Security Act to prevent him from entering Uttar Pradesh.
A few hours later BJP leaders in New Delhi informed President Ramaswamy Venkataraman that the party's 88 MPs were withdrawing their crucial "external" support for Singh's government.
At the same time the BJP called a nationwide strike on Oct. 24, during which 4,000 people were arrested and 16 killed.
President Venkataraman refused to dissolve parliament.
Instead, he ordered parliament to be summoned for a special session on Nov. 7 at which V. P. Singh would be given the opportunity to prove his government's viability.
However, on Oct. 26 both the BJP and the Congress (I) announced that they would be prepared to table no confidence motions in the government at the Nov. 7 session.
At the same time dissidents within Singh's own Janata Dal began manoeuvring ahead of the session.
Maneka Gandhi resigned as Minister of State for Environment and Forests on Oct. 26 [for her appointment to the post in December 1989 see p. 37125].
In her resignation letter Gandhi claimed that she was unhappy at the "strange and unilateral decisions" taken by Singh and criticized him for his policies regarding Kashmir and Punjab and for his implementation of the Mandal Commission report [see below].
She urged Singh to resign the premiership "for the sake of the same morality we hold so dear" .
Supreme Court decision on reservations issue — Naxalite train attack in Andhra Pradesh
On Oct. 1 India's Supreme Court ordered the government to delay its implementation of the Mandal Commission recommendations until it had fully completed a list of the castes it intended to target.
The government had announced in early August its decision to implement the Commission's recommendations to reserve 27 per cent of public-sector jobs for members of the lower castes, a decision which had resulted in widespread civil disorder and had exacerbated the already tense political situation [see pp. 37653; 37710-11].
The Supreme Court action was taken in response to a petition against the government's decision submitted by the Bar Association.
The judges hearing the petition said that they hoped that the delay would cool protests which had already cost some 70 lives.
However, on Oct. 2 some 200,000 people gathered in New Delhi to demonstrate against recommendation of the Commission's implementation.
The demonstration quickly turned violent, and seven people were killed.
Throughout October high-caste youths continued to kill themselves in protest at the government's plan.
Naxalite guerrillas belonging to the People's War Group (PWG) of the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist) attacked a train in the southern state of Andhra Pradesh on Oct. 10, burning to death 47 passengers.
According to press reports the guerrillas claimed to have carried out the attack in support of a state-wide bandh (political strike) backing the implementation of the Mandal Commission report.
Political crisis in Karnataka
A dispute within the ruling Congress (I) Party in the southern state of Karnataka resulted in the imposition of a brief spell of President's rule and an eventual change of Chief Minister.
The crisis engendered by the dispute had national implications, Karnataka being one of the main bastions of Congress (I) strength in the Lok Sabha (the lower house of the Indian parliament).
The dispute arose out of a conflict between the Karnataka Chief Minister, Veerendra Patil, and Congress (I) president and leader of the (central) opposition, Rajiv Gandhi.
During September Patil had refused to bow to pressure from the Congress (I) high command to appoint certain individuals to the state Cabinet.
Towards the end of September Patil's position was weakened when he suffered a stroke, and in early October his predicament worsened when Advani's Rath Yatra [see above]incited serious communal rioting in Karnataka which resulted in up to 50 deaths.
Gandhi travelled to the state on Oct. 6 and the next day he announced that Patil would be replaced as Chief Minister within four days.
However, Patil, although weak and partially paralysed, refused to accept Gandhi's directive to resign, despite the resignation of 13 of his ministers.
On Oct. 10, the date on which Gandhi had promised to produce a new Chief Minister, the central government stepped into the fray.
Although the Janata Dal held only 24 of the 225 seats in the Karnataka State Assembly (compared with 178 held by Congress (I)), the Singh government imposed President's rule on the state and suspended its Assembly.
Bhanu Pratap (Singh, the state Governor, declared that the decision had been taken largely because of the serious law and order situation, but in his statement he openly defied convention by issuing a political message which questioned Gandhi's right to be involved in the state's politics.
In its Oct. 11 editorial The Hindu described the central government's move as "an outrage on the Constitution that devalues any claim of the Janata Dal to higher democratic values and constitutional propriety" .
In April 1989, with a Congress (I) government at the centre, President's rule had been imposed in Karnataka prompting bitter complaints from the Janata Dal that the government had adopted a "blatantly partisan attitude" [see p. 36591].
The Congress (I) party in the Karnataka legislature removed Patil as its leader on Oct. 11, replacing him on Oct. 12 with S. Bangarappa, a former Agriculture Minister in the Patil Cabinet and a Gandhi supporter.
The central government finally relinquished President's rule on Oct. 17 and Bangarappa was sworn in as the new Chief Minister.
Developments relating to Punjab
A bill to extend President's rule in the troubled state of Punjab collapsed in the Lok Sabha on Oct. 1 when it failed to secure the required majority [for previous extension of President's rule in April 1990 see p. 37377].
The Constitutional Amendment bill fell through because Congress (I) members abstained in the vote.
The defeat placed the beleaguered Singh government in a difficult position by raising the possibility that elections would have to be held in Punjab before the current period of President's rule ended on Nov. 10.
The Indian Constitution barred the reintroduction of any defeated bill during the same parliamentary session, but this constitutional rule (338) was waived and the bill was reintroduced on Oct. 4.
On this occasion Congress (I) voted with the government and the Constitution (76th) Amendment bill was passed, extending President's rule in Punjab for another six months beyond Nov. 10.
Simranjit Singh Mann, leader of the Akali Dal (Mann) faction, resigned from the Lok Sabha on Oct. 12.
Mann had been elected to the Lok Sabha in the November 1989 general election and his faction constituted the largest Sikh contingent in the chamber.
In his resignation letter Mann said he had resigned to protest against the recent extension of President's rule in Punjab and the refusal of the government to allow a state legislature to be elected.
He also called for the UN to arrange a vote on self-determination for Punjab.
In the absence of any concrete government initiative on Punjab, violence in the state had spiralled during 1990, although all parties accepted that many of the killings were criminally motivated.
A report in the Guardian of Oct. 6 stated that 24 people had been killed in the state on the previous day, taking the October toll to 122 and the total for 1990 to 3,550 [for previous report on Punjab violence see p. 37611].
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Capture of Tarin Kot — Mujaheddin alliance talks
On Oct. 3 Tarin Kot fell to Gulbuddin Hekmatyar's fundamentalist mujaheddin group Hezb-e Islami, its first significant military success since the Soviet withdrawal of February 1989.
The town was the capital of the central Afghanistan province of Urozgan, and mujaheddin sources reported that they had taken over the administration of the entire province following the defection of its governor, its chief of police, and Tarin Kot's garrison of 500.
On Oct. 5 the deputy Defence Minister, Gen. Muhammad Nabi Azimi, confirmed the defeat and blamed it on interference by Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence agency (ISI), which, it was alleged, had been "supplying new weapons to the armed extremists in a bid to capture one of the cities inside Afghanistan" .
Mujaheddin forces also attacked Qalat, the capital of the southern province of Zabul.
On Oct. 12 the Afghan government retaliated against a two-pronged attack on Kabul launched by Hezb-e Islami by carrying out heavy air and artillery strikes on mujaheddin positions to the west and south-east of the city.
Mujaheddin meeting in Islamabad
Hekmatyar's most powerful rival in the mujaheddin, the northern-based Jamaat-e-Islami leader Ahmad Shah Massud (known as the "Lion of Panjsher" for his victories over Soviet troops in the Panjsher Valley — see p. 36396), visited Islamabad, the Pakistan capital, on Oct. 13 for the first time for more than 10 years, to meet other mujaheddin leaders and senior Pakistani civilian and military officials, including the Pakistani President, Ghulam Ishaq Khan, the Army Chief of Staff, Gen. Mirza Aslam Beg, and the ISI chief, Maj.-Gen.
Asad Durrani.
The week-long visit was the most significant move since the Soviet withdrawal in terms of creating a common line among the mujaheddin groups.
Held on the initiative of Pakistan, its objective (requiring a rapprochement between Massud and Hekmatyar) was to reshape the discredited Afghan interim government by forming a wider alliance between Peshawar-based leaders and field commanders in Afghanistan.
Massud, who was picked up by a Pakistani helicopter from the Afghan border, arrived in Islamabad after attending an important meeting of mujaheddin commanders inside Afghanistan on Oct. 9-12.
This council, in which Massud accepted a major role, rejected Hezb-e Islami plans to attack Kabul later in October, arguing that the mujaheddin were too lightly armed to take Kabul and that the fierce rocket attacks favoured by Hekmatyar would kill civilians as well as soldiers.
On Oct. 27 Massud announced from Peshawar that, following discussion with Hekmatyar, consensus had been reached on a new plan to topple the Kabul government.
The so-called Islamabad agreement also covered the holding of elections in the 13 northern provinces of the country before March 21, 1991, in which only Jamaat-e Islami and Hezb-e Islami would participate.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Opposition-led agitation against Ershad regime
Violent anti-government demonstrations took place in the capital of Bangladesh, Dhaka, during mid-October.
The demonstrators, many of whom were students, demanded the resignation of President Hussain Mohammad Ershad and the holding of a fresh general elections under the auspices of a caretaker government.
The first demonstrations were held on Oct. 10 and were organised jointly by the student wings of the two main opposition alliances, the Awami League and the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP).
According to Western press reports five people were killed and 200 injured as riot police tried to quell disturbances in Dhaka.
Demonstrations continued during the following days, culminating in a series of nationwide strikes and rallies on Oct. 15-16, by which time the death toll had risen to eight.
In an effort to calm the situation the government had closed all educational institutions in Dhaka on Oct. 14.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Registration of Chaovalit's new party — Pressure on government
Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut, who was regarded as the principal political rival of the Prime Minister, Maj.-Gen.
Chatichai Choonhaven, was elected as leader of the newly formed New Hope Party (NHP) on Oct. 22.
The NHP had been registered officially as Thailand's 16th political party on Oct. 11.
In June 1990 Gen. Chaovalit, the former Army C.-in-C., had resigned as Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister after serving less than three months in the Cabinet [see p. 37532].
Chaovalit's formal entry into Thai party politics occurred at a difficult time for Chatichai and his government, already under pressure as a result of an outbreak of serious Cabinet infighting in late September.
The disagreements ostensibly related to disputes involving large communications contracts, but some commentators claimed that they reflected Chatichai's concern over the growing influence of the powerful Interior Minister, Banharn Silpa-Archa.
Chatichai was faced with another source of pressure on Oct. 14 when students from Ramkhamhaeng University launched an anti-government protest in Bangkok.
One of the students, Thanavuth Klingchua, set himself alight during the demonstration and died of his injuries four days later.
On the day of his death Bangkok police announced that they had grounds to believe that members of the National Revolutionary Council (Sapha Patiwat, also known as the National Democratic Council — see p. 36151) had been involved in the incident.
Subsequent reports suggested that the police were planning to arrest a number of key members of the group, including the Council's leader Prasert Sapsunthorn.
The alleged involvement of the Council had potentially serious political implications as the group had in the past publicly supported Gen. Chaovalit, and in particular his concept of "peaceful revolution" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Death of Le Duc Tho — Foreign relations — Internal security
Death of Le Duc Tho
Le Duc Tho, a veteran leader of the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV), died of cancer in Hanoi on Oct. 13, aged 79.
Born as Phan Dinh Khai in northern Vietnam, then part of French Indo-China, in 1911, Le Duc Tho was a founder member of the Indo-chinese Communist Party (ICP) in 1929.
Along with other future communist leaders, he was imprisoned by the French colonial authorities for most of the 1930s.
He escaped to China in 1940 and helped found the Revolutionary League for the Independence of Vietnam (the Viet Minh) in the following year.
After the establishment by the Viet Minh of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV) in the north in 1945, he was dispatched to the South during the war against the French in the early 1950s, but soon returned to Hanoi and to a place in the Communist Party politburo, Vietnam having meanwhile, in 1954, been partitioned into two military zones, with DRV forces in the north and French forces in the south.
Le Duc Tho was appointed to the secretariat of the Communist Party (in charge of ideology and organisation) in 1960, and came to international prominence after 1968 as a "special adviser" to the North Vietnamese delegation at the Paris peace talks.
It was in this capacity that Le Duc Tho conducted secret negotiations in the early 1970s with Henry Kissinger, US President Nixon's National Security Adviser, which eventually led to the signing of the 1973 Paris agreements.
Unlike Kissinger, Le Duc Tho declined the Nobel Peace Prize offered to him for his role in negotiating the agreements.
Upon his return from Paris Le Duc Tho travelled secretly to South Vietnam to direct the final military assault (the "Ho Chi Minh Campaign" ) on Saigon which toppled the US-backed Thieu regime in 1975.
Less than four years later he played a significant role in Vietnam's ousting of the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia.
Le Duc Tho was re-elected to the politburo and secretariat at the CPV's fourth and fifth congresses (1976 and 1982).
At the sixth congress (1986) he formally resigned from his party posts, continuing as an "adviser" to the central committee.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Nov. 1 pointed out that although commentators had disagreed on Le Duc Tho's exact political function as an "adviser" all were agreed that he remained a key player.
Some commentators regarded him as the leader of a conservative faction which had opposed the economic reformist policies of CPV general secretary Nguyen Van Linh.
Others denied that Le Duc Tho opposed Nguyen Van Linh's policies, stressing that many of his protegés (including his brother, Interior Minister Mai Chi Tho), eagerly accepted Nguyen Van Linh's policies.
Relations with the USA and Japan
A further step was taken towards the normalization of Vietnamese-US relations on Oct. 17 when Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, visited Washington for talks with Gen. John Vessey, President Bush's special envoy dealing with US servicemen missing in action (MIA) in Indo-China.
They agreed to establish a US office in Hanoi to gather information about some 1,700 MIAs.
Nguyen Co Thach's visit was the first official visit to the US capital by a high-ranking Vietnamese official since the unification of Vietnam in 1976.
In late September Thach had met with the US Secretary of State, James Baker, at the UN in New York [see p. 37713].
Nguyen Co Thach visited Japan on Oct. 22-27, the first official visit by a Vietnamese Foreign Minister since Vietnamese unification; discussions during the visit focused on the issue of Cambodia.
In June Japan had hosted a peace conference of the various Cambodian factions [see pp. 37532].
Trial in Hanoi of captured guerrillas — Dismantling of opposition group
In a trial held on Oct. 10-13 in Hanoi, 38 members of a Vietnamese resistance movement were sentenced to prison terms of between three years and life, having been found guilty of "traitorous activities" .
The "traitors" were members of the National United Front for the Liberation of Vietnam (NUFLVN), a California-based resistance movement.
A group of 68 NUFLVN members, led by Tran Quang Do, had been discovered in Laos by members of the Lao armed forces in August 1989.
In the ensuing fighting, which lasted over a month, 38 guerrillas were captured, including Tran Quang Do; 29 were killed and one escaped.
The 38 captured guerrillas were extradited from Laos in January 1990.
A similar group of NUFLVN guerrillas had been sentenced to prison terms in late 1987 [see p. 35902].
The Vietnamese newspaper Nguoi Ha Noi reported on Oct. 7 that a clandestine opposition group, the Scientific Social Party of Vietnam (SSPV), had been dismantled in July.
According to the report the SSPV, led by Nguyen Kiet, had planned to assassinate a number of high-ranking officials and set off bombs near Ho Chi Minh's mausoleum on Sept. 2, Vietnam's national day.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Meeting of US and Lao foreign ministers
The Lao Foreign Affairs Minister, Gen. Phoune Sipaseuth, met with his United States counterpart, Secretary of State James Baker, at the UN in New York on Oct. 3.
The 30-minute meeting constituted the highest-level contact between the two countries since the communist victory in Laos in 1975.
Discussions centred on the issue of some 530 US servicemen reported as missing in action (MIA) in Laos during the Vietnam war.
The two sides also discussed ways of co-operating to reduce poppy cultivation and opium refining in Laos, one of the world's principal opium-producing countries.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Stalemate over SNC formation
Disputes continued throughout October between the contending factions in the Cambodian conflict over the formation of a Supreme National Council (SNC).
The tripartite resistance, insisting that they had already compromised, demanded that the State of Cambodia regime (the Phnom Penh government) must now accept the choice of Prince Norodom Sihanouk as chair of the SNC.
They claimed that the agreement by the five permanent members of the UN Security Council [see p. 37712] "clearly and unambiguously stated…that Samdech Norodom Sihanouk will be elected chair of the SNC" .
The resistance also refused to consider having the Phnom Penh Prime Minister, Hun Sen, as SNC vice-chair.
For its part, the Phnom Penh government insisted that the "obstacle" of the former ruler must not be allowed to hold up the peace process, and denied that he had to be SNC chair under September's Jakarta agreement on setting up the SNC.
Stressing the need for "equal numerical composition" , it outlined three options:(i) Sihanouk as chair and Hun Sen as vice-chair;(ii) two vice-chairs; or (iii) a single chair on a rotating basis.
Amid calls from all interested parties for the reconvening of the Paris International Conference on Cambodia (held inconclusively in August 1989 — see pp. 36848-49), Ali Alatas, as Indonesian Foreign Minister one of the two co-chairs of the Paris conference, said that a solution should be found to the Cambodian problem without waiting for the SNC chairmanship issue to be resolved.
First unanimous UN resolution on Cambodia
A UN General Assembly resolution on Oct. 15 called on the Cambodian leaders to co-operate and to exercise self-restraint, and welcomed the agreement to set up the SNC and to send an SNC representative to occupy Cambodia's seat.
This was the first UN resolution since 1978 which did not condemn Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia and demand the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops; it was also the first unanimous resolution on Cambodia.
The resolution was welcomed by all parties concerned in the Cambodian conflict.
High-level French delegation in Phnom Penh
In early October contacts between France and the State of Cambodia were considerably strengthened, after a visit in late September by the French Secretary of State for International Cultural Relations, Thierry de Beaucé.
His three-day visit was the first official French government visit for more than 20 years, and he was the most senior Western government minister to visit Cambodia in more than 15 years.
The French government also authorized the charter company Air Liberté to begin direct flights between Paris and Phnom Penh — the first Western country to do so.
US aid to non-communists — UK denial of support for Khmers Rouges
On Oct. 12 the United States Senate voted to give US$20,000,000 in non-military aid to the non-communist Cambodian resistance, to be channelled openly though government agencies rather than covertly through the CIA as in the past.
In the United Kingdom reports that the secret service MI6 was training the Khmers Rouges in mine-laying and mines technology were strongly denied by the Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd.
In a House of Commons debate at the end of the month the Foreign Office said that UK had "never given, and will never give, support of any kind to the Khmers Rouges" .
Continued fighting — Supply of tanks to Khmers Rouges
On Oct. 14 the Khmer Rouge radio stations resumed their regular battle reports, not heard since early September when the Jakarta agreement was signed.
Shortly beforehand, Prince Norodom Ranaridh, commander-in-chief of the armed forces of Sihanouk's faction, called for intensified military and political activities.
Fighting in October was widespread but particularly in evidence in the provinces of Battambang, Kompong Thom, Pursat, Siem Reap and Oddar Meanchey, and around Phnom Penh.
In mid-month a Khmer Rouge attack on the Phnom Penh-Kompong Som train left 50 dead, and it was revealed by Phnom Penh that since January the Khmers Rouges had launched 72 attacks on trains.
The resistance continued to claim that Vietnamese troops and settlers were infiltrating Cambodia (over 5,000 in the first half of the month alone), and in one report alleged Lao involvement.
Referring to China's alleged delivery of 24 T-59 tanks to the guerrillas in the previous two months, the Economist of Oct. 27 said that in fact 12-20 "clapped out" tanks had been delivered at the beginning of the year, and were probably still on the Thai-Cambodian border, as their value was mainly psychological.
The Khmers Rouges had claimed meanwhile that a "group of Soviet technicians" was repairing "electronic equipment in Soviet-made tanks" in preparation for an attack on Battambang by the State of Cambodia forces.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Formation of new Cabinet
The first session of the newly-constituted State Little Hural, or standing parliament [see p. 37713], ended on Oct. 5 with the confirmation of a 15-member Cabinet as stipulated in the Law on the Structure and Composition of the Mongolian Government [ibid.].
The new and more streamlined Cabinet was drawn from all four political parties: the ruling Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP), the Mongolian Democratic Party (MDP), the National Progressive Party (NPP) and the Mongolian Green Party.
During the session there had been some debate over the selection of the ministers of finance and foreign affairs.
The appointment of the former Finance Minister, Ayuurdzanyn Badzarhuu, was initially opposed, but later confirmed, while the appointment of Tserenpiliyn Gombosuren as Foreign Minister was delayed until his return from the UN General Assembly session in New York.
The session also established the Supreme Court and the Office of Public Prosecutor, dismissed the people's auditing bodies and revoked the 1957 law on taxation of single and childless people.
A 16-member commission to draft a new constitution was also set up.
Headed by President Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat, members included the Premier, Dashiyn Byambasuren; the deputy chair of the Little Hural, Kinayatyn Dzardyhan, and the general secretary of the MPRP, Gombojavyn Ochirbat.
The State Little Hural was to resume its session on Nov. 12.
Dashiyn Byambasuren (MPRP) Prime Minister Davaadorjiyn Ganbold (NPP) Vice-Prime Minister Dambiyn Dorligjav (MDP) Deputy Prime Minister Choyjilsurengiyn Purevdorj (MPRP) Deputy Prime Minister Maj.-Gen.
Shagalyn Jadambaa Defence Dandzangiyn Radnaaragchaa Agriculture Nonovyn Urtnasan Education Tserenpiliyn Gombosuren (MPRP) Foreign Relations Ayuurdzanyn Badzarhuu (MPRP) Finance Jamyangiyn Batsuur National Development S. Bayarbaatar Trade and Industry Choyjamtsyn Badamhaamb Labour Jugneegiyn Amarsanaa Justice Pagvajavyn Nyamdavaa Health and Policy Plans Dzardin Batjargal State Control Committee for Nature and the Environment 
Mongolian Cabinet
MPRP politburo members
Tserenpiliyn Gombosuren, Tseveenjavyn Oold, Lodongiyn Tudev, Budyn Sumyaa.
Central Committee secretariat: Tseveenjavyn Oold, Budyn Sumyaa.
By-elections to People's Great Hural
The new President, the Premier, the two Deputy Premiers and the Defence Minister all held seats in the People's Great Hural which they were required to give up, as it was stipulated that Cabinet post-holders could not concurrently serve as deputies to the assembly.
Elections were thus scheduled for Nov. 18 in these five constituencies, and in seven others where candidates had failed to get the necessary minimum number of votes in the July 29 elections [see p. 37656].
Establishment of two new Councils
Two new bodies had been set up by presidential decree in September.
The 23-member Presidential Civil Council was established as a consultative body for co-ordinating the work of different political and social groups, while the 24-member Scholarly Council was to be an independent recommendatory body for state and government policy.
Economy
According to the Ministry of Finance, the first shares in enterprises were to be offered to individuals and corporate shareholders.
The only enterprises to be excluded from this plan were to be geothermal power stations, the central airport, and "possibly" the railways and other important national facilities.
In an interview with the trade union paper Hodolmor, the new Minister of Labour, Choyjamtsyn Badamhaamb, stressed the importance of developing small production and service enterprises to solve the unemployment problem.
She pledged to provide a guaranteed minimum wage, protect standards of living and prevent price rises in consumer goods.
A new trade union, the National Free Workers' Association, was set up in September.
The Foreign Minister, Tserenpiliyn Gombosuren, met US Secretary of State James Baker during the UN General Assembly session in New York in early October, and signed an inter-governmental agreement on stimulating investment in Mongolia by US companies, aimed at contributing to Mongolia's economic development.
REFERENCES: Reference article pp. 37343-45; September 1990 election of leading officials p. 37713.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Hosting of Asian Games
The 11th Asian Games was held in Beijing on Sept. 22-Oct. 7, the first time China had hosted an international sporting event of this size.
The 37 participating countries included Taiwan (competing under the name Taipei:China), Vietnam (for the first time for 20 years) and Kuwait, but not Iraq, excluded by an emergency meeting of the Olympic Council of Asia on Sept. 20 because of its Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait.
In the competition, Chinese competitors won 183 gold medals; the next highest total was 54 won by South Koreans.
The Games were hailed as "a great success" by the mayor of Beijing and Games organizer, Chen Xitong.
Praising the "spirit of the Asian Games" , the People's Daily on Oct. 8 said that the successful hosting of the event would become a "lasting impetus to boost China's modernization drive" .
The Japanese news agency Kyodo reported that a number of "destructive elements" , some of them carrying bombs, had been arrested near the Games village.
The official New China News Agency Xinhua, however, said that no security incidents had been reported throughout the Games.
Qiao Shi, a member of the politburo's standing committee, told a national conference on Oct. 22 that the country's "serious onslaught" on crime would continue following the Games.
He specifically targeted criminal gangs, saying that since May police had successfully "destroyed" a number of gangs and dealt with 796,000 crimes.
Li Peng's National Day speech
In a speech on the eve of the 41st National Day on Oct. 1, Premier Li Peng hailed China's improved international standing, citing newly-established ties with Saudi Arabia, Indonesia and Namibia, and the West's "essential flexibility" in its relations with China.
He also signalled China's willingness to improve ties with Vietnam following a secret contact in September and the visit of the Vietnamese Vice-Premier, Senior Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, who had said that the time was "ripe" for better relations [see pp. 37712-3].
Li Peng explicitly linked "gradual" normalization of relations with a political solution to the Cambodian problem, calling on Vietnam to take "positive measures" .
Li Peng said that economic order had improved "to some extent" and the economy was moving along "a healthy path" .
China was now formulating a tentative 10-year plan, he said, and would present the outline for the eighth five-year plan (1991-95) to the party's seventh plenum originally scheduled for September, but now likely to take place in December.
Conflict over pace of reform
In a speech at a national conference on industrial production made on Aug. 2 and released on Oct. 8, Li Peng warned against "blind" over-rapid growth, and summed up the policies to be continued into the first two years of the forthcoming eighth five-year plan as "rectification and the deepening of reform" , with the emphasis on central control.
Counselling an overall growth rate of 5.5-6 per cent in the next five years, he said that the government would maintain subsidies for state-owned enterprises, accounting for one-third of the national budget.
Commentators noted the contrast between Li Peng's line and remarks by Jiang Zemin and Yang Shangkun to the Singapore Premier, Lee Kuan Yew, on Oct. 18 calling for the reforms to be speeded up.
The new head of the State Council's Economic Reform Commission, Chen Jinhua, who had replaced Li Peng in September [see p. 37713], also said that he was looking forward to "more rapid and more effective" change in the 1990s, "as Deng Xiaoping has required" .
However, Chen added that Li Peng would retain direct leadership over the commission.
Attempted hijack
On Oct. 2, 128 people including 37 foreigners died when a Boeing 737 belonging to the Civil Aviation Administration hit two other aircraft on the runway during an emergency landing at Baiyun airport in Guangdong after two hijackers had ordered the crew to fly to Taiwan.
There was widespread criticism of the handling of the disaster.
The crash was not reported by state-controlled radio for 12 hours, and relatives of the dead were not informed for up to two days.
Following an inquiry into the crash, a management shake-up of the aviation authority was promised.
Reported formation of secret pro-Zhao army group
A group of People's Liberation Army (PLA) officers was reported to have formed a secret group backing the reinstatement of the former party chief, Zhao Ziyang.
Western reports, citing a PLA source, said that the 1,300-strong group mainly comprised officers from the Guangzhou and Chengdu military commands in the south where Zhao had previously worked.
Loyal to the party, the group was said to be seeking the dismissal of President Yang Shangkun and of his brother, the head of the Army's general political department, Yang Baibing.
The Yang brothers had taken a prominent part in quelling the "turmoil" in mid-1989 and presided over a massive programme of political education within the army.
REFERENCES: Reference article pp. 37336-42; June 1990 Tiananmen Square anniversary, release of Fang Lizhi pp. 37531-32; August Premier's south-east Asia tour p. 37656; September replacement of Li Peng in Economic Commission and visit by Soviet Foreign Minister pp. 37713-14.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Conviction of Li on corruption charges
Ronald Li, the former chairman of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, was convicted on Oct. 24 on two counts under the colony's Bribery Prevention Ordinance of accepting preferential offers of shares in Cathay Pacific Airways and Novel Enterprises in 1986 and 1987 in return for helping to obtain listings for the companies on the stock exchange.
Li, who denied the charges and said that he would appeal against the conviction, had been arrested and first charged in January 1988 [see pp. 35742; 36764].
Li was sentenced to four years in prison, two years for each count, and ordered to pay both the alleged HK$865,000 (US$110,000) profit he had made from the sale of the shares, and the estimated US$1,300,000 in court costs.
In sentencing him, Justice Kemal Bokhary said that the offences committed by Li had been "very serious indeed" but that he had taken into account the accused's good record and his "contributions to the community in the past years" .
(The maximum penalty for each offence was seven years in prison and a HK$500,000 fine.)
Li had been instrumental in transforming the Hong Kong stock exchange into one of the most dynamic in the world, particularly after the merger of the colony's four exchanges in 1986.
He had been one of the most influential members of Hong Kong's financial community and was one of the most prominent figures ever tried in the colony.
Along with seven other former senior members of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, Li still faced additional similar corruption charges involving the acceptance of bribes for approving listings for Hong Kong companies on the exchange.
The second trial was scheduled for February 1991.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Release of Japanese seamen
Two Japanese seamen, imprisoned in North Korea since 1983, were released on Oct. 11 and were allowed to return to their homeland.
The men, convicted on espionage charges, had been sentenced to 15-year prison terms in 1987.
The release of the prisoners, which had been widely anticipated following the successful visit of a joint Liberal Democratic Party and Japan Socialist Party delegation to North Korea in September, was interpreted as an important gesture of conciliation and as a means of clearing the way for further talks aimed at the eventual establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Emergence of spy scandal — Relations between government and opposition
Dismissal of Defence Minister
The South Korean Defence Minister, Lee Sang Hoon, was dismissed on Oct. 8, after being held responsible for the unauthorized military surveillance of civilians.
Lt.-Gen.
Cho Nam Pung was also dismissed from his position as head of the Defence Security Command (DSC), a key military counterintelligence agency.
The opposition had seized upon the surveillance controversy as a sign of the continued involvement of the military within the political process.
The affair was based on evidence from a deserter from the DSC, who claimed that the DSC had conducted unauthorized surveillance against some 1,300 civilians, including politicians, journalists and religious figures.
President Roh Tae Woo appointed a former Army Chief of Staff, Lee Jong Koo, as the country's new Defence Minister; Lt.-Gen.
Ku Chang Hoe was named as the new DSC commander.
In making the appointments, Roh ordered "changes in thinking and improvements in military operation commensurate with democratization…so that the public would not have doubts about matters regarding national security" .
Following his appointment Lee immediately announced that he intended to close the DSC interrogation bureau, reduce the total number of intelligence agents and streamline the organization's structure.
Personnel changes within ruling party — Continued opposition boycott of legislature
Continuing problems between the factions of the Democratic Liberal Party (DLP) on Oct. 12 prompted its three chairmen — Kim Young Sam, Kim Jong Pil and Park Tae Joon — to recommend party changes.
Shortly afterwards the President announced a reshuffle of DLP posts which included the appointment of Kim Yoon Whan, hitherto Minister of State for Political Affairs, as floor leader of the party within the National Assembly.
His Cabinet portfolio was given to his predecessor as floor leader, Kim Dong Young.
The changes also reflected the current impasse within the National Assembly, with the opposition continuing to boycott proceedings in protest against the DLP having used its newly-created overall majority to push through several controversial pieces of legislation.
Kim Dae Jung, head of the main opposition Party for Peace and Democracy (PPD), began a hunger strike on Oct. 8 in support of demands for greater social and economic justice, the implementation of local autonomy measures, the dissolution of the DSC and the abandonment of plans to transform the current presidential political system into Cabinet government.
On Oct. 15 Kim was admitted to hospital, whereupon all 69 PPD legislators voted to begin individual hunger strikes in support of their leader.
The hunger strikes were called off on Oct. 20, although the PPD said that it would continue its boycott of the National Assembly.
Trade agreement with China
South Korea's rapprochement with the communist allies of North Korea continued with the signature on Oct. 20 of a trade agreement with China.
Trade offices were expected to open in November in Beijing and Seoul.
The agreement, signed in Beijing by the China Council for the Promotion of International Trade (CCPIT) and the Korea Trade Promotion Corporation (KOTRA), bilateral trade and serve as a first step towards the eventual establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries.
The trade offices, which would perform limited consular functions, represented the first permanent missions to be exchanged between the two countries.
Bilateral trade between the two had grown in recent years and was expected to reach $3,200 million in 1990 and $3,500 million in 1991.
The agreement followed South Korea's establishment of diplomatic relations with all eastern European countries (except Albania) over the last two years.
This trend had culminated in a joint communiqué issued at the UN on Sept. 30, in which South Korea and the Soviet Union had announced their intention to establish diplomatic relations at ambassadorial level with immediate effect.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Premiers' meeting — Sporting contacts
Second round of Premiers' talks
A South Korean government delegation led by Prime Minister Kang Young Hoon visited North Korea on Oct. 16-19 for a second session of the joint Premiers' talks which had begun in September.
During his stay in Pyongyang Kang held several sessions of talks with his North Korean counterpart, Yon Hyong Muk and, on Oct. 18, made a courtesy call upon President Kim Il Sung.
Little tangible progress was achieved, however; as at September's Seoul meeting, the Southern delegation demanded the agreement of inter-Korean reconciliation measures, including telephone and mail links, freer travel and economic exchanges and co-operation, whilst the Northern delegation insisted upon a joint non-aggression declaration and a commitment to disarmament.
The two sides also differed over the issue of Korean membership of the UN.
Kang proposed that the two states should acquire separate UN membership as a temporary measure until such time as Korean reunification was achieved.
Yon reiterated the North's position that the two states should enter the UN sharing a single Korean seat.
During his talks with Kim Il Sung, Yon emphasized the willingness of South Korean President Roh Tae Woo to hold a summit meeting with the 78-year-old Northern leader.
Kim suggested that he wished to hold an early meeting with Roh, but that this would be dependent upon the Premiers' talks yielding "visible results" .
A presidential summit, claimed Kim, "should be an encounter that produces good results; if there is no outcome it will disappoint the people" .
The talks ended without agreement upon a joint statement, with each side adhering to its previously outlined position.
Nevertheless, the two sides agreed to hold a further session of talks in Seoul on Dec. 11-14.
North-South Korean soccer matches
An unprecedented sporting contact between the two Korean states occurred on Oct. 11 when the first round of the North-South Korean Unification Soccer Matches was played in Pyongyang before a crowd of 150,000.
The two teams arrived in the northern capital from Beijing where they had been competing in the Asian Games.
The Northern team won 2-1, but the second match, played in Seoul on Oct. 23, resulted in a 1-0 Southern victory.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Financial scandals — Rioting in Osaka
Sentencing of Hisashi Shinto
Hisashi Shinto, 80, one of Japan's most senior industrialists, was on Oct. 9 given a suspended prison sentence of two years for having accepted bribes in the Recruit shares-for-influence scandal whilst serving as chairman of the privatized Nippon Telephone and Telegraph (NTT).
The sentence imposed by the presiding judge in the Tokyo district court was suspended because of Shinto's extreme age and "his past contribution to the business world" ; he was also fined 22,700,000 yen (nearly US$174,000).
Shinto's resignation from NTT in December 1988 had marked the first major development in the Recruit affair, a scandal which had involved the purchase of influence by Recruit chairman Hiromasa Ezoe, in return for the provision of cheap pre-flotation shares in a Recruit subsidiary to leading figures within of the country's political, administrative and economic spheres.
The exposure of the scandal blighted the careers of several leading politicians and led ultimately to the resignation of Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita in May 1989.
The conviction of Shinto, after a 20-month trial, marked the first occasion on which a court had ruled that the Recruit shares had been intended as a bribe.
As such it undermined the defences of the other 10 who faced charges arising from the affair and who, like Shinto, had argued that the shares did not constitute a form of bribery.
Rioting in Osaka
For five nights, beginning on Oct. 2, up to 1,500 rioters armed with rocks and petrol bombs fought running street battles with 2,500 police in the country's most serious disturbances for almost 20 years.
The rioting occurred in Airin, a deprived area of Osaka, the territory of some of Japan's most notorious criminal gangs.
It resulted in some 200 injuries, the arrest of at least 55 people, and extensive damage including the burning of a train depot.
The unrest was sparked off by the arrest of a local policeman on charges of corruption.
The longstanding allegation of police complicity in the activities of Airin's criminal syndicates made the arrest particularly sensitive.
The situation was further inflamed by the arrest of a man for making a speech criticizing the forthcoming enthronement ceremony of Emperor Akihito.
A series of confrontations between protesters and police escalated into violence, with the numbers swelling on each successive night.
The unrest then subsided unexpectedly, but police rejected as unfounded the rumours that they had struck a deal with the criminal syndicates.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SINGAPORE
Establishment of diplomatic relations with China
Singapore and China established diplomatic relations on Oct. 3.
A joint communiqué signed at the UN in New York by the Singaporean Foreign Affairs and Community Development Minister, Wong Kan Seng, and the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, stated that the two governments had decided to establish diplomatic relations "on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence and the principles enshrined in the Charter of the UN" .
An agreement to establish relations "as early as possible" had been reached during an Aug. 11-13 visit to Singapore by the Chinese Premier Li Peng [see p. 37656].
The impetus for this agreement had been provided on Aug. 8 by the resumption of diplomatic relations between China and Indonesia, one of Singapore's five partners in the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN)[see pp. 37612-13; 37656].
Brunei was now the sole ASEAN member without formal diplomatic ties with China.
Relations between China and Singapore were especially sensitive given that well over 70 per cent of Singapore's population were of Chinese descent.
A further complicating factor was Singapore's close economic and military links with Taiwan.
On Oct. 2 the Taiwanese Premier, Gen. Hau Pei-tsun, told members of the Legislative Yuan that Taiwan's "substantive relations" with Singapore would not be affected by Singapore's establishment of diplomatic ties with China.
On the same day the Taiwanese representative in Singapore, Chen Yu-chu, announced that relations with Singapore would "continue to develop in the future" .
The Prime Minister of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew, visited China on Oct. 16-24, his fifth such visit in his 31 years as Premier.
He met a number of high-level Chinese leaders including Li Peng, President Yang Shangkun and the general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Jiang Zemin.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
Premature general election
On Oct. 5 the Dewan Rakyat (lower house of federal parliament) and state legislative assemblies, except those of Sabah and Sarawak, were dissolved and elections, general and state, called for Oct. 21 (Oct. 20 and 21 for general election voting in Sabah and Sarawak), one year before their due date.
At stake were 180 parliamentary and 455 state assembly seats.
Datuk Seri Mahathir Mohamed, Prime Minister since 1981, was seeking a third term and led an 11-party multiracial National Front coalition (Barisan Nasional), which held 133 seats in the outgoing parliament.
The opposition was loosely grouped into the Gagasan Rakyat (People's Might), led by Tengku Razaleigh Hamzah, a former Finance Minister and one-time Mahathir ally.
For the first time since independence the opposition alliance included Malays, whose dominance was enshrined in the constitution, rather than being restricted to the Chinese and Indian communities.
The Parti Islam (PAS) and Razaleigh's own party, Semangat "46 (Spirit of" 46), agreed not to put up candidates against each other.
The official campaign period was only 10 days.
At the outset parties were reminded that they could not hold political meetings in places of worship and had to obtain police permission to hold any meetings at all.
In addition government control of the media ensured that the opposition's campaign was given little coverage.
Mahathir's campaign slogan was "Peace, stability and prosperity" ; the opposition's was "Save Malaysia" .
The main issues in the election included the economy, political liberalization, public services and spending (in particular the controversial road privatization plan), greater autonomy for investigators into corruption, and relations between the states and the federal government.
Analysts agreed that the campaign was one of Malaysia's most fiercely contested and most expensive, although the shortest.
Prior to calling the election Mahathir had claimed to have tapes of Razaleigh telling his own supporters that if Semangat "46 won, he would" destroy"the PAS and the Democratic Action Party (DAP), the largest opposition party in the coalition.
Razaleigh insisted that this evidence had been fabricated.
On Oct. 15 the Parti Bersatu Sabah, one of the parties in the National Front, switched its allegiance to the opposition.
This called into question the government's chances of winning a two-thirds majority, which it would need to make constitutional changes, and which every government had achieved hitherto, except in the 1969 elections.
Election results
Mahathir's coalition won 127 parliamentary seats, thereby securing its two-thirds majority.
The Prime Minister's own majority in his constituency increased by more than 12,000, and all the outgoing government ministers were returned to power except the Minister of Defence, Tengku Ahmad Rithauddeen, and the Minister of Science, Technology and Environment, Datuk Amar Stephen Yong.
Mahathir said that there would not be a major Cabinet reshuffle.
The opposition coalition's strength increased from 37 to 53 seats.
Semangat"46, however, lost five of the 12 seats it had held, and both its deputy president, Datuk Rais Yatim, and the DAP chairman, Chen Man Hin, lost in their constituencies.
The turnout was given as up to 70 per cent of the electorate, the balloting was reported incident-free, and observers declared the elections to be "free in accordance with Malaysian law and circumstances" .
after elections at dissolution National Front United Malays National Organization 71 73 Malaysian Chinese Association 18 17 Gerakan 5 5 Malaysian Indian Congress 6 5 United Sabah National Organization 6 5 Parti Bansa Dayak Sarawak 4 4 Parti Pesaka Bumiputra Bersatu 10 7 Sarawak United People's Party 4 4 Sarawak National Party 3 4 Democratic Action Party (DAP) 20 24 Parti Bersatu Sabah 14 9 Semangat"46 8 12 Parti Islam (PAS) 7 1 Independents 4 4 Permas 0 1 Total 180 175 
Malaysian election results Seats
Results in states
The National Front was able to form governments in all states in peninsular Malaysia except Kelantan, where all 39 seats were won by the Angkatan Perpaduan Ummah (Muslim Unity Movement).
In Sabah the United Sabah Party (Parti Bersatu Sabah — PBS) won 14 of 20 federal seats, and was expected to press for a better return from the exploitation of Sabah's natural resources.
In Penang the National Front's outgoing Chief Minister, Lim Chong Eu, lost to the DAP secretary-general, Lim Kit Siang.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Attempted coup in Mindanao
Some 350 Army mutineers led by a renegade colonel, Alexander Noble, on Oct. 4 seized two key military bases in the Northern Mindanao provincial capitals of Butuan and Cagayan de Oro.
Statements faxed to Western embassies proclaimed the island of Mindanao — the second largest in the Philippines — as "the free and sovereign federal republic on Mindanao" .
Noble had been in hiding since his participation in the December 1989 coup attempt against the Aquino government — the most serious to date — and was believed to be closely associated with the Reform the Armed Forces Movement (RAM), the dissident movement within the military led by the now fugitive colonel, Gregorio "Gringo" Honasan.
Some analysts speculated that Noble's action was originally part of a wider plot against the Aquino government, and was designed to coincide with revolts elsewhere on Mindanao and, possibly, in other areas of the Philippines.
The failure of other parties to act, however, left Noble isolated and outnumbered by loyal forces.
The rebels abandoned the Bancasi army camp in Butuan, the headquarters of the 402nd brigade, after government aircraft bombed the camp's main buildings and communications systems on Oct. 5.
They continued to occupy the 4th Division's Camp Evangalista headquarters in Cagayan de Oro, however, which Noble had designated his headquarters.
Although in control of the divisional command post, the rebels made no attempt to seize the remainder of the camp which was defended by some 200 loyal troops.
As more loyal forces were moved into the area, the rebels were reported to be short of supplies, and forced to rely upon food donations from a local religious group.
Despite vowing to die in defence of Evangalista, in the early hours of Oct. 6 Noble surrendered unconditionally.
Aspects of the revolt gave further illustration of the unreliable loyalty of sections of the armed forces.
The commander of the 4th Division, Brig. -Gen.
Miguel Sol, appeared to take no action to crush the rebellion, and Col. Hercules Galon seemed unable to control the dissident elements of the 402nd Brigade which allowed Nobel's forces to pass unhindered through several military checkpoints during the drive between Butuan and Cagayan de Oro.
The fact that a Marine battalion from Basilan and a police unit from Leyte were eventually used to confront the rebels, also suggested that the government lacked confidence in the reliability of the local units based in Mindanao.
Within days of Noble's surrender, the Philippine Congress finally passed legislation which prescribed heavy punishments for those involved in plotting coup attempts.
Under the terms of the bill, which had yet to be signed by President Corazon Aquino, civilian and military coup leaders would face life imprisonment whilst other participants could receive 20-year prison terms.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
National Party election victory
The conservative National Party, led by Jim Bolger, ended six years of Labour Party rule on Oct. 27 when it achieved a crushing general election victory.
The Nationals won 49 per cent of the vote and took 68 of the 97 seats in the unicameral parliament, an increase of 28; Labour polled 35 per cent and won 28 seats, a net loss of 28; and the left-wing New Labour Party retained its single seat.
Although the outgoing Prime Minister and newly-elected Labour leader, Mike Moore, retained his seat, eight members of his Cabinet were defeated, as was the parliamentary Speaker, his deputy, and two government whips.
At 28, Labour's parliamentary caucus was smaller than at any time since 1931, before the first Labour government had ever been elected.
The result was widely predicted, the only real doubt being the likely extent of the National victory.
During his two months as Labour leader and Prime Minister Moore was successful in closing the gap between the two parties, but the opinion polls continued to point to a clear National Party victory.
Labour's position was not helped by a rise in the unemployment rate from 7.3 per cent of the workforce in July to 7.9 per cent in August.
In terms of policy there was little to differentiate the two main parties, with each committed to maintaining the essence of Labour's laissez faire economic approach which had included extensive deregulation and privatization measures.
Even in the controversial areas of defence and foreign policy there was little difference, since the National Party had performed an unexpected and unlikely volte face earlier in the year and had adopted Labour's anti-nuclear policy which banned nuclear warships from New Zealand ports.
Formation of new government
Bolger took office on Oct. 28 and announced his new 18-member Cabinet on Nov. 1, using the occasion to stress that he expected all Ministers to observe the tradition of collective responsibility.
Bowing to pressure not to appoint a pakeha (one of European extraction) as Minister of Maori Affairs, Bolger gave the portfolio to Winston Peters, the National Party's only Maori MP, despite the latter's characterization of the new government's economic policy as "economic drivel" .
Peters's independent approach to economic policy — particularly his reservations concerning the social consequences of economic deregulation — had already earned him a shadow Cabinet demotion in 1989.
The former National Party leader and Prime Minister Sir Robert Muldoon, also an outspoken opponent of free market economics, was offered several minor posts outside the Cabinet, but turned them all down as "insulting" and expressed his intention to remain on the back benches, from where he would be free to criticize the new government.
Bolger, 55, a farmer, a Catholic, and the father of nine children, was the son of Irish immigrant parents.
He had served six years in the Cabinet under Muldoon, and had been opposition leader since 1986.
His unflamboyant political style, his physical appearance, and his representation of a remote North Island rural constituency, earned him the nickname "Potato Head" .
He had not been to university, he had some difficulty in grasping complex economic issues, and was prone to malapropisms, but was widely respected for his managerial skills and his political experience.
In the last two years Bolger had been overshadowed in the opinion polls by Peters, 44, who had degrees in law and politics along with considerable charm, verbal dexterity and political charisma.
Most commentators agreed that the presence of both Peters and Muldoon within the National Party's parliamentary caucus made an eventual challenge to Bolger's leadership highly likely.
The size of the new government's legislative majority was also considered to be destabilizing in that it would encourage factionalism within the National Party.
Jim Bolger Prime Minister; Minister in charge of New Zealand Security Intelligence Services Don McKinnon Deputy Prime Minister; External Relations and Trade; Foreign Affairs Bill Birch Labour and Immigration Ruth Richardson Finance John Faloon Agriculture; Forestry Paul East Attorney General; Leader of the House Simon Upton Health; Environment; Research, Science and Technology Doug Kidd State-owned Enterprises; Fisheries; Railways; Works and Development Philip Bundon Commerce John Banks Police; Tourism; Recreation and Sport Jenny Shipley Social Welfare; Women's Affairs Warren Cooper Defence; Local Government Doug Graham Justice; Disarmament and Arms Control; Arts and Culture Lockwood Smith Education Morris McTigue Employment Rob Storey Transport; Statistics; Lands Winston Peters Maori Affairs Dennis Marshall Conservation and Science John Luxton Housing and Energy Wyatt Creech Revenue and Customs
New Zealand Cabinet
The new Finance Minister, Ruth Richardson, 39, a lawyer from a wealthy farming family, was a firm advocate of continuing the laissez faire approach of Labour, and extending deregulation into the labour market and the social services sector.
The appointment of Richardson was characterized by Muldoon as possibly "Bolger's first mistake" .
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
UK decision to join ERM
On Oct. 5 the United Kingdom Chancellor of the Exchequer, John Major, announced that the pound sterling would enter the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System as of Oct. 8, at a central rate against the deutsche mark of DM2.95.
The pound would be allowed to fluctuate initially by up to 6 per cent on either side of its central parity rate (as was also the case for the Spanish peseta), but would move into the narrower 2.25 per cent fluctuation band as soon as possible.
Of the 12 members of the European Communities (EC), only Portugal and Greece now remained outside the ERM.
At the same time Major announced a cut of 1 percentage point in the minimum lending rate, to 14 per cent, and said on Oct. 7 that revaluation of the pound within the ERM was a possible alternative to further interest rate cuts if the pound reached the top of its permitted fluctuation range.
Major attributed the timing of ERM entry to the fact that the "sustained policies of high interest rates and firm budgetary control are now reducing inflationary pressures in the economy, monetary growth is falling very sharply to within its target range, and the growth of demand has slowed and continues to do so" .
The Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, who had previously held that the time was not yet ripe for ERM entry, said at a press conference later on Oct. 5 that it was now possible because of "incontestable signs that the economy is working in the way we intended it to" .
At the Madrid summit of EC leaders in June 1989 Thatcher had specified, as a condition for the UK joining the ERM, that inflation must first be reduced substantially.
(The annualized UK rate of retail price inflation to October 1990 was 10.9 per cent, compared with about 8 per cent in June 1989.)
Belgian franc 42.4032 Danish kroner 7.84195 Deutsche Mark 2.05586 Spanish peseta 133.631 French franc 6.89509 Irish punt 0.767417 Italian lira 1538.24 Luxembourg franc 42.4032 Dutch guilder 2.31643 British pound 0.696904 Greek drachma** 205.311 Portuguese escudo** 178.735 *For central rates as of latest realignment in January 1990 see p. 37196. **Not in ERM [see p. 37625].
New EC central currency rates against ECU*
Linkage of Norwegian krone to ECU
The Norwegian government announced its decision on Oct. 19 to link the krone to the European currency unit (ECU) as a move towards closer association with the EC.
The value was set as of Oct. 22 at ECU1=NKr7.9940, and Norway committed itself to remaining within the narrow 2.25 per cent fluctuation band.
Rome summit of European Council
The European Council of heads of state and government met for a special summit in Rome on Oct. 27-28.
Despite an earlier suggestion from Jacques Delors, president of the European Commission, that the summit should focus on the originally scheduled topics of aid to the Soviet Union and the Gulf crisis, all the member countries except the UK used the meeting to state their agreement that Stage 2 of economic and monetary union (EMU — see p. 36598 for three-stage Delors plan for EMU) should start on Jan. 1, 1994, and established an effective negotiating brief for the intergovernmental conferences on political, economic and monetary union due to begin on Dec. 14.
UK reservations about European union were expressed in the final communiqué.
Thatcher afterwards complained that the December conferences had been "pre-empted" .
She accused EC leaders of conducting business incompetently and of living in "cloud cuckoo land" .
On the introduction of a single currency, the preferred outcome of the Delors plan under Stage 3, she emphasized that she would never suggest to the UK parliament the abolition of the pound sterling, which she described as "the most powerful expression of sovereignty you can possibly have" .
She also accused France and Germany of acting in their own interests to prevent an EC position from being reached on farm subsidies to submit to the "Uruguay Round" world trade negotiations of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), due to end in December [see p. 37797].
Her attitudes were most forcefully revealed in parliamentary exchanges following her statement to the UK House of Commons on Oct. 30.
Conclusions on European union
The final communiqué began with a section on progress towards European union.
In the first part of this, on the proposed December 1990 Conference on Political Union, UK reservations were expressed at certain points in the communiqué [marked here in italics followed by the words "UK reservation" ], with the words: "On these points the UK delegation prefers not to pre-empt the debate in the intergovernmental conference." 
The Council confirmed its will "progressively to transform the Community into a European Union by developing its political dimension, strengthening its capacity for action and extending its powers [UK reservation]" .
Such a union would"evolve with due regard being paid to national identities and to the principle of subsidiarity…
The progress of the Community towards European Union must be accompanied by the development of the European Parliament's role in the legislative sphere [UK reservation]and with respect to the monitoring of the activities of the union, which, together with the role of the national parliaments, will underpin the democratic legitimacy of the union.
This same requirement will be met by defining European citizenship [UK reservation], to be additional to citizenship of a member state, as well as by taking account of…the particular interests of the regions.
At the same time, efforts will be made to strengthen the other institutions within a balanced framework…"
"In the sphere of foreign policy, the Council recorded consensus on the objective of a common foreign and security policy [UK reservation]to strengthen the identity of the Community and the coherence its action on the international scene…
The European Council noted the need to review the procedures and mechanisms for preparing, adopting and implementing decisions where foreign policy is concerned, so as to increase the coherence, speed and effectiveness of the Community's international action…
No aspect of the Union's external relations will in principle be excluded from the common foreign policy.
The European Council noted that there was a consensus to go beyond the present limits in regard to security [UK reservation]; the content and detailed rules for the role of the Union in the security sphere will have to be defined gradually."
The second part of the conclusions on European union concerned the December 1990 Conference on economic and monetary union.
Here it was made explicit that"for the final phase of economic and monetary union 11 member states consider that the work on the amendment of the Treaty will be directed to the following points…
".
It was recorded that the UK was "unable to accept the approach set out" , but agreed that "the overriding objective of monetary policy should be price stability, that the Community's development should be based on an open market system, that excessive budget deficits should be avoided, and that there should be no monetary financing of deficits nor the assumption of responsibility on the part of the Community or its member states for one member state's debts" .
The UK was "ready to move beyond Stage 1 through the creation of a new monetary institution and a common Community currency" , but believed "that decisions on the substance of that move should precede decisions on its timing" .
The points agreed by the 11 as the focus for work on amending the Treaty [of Rome]were:
(1)"For economic union, an open market system which combines price stability with growth, employment and environmental protection and is dedicated to sound and sustainable financial and budgetary conditions and to economic and social cohesion.
To this end, the ability to act of the Community institutions will be strengthened."
(2)"For monetary union, the creation of a new monetary institution comprising member states' central banks and a central organ, exercising full responsibility for monetary policy…
The institution as such, as well as the members of its Council, will…report to the institutions which are politically responsible.
"With the achievement of the final phase of EMU, exchange rates will be irrevocably fixed.
The Community will have a single currency — a strong and stable ECU…
"The second phase of EMU will start on Jan. 1, 1994, after (i) the single market programme has been achieved; and (ii) the treaty has been ratified, and by its provisions:(a) a process has been set in train designed to ensure the independence of the members of the new monetary institution at the latest when monetary powers have been transferred;(b) the monetary financing of budget deficits has been prohibited and any responsibility on the part of the Community or its member states for one member state's debt been precluded; and (c) the greatest possible number of member states have adhered to the ERM.
…
In order to move on to the second phase, further satisfactory and lasting progress towards real and monetary convergence will have to be achieved, especially as regards price stability and the restoration of sound public finances.
"At the start of the second phase the new Community institution will be established.
This will make it possible…(i) to strengthen the co-ordination of monetary policies;(ii) to develop the instruments and procedures needed for the future conduct of a single monetary policy; and (iii) to oversee the development of the ECU.
At the latest within three years from the start of the second phase, the Commission and the Council of the monetary institution would report…on the functioning of the second phase and in particular on the progress made in real convergence, in order to prepare the decision concerning the passage to the third phase, which will occur within a reasonable time…
The treaty may lay down transitional provisions for the successive stages of EMU according to the circumstances of the different countries."
Communiqué points on external relations
 "The Council heard a preliminary report from the Commission following talks with the Soviet government…with a view to drawing up proposals on short-term credit and longer-term support to be given to structural reforms." 
The European Council reaffirmed its willingness to help the Soviet Union but referred back to the Commission the task of submitting before the next Council meeting proposals for decisions to be taken, and also asked it to draw up a plan for a major commercial, scientific and technical co-operation agreement with the Soviet Union.
Assuming a special relationship towards central and east European countries, the Council expressed support for economic reforms and democratic developments in Yugoslavia and promised to support Hungary in its efforts to move towards democracy, stability and economic development in the framework of the Group of 24, particularly as regards energy problems, and promising the immediate disbursement of the second tranche of an EC loan (of US$1,000 million).
On the Gulf crisis, the Council denounced Iraq's "unscrupulous use" of hostages and agreed unanimously "not to send representatives of their governments in any capacity to negotiate with Iraq the release of foreign hostages and to discourage others from doing so" , while calling on the UN Secretary-General to send a special representative to Iraq to press for the hostages' release.
It endorsed the UN embargo on Iraq and said it was "ready to consider additional steps consistent with the UN Charter" .
On the Middle East, the Council called on Israel to respect Palestinian rights, noting that the recent "tragic events" in Jerusalem [see p. 37760]showed once again that the status quo in the occupied territories was unsustainable.
The Council considered that the document for the forthcoming Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) summit in Paris should "reflect the historical significance of that event" .
On world trade negotiations, the leaders committed themselves to "making a full contribution to a positive outcome" of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) which was due to end in December [see p. 37228].
Easing of sanctions against China and Iran — Relations with Vietnam and Romania
The Council of (Foreign) Ministers decided at a meeting in Luxembourg on Oct. 22 to lift diplomatic and economic sanctions against China (imposed in June 1989 — see p. 36722) and Iran (agreed in February 1989 — see p. 36450) and to establish diplomatic and economic relations with Vietnam, broken off after its invasion of Cambodia in 1978.
The embargo on arms deliveries to China and the ban on military co-operation remained in force.
A five-year agreement on trade and economic co-operation between the EC and Romania was signed on Oct. 22.
First initialled on June 8, the agreement had been suspended following the mid-June violence in Bucharest [see pp. 37544-45].
It still required approval by the European Parliament, where members were reportedly less convinced of the improvement in the political situation and on human rights.
Transit dispute between Italy and Austria
In a resurgence of the transit dispute between Italy and Austria [see p. 37689], the Italian Transport Minister, Carlo Bernini, on Oct. 15 ordered the closure of its Alpine border to all goods traffic, in response to Austrian restrictions on granting annual transit passes for Italian lorries.
Italy required more than the current quota of 18,500 passes per month, but Austria sought the transfer of more Italian freight to the railways and other concessions.
A temporary truce in the dispute had been reached in August, and talks were in progress for a new bilateral agreement to replace that concluded in 1960.
Agreement on CO2 emissions
On Oct. 29 the Council of (Environment and Energy) Ministers agreed that by the year 2000 the EC as a whole should stabilize emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), a key greenhouse gas, at levels no higher than those of 1990.
The compromise nevertheless allowed individual member states to diverge from this target, with the UK retaining its less ambitious aim of reaching the target by 2005 rather than 2000, and Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain also not taking on a 2000 target for their individual performance.
[See pp. 36791-92 for June 1988 EC agreement on sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions.]
EUROPE
COUNCIL OF EUROPE
Rulings on UK practice of "release under licence" and Spycatcher
The European Court of Human Rights on Oct. 25 condemned United Kingdom regulations which denied prisoners legal recourse over government decisions extending their prison terms or recalling former inmates to prison.
The ruling effectively voided the British legal notion of the "discretionary" life sentence, under which the Home Office had the power to extend prisoners' actual terms in gaol, or detain them again after an initial release (known as "release under licence" ) if they were deemed to be a danger to society.
The court thus upheld a claim by three men who had been given discretionary sentences for various sex offences.
Under the existing procedures, their sentences had been reviewed by the Home Office after a fixed period.
Two who were released, were later recalled, even though they had committed no further offences.
The court ruled that such action was contrary to the 1950 European Convention of Human Rights, which guaranteed, to any individual deprived of freedom, the right to a review in a court of law, as well as the right to contest the reasons for a reimprisonment.
Also on Oct. 25 the European Commission of Human Rights issued a preliminary opinion in favour of three British newspapers which had been prevented from publishing excerpts from Spycatcher, a controversial book about the UK counterintelligence service written by former agent Peter Wright.
The commission upheld the claim brought by the Observer, the Guardian and the Sunday Times that the injunctions barring them from printing Wright's allegations, obtained by the UK government in 1986 [see p. 35539], breached Article 10 of the Convention safeguarding freedom of expression.
The Commission's opinion was due to be presented to the Court of Human Rights in 1991.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
IRA "human bomb" attacks
Five British soldiers were killed in Londonderry, 10 were seriously injured and about 18 residents of a nearby housing estate were treated in hospital when early on Oct. 24 a man was forced by the Irish Republican Army (IRA) to drive a van packed with explosives into an Army checkpoint, where it was blown up by remote control.
The driver, Patsy Gillespie, who was also killed, was described by the IRA as a "collaborator" for having carried out construction work for the security forces, and had been coerced into a similar operation previously at the Fort George Army base in the city.
Another soldier died and 11 were injured in Newry in a similar and simultaneous attack.
In this case the family of an alleged "collaborator" were held hostage and he was forced to drive a car carrying explosives into the army checkpoint on the Belfast-Dublin road.
The 65-year-old driver, who was able to jump clear and shout a warning, escaped with a broken leg.
In a third attack a driver was tied into his van loaded with explosives and was forced to drive to an Army base in Omagh, but the detonator failed to activate the device.
The bombings were thought to be in retaliation for the shooting by British soldiers in an undercover operation on Oct. 9 of IRA activists Desmond Grew and Martin McCaughey near Loughgall in south Armagh.
Eight men were arrested in Ireland later on Oct. 24 for questioning in connection with the attacks.
Imminent collapse of Brooke initiative
Peter Brooke, the UK Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, met the Irish Foreign Minister, Gerard Collins, on Oct. 25, in pursuit of Brooke's stalled initiative aimed at reviving talks on the political future of Northern Ireland.
The main stumbling block continued to be the Irish government's insistence on involvement in talks from the start, whereas Ulster Unionists were reluctant to allow Ireland to take part until substantial progress had been made on negotiating a new form of devolved government for Northern Ireland.
Brooke said that "certain exploratory steps" (thought to involve talks with Ulster Unionists and with the Social Democratic and Labour Party) remained to be taken to see whether an agreement could be reached.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Eastbourne by-election
A parliamentary by-election was held in Eastbourne on Oct. 18 to fill the seat left empty by the murder of the Conservative MP, Ian Gow, by the Irish Republican Army on July 30 [see p. 37623].
The result was a surprise Conservative defeat and a victory for the Liberal Democrat candidate, David Bellotti.
The campaign of the Conservative candidate, Richard Hickmet, was criticized for the way in which it dwelt on the controversial claim that it would be a "moral victory for terrorism" if the seat were to change hands as a result of the killing of Gow.
The Conservative vote dropped from 59.9 per cent of the valid vote at the 1987 general election, to 40.9 per cent.
The Liberal Democrats won 50.8 per cent(29.7 per cent for the Liberal/Social Democratic Party Alliance in 1987), and the Labour vote fell from 8.8 to 5 per cent .
The Green candidate, finishing fourth out of eight, won only 1.2 per cent(1.5 in 1987).
The Liberal Democrat majority was 4,550, compared with a previous Conservative majority of 16,923.
The turnout was 60.75 per cent(75.6 per cent in the 1987 general election).
EUROPE
FRANCE
Cabinet reorganization
President François Mitterrand reorganized the Cabinet on Oct. 2 as a result of the resignation of Edith Cresson as Minister-Delegate for European Affairs.
She was replaced by Elisabeth Guigou.
At the same time Louis Mermaz was appointed Minister of Agriculture and Forestry, with Henri Nallet moving to Justice in place of Pierre Arpaillange.
George Kiejman became Minister-Delegate attached to the Ministry of Justice, and Bruno Durieux, a member of the Centre of Social Democrats (CDS), became Minister-Delegate for Health attached to the Ministry for Solidarity and Social Protection.
The Secretary of State for the Environment, Brice Lalonde (Ecology Generation), was promoted to Minister-Delegate responsible for the prevention of technological and natural disasters, while Hélène Dorlhac (Union for French Democracy), Secretary of State for the Family, also took over responsibility for the Elderly, from Théo Braun who left the government.
Guigou was previously special adviser to the President on European issues.
Mermaz, who had been president of the National Assembly from 1981 to 1986 and was briefly Minister of Transport in 1988, had been leader of the Socialist group in the Assembly since 1988.
He was replaced in this post on Oct. 10 by Jean Auroux, a former Minister and a supporter of the PS faction associated with former Prime Minister Laurent Fabius.
Auroux narrowly defeated the rival candidate, Henri Emmanuelli, by 113 votes to 109.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
General election
In elections to the 183-seat Nationalrat (lower house of parliament) on Oct. 7 the Socialist Party (SPÖ) retained its position as the largest single party.
Its conservative partner in the outgoing government coalition, the People's Party (ÖVP), registered its worst result since 1945 and lost a quarter of its votes and seats.
The main beneficiary of the ÖVP decline was the liberal party (FPÖ), led by the populist Jörg Haider, which based its campaign on warning against the dangers of immigration from eastern Europe.
Seats Percentage of valid votes SPÖ 80 42.8% ÖVP 60 32.1% FPÖ 33 16.6% Green Alternative 10 4.8% Others* 0 3.8% *Including Communists (KPÖ) and United Greens (VPÖ).
Turnout: 86 per cent of total electorate of 5,600,000.
Austrian general election results
President Kurt Waldheim on Oct. 9 asked the Chancellor, Franz Vranitzky, to form a new government.
Vranitzky, who had previously ruled out co-operation with Haider's FPÖ, began negotiations on Oct. 16 to renew the "grand coalition" of the SPÖ and the ÖVP for a further term.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Basque regional elections
In elections to the 75-seat Basque parliament on Oct. 28 the moderate Basque Nationalist Party (PNV) regained its pre-1986 position as the largest single party, beating the Basque Socialist Party (PSE-PSOE) into second place.
United People (HB) remained in third position, overtaking the PNV as the most popular party in Guipúzcoa province, but two other nationalist parties, Basque Solidarity (EA) and Basque Left (EE), suffered setbacks.
The right-wing Popular Party (PP) improved its position and the Alava Union (UA), a new provincial splinter group of PP, entered the parliament for the first time.
The turnout was 60.25 per cent of the Basque electorate of 1,500,000, about 8 per cent lower than in 1986.
Seats Percentage of votes PNV 22 28.9 PSE-PSOE 16 20.8 HB 13 17.3 EA 9 10.4 EE 6 7.9 PP* 6 8.7 UA 3 1.7 Others 0 4.3 *Formed part of Popular Coalition (CP) in 1986.
Basque election results 1990
It was envisaged that the PNV and the PSE-PSOE would continue to form the governing coalition with José Antonio Ardanza as lendakari (Premier).
PSOE alliance with opposition parties
In October the governing Socialist Party (PSOE) formed a tactical alliance or "democratic bloc" in the Chamber of Deputies (lower house of the Cortes — parliament) with smaller opposition parties including Convergence and Union (CiU — 18 seats), the PNV (five), and the CDS (14).
The CDS leader, Adolfo Suárez, acknowledging that his party no longer represented a viable government alternative, said that the CDS would remain in its existing alliances with the conservatives until the May 1991 regional and municipal elections were over.
EUROPE
GREECE
Municipal elections
Elections for mayors and councillors in 359 towns and in 5,600 communes of less than 10,000 inhabitants, were held on Oct. 14, followed by a run-off on Oct. 21.
The ruling New Democracy (ND) party won in 136 towns (compared with 87 in 1986), while the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok) and the Communist-dominated Left Coalition, often contesting seats jointly, won a combined total of 213; independents won 10.
In Athens (hitherto held by the ND) the pro-ND independent, former Pasok Cabinet minister Antonis Tritsis [see p. 36042], was elected mayor with 50.2 per cent of the vote, defeating the Pasok-Left Coalition candidate, and former Minister of Culture Melina Mercouri, who polled 46 per cent.
In Piraeus the Pasok-Left Coalition candidate, Stelios Logothetis, won with 56.5 per cent, and the left also took Patras and Iraklion.
Konstantinos Kosmopoulos retained Salonika for the ND with 50.9 per cent, beating the Pasok-Left Coalition candidate.
EUROPE
ITALY
Resignation of Interior Minister — Moves against Mafia
The Interior Minister, Antonio Gava, resigned on health grounds on Oct. 15 and was replaced by Vincenzo Scotti, leader of the Christian Democratic (DC) group in parliament.
Gava had been criticized over his failure to deal with organized crime and had been accused by the Communist Party (PCI) of links with the Camorra, the Neapolitan branch of the Mafia.
After weeks of violence culminating in the brutal murder of a magistrate, Rosario Livatino, in Sicily on Sept. 21, President Francesco Cossiga had warned in an open letter to parliament on Sept. 23 that "whole regions of Italy are now controlled by the Mafia, not by the state" and that Sicily, Campania and Calabria needed to be "reconquered" .
Emergency measures to fight organized crime, announced by the Cabinet on Sept. 20 and supplemented on Sept. 25 after Livatino's murder, included the commitment of more money and police, moves to oblige magistrates to work in Mafia-controlled areas, and vetting of candidates for local government office, as well as closer state supervision of financial transactions in local administration.
Discovery of Moro letters — Dismissal of intelligence chief
During building renovations in a Milan flat at the end of October, copies of letters were discovered written in 1978 by the then DC president, Aldo Moro, while he was being held captive by the Red Brigades before they murdered him [see pp. 29053-55].
In the letters, Moro begged leading DC politicians including Giulio Andreotti (Prime Minister at the time), and also Pope Paul VI, to negotiate for his release.
The flat, known in 1978 as a Red Brigades hideout, had been extensively searched at the time by all the security services, and it was suggested that the letters might have been planted there more recently to embarrass the government, particularly Andreotti (now Prime Minister again) and Cossiga (Interior Minister in 1978), who had held out against negotiating with the Red Brigades.
Andreotti on Oct. 22 dismissed the chief of military intelligence, Adml.
Fulvio Martini, with effect from Feb. 1.
Name changes for Communist and Socialist parties
After months of discussion it was proposed on Oct. 10 that the Communist Party (PCI), founded in 1921, should be renamed the Democratic Party of the Left (Partito Democratico della Sinistra — PDS).
A party congress in January 1991 was required to give final approval to the changes, designed to move the party towards social democracy and to increase its electoral support.
The party's general secretary, Achille Occhetto, acknowledged the failure of communist policies in 1989, and said that the new name represented "the two great ideas that define the fundamental alliance of the forces of renovation in the world" , while its new emblem, an oak tree with the hammer and sickle reduced to a small detail beneath it, combined a representation of the history of the workers' movement with "our duty to live in a relationship with nature" .
The goals of the party were now, he said, "a united democratic Europe based on civil and social rights" , bringing together the values of liberty and equality.
At a conference in the northern city of Brescia on Oct. 6 the Socialist Party (PSI) had without warning announced a change of name to Socialist Unity Party (PSU — Partito Socialista Unita).
EUROPE
TURKEY
Resignation of Foreign and Defence Ministers
Ali Bozer resigned as Foreign Minister on Oct. 12, and Safa Giray resigned as National Defence Minister on Oct. 18.
Bozer was apparently acting in protest at not having been fully consulted by President Turgut Özal on Turkey's stance in the current Gulf crisis.
Giray publicly attributed his resignation to personal differences with Prime Minister Yildirim Akbulut, but sources within the ruling Motherland Party claimed that it stemmed from a factional rift concerning the organization of delegate elections for the party congress due in January 1991.
Bozer, hitherto Minister of State (and effectively deputy Prime Minister), had been appointed Foreign Minister only in February 1990.
His successor, appointed on Oct. 12, was Ahmet Kurtcebe Alptemocin, Finance Minister in 1984-87.
Hüsnü Dogan, hitherto a Minister of State, was appointed Defence Minister on Oct. 28.
Government proposal to resume executions
Mehmet Kececiler, the most senior Minister of State, sparked a major controversy with a statement on Oct. 13 that the government wanted the Grand National Assembly (parliament) to sanction immediately the execution of nearly 200 political extremists.
Renewed executions, he suggested, would act as a deterrent to counter a recent upsurge in political violence (more than 20 people had been assassinated in Turkey so for in 1990).
No executions had been carried out since 1984, and there were currently 287 people in prison waiting for parliament to confirm or commute their death sentences (mostly handed down in the early 1980s).
Kececiler's statement was condemned by opposition politicians and the press.
However, the Middle East Economic Digest of Oct. 26 noted that in some quarters it was being interpreted as "a gambit to force parliament to commute the sentences, thereby improving Turkey's international image" .
Murder of prominent figure in headscarves controversy — Passage of headscarves legislation
The latest assassination victim was Bahriye Ucok, a prominent member of the main opposition Social Democratic Populist Party (SDPP), who was killed on Oct. 6 by a parcel bomb at her Ankara home.
An anonymous caller to a newspaper claimed that a (previously unknown) Islamic fundamentalist group calling itself the Islamic Movement had killed Ucok because of her secularist and feminist stand against the current fundamentalist campaign for the veiling of women.
The Grand National Assembly on Oct. 26 adopted a bill allowing women at Turkish universities to cover their heads in Islamic style.
The SDPP said that it planned to challenge the vote in the Constitutional Court, which had overturned similar legislation in March 1989 [see pp. 36528; 37592-93].
Proposed US-Turkey free trade accord
Özal returned on Oct. 1 from an eight-day tour of the United States, where he had formally proposed, at a meeting with President Bush on Sept. 25, the conclusion of a free trade agreement.
Bush promised that the idea would be studied carefully, and also acceded to requests for negotiations on higher quotas for Turkish textile imports to the USA and on greater US military aid.
Upon his return home Özal commented that Turkey's bargaining power had been enhanced by its vital co-operation in enforcing sanctions against Iraq during the current Gulf crisis [see p. 37641].
The emphasis on closer trade ties with the US was also interpreted as a signal of impatience over the lack of progress on Turkey's application for European Community membership.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Switch to market economy
An outline programme to create a market economic system was finally approved by the USSR Supreme Soviet on Oct. 19.
The momentousness of the decision to abandon more than 60 years of centralized state economic control was largely overshadowed, however, by the unresolved bitter arguments over how best to proceed.
The mood of the Supreme Soviet was described by the Guardian of Oct. 20 as "sombre and desperate" .
The programme was the product of three weeks' intensive work by President Mikhail Gorbachev and his advisers to produce a compromise between Stanislav Shatalin"s radical proposals and the more cautious plan produced by Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov.
Published for consideration by the deputies and in Supreme Soviet committees on Oct. 16, it was presented formally by Gorbachev and approved in principle without a debate on Oct. 19, and was given final approval later the same day, with minor amendments proposed by committees, by 333 votes to 12, with 34 abstentions.
A resolution called on the President, the government and the Supreme Soviet to formulate detailed legislation to implement the programme.
It was anticipated, however, that at least during the first stage Gorbachev would make extensive use of emergency powers, granted to him in September, to introduce reforms by presidential decree.
The overwhelming vote in favour showed that deputies were weary of the arguments which had raged since May, and were aware that a decision was needed urgently if the country was to stand a chance of warding off imminent economic collapse.
However, the compromise had drawn a furious response on Oct. 16 from Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin, originally co-sponsor with Gorbachev of the working group which had produced the Shatalin plan.
Addressing the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet, he described the compromise programme as "an attempt to preserve the administrative-bureaucratic system" which would "lead the country to catastrophe" , and accused the central authorities of deliberately sabotaging the Russian Federation's plan to proceed with the Shatalin programme from Nov. 1.
In reply, Gorbachev in his Oct. 19 Supreme Soviet address lashed out at Yeltsin, accusing him of getting "carried away trying to mount a show of strength" by demanding creation of a radical coalition government.
The programme
Entitled Main Directions for Stabilization of the National Economy and Transition to a Market Economy, the programme listed as conditions for creation of a market economy (i) "maximum freedom of economic activity" ;(ii) "full responsibility of organizations, entrepreneurs and workers for the results of their economic activities, based on the equality of all forms of property" ;(iii) competition between producers as a vital factor in stimulating economic activity, requiring an end to monopolies;(iv) price freedom, based on supply and demand;(v) "abandonment of direct state participation in economic activity (with the exception of certain specific sectors)" ;(vi) "extension of market relations to those spheres where they are more effective than administrative forms of regulation" (continuing as "non-market sectors" would be defence, health, education, science and culture);(vii) "an open economy and its progressive integration with the world economic system" ; and (viii) a state social security system.
Retained from the Shatalin plan was the idea of a four-stage transition [see p. 37722], although Shatalin's 500-day time frame was replaced with a vague prediction that implementation should take between 18 months and two years.
A more cautious approach had prevailed most notably in the crucial areas of privatization and price liberalization (most of the latter was now to be effected in the second stage), while the programme was less specific on how to effect a planned cut in the budget deficit to 25,000 million-30,000 million roubles in 1991 (a quarter of the present annual rate).
The programme was conspicuously short on detail, although Abel Aganbegyan, its principal author, told deputies on Oct. 18 that this allowed differences between the republics' approaches to reform to be accommodated.
The republics were to decide for themselves policy in such key areas as private property and land ownership.
It was envisaged, however, that they would "voluntarily delegate" to the central authorities control over financial, credit and exchange policy, over common customs policy "to ensure protection of the union-wide market" , and over a range of other activities including management of defence industries, transport, energy and telecommunications.
Presidential decrees enacting reform
Gorbachev used his emergency presidential powers to issue during October four decrees marking critical steps towards market reform.
Liberalization of wholesale prices.
A decree of Oct. 4 ordered a switch in 1991 from fixed to negotiated contract wholesale prices.
It was designed to "intensify enterprises' interest in increasing output and boosting production efficiency" , and to broaden financial autonomy, by effectively introducing competitive bargaining between enterprises.
However, there was to be a government-imposed profit ceiling above which a 100 per cent tax would be levied.
The decree exempted a list of raw and construction materials and production and technical goods, which would remain at fixed prices.
The decree also ordered an increase in state social insurance contributions by enterprises, from the current 14 per cent to 26 per cent in 1991.
Commentators noted the burden this would place on inefficient, loss-making enterprises.
Rouble commercial exchange rate.
Intended to stimulate exports and rationalize imports, and as a step towards full rouble convertibility, a decree of Oct. 26 set a rate of US$1.00=1.80 roubles, effective from Nov. 1, for all imports and exports.
The official exchange rate of US$1.00=0.56 roubles would continue to exist, but was rendered largely meaningless (tourists already enjoyed a special rate of US$1.00=5.60 roubles, while on the black market the rate was around US$1.00=20 roubles).
The decree also established from Jan. 1, 1991, currency exchanges where enterprises could sell roubles for hard currency.
Foreign ownership of enterprises.
Also issued on Oct. 26, a decree granted foreign investors (individual or corporate) the right to set up on Soviet soil a 100 per cent foreign-owned enterprise, or to buy a shareholding in existing Soviet enterprises.
Foreigners could also buy property, but could only purchase land leasehold.
Repatriation of profits would be possible by converting roubles into hard currency on the new exchanges.
Previously, foreign investment had been allowed only in specially created joint venture companies, to a maximum 49 per cent stake, while repatriation of profits had been accomplished only through complex barter deals.
Personal savings.
A third decree issued on Oct. 26 encouraged domestic savings by raising interest rates substantially from Nov. 1 on deposit accounts with the USSR Workers' Savings and Credit Bank.
Legislation against black market
The USSR Supreme Soviet on Oct. 31 adopted legislation cracking down on black-market trading in the period of transition to a market economy.
It covered speculation (described as reselling for profit goods purchased at fixed state retail prices), abuse of position by retail trade workers such as by unauthorized sale of goods from depots and warehouses, and private price fixing by groups or individuals with access to scarce goods.
The maximum sentence was 10 years in prison or a 15,000-rouble fine.
Legalization of new political parties
A law on public associations was passed by the USSR Supreme Soviet on Oct. 9.
Awaited since the Communist Party (CPSU) renounced its constitutionally guaranteed "leading role" in March, the law formally set in place a multiparty system.
New political parties, and other types of public association such as trade unions, could be set up by as few as 10 people.
They were required to adopt statutes at a constituent congress, and to register them with the USSR Justice Ministry (or the equivalent republican Ministry, depending on how widely the new association was to operate).
All political parties would have the same legal standing.
There had been heated argument in the Supreme Soviet on the question of whether to allow members of the armed forces and police to belong to a political party.
The new law enshrined a compromise formula which stated that such individuals "shall be guided in their activity by the requirements of the law, and are not bound by the decisions of parties and mass public organizations to which they belong" .
A host of new political parties had already been formed in various parts of the Soviet Union [for February-March 1990 multiparty elections in the Baltic republics see pp. 37299-300; 37321-22; for October elections in Georgia see below].
A party seeking to appeal across republican boundaries and to challenge the CPSU on an all-union basis had yet to emerge.
Notable among new political parties in the Russian Federation were the Social Democratic Party of Russia, which had held its founding congress in Moscow on May 4, when it already claimed over 4,000 members (including more than 100 USSR and Russian parliamentary deputies); and the Democratic Party of Russia, which had held its founding congress in Moscow at the end of May.
The latter was among nine fledgling political parties and 18 other associations which on Oct. 20-21 held the constituent congress of an opposition coalition called Democratic Russia.
Reform of official trade unions
At its 19th congress on Oct. 23-27 the All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions (AUCCTU) reconstituted itself as the General Confederation of USSR Trade Unions.
The congress assessed that the AUCCTU had "failed to protect working people socially or economically in the context of transition to the market" .
Vladimir Shcherbakov, a former AUCCTU deputy chair who was elected on Oct. 27 to chair the new Confederation, said that it would be a "voluntary union of sovereign member organizations" with no monopoly on organizing trade unionists.
It was also declared to be independent of government bodies and of "political and public structures" (the AUCCTU had worked "under the guidance" of the CPSU).
Independent miners' union
A second independent miners' congress, held in Donetsk (Ukraine), ended with a declaration on Oct. 26 that it had been the founding congress of an independent miners' trade union.
The question of forming an independent union had sharply divided delegates during the five days of debate, despite having been approved in principle at the first congress in June [see p. 37617].
In the end a narrow majority endorsed the declaration as proposed by radical delegates from West Siberia's Kuzbass coalfield, who had forced the issue by voting on Oct. 25 to set up a new union whether or not the congress supported them.
Law on freedom of worship
The improvement in church-state relations since 1988 culminated on Oct. 1 in the overwhelming approval by the USSR Supreme Soviet of a law on freedom of conscience and religious organizations, marking a formal end to over seven decades of state persecution of believers.
The law denied to the state the right to propagate atheism or otherwise to interfere in religious affairs.
Placing all religions on an equal legal footing, it guaranteed to individuals the freedom to decide whether or not to profess and practice a religion, and guaranteed to religious organizations the freedom to perform religious rites and to open new places of worship.
Other significant clauses granted to ecclesiastical students the same privileges as secular students (notably deferment of military conscription), and allowed armed forces personnel to take part in acts of worship when off duty.
The law entered into force immediately.
The most contentious debate had centred on the issue of religious education.
Although the law meant an end to the teaching of atheism in schools and universities (a supplementary resolution instructed the USSR Council of Ministers to revise the state curricula accordingly), arguments for religious instruction in state schools were defeated.
Furthermore a clause in the draft of the bill which would have allowed the use of state school premises after school hours for religious instruction had been dropped after the Supreme Soviet had failed to reach agreement on it after passing the whole bill at first reading on Sept. 26.
Nevertheless, religious organizations were given the right to set up their own schools.
Decree on protecting Lenin monuments
In a telling reflection of the public repudiation of the legacy of communist rule and of collapsing law and order, Gorbachev on Oct. 13 issued a decree ordering the security forces to take additional measures to protect monuments to Lenin and other symbols of Soviet power.
This followed a spate of incidents in which the ubiquitous Lenin statues had been toppled, blown up or otherwise vandalized in towns across the Soviet Union.
Monument to victims of Stalinism
At a ceremony in Moscow attended by several thousand people, the Memorial organization on Oct. 30 unveiled a monument to the victims of the Stalinist purges.
The monument, in Dzerzhinsky Square opposite the Lubyanka, the headquarters of the State Security Committee (KGB), consisted simply of a granite boulder brought from the Solovetsky Islands in the White Sea, site of one of the first camps for political prisoners established under Soviet rule.
Reassertion of central authority — Developments in republics
Reassertion of all-union legislative supremacy — Further sovereignty declarations
The USSR Supreme Soviet on Oct. 24 rushed through emergency legislation reaffirming the supremacy of all-union laws over republican laws "within the centre's sphere of responsibility" , pending conclusion of a new union treaty.
It was intended to end the so-called "war of laws" , arising when republics issued sovereignty declarations which asserted the primacy of their own legislation.
Kazakhstan on Oct. 25 and Kirghizia on Oct. 30 were the last of the 15 union republics to issue sovereignty declarations.
Seven more of the Russian Federation's 16 autonomous republics (ASSRs) and six of its autonomous oblasts and national okrugs issued sovereignty declarations during September and October.
In almost all cases the declaration was accompanied by a unilateral upgrading of status [for August sovereignty declarations by three ASSRs see p. 37664].
Presidential systems in Turkmenia and Kirghizia
In Turkmenia Saparmurad Niyazov, Turkmen Communist Party (CP) first secretary and hitherto de facto president in his capacity as Chair of the Turkmen Supreme Soviet, was unopposed in a direct election on Oct. 27 for the new post of executive President (who would also head the republic's government), and polled 98.3 per cent of the vote.
In Kirghizia a new executive President was elected by the Supreme Soviet on Oct. 28, Academy of Sciences president Aksar Akayev emerging as winner after several rounds from a field of six candidates.
Elections in Azerbaijan
The CP of Azerbaijan emerged as clear winner in elections to the 360-seat Azerbaijan Supreme Soviet held in two rounds on Sept. 30 and Oct. 14.
This confirmed a dramatic reversal in the political fortunes of the Azerbaijan Popular Front, which in January had been on the verge of taking power with mass support until Soviet troops had staged a bloody crackdown.
The communists advocated keeping Azerbaijan within the Soviet Union but attracted nationalist support by opposing any compromise on Nagorny Karabakh.
In the first round alone they won 220 of the 260 seats decided.
Of the 1,185 candidates competing for 349 seats (polling was not scheduled in 11 constituencies in Nagorny Karabakh and the neighbouring Shaumyan district because of security concerns), 921 were CP members.
By contrast, the main opposition Democratic Alliance, incorporating the Popular Front, put up only 218 candidates (the opposition alleged communist manipulation of the candidate registration process).
Popular Front leaders also protested before the elections that the conditions were unfair given the continuing state of emergency in Baku (the capital), where outdoor rallies remained banned and meetings of more than 100 people needed approval by the military authorities.
The Front blamed the state of emergency for a low turnout in Baku on Sept. 30 (estimated at only 52 per cent, compared with 81 per cent throughout Azerbaijan).
Baku's military commanders had closed the city to all non-residents from Sept. 26 to Oct. 2, but during polling they had kept troops out of sight.
First-round elections in Georgia
The first round of elections to the 250-seat Georgian Supreme Soviet, on Oct. 28, was won convincingly by the Round Table-Free Georgia bloc of pro-independence parties.
It took 54.03 per cent of the vote, which under a mixed system of direct elections and proportional representation gave it 114 of the 181 seats decided; the Georgian CP took 24.42 per cent and 60 seats.
A second round for the undecided seats was due on Nov. 11.
The elections passed off relatively peacefully, although a partial boycott was reported in the troubled Abkhaz ASSR and South Ossetian Autonomous Oblast.
Two days before, an unidentified gunman had shot and wounded Georgy Chanturia, leader of the National Democratic Party.
A rival of the Round Table, this party boycotted the elections on the grounds that the Supreme Soviet belonged to a power structure illegally imposed on Georgia.
On Sept. 30-Oct. 1 it had come second in a rival poll for a National Congress, behind the National Independence Party (which also boycotted the Oct. 28 elections).
Resignation of Ukrainian Premier following student protests
In a major nationalist victory, student demonstrations and a hunger strike secured the resignation of Ukrainian Prime Minister Vitaly Masol.
The hunger strike involved up to 350 students plus thousands of supporters camped in tents in Kiev's October Revolution Square and on the steps of the parliament building.
It began on Oct. 1 after tens of thousands of nationalists opposed to communist party domination of the Ukrainian government had taken part for the second consecutive day in demonstrations in Kiev.
These coincided with the start of the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet's autumn session.
Nationalists had also called a one-day general strike for Oct. 1 against the proposed new union treaty, but only in the West Ukraine did this attract anything more than patchy support.
The students targeted Masol principally because his government, backed by the communist majority of Supreme Soviet deputies, was blocking legislation which would disentangle the Ukraine's July sovereignty declaration from contradictory constitutional articles.
Failure of his government's economic programme fully to embrace market principles was also criticized, and prompted a vote of no confidence by nationalist deputies which was defeated on Oct. 10.
Masol was forced to concede and announced his intention to resign on Oct. 17, the third day of protest marches through Kiev by up to 100,000 students and the sixth day of a city-wide student strike; he resigned formally on Oct. 23.
Also on Oct. 17 the Supreme Soviet passed a decree which went a long way towards meeting other student demands, and secured an end to the protests.
It undertook to pass a law by Dec. 31 ensuring that Ukrainian conscripts served only on Ukrainian soil; called for formation of a parliamentary commission to discuss nationalizing Communist Party assets; asserted that the Ukraine would not enter into a new union treaty before a new constitution creating a sovereign Ukraine was drafted; and called a referendum in 1991 "on confidence in the Ukrainian President" , the result of which would determine whether to hold fresh elections by the end of the year.
Rukh congress
The main Ukrainian nationalist organization Rukh at its second congress in Kiev on Oct. 28 adopted as its main policy objective the Ukraine's complete independence.
Previously its goal had been state sovereignty within a reformed Soviet Union.
Crisis involving Moldavia's Gagauz minority
In the last week of October Moldavia faced the prospect of violence between the Moldavian (Romanian) majority and the small Gagauz minority living in the south of the republic.
The crisis erupted after the Gagauzes attempted to reinforce their August unilateral secession declaration by calling constituent elections for Oct. 28 to a "Republic of Gagauzia" Supreme Soviet.
Moldavia's President Mircha Snegur on Oct. 22 appealed to the Gagauzes to cancel the elections, but on Oct. 23 the government raised tensions by ordering the formation of voluntary patrols "to maintain public order and stabilize the socio-political situation" .
Fearing an imminent clampdown, the Gagauzes brought forward the elections to Oct. 25, when thousands demonstrated in the main Gagauz town of Komrat, defying the Moldavian authorities to intervene and calling on USSR authorities for assistance.
Meanwhile, the Moldavian Popular Front on Oct. 25 appealed for its own "peacekeeping volunteers" to prevent Gagauz secession.
By the following day up to 50,000 Moldavians, some armed, were blockading the Gagauz districts, where the Gagauzes in turn had formed their own defence force.
The Moldavian Supreme Soviet declared a state of emergency in the Gagauz districts on Oct. 26, suspending local government and banning public meetings.
To keep the Moldavians and Gagauzes apart two regiments of USSR Interior Ministry troops were despatched to the Gagauz districts at Snegur's request on Oct. 28.
Their presence provoked the first violent incidents, when on Oct. 31 some 3,000 People's Front volunteers seized two checkpoints on the USSR-Romania border and threatened to kill the border guards and their families if the troops were not withdrawn.
They gave up their protest after negotiations with the authorities, however.
The new Gagauz Supreme Soviet convened in Komrat on Oct. 31.
Stepan Topal was elected Gagauzia's President.
Polish autonomy declaration in Lithuania
A congress of mostly ethnic-Polish deputies to local soviets and to the USSR Supreme Soviet and Lithuanian Supreme Council on Oct. 6 declared a "Polish national-territorial autonomous area" in south-east Lithuania.
This was immediately pronounced illegal by the Lithuanian Supreme Council Presidium.
Sentencing of Russian anti-Semite
In the first ruling of its kind in the Soviet Union, a Moscow court on Oct. 12 sentenced Konstantin Smirnov-Ostashvili, a leader of the extreme Russian nationalist Pamyat organization, to two years in a labour camp for inciting racial hatred.
He had gone on trial on July 24, charged with leading a raid by Pamyat militants on a meeting of the reformist writers' group Aprel (which had many Jewish members) at a Writer's Union building in Moscow on Jan. 18.
Participants in the meeting had been beaten up and taunted as "Yids" , and the raiders had launched into a diatribe from the platform featuring accusations that Jews, especially through their links with Bolshevism, were responsible for ruining Russia.
The trial had proceeded amid frequent uproar as Ostashvili and his supporters in the courtroom interrupted the judge, berated lawyers and witnesses, and used the courtroom for impromptu political rallies.
Announcement of the verdict was accompanied by shouts of "Shame!" by Ostashvili's supporters (who ranged from young skinheads to elderly war veterans), and banners were unfurled bearing anti-Zionist slogans.
Police were forced to clear the court.
The case attracted wide publicity in the Soviet press.
Public prosecutor Andrei Makarov declared afterwards that it had been significant "not so much because it punished Ostashvili, but because it brought to light the forces standing behind this small figure and exposed the fascism which is growing in society" .
An upsurge in anti-Semitism, attributed in some quarters to the worsening economic situation, was a significant factor behind the emigration of Soviet Jews currently in record numbers.
Gorbachev's visits to Spain and France
Gorbachev visited Spain and France in the last week of October.
A principal purpose appeared to be to secure support for European Community (EC) aid for the Soviet economy.
Gorbachev arrived in Spain for his first official visit on Oct. 26.
His talks in Madrid with Prime Minister Felipe González ended with a joint political declaration and agreement on a package of economic and cultural agreements included the granting to the Soviet Union of 150,000 million pesetas (US$1,500 million) of Spanish credit to be used to pay for imports of Spanish consumer goods.
Gorbachev travelled on Oct. 28 to Barcelona, and from there to Paris for a two-day state visit to France.
The main item of business was the signature on Oct. 29 by Gorbachev and President Mitterrand of a Franco-Soviet friendship and co-operation treaty.
This featured support for Gorbachev's idea of a "common European home" and Mitterrand's vision of a European confederation [see p. 37724], and committed France to assisting Soviet economic reform.
Agreements signed on Oct. 28 provided F5,000 million (US$1,000 million) worth of French loans and export credits to the Soviet Union, and set up a joint five-year industrial, scientific and technical programme involving professional training, co-operation between public-sector enterprises, and scientific research.
[For Gorbachev-Mitterrand discussions relating to Gulf crisis see p. 37758.]
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Confirmation of Mesic as Vice-President
Stjepan Mesic was confirmed by the Federal Assembly on Oct. 19 to fill Croatia's seat on the eight-member federal Collective State Presidency; he also became Vice-President according to the fixed sequence whereby senior offices within the Presidency rotated annually among the republics and provinces (Croatia would hold the Vice-Presidency until May 1991).
Formerly Prime Minister in the Croatian government formed by the right-wing Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) in May, he had been elected to the Presidency by the Croatian Assembly in August after it had recalled the communist Stipe Suvar.
Yugoslavia was now set to get its first non-communist President when Mesic took over from the Serb Borisav Jovic in May 1991, in accordance with the rotation sequence.
Serb and Montenegrin Federal Assembly delegates had attempted to block Mesic's confirmation to the presidency.
Jovic and the Montenegrin Presidency member Nenad Bucin were both absent from Mesic's swearing-in.
Autonomy declaration by Serb minority in Croatia
Agitation by Serbs in Croatia came to a head with the unilateral proclamation on Oct. 1 by the so-called Serbian National Council of an "autonomous region" comprising those districts where they were in the majority.
The Council declared that this reflected the will of the Serbs, as expressed by an overwhelming vote in favour of autonomy in the unofficial referendum conducted in August.
The proclamation came amid a renewal of disturbances akin to those which had surrounded the holding of the referendum, this time provoked by a Croatian government order to disarm reserve police officers in Serb-populated municipalities.
On Sept. 29-30 there were clashes between special paramilitary police units and residents in the towns of Petrinja, Glina and Dvor na Uni (all near Zagreb, the Croatian capital).
One policeman and a civilian were wounded, and there were numerous arrests.
Around Knin, the scene of the most dramatic August events, residents blockaded roads and railway lines early on Oct. 1, cutting off traffic to the cities of Split and Zadar on the Adriatic coast.
Late on Oct. 2 two policemen were shot and wounded by Serbs manning a roadblock at Vrbnik, near Knin.
Croat-owned shops in Knin were petrol bombed on the morning of Oct. 3.
The government of Serbia, under the hardliner Slobodan Milosevic, on Oct. 1 called on the federal authorities to intervene to "defend Serbs from repression in Croatia" .
On the following day a leading member of Milosevic's Serbian Socialist Party labelled the Croatian authorities as fascists, while Croatia's President Franjo Tudjman accused the Serbian leadership of inciting terrorism.
Meanwhile, large rallies in support of the Serbs in Croatia were staged in Serbia and Montenegro: at a rally outside the Federal Assembly building in Belgrade on Oct. 1 Vuk Draskovic, leader of the opposition Serbian National Renewal, demanded "a declaration of war" against Croatia.
In this worsening climate of inter-republican invective, the collective State Presidency met in emergency session on Oct. 2.
According to an assessment by Jovic, who had cut short a visit to the UN in New York, the conflict between Serbia and Croatia, combined with escalating tensions in Slovenia (see below), presented Yugoslavia with an unprecedented crisis.
The 14-hour meeting failed, however, to produce agreement on any measures to solve the conflict in Croatia beyond a call for the withdrawal of the special Croatian police units.
Determined to defuse the crisis, the Croatian authorities complied with the Presidency's directive and began a withdrawal on Oct. 3.
In the following two weeks tensions eased somewhat, although rail traffic between Zagreb and the Adriatic coast remained seriously disrupted because Serbs on several occasions blew up railway lines.
However, tensions were again heightened on Oct. 19 by reports of a general mobilization of Croatian police reservists.
The republican Interior Ministry insisted that this was just a routine annual drill and was in no way linked to speculation in the Croatian press that the Yugoslav People's Army (JNA), in connivance with the Serbian authorities and Serb minority leaders in Croatia, was preparing a coup against Tudjman's adminstration.
Army occupation of Slovenia defence force headquarters
Amendments to Slovenia's constitution adopted by the republican Assembly on Sept. 28, which asserted the Assembly's jurisdiction over the Slovene territorial defence force (civilian units akin to a National Guard in the USA), brought Slovenia into conflict at the beginning of October with the federal Presidency, the federal Secretariat for National Defence, and the Serb-dominated JNA high command.
Accusing Slovenia of contravening the federal Constitution, the Presidency on Oct. 2 reasserted that Slovenia's territorial defence remained under the command of the JNA's Fifth Army District (covering Slovenia and Croatia).
In a bold demonstration of the federal authorities' resolve to thwart any concrete Slovene actions which might lead to secession, late on Oct. 4 JNA military police occupied the Slovene territorial defence force headquarters in Ljubljana (Slovenia's capital).
However, the Slovene authorities, anticipating the move, earlier in the day had moved the defence force command to temporary offices elsewhere in the city.
The Slovene presidency immediately protested that the JNA was guilty of "provocation aimed at exciting unrest" .
The Slovene authorities cut electricity supplies and telephone lines to the occupied building in an effort to force the occupiers out.
As of the end of October, however, stalemate persisted, with the JNA still in possession of the building and no negotiations having taken place.
There had been strong anti-JNA feeling in Slovenia since the notorious 1988 trial of journalists and a warrant officer accused of illegally disclosing secret plans for a military clampdown against Slovene liberals [see pp. 36374; 36663].
One of the defendants had been Ivan "Janez" Jansa, who was now Slovenia's defence minister and an advocate of setting up a separate Slovene army.
Death of Morina
Rahman Morina, the leader of the Kosovo League of Communists (LC), died of a heart attack on Oct. 12, aged 47.
He collapsed at the inaugural conference of the Serbian Socialist Party for Kosovo and Metohija, which replaced the Kosovo LC and was to be subordinate to the Serbian Socialist Party formed in July [see p. 37622].
He would have been one of the new party's few ethnic Albanian members.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Local election setback for government parties
Local government elections held in two rounds on Sept. 30 and Oct. 14 produced a reversal in the fortunes of the Hungarian Democratic Forum (HDF) and its two smaller coalition partners in the centre-right government formed in May.
They took only 35.7 per cent of seats on municipal councils, compared with 42.2 per cent for the centre-left opposition coalition of the Alliance of Free Democrats (SzDSz) and the League of Young Democrats (FIDESz).
In elections to rural councils independent candidates won two-thirds of the seats and 80 per cent of mayorships.
The elections established a new local government structure with considerably enhanced powers in place of local councils still dominated by former communists.
In Budapest the SzDSz won 34.7 per cent of the vote and FIDESz 18.2 per cent, compared with the HDF's 27.3 per cent and 5 per cent for the HDF-allied Christian Democratic People's Party.
Gabor Demszky of FIDESz was elected Budapest's mayor on Oct. 31.
The drop in support for the government parties after less than five months in power was widely attributed to growing scepticism about whether the government could produce a workable programme to tackle the country's economic crisis.
However, combined results disguised a collapse of support for the Independent Smallholders' Party, the other government coalition partner.
This had been badly damaged when on Oct. 3 the Constitutional Court ruled unconstitutional the government's proposals, based on the main plank of Smallholders' policy, to return to their original owners lands confiscated by the state after the communists had taken power in 1947.
The Court found that the government could legitimately return assets which were now in state ownership; however, it objected to proposals to accompany the return of confiscated lands with payment of only partial compensation to present private owners (principally farm co-operatives).
Public disenchantment with the fruits of democratization, and voter fatigue (the second round on Oct. 14 was the sixth nationwide ballot in less than a year), were blamed for widespread apathy towards the elections.
A turnout of at least 40 per cent was required to make a first round vote valid, but on Sept. 30 this threshold was not met in the majority of constituencies (turnout nationwide was only 36 per cent), necessitating a second ballot for more than 80 per cent of council seats.
On Oct. 14 (when no threshold applied) the turnout nationwide was down to 27.4 per cent.
Government crisis over fuel price rise
The oil crisis in all East European member states of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA or COMECON), sparked off in July by the unilateral Soviet decision to cut deliveries in the third quarter of 1990, worsened considerably in October as it became obvious that the Soviet Union would fail to make promised fourth quarter deliveries in full.
Forced to buy more oil at world market prices sharply increased by the Gulf crisis, the Hungarian government on Oct. 25 announced a 65 per cent rise in the retail price of motor fuel.
This immediately provoked a strike by taxi drivers and private haulage operators who blocked main roads and border crossings, bringing the country virtually to a standstill on Oct. 26-28.
The prospect of disruption to supplies prompted panic food buying which by the afternoon of Oct. 26 emptied shelves in Budapest and other cities.
Faced with its gravest crisis since coming to power in May, the government on Oct. 28 secured the lifting of the traffic blockade by offering to reduce the price rise to 35 per cent.
The government initially had ruled out any compromise with the strikers: Interior Minister Balazs Horváth (deputizing for Prime Minister Jozsef Antall, who was in hospital) told parliament on Oct. 26 that Hungary had petrol reserves sufficient to last for only four days, and that the economy might collapse if the price rises did not stand.
It threatened to use force against the strikers, but this was challenged both by Budapest's police chief and by President Arpad Göncz.
Following announcement of the settlement, the government admitted that it had blundered in its handling of the affair, and on Oct. 30 Antall went so far as to suggest to parliament that he should resign (no formal resignation offer was made, however).
Curtailing the price rise represented only an interim solution, the government having agreed on Oct. 28 in negotiations with trade union and employers' representatives to propose within one week legislation freeing fuel prices from state control.
Effects of oil shortage elsewhere in Eastern Europe
With stocks running perilously low, the Czechoslovak government on Oct. 6 introduced a fuel rationing system whereby a maximum 25 litres could be bought at existing prices, with purchases over that limit charged at prices one-third higher (all petrol was to be charged at the higher price from Nov. 1).
In Bulgaria, where motorists had reportedly been queuing for up to three days at pumps, rationing was introduced on Oct. 15.
In Poland a 15 per cent price rise on Oct. 5 was the latest in a series which had increased fuel prices by more than 50 per cent since the beginning of August.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Dismissal of Defence Minister
President Vaclav Havel on Oct. 17 dismissed Gen. Miroslav Vacek as federal Minister of National Defence.
On the following day, however, a presidential commission investigating the role of the security forces during the November 1989 revolution published findings implicating Vacek, at that time Army Chief of Staff and First Deputy Defence Minister, in preparations by the Army high command to clamp down against the demonstrations which ultimately had overthrown the communist regime.
There had also been recent allegations that Vacek had acted to prevent relevant documents from reaching the commission.
On Oct. 17 Havel had praised Vacek for "never having allowed the Army to be misused against the people" , for his loyalty to the new regime, and for having "started the process of fundamental restructuring of the Czechoslovak Army" .
Havel stressed that the dismissal was a reflection not of any disappointment with Vacek's work, but rather of a resolve that the post should go to a civilian.
He appointed Lubos Dobrovsky as the new Defence Minister on Oct. 18.
Previously Deputy Foreign Minister, Dobrovsky, like Havel, was a former dissident and founder member of the Charter 77 human rights group.
He had been a Civic Forum spokesman during the revolution.
Further sentencing of Stepan
Miroslav Stepan, former Communist Party secretary in Prague, was sentenced on Oct. 22 to 30 months' imprisonment following confirmation by an appeal court of his July conviction on charges of abuse of power connected with the suppression of a Prague demonstration on Oct. 28, 1988; a second charge relating to a January 1989 demonstration was referred back to the Prosecutor's Office [for his conviction and initial sentence of four years' imprisonment see p. 37737].
Election of Klaus as Civic Forum chair
Civic Forum, the movement which had emerged to lead the November 1989 revolution in the Czech lands and which with its Slovak sister organization Public Against Violence had won the June 1990 general election [see p. 37542-43], elected the Federal Finance Minister Vaclav Klaus as its first chair at a delegates' meeting in Prague on Oct. 13.
Klaus defeated Martin Palous, the candidate of the outgoing collective leadership, by 115 votes to 52, in what one government source described as a revolt by rural delegates against Civic Forum's Prague organization.
Klaus subsequently declared that he intended to steer Civic Forum, currently a broad-based coalition, to the right.
This led commentators to predict a widening of the rift between Klaus and Havel already evident in differences over the pace of market economic reforms, and even a split in Civic Forum.
Devaluation
As a first step towards implementing market reforms, the federal government devalued the crown (koruna) by 35 per cent, effective from Oct. 15.
This brought the exchange rate against the US dollar to US$1.00=kcs24.
Crisis over Slovak language law
The Slovak National Council (parliament) on Oct. 25 adopted a bill making Slovak the official state language in the republic.
The new law immediately sparked off a political crisis as hardline Slovak nationalists began demonstrations and a hunger strike in protest against a clause allowing the official use of minority languages in towns or villages where the minority nationality formed at least 20 per cent of the population (a large ethnic Hungarian minority, concentrated in southern Slovakia, was increasingly the target of nationalist hatred; there were also Polish, Ukrainian and Gypsy communities).
Immediately following adoption of the bill, sponsored by the three parties in the governing coalition, deputies from the Slovak National Party (SNS — the third largest group in parliament) walked out in protest.
They favoured a rival draft of the bill, put forward by the nationalist Matica Slovenska organization, which called for Slovak to be the sole official language.
Several thousand supporters of that draft who had gathered outside the parliament building in Bratislava (the capital) were told by SNS chairman Vitazoslav Moric to continue a campaign of demonstrations (begun on Oct. 5 with a large rally in Bratislava), and to engage in civil disobedience, until the National Council bowed to "the will of the Slovak people" and resigned.
A group of 80 demonstrators immediately began a hunger strike outside the parliament building, 35 of them continuing their protest until Nov. 1.
A demonstration by around 20,000 people on Oct. 26 prompted the Slovak government to step up security in Bratislava.
On Oct. 29 Slovak Premier Vladimir Meciar warned that "extremist forces" might be preparing to declare Slovakia's secession.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Parliamentary controversy over depoliticization bill
Bulgaria's Grand National Assembly on Oct. 24 passed an amendment to the Political Parties Act which debarred all personnel in the Army, police, judiciary, diplomatic service and full-time presidential staff from membership of a political party.
The bill, introduced by President Zhelyu Zhelev on Sept. 14, had been passed in principle on Oct. 10.
Its detailed provisions, however, provoked one of the most serious conflicts yet seen in the Assembly and a mass walk-out on Oct. 18 by deputies from the main opposition Union of Democratic Forces (UDF).
The UDF had proposed including the diplomatic service within the bill's purview, and claimed that the ruling Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) was reneging on an earlier promise by voting en bloc against this proposal.
A sitting scheduled for Oct. 19 was cancelled, and the UDF deputies only agreed to return to the Assembly after a compromise was reached in crisis talks with Zhelev.
This compromise, taking into account an initiative from diplomatic service personnel, would merely require ambassadors to freeze any political party membership while in office.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Defection of celebrated writer
Ismail Kadare, Albania's best-known writer, who had several times been shortlisted for the Nobel Prize for literature, requested political asylum in France on Oct. 25.
In an open letter to President Ramiz Alia, he expressed his own "bitter disillusionment" , and that of "the great majority of Albanians" , that the Albanian leadership had "no intention of emulating the political reforms of Eastern Europe" .
He declared that he had already "expressed very clearly the need for a rapid, profound and complete democratization" , and had chosen to leave because there was "no possibility for legal opposition in Albania" .
Kadare's defection dented the credibility of Albania's recent cautious reforms.
Held up as an example of how the regime's cultural policies nurtured world-class artists, he had been firmly identified with the regime, holding the office of deputy chair of the Democratic Front (the political umbrella movement incorporating the ruling communist Party of Labour).
Moreover, he had recently been allowed to make some outspoken criticisms of aspects of official policy, thereby apparently demonstrating the existence of a new and more liberal climate.
EUROPE
BALKANS
Foreign Ministers' conference in Albania
The Foreign Ministers of Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, Turkey and Yugoslavia met in Tirana (the Albanian capital) on Oct. 24-25.
This was only the second such meeting since the revival of Balkan co-operation in 1988.
Although the tone was generally optimistic, with much talk of prospects for greater regional co-operation, there were allusions in speeches to the enduring sources of conflict between the six states.
Most notably, Greek Foreign Minister Antonis Samaras made a thinly veiled attack on Albania's lack of political, economic and religious freedoms.
He declared that for Albania to realize its stated ambition of joining the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), "tangible proof" of reform was needed.
His scepticism appeared born out, and a shadow was cast over the final communiqué (featuring commitments to the 1975 Helsinki Declaration, and institutionalizing annual Balkans conferences), by the news that Albania's foremost writer, Ismail Kadare, had defected on Oct. 25 to France [see this page].
Albania's hosting of the conference was the latest example of its emergence from international isolationism.
This was also demonstrated by Albania's Oct. 19 decision to open its airspace to commercial aircraft.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Removal of Gen. Aoun — Release of Shiite "hostages" 
Syrian and Lebanese troops finally succeeded in expelling Gen. Michel Aoun, the self-declared interim Premier of Lebanon, from his East Beirut stronghold in mid-October.
Syria, having given its support to the United States-led anti-Iraq coalition in the Gulf crisis, was currently enjoying the consequent improvement in its image in the West, and it was noticeable that there was hardly any international condemnation of its action in Lebanon.
Background to Aoun's removal
Aoun, a Maronite Christian and former Army Commander, had been appointed to head an interim military government in September 1988 by the outgoing President Amin Gemayel [see pp. 36361-63].
The legitimacy of Aoun's Iraq-backed regime was challenged from the outset by a pro-Syrian West Beirut-based Cabinet headed by Selim al Hoss.
In March 1989 in an act of monumental bravado Aoun launched a "war of liberation" against Syria [see p. 36538].
Unable to drive the Syrians out of Lebanon, he merely succeeded in extended the civil war into Christian East Beirut.
Arab intervention to halt the bloodshed resulted in the drawing up of the Taif accord for national reconciliation [see p. 36986], elements of which were formally written into the Lebanese Constitution in September 1990 [see p. 37729].
The accord was rejected by Aoun on the grounds that it did not provide for an immediate Syrian troop withdrawal.
Forces loyal to Aoun engaged in another major confrontation during the first half of 1990 when they fought for control of Christian East Beirut against Samir Geaga's Lebanese Forces (LF) militia.
The contest ended in a stalemate, but as the year progressed Aoun became increasingly isolated.
In late September troops loyal to the Lebanese President, Elias Hrawi, moved to tighten an economic blockade on Aoun's stronghold at Baabda in East Beirut [see p. 37729].
Death River killings
Civilian supporters of Aoun held a candle-lit demonstration against the blockade on the evening of Oct. 1 near the Nahr al-Mawt ( "Death River" ).
Unidentified gunmen attacked the demonstrators, killing 25 people and injuring 82 others.
Aoun, and most Western diplomats, blamed the LF militia for the attack, but Geaga claimed that it had been organized by Aoun's own intelligence officers in an attempt to gain a measure of international sympathy.
Tension rose in East Beirut following the Death River killings, and there were skirmishes between Aounist and LF forces.
The tension was also reflected in West Beirut, where support for the blockade began to diminish.
In particular Walid Jumblatt, leader of the (Druse) Progressive Socialist Party (PSP) and Minister of Public Works, was opposed to the blockade.
Toppling of Aoun
On Oct. 10 President Hrawi formally invited Syrian forces to help the Lebanese Army remove Aoun from Baabda.
The next day thousands of Syrian troops took up forward positions around Aoun's 100-sq-km. enclave.
In an interview with France (Inter) radio on Oct. 11 Aoun admitted that he was surrounded on all sides, but claimed to be ready for "the last battle" .
He addressed a crowd of his civilian supporters at Baabda on Oct. 12, when he only narrowly escaped an assassination attempt.
The operation to dislodge Aoun started early on Oct. 13.
A Syrian aerial attack on Aoun's Baabda bunker was followed by heavy artillery fire.
Within an hour of the Syrian air attack, Aoun, his family and high-ranking supporters had fled to the French embassy.
Meanwhile, troops loyal to Aoun remained in position as Syrian and Lebanese forces under Gen. Emile Lahud pushed into the enclave.
In late morning Aoun, under pressure from the French ambassador, broadcast a radio message ordering his forces to obey Lahud.
However, in a private call to his senior officers he urged them to fight on.
Fighting continued until early afternoon, when the Syrians gained control of the disputed area.
The battle for control of the territory, although short, was brutal; press reports detailed a number of massacres and atrocities.
According to some reports at one point an Aounist unit laid a "white flag trap" which allowed them to shoot dead up to 150 unsuspecting Syrian soldiers.
For their part, the Syrians were reported to have executed as many as 80 captured Aounist soldiers.
Atrocities were also reported to have been carried out by two militias accompanying the Syrian troops, pro-Syrian Phalangists led by Elie Hobeika, and the Syrian National Socialist Party.
At the time most reports gave casualty figures of about 200 dead, 800 wounded, but as the month progressed the estimates of the number of dead increased to 800.
Dismantling of "Green Line" — Implementation of greater Beirut security plan
Syrian forces immediately began dismantling the "Green Line" separating Moslem west and Christian east Beirut.
On Oct. 15 the Mar Mikha'il-Galerie Sim'an and the Dar al-Wahsh-Alayh crossing points were re-opened, making the Beirut-Damascus highway fully passable for the first time since 1985.
Soon after the toppling of Aoun, Hrawi announced that he intended to put in place a security plan for the whole of greater Beirut and start the process of disarming the militias.
Hrawi underlined his determination to press ahead with the security plan on Oct. 24 when he formally ordered all militias to leave Beirut and to hand over positions to the Lebanese Army.
The following day three main militias (the LF, the PSP and Amal) issued statements saying that they would withdraw.
However, Hezbollah, which maintained a stronghold in the suburbs of southern Beirut, reportedly informed the government that it was not yet ready to make a decision on the security plan.
Assassination of Dany Chamoun
Dany Chamoun, president of the right-wing National Liberal Party and a prominent supporter of Aoun, was assassinated in his east Beirut residence on Oct. 21.
Chamoun was the son of former Lebanese President Camille Chamoun, and one of the last remaining hereditary leaders in Lebanon.
Three hooded gunmen wearing Lebanese Army fatigues entered his apartment where they killed him, his wife and their two small sons.
Chamoun's baby daughter survived the assault.
The assassination of the Chamoun family raised questions about the ability, or the readiness, of the Syrian forces to impose law and order in the East.
Hrawi, who was visiting Damascus, the Syrian capital, at the time of the assassination, described it as "an act of aggression against the state security" .
Question of Aoun's political asylum
Soon after Aoun entered the French embassy on Oct. 13 France granted him political asylum.
However, with Lebanese Forces tanks and infantry surrounding the embassy, Aoun remained in the building as of early November.
The Hrawi government announced that he would be prevented from leaving Lebanon and would be put on trial charged with mutiny and the misuse of public funds.
The French President, François Mitterrand, confirmed on Oct. 15 that Aoun had been granted political asylum as a "question of honour" and that he would be allowed to remain in the embassy indefinitely.
Aoun's wife and three daughters were allowed to leave the embassy for France on Oct. 19.
Release of Shiite "hostages" from Khiyam — Press interview with Fadlallah
The Israeli-backed South Lebanon Army (SLA) released 40 Shia Moslem "hostages" or prisoners from its notorious Khiyam prison in southern Lebanon on Oct. 1.
The release of Shiites from Khiyam had long been demanded by Iran and Hezbollah.
The Tehran Times of Oct. 3 stated that if the West pressured Israel to release more detainees "it can be hopeful that the problem of hostages in Lebanon will be solved by the end of the current year" .
The Independent of Oct. 8 carried an interview with Hezbollah's spiritual adviser, Sheikh Allamah Mohammed Husayn Fadlallah.
According to the report, during the course of the interview the Sheik rejected any possibility of a hostage exchange.
 "It is not necessary" , he said,"to do one thing in exchange for another.
All sides — Iran and all parties capable of doing something — can bring pressure to end this tragedy in such a manner as to avoid giving the impression that this was done to make trade or that one side has blackmailed the other into doing something it did not want to do."
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
Deterioration of relations with Egypt and Saudi Arabia — Other effects of Gulf crisis
Worsening relations with Egypt over expulsion of workers — Continuing dispute with Saudi Arabia over oil supplies
Jordan's traditionally friendly relations with Egypt and Saudi Arabia came under increasing pressure in October as a result of the Gulf crisis.
Whereas Egypt and Saudi Arabia constituted the Arab backbone of the anti-Iraq coalition, Jordan had, by necessity, maintained close relations with Iraq.
On Oct. 14 Egypt's state-controlled Middle East News Agency reported that of the 90,000 Egyptians currently residing in Jordan, some 70,000 without work permits were to be fined and deported.
According to the report 50,000 Egyptian workers had already been deported from Jordan between June and September.
The Times of Oct. 16 reported that the news had been greeted angrily in Egyptian government circles.
The rift between Jordan and Egypt followed the souring of previously cordial relations between Jordan and Saudi Arabia in September [see p. 37728].
A Radio Monte Carlo report of Oct. 6 stated that Saudi Arabia had recalled its ambassador to Jordan that day.
Quoting sources in Amman, the radio reported that the measure was in retaliation for Jordan's decision to recall its ambassador in September.
It was also reported that Syria was mediating in the dispute.
The halting of Saudi oil supplies to Jordan in mid-September [ibid.]prompted the Jordanian government to introduce energy-saving measures in October.
The government also made efforts to persuade Saudi Arabia to resume oil supplies, including making a payment of US$6,000,000 outstanding for June oil bills.
However, the Jordanian government considered that a further US$40,000,000 owed to Saudi Arabia since the mid-1980s had previously been written off by the Saudi ruler King Fahd ibn Abdul Aziz.
The Jordanian Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources, Thabit al-Thair, announced on Oct. 24 that Jordan had offered to repay the interest on the US$40,000,000, but that the Saudis had still turned down a request to re-open supplies.
Jordan was still receiving 40 per cent of its oil supplies from Iraq, but the government affirmed in October that it would not increase this amount.
Jordanian efforts to enforce sanctions against Iraq — Refugee situation
Signs that Jordan was adhering to international sanctions against Iraq emerged in October.
On Oct. 15 the government prevented a convoy of trucks carrying medicine and food raised by charities for Iraqi children from leaving Amman on the grounds that UN permission would be required to ensure that the shipment did not break sanctions.
The Middle East Economic Digest of Nov. 2 reported that the government had recently banned the shipment of all goods, including food and medicines, to Iraq and Kuwait.
The Jordanian government had been under heavy United States pressure to carry out sanctions.
Moves to demonstrate the government's seriousness came at a time when the UN was due to release a report on the effects of the embargo on the Jordanian economy.
According to UN envoy Jean Ripert, sent to Jordan in October, the crisis would cost Jordan as much as 30 per cent of GDP in 1990 and about 50 per cent in 1991.
The UN announced on Oct. 12 that the number of refugees from Iraq and Kuwait awaiting repatriation in Jordan had fallen to 700, from some 43,000 at the start of the month.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Election of Assembly of Experts
Nationwide elections were held on Oct. 8 to Iran's 83-member Assembly of Experts, the body first elected in 1982 [see p. 32098]and empowered to appoint the country's spiritual leader and to interpret its Constitution.
Around 11,600,000 people, nearly 50 per cent of the electorate, voted to elect 76 members from a list of 100 candidates; voting did not take place in seven constituencies because of the absence of candidates.
Amongst those elected were the President, Hojatolislam Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani; the son of the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, Ahmad Khomeini; the president of the outgoing Assembly, Ayatollah Ali Meshkini; and the head of the judiciary, Hojatolislam Mohammad Yazdi.
The elections were seen as a political victory for Rafsanjani, whose supporters won a majority of the seats, and a setback for the radical faction led by the Speaker of the majlis, Ayatollah Mehdi Karrubi, and the former Interior Minister, Hojatolislam Ali Akbar Mohtashemi.
In the weeks of intense political feuding before the poll the hard-liners had accused the government and sections of the religious establishment, including the country's spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, of attempting to purge them from positions of influence.
These accusations related to controversial new changes implemented in July, requiring candidates for election to the Assembly to be vetted by the Council of Guardians.
In late September the Council approved a list of 109 candidates, while requiring 60 other candidates to take a written test to establish their credentials as mujtahids (those qualified to interpret the Koran and to issue judgements).
Several prominent figures refused to take the test, including a former state prosecutor Mohammad Moussavi Khoeniha and a former chief justice Ayatollah Abdelkarim Moussavi Ardebili; among those who did take it, but failed, were Ayatollah Karrubi and Ayatollah Sadeq Khalkhali (the head of the Islamic revolutionary courts set up after the 1979 revolution).
Radical deputies attempted unsuccessfully on Oct. 2 to postpone the elections by proposing a bill which would require the number of candidates to be at least twice the number of seats at issue.
The proposal was blocked when some deputies stayed away to prevent a quorum.
In what was seen as an effort to halt allegations of political rigging, which culminated in heated exchanges and fist fights on the floor of the majlis on Oct. 2-3, the Council of Guardians issued a statement on Oct. 3 declaring that "nothing, apart from the law and the Shariah, influenced our opinion" .
In another statement on Oct. 3 Ayatollah Khamenei defended the Council as an "official, reliable and trustworthy" body and called on Iranians to regard voting as a religious duty.
Following the elections, there were reports that senior religious figures, including Karrubi, had appealed for unity between opposing factions by calling for obedience to Khamenei.
Re-opening of embassies
The United Kingdom reopened its embassy in Tehran on Oct. 28, a month after the resumption of diplomatic relations [see p. 37727].
The Iranian embassy in London reopened on Nov. 2.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ — IRAN
Resumption of diplomatic relations
Iran and Iraq announced on Oct. 14 their decision to resume diplomatic relations, formally severed in October 1987 [see p. 35601], and to re-open their respective embassies.
The two countries had yet to finalize a peace treaty formally ending the conflict which had effectively been halted by the 1988 ceasefire agreement [see pp. 36568-69].
The announcement followed talks in Tehran on Oct. 10-14 between the Iraqi Deputy Foreign Minister, Wisma al-Zahawi, and his Iranian counterpart, Manuschehr Motaki.
A communiqué issued at the end of the talks said that "Iran and Iraq and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) have agreed to set up a joint commission to review the resumption of the exchange of prisoners of war" .
On Oct. 18 Iran and Iraq agreed to pardon and release those prisoners of war convicted on legal charges by tribunals in both countries.
Demand for release of former Iranian minister
On Oct. 22 Mohammad Ali Nazaran, the Iranian representative on the tripartite Iranian-Iraqi-ICRC commission charged with supervising the exchange of prisoners, demanded that Iraq "release immediately" Mohammad Javad Tondguyan, who had been appointed Iranian Oil Minister in September 1980 [see p. 30630]and captured by an Iraqi military patrol shortly after the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq war [see p. 31008].
He was believed by Iran to have been secretly detained by Iraq; the latter maintained, however, that he had died while under detention, a claim supported by the ICRC which, in September, indicated that it had received his death certificate.
Expulsion by Iraq of Iranian dissidents
It was reported on Oct. 22 that Iraq had expelled members of the Mujaheddin e-Khalq, based in Baghdad and the largest and most important dissident group opposed to the Iranian regime.
Observers believed that the move, requested by Iran, expressed the "new understanding between Iran and Iraq" .
In a separate development, it was reported on Oct. 18 that anti-Iranian radio stations using Iraqi facilities were no longer permitted to broadcast their programmes.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
YEMEN
Expulsions from Saudi Arabia
It was reported on Oct. 23 that around 350,000 Yemeni nationals and 32 diplomats had returned from Saudi Arabia following a Saudi decision on Sept. 19 to abolish privileges granted to Yemenis.
The Foreign Minister, Abdel Karim al-Iryani, estimated that there had been 1,000,000 Yemeni expatriates in Saudi Arabia before the exodus started.
Other estimates put the figure between 500,000 and 3,000,000.
The loss in remittances from workers in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf States by the end of 1991 was expected to be in excess of US$150 million.
The Saudi announcement, attributed to annoyance over the Yemeni government's stance on the Gulf crisis [p. 37637], meant that Yemenis would no longer be exempt from the need to obtain visas when entering the country, nor allowed to conduct business without a Saudi sponsor.
Amnesty International claimed on Nov. 1 that some 800 Yemenis had been detained, tortured and ill-treated by Saudi troops since August "for no apparent reason other than their nationality, or their suspected opposition to the Saudi Arabian government's position on the Gulf crisis" .
On Nov. 2 Saudi Arabia denied the allegation, describing it as "totally fabricated" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Death of Prime Minister
Shaikh Rashid bin Said al-Maktoum, the ruler of Dubai and Vice-President and Prime Minister of the United Arab Emirates (UAE), died in Dubai on Oct. 7.
Shaikh Rashid, born in 1914, became ruler of Dubai in 1958 and Vice-President of the UAE on its formation in 1971 as a federation of six of the seven Trucial States [see p. 25010].
Shaikh Rashid, who was credited with transforming Dubai into one of the most prosperous trading centres in the Middle East, had in August 1990 supported the deployment of foreign and Arab forces to counter the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait [see p. 37636].
Shaikh Rashid was succeeded as ruler of Dubai by his eldest son, the Crown Prince, Shaikh Maktoum bin Rashid al-Maktoum.
There was no announcement as to whether Maktoum, currently UAE deputy Prime Minister, would also succeed his father as UAE Vice-President and Prime Minister.
MIDDLE EAST
EGYPT
Assassination of Speaker of National People's Assembly
Rifaat al-Mahgoub, the Speaker of the People's Assembly, was shot dead with his four security guards and driver in Cairo on Oct. 12.
The Ministry of the Interior announced on Oct. 30 that eight members of the Islamic fundamentalist group Al Jihad, arrested on Oct. 27 in possession of arms and forged documents, were responsible for the assassination; two others had been shot dead while resisting arrest.
The attack was judged to be Egypt's most serious such incident since the assassination of President Anwar Sadat in October 1981 [see pp. 31253-54].
According to the government, evidence and papers seized by the police proved that one of those arrested, Safwat Abdel Ghani, had been the organizer of the unsuccessful plot to murder the then Interior Minister Maj.-Gen.
Zaki Badr in December 1989 [see p. 37221].
Over 400 Moslem fundamentalists were arrested after the attack.
The government initially claimed that the killing was the work of the Palestinian Abu Nidal group, sponsored by Iraq, but the Iraqi government news agency strenuously denied involvement.
The Interior Ministry announced on Oct. 30 that 13 foreign terrorists from Jordan, Iraq, Tunisia and Algeria had recently been arrested.
It alleged that they were planning acts of sabotage to destabilize Egypt, and that the prime purpose of killing Mahgoub had been to undermine Egypt's internal stability and its role in the current Gulf crisis.
Mahgoub, 64, had been Speaker since 1984.
Although nominally neutral, he was a firm supporter of the ruling National Democratic Party of President Hosni Mubarak and well known for his hostility towards opposition groups, in particular towards Moslem fundamentalist parties.
Referendum
According to results published on Oct. 12 by the Interior Ministry, a referendum the previous day overwhelmingly approved the dissolution of the People's Assembly, and fresh elections were scheduled for Nov. 29, with further elections if necessary on Dec. 6.
The Assembly was dissolved by presidential decree on Oct. 12.
Ministry figures showed 16,273,616 eligible voters, of whom 9,359,656 had cast valid votes in the referendum while 169,486 ballot papers were void.
There were 8,829,606 votes in favour (92.66 per cent) and 530,050 against.
The referendum followed the Supreme Court ruling on May 19 that the 1987 elections to the People's Assembly had been unconstitutional [see p. 37472].
The four major opposition parties reportedly decided to boycott the Nov. 29 elections in protest at alleged unfair election conditions.
Amnesty report
A report published on Oct. 17 by the human rights group Amnesty International stated that the security forces continued to detain and torture opponents of the government "with apparent impunity" under the continuing state of emergency imposed in 1981.
Amnesty claimed that Moslem fundamentalists made up the majority of the 8,000 people arrested for political reasons in 1989.
Debt write-offs — Aid
As reported on Oct. 25 the Gulf Co-operation Council countries agreed to write off about US$7,000 million in debts owed by Egypt.
On the previous day the US Senate approved forgiveness of $7,100 million owed for military aid [see p. 37695].
Together these amounts equalled nearly one-third of Egypt's foreign debt.
Preceding an official visit by Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu on Oct. 2, the Japanese government announced that Egypt would share in a $2,000 million economic aid package with Turkey and Jordan, made available by Japan to offset the effects of the Gulf crisis.
Egypt would receive $400,000,000 immediately as an emergency commodities loan to purchase food and medicines.
On Oct. 30 the German government approved $300,000,000 in economic aid for Egypt.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
Reshuffle of General People's Committee
In the most sweeping changes in the executive since March 1987, the General People's Congress on Oct. 7 approved the appointment to the General People's Committee (GPC — Cabinet) of a new Secretary-General (Prime Minister) and 11 new secretaries.
The changes were interpreted by foreign commentators as a victory for hardliners over moderate elements.
The opposition National Front for the Salvation of Libya stated that several of those promoted had taken part in purges of dissidents and had been expelled from European countries.
Leading moderates Umar Mustafa al-Muntasser, hitherto Secretary-General, and Jadallah Azouz al-Talhi, hitherto Secretary for Foreign Liaison, were moved to head the new combined Economy and Planning Secretariat and the Strategic Industries Secretariat respectively.
Three secretaries who in March had taken the unprecedented step of tendering their resignations to the GPC [see also p. 37333]were also affected: Izz al-Din Mohammad al-Hinshiri, hitherto Justice Secretary, was moved to the Secretariat of Transport and Communications while Mubarak al-Shamikh and Ahmed Mohammed Ibrahim, hitherto Secretaries for Transport and for Higher Education respectively, stood down.
Secretariats for Electricity, Social Security and Youth and Sports, abolished in 1986, were revived and a new secretariat was created to promote co-operation with the Arab Maghreb Union.
The secretariat for Mass Mobilization and Revolutionary Guidance was abolished.
Abu Zaid Omar Dourda Secretary-General Ibrahim Mohammad Bashari Foreign Liaison, International Co-operation Abdullah Salem al-Badri Petroleum *Mohammed Madani al-Bukhari Treasury Ibrahim Mohammad Bakkar Justice Izz al-Din Mohammad al-Hinshiri Communications, Transport Zidan Badr Zidan Health Ibrahim Misbah Abu Khzam Higher Education Madani Ramadan Abu Tweirat Education Umar Mustafa al Muntasser Planning, Economy Jadallah Azouz al-Talhi Strategic Industries Ahmad Fathi Bin Shatwan Light Industries *Nuri al-Fayturi al-Madani Scientific Research *Miftah Mohammed Kuaybah Marine Wealth Jumaa Salem Larbash Electricity** Ali Milad Abu Jazia Information and Culture *Abdal-Majid al-Qa'ud Agrarian Reform and Land Reclamation Salem Ahmed al Fanayesh Utilities, Public Works *Matooq Mohammed Matooq Vocational Training Ismail Miftah Bin Shrada Social Security** Bukhara Salem Houda Youth and Sports** Mohammad al Zaroug Rajab Arab Maghreb Affairs** *Unchanged. **New portfolio.
Libyan General People's Committee
NORTH AFRICA
ALGERIA
Split in ruling FLN
A government decision to increase the pace of liberal economic reforms provoked a crisis in the ruling National Liberation Front, with the protest resignations of Rabat Bitat, the president of the National Assembly since 1977, on Oct. 3, and of Col. Kasdi Merbah, the former Prime Minister dismissed in September 1989 [see p. 36905], who resigned from his post on the FLN central committee on Oct. 6.
On Oct. 26 a letter from 12 veteran FLN leaders was made public, calling for an emergency session of the FLN congress to discuss the country's and the FLN's future.
Merbah announced his intention of forming a new political party to rally followers of the late President Houari Boumedienne.
Bitat was replaced by Abdel Aziz Belkhadem on Oct. 4.
Confidence in the government was further lowered by public accusations by Merbah's predecessor as Prime Minister Abdelhamid Brahimi (who resigned from the FLN central committee on Oct. 16), that President Chadli Bendjedid had known about a US$26,000,000 corruption scandal involving state contracts, which was currently subject to a parliamentary inquiry, and had covered up for senior ministers involved.
Strikes
Strikes continued over prices and unemployment, with tens of thousands of workers in one protest in the north-eastern city of Constantine on Oct. 9 carrying empty food baskets in protest at soaring food prices.
On Oct. 25 the General Union of Algerian Workers (UGTA) signed an agreement with the government to raise the minimum monthly wage, but on Oct. 28 some 7,000 more workers went on strike in Jijel in the north of the country.
The Oct. 25 agreement involved raising the notional rate used for the calculation of pensions, from 1,000 dinars to 1,800 dinars by Jan. 1, 1991 and to 2,000 dinars by July 1, 1991.
For an "active" person in the private and state sectors the actual monthly minimum would be 2,100 dinars in November 1990, 2,300 by January 1991 and 2,500 by July 1991.
(US$1.00=9.5255 dinars as at Oct. 29, 1990.)
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
US-EC controversy on agricultural subsidies
Continuing disagreement between the United States and the European Communities (EC), on the issue of agricultural subsidies, threatened to obstruct the conclusion of the current "Uruguay Round" of multilateral trade negotiations on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), under way for four years and due to be finalized by the end of December [see pp. 36508-09; 36605; 37227-28; 37476].
EC Commission proposals — Opposition from member states
On Oct. 3 the EC Commission announced, in response to US demands for radical cuts in subsidies paid out to farmers, that it had proposed a 30 per cent cut in its farm-support programme over the period 1986 to 1996.
At a meeting in Luxembourg on Oct. 8, however, EC Agriculture Ministers, with the exception of those from Denmark, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, refused to endorse the Commission's proposals.
Ministers from Germany, France and Ireland argued that the latest proposals potentially undermined the basis of the EC common agricultural policy (CAP).
In statements issued after the meeting, EC officials confirmed that it would not be possible to meet the Oct. 15 GATT deadline for submitting offers on cutting farm subsidies.
On Oct. 16 the Commission submitted a compromise proposal, originally put forward by Italy, to EC Agriculture Ministers meeting in Luxembourg.
Apparently designed to accommodate demands from Germany and France for extra compensation for affected producers, this compromise envisaged income supports and other benefits to offset the impact of cuts in farm prices and export subsidies, especially in poorer regions.
The proposal failed to win unanimous endorsement at a subsequent ministerial meeting on Oct. 19.
Reports suggested heightened tension between Ray MacSharry, the EC Commissioner responsible for agriculture and rural development, who favoured raising tariffs on imports of US oilseeds and cereal substitutes to offset the loss to farmers, and Frans Andriessen, the Commissioner responsible for external relations, trade policy and co-operation with other European countries, who preferred a less protectionist Community offer.
EC agriculture and trade ministers met again on Oct. 26 but again failed to reach agreement on the Commission's compromise proposal.
For Germany, Agriculture Minister Ignaz Kiechle rejected as insufficient the proposed amount of compensation payments to farmers.
The new French Agriculture and Forestry Minister, Louis Mermaz, said that France would not be pushed into an accord even if it meant extending the December deadline for completing the GATT talks.
US proposals
On Oct. 15 the USA formally proposed, at a round of GATT talks in Geneva, a 75 per cent reduction (based on 1986-88 figures) in internal farm support, and a 90 per cent cut in export subsidies by the EC (using 1987 as a base year).
The reductions would be made over 10 years, starting in 1991-92.
On Oct. 15 the US Representative for Trade Negotiations Carla Hills said in Washington that the USA had rejected EC proposals for "re-balancing" , which sought tariff increases on items such as oil seeds to offset cuts elsewhere, adding that the USA could "not tolerate" such an idea, which effectively allowed the re-imposition of tariffs, even where they had been negotiated away.
At a meeting of trade ministers from the USA, Canada, EC and Japan held in St John's, Newfoundland, on Oct. 11-13, Hills warned that the stalemate on agricultural subsidies could jeopardise negotiations and lead to trade conflicts worse than those of the 1980s.
 "Cairns Group" proposals
It was reported on Oct. 16 that the 13 countries of the "Cairns Group" of agricultural exporting nations, led by Australia [see pp. 36508; 37228], had agreed to support the US proposal for reductions in subsidies but had demanded that the "export component" in US deficiency payments to farmers also be subjected to a 90 per cent cutback.
Peter Field, the chief Australian negotiator, said that although developing countries in the "Cairns Group" would be expected to make lower cuts in protective import tariffs, their endorsement of the proposals showed that they were "prepared to bite the bullet" .
Other developments in Uruguay Round
Trade ministers at their Oct. 11-13 Newfoundland meeting [see above]agreed to reject calls to extend the December deadline for completing the Uruguay Round.
Although sharp disagreements remained on the question of agricultural trade and on opening up government procurement to foreign companies, there was agreement on (i) curbs on general industrial and commercial subsidies;(ii) speedy resolution of intellectual property rights; and (iii) special treatment for special service sectors such as air transport and shipping.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Soviet ratification of nuclear test ban treaty
Two bilateral United States-Soviet treaties, the Threshold Test Ban Treaty signed in July 1974 [see pp. 26614-15]and the Peaceful Nuclear Explosions Treaty signed in May 1976 [see pp. 27813-14; 36060], limiting underground explosions to 150 kilotons or less, were ratified by the USSR Supreme Soviet on Oct. 9, having been ratified by the US Senate on Sept. 25.
The treaties also contained provisions relating to verification methods for arms controls treaties and to each country's right to maintain intrusive, on-sight monitoring equipment at three sites in the other's territory.
The Supreme Soviet in the same vote (by 347 to none, with nine abstentions) referred to its international and national security committees questions stemming from several reservations about the treaties.
Following the ratification it issued an appeal "to the world's legislatures and public" to "put an early end to all nuclear testing" .
Baker-Shevardnazde talks
The US Secretary of State, James Baker, and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, announced in New York on Oct. 3 that agreement had been reached on a comprehensive US-Soviet treaty on the deployment of conventional weapons in Europe.
Both ministers cautioned, however, that its final approval depended on consultation with their respective allies, in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and Warsaw Pact.
The agreement, which came after five hours of talks, established ceilings for NATO and the Warsaw Pact countries which restricted each side to 20,000 tanks, 20,000 artillery pieces and 30,000 fighting vehicles.
The ceiling on combat military aircraft, including combat helicopters, remained open to negotiation although the number was expected to be around 7,000.
On Oct. 7 Baker and Shevardnadze confirmed that the "loose ends" concerning the number of combat aircraft and helicopters had been "tied up" , although neither gave details.
The accord also resolved, reportedly in favour of the NATO position, the question of a "sufficiency rule" — the proportion of the permitted total in each category of weapons held by any one country.
Soviet negotiators had been eager to preserve for the Soviet Union the right to retain something close to 80 per cent of the Warsaw Pact total.
Western negotiators called for a ceiling for any one country of 30 per cent of the combined East-West total.
The agreement settled the "sufficiency rule" as 33.3 per cent for tanks and armoured combat vehicles; 34.3 per cent for artillery; and 37.5 per cent for helicopters.
[See below for further reduction in Soviet tank and artillery quota.]
A joint statement issued at the end of the talks also called on the international community to adhere to sanctions against Iraq for its invasion of Kuwait [see p. 37639].
INTERNATIONAL
WARSAW PACT
Meeting on Conventional Forces in Europe
Warsaw Pact deputy foreign ministers and military commanders meeting in Prague agreed on Oct. 27 to cut 490 tanks and 400 artillery pieces from their conventional arms holdings, clearing the way for a European arms treaty due to be signed in Paris in November.
The agreement came in the wake of a fourth attempt, in as many weeks, to reach a consensus among members.
The agreement, reached after a meeting on Oct. 10-11 had ended in deadlock over the issue of Soviet tank quotas, followed a decision by the Soviet Union to cut its allocation of tanks by 150 to 13,150 and its artillery by 500 to 13,200 pieces.
The five other Pact countries had initially demanded that the number of tanks allocated to the Soviet Union under the terms of accord endorsed by the US Secretary of State, James Baker and his Soviet counterpart, Eduard Shevardnadze, in New York [see above]be cut by 300.
INTERNATIONAL
NUCLEAR TESTS
Protests in Soviet Union
Reflecting the growth of protests against nuclear weapons testing in Kazakhstan [see p. 37420], it was reported on Oct. 1 that the regional soviet in Semipalatinsk oblast, the location of the Soviet Union's main nuclear test site, had banned further explosions there.
The soviet cited concern for public health and for the region's future.
It was unclear, however, whether this decision would be binding on the military authorities which carried out the tests.
An underground nuclear test, the first by the Soviet Union for almost a year, was carried out on Oct. 24 on Novaya Zemlya island inside the Arctic Circle.
This provoked a political storm: the USSR Supreme Soviet in a resolution on Oct. 31 criticized as insufficient the notice given to its own committees and to the USSR State Committee for the Protection of the Environment, and also deplored the potential damage to foreign relations (Sweden and Finland had already protested).
The resolution demanded within two months a full timetable of tests for 1991, and an inquiry into the environmental effects of testing on Novaya Zemlya.
Supreme Soviet deputies were angry that they had known less about the test than the Greenpeace international environmental group, whose members had been thwarted in an attempt to disrupt the test when coast guards had intercepted their vessel off Novaya Zemlya on Oct. 8.
INTERNATIONAL
WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN COUNTRIES
Meeting on regional co-operation
Foreign Ministers from member states of the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU)— Algeria, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia and Mauritania — met those from Italy, France, Portugal and Spain in Rome on Oct. 10 to discuss regional co-operation the creation of a permanent Conference on Security and Co-operation in the Mediterranean (CSCM — see p. 37731).
The "Group of Nine" plus Malta, which was included as an observer, agreed to set in motion a mechanism for co-operation involving annual ministerial meetings — the first scheduled for 1991 in Algiers — and collaborative ventures on multilateral financial institutions, self-sufficiency in food, migration, debt and the protection of cultural heritage, and collaborative action against desertification.
Among the European participants, the French regarded proposals to extend the proposed CSCM to include other Mediterranean countries as premature, whereas Italian and Spanish representatives envisaged the integration of the entire Mediterranean basin in such a structure.
While a communiqué issued at the end of the meeting stressed that the "Nine" had expressed "their agreement with the CSCM project" , each North African Foreign Minister called for a "pragmatic" approach excluding global solutions to regional problems of security.
Political discussions had centred on the Gulf crisis and on the recent Arab deaths in Jerusalem [see p. 37759]; all were able to condemn the latter, and according to the Financial Times of Oct. 11 "the Arab side appeared encouraged by what they [saw]as French recent acceptance of some linkage between the Gulf and the Arab-Israeli problem" .
INTERNATIONAL
NOBEL PRIZES
1990 awards
The 1990 Nobel Peace prize was awarded to the Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev, 59, on Oct 15.
It was the first time that the award had been made to a Communist head of state.
In its citation, the Nobel Committee (of the Norwegian parliament, which awarded the Peace Prize) said that it wished to honour Gorbachev for his "many and decisive contributions" to East-West relations and "for the greater openness he has brought about in Soviet society" .
The Soviet President, whose domestic popularity had plummeted to the extent that opinion polls currently gave him only a 19 per cent approval rating, said that the award was a "recognition of our perestroika" .
Other Nobel prizes as awarded by the Swedish Academies
The prize for medicine, announced on Oct. 8, was shared by Joseph E. Murray (USA) and E. Donnall Thomas(USA) for their discoveries relating to organ transplants.
The economics prize, announced on Oct. 16, was awarded to three US economists, Harry M. Markowitz, William F. Sharpe and Merton Miller, for their work on stock-price theory.
The prize for chemistry was awarded on Oct. 17 to Elias James Corey (USA) for finding new ways of producing and synthesising chemical compounds, and the prize for physics on Oct. 17 to Jerome Friedman (USA), Henry Kendall (USA) and Richard Taylor (Canada) for pioneering the discovery of structure in the protons and neutrons of the atomic nucleus.
The prize for literature was awarded on Oct. 11 to the Mexican poet, Octavio Paz.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
Launch of Ulysses space probe
The United States space shuttle Discovery landed safely on Oct. 10 after a flawless four-day mission during which it launched the Ulysses space craft, a joint project of the US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the European Space Agency (ESA), on a US$750,000,000 five-year mission to investigate the Sun's unexplored polar regions, its magnetic field and the solar wind.
The US shuttle fleet had been grounded since April due to the cancellation of Atlantis and Columbia shuttle flights because of fuel leaks.
Soviet rocket failure
The official Tass news agency announced on Oct. 11 that the Soviet Union's most advanced Zenit booster rocket had exploded seconds after launch at the Baikonur Cosmodrome in the Central Asian republic of Kazakhstan on Oct. 4.
New ESA director
Jean Marie Luton, the former head of the French National Centre for Space Studies, assumed the directorship of the ESA on Oct. 1.
AFRICA
MAURITANIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,030,700 sq km.
Population: 1,907,000 (1988).
Capital: Nouakchott.
Languages: French and Arabic (official), Hassaniya.
Religion: Islam.
Av. life expectancy: 46 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 11,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$480 (1988).
Currency: Ouguiya (US$1.00=78.9813 ouguiya, as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The Islamic Republic of Mauritania, formerly part of French West Africa, gained full independence in 1960 and has been ruled since a military coup in 1978 by a Military Council of National Salvation (Comité militaire de salut national — CMSN), headed by a chairman (currently Col. Moaouia Ould Sidi Mohamed Taya) who is President of the Republic and whose executive power derives from a Constitutional Charter published in 1978.
The Charter suspended the National Assembly and the country's sole political party and is to remain effective "until new democratic institutions are established" .
The President appoints the Council of Ministers.
Col. Moaouia Ould Sidi Mohamed Taya President of the Republic; Chairman of the Military Council of National Salvation; Prime Minister; Defence Hassiny Ould Didi Foreign Affairs and Co-operation Maj. Cheikh Ahmed Ould Baba Interior; Posts and Telecommunication Sow Adema Samba Justice Sidi Mouhamed Ould Boubaker Economy and Finance Ahmed Ould Khalifa Ould Jiddou Fisheries and Maritime Economy Boullaha Ould Magaya Mines and Industry Col. Dieng Omar Harouna Equipment and Transport Moktar Ould Haye National Education Mohamed Ould Haimer Civil Service; Youth and Sports Moustafa Ould Abderrahman Energy and Water Supply Maj. Mohamed Ould Sidi Ahmed Lekhal Rural Development Abderrahmane Abou Ould Moine Public Health and Social Affairs Mohamed Lamine Ould Ahmed Information El-Yassa Ould Soueid'Ahmed State Control Didi Ould Bounaama Culture and Islamic Orientation Soumare Oumar Trade, Handicrafts and Tourism Mouhamedou Ould Michel Planning and Labour Ahmedou Ould Sidi Minister of State in charge of Maghreb affairs Barou Abdallah Secretary-general to the Government Ba Alassene Yero Assistant Secretary-General to the Government Rachid Ould Saleh Secretary of State for Basic Education and Literacy 
Mauritanian Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Cabinet changes
Lt.-Col. Mohamed Sidina Ould Sidya, appointed as Minister of the Interior in February 1990 [see p. 37239], was dismissed in a reshuffle on April 28 and replaced by Maj. Cheik Sid'Ahmed Ould Baba.
The latter was replaced as Foreign Minister by a civilian, Hassiny Ould Didi, hitherto Minister of National Education.
The rapid changes at the Interior Ministry were seen as indicative of tribal and political rivalries within the government.
At the same time the Ministers of Mines and Industry, of Culture and Islamic Orientation and of Justice left the government.
These portfolios were taken over, respectively, by former Health Minister Boullaha Ould Magaya, former State Prosecutor Didi Ould Bounaama, and former Health Minister Secretary-General Sow Adema Samba.
Abderahmane Abou Ould Moine became Health Minister.
On April 9 the former deputy governor of the Central Bank, Mouhamedou Ould Michel, had replaced Mohamed Ould Nany as Finance Minister.
After the death in June 1990 of Minister of Trade, Handicrafts and Tourism Khadjia bint Ahmed Abderrahman — the only woman in the Cabinet — Ahmed Ould Sidi Ould Hanena, was appointed to the post.
At the same time Maj. Mohamed Ould Sidi Ahmed Lekhal replaced Lt.-Col. Omar Dieng Harouma as Rural Development Minister.
Further changes were announced on Oct. 21, 1990, as follows (previous portfolios, if any, shown in parentheses):(i) Sidi Mohammed Ould Boubaker — Economy and Finance;(ii) Mouhamedou Ould Michel (Economy and Finance)— Planning and Labour (iii) Soumare Oumar (Energy and Water Supply)— Trade, Crafts and Tourism (the previous incumbent, Hanena, leaving the government);(iv) Mostefa Ould Abderrahmane (Planning and Labour)— Energy and Water Supply.
SECURITY
Black opposition movements
On May 31, 1990, the African Liberation Forces of Mauritania (Forces de libération africaine de Mauritanie — FLAM), a black Mauritanian opposition movement committed to armed struggle against the ruling CMSN, accused Mali of assisting the Mauritanian government in what it called "genocidal racism" against blacks.
FLAM said that the help provided by Mali to end border incursions was a "grave threat against Mauritanian refugees in Mali" .
On Oct. 11, 1989, FLAM activists had claimed in Senegal that the movement had killed 54 people inside Mauritania the previous month in its struggle against the CMSN government.
In addition to FLAM, two other militant black rights groups emerged in 1990, namely (i) the Resistance Front for Unity, Independence and Democracy in Mauritania (FRUIDEM); and (ii) the United Front for Mauritanian Armed Resistance (FURAM).
Both were reported to have attacked military and civilian targets.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 1.6% (1980-88)
Current-account balance -US$179 m. (1988)
Trade balance +US$16 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$1,823 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 21.6% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$900 m. (1988)
Gross national product US$910 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 12.1% (average 1980-88)
Principal trading partners European Communities, Japan
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced a loan of 50,800,000 special drawing rights (approximately US$63,900,000) under an enhanced structural adjustment facility on May 24, 1989.
The loan, which replaced the structural adjustment facility effective since September 1986 [see p. 36140], was to be disbursed in six twice-yearly instalments, with the first, representing SDR8,500,000 (US$10,700,000), due on June 15, 1989.
The loan was granted in support of the government's 1989-91 economic reform programme, aimed at achieving a 3.5 per cent growth and 4.5 per cent inflation by 1991.
At a donors' meeting in Paris on July 27-28, 1989, US$200,000,000 of the estimated US$600,000,000 needed for the economic reform programme was raised.
The World Bank, which sponsored the meeting, was to provide US$40,000,000 for the recovery programme and US$70,000,000 in structural adjustment finance.
On Dec. 28, 1989, the Council of Ministers approved a balanced budget for 1990.
This envisaged expenditure amounting to the equivalent of 20 per cent of GNP and tax reform measures (with revenues intended to increase from 22.8 per cent of GNP in 1989 to 23.2 per cent).
Total income and expenditure amounted to approximately 22,100 million ouguiyas.
FOREIGN
Responding to Senegalese assertions in May 1990 that Mauritania was blocking efforts by the Organization for African Unity (OAU) and Egypt to find a solution to the border dispute between the two countries, the Mauritanian government claimed that 300,000 Mauritanians were being held in Senegal against their will.
On June 6 President Traore of Mali made a brief visit to Nouakchott and held talks with Taya on issues relating to the dispute with Senegal.
On May 29 the situation on the border with Mali had been described as explosive.
According to reports, clashes occurred after black Mauritanians, who had left their country for Mali during the dispute with Senegal, had organized raids into Mauritania to recover the livestock which they had left there.
AFRICA
SENEGAL
BASIC DATA
Area: 196,722 sq km.
Population: 7,154,000 (1988).
Capital: Dakar.
Languages: French (official); Senegalo-Guinean, Mandé, Peulh.
Religion: Moslem (90%); Christian (5% — mostly Roman Catholic); animism.
Av. life expectancy: 48 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 9,700 (includes federal)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$630 (1988).
Currency: franc of the Communauté financière africaine (US$1.00=253.8418 francs CFA as at Oct. 29, 1990).
Senegal became independent from France in June 1960 as part of the Federation of Mali (originally formed in April 1959), from which it seceded soon afterwards, and the Republic of Senegal was proclaimed.
Executive power is vested in the President (currently Abdou Diouf), who is head of state and head of government.
The President is elected by direct popular vote for a five-year term, at the same time as elections are held to the National Assembly.
The President appoints the Council of Ministers.
In the event of the presidency falling vacant, the president of the National Assembly is automatic successor as head of state.
A total of six political parties contested the general election of February 1988, in which the President's Socialist Party of Senegal (Parti socialiste sénégalais — PS) obtained 103 of the 120 seats in the Assembly, the remainder being won by the principal opposition party, the Democratic Party of Senegal (Parti démocratique sénégalais — PDS)[see p. 35812].
Medoune Fall Armed Forces Serigne Lamine Diop Justice; Keeper of the Seals André Sonko Minister and Secretary-General at the Presidency Seydou Madani Sy Minister and special adviser to the President Seydina Oumar Sy Foreign Affairs Famara Ibrahima Sagna Interior Moussa Toure Economy and Finance Djibo Ka National Education Robert Sagna Equipment, Transport and Housing Abdou Khadre Cissokho Rural Development and Water Resources Alassane Dialy Ndiaye Industry and Crafts Jacques Baudin Tourism and Environmental Protection Assane Diop Health and Social Development Moustapha Ka Culture and Communication Moctar Kebe Labour and Professional Training Abdoulaye Makhtar Diop Youth and Sports Mbaye Diouf Animal Resources Ahmidou Kane Minister-Delegate for African Economic Integration Ndioro Ndiaye Minister-Delegate for Women and Child Welfare Coumba Ndoffene Bouna Diouf Minister-Delegate for Relations with the Assemblies Mata Sy Diallo Minister-Delegate for Emigration 
Senegal Council of Ministers
POLITICS
The PS held its annual congress in Dakar on July 28-29, 1990, re-electing Diouf as party Secretary-General and electing a new, 30-member, "non-hierarchical" political bureau.
In his opening address Diouf pledged firm action against what he described as the dangers of "secessionism and fundamentalism of all kinds" , a reference to the mounting insurgency in Casamance province [see below].
He also promised "openness and deep changes" within the party, while reaffirming the doctrine of "democratic socialism" .
On Oct. 4, 1989, the National Assembly approved a new electoral law providing for the use of proportional representation in legislative elections with candidates elected on a party list by department.
Previously, half the 120 seats were filled by a first-past-the-post system by department and half by a national party list system.
Although it had demanded such changes, the opposition criticized the government's alleged failure to consult adequately, with PDS members boycotting the session at which the legislation was approved.
(In June 1989 the PDS had declared a boycott of the Assembly in protest at what it claimed was insufficient opposition access to the media.)
Opposition groups continued to call for Diouf's resignation and the holding of fresh elections [for 1988 legislative elections, which government opponents claimed had been rigged, see pp. 35812-13].
A "day of action" was organized by eight of Senegal's 16 opposition parties on Feb. 28, 1990; in subsequent weeks the authorities suppressed expressions of dissent, notably in the opposition press [see below]; on March 10 however, around 2,000 people attended an opposition public meeting in Dakar.
On Feb. 15, 1990, Ousmane Ngom, parliamentary leader of the opposition PDS, was given a three-month prison sentence for insulting the head of state.
He had written an editorial in the PDS newspaper, Sopi, claiming that Diouf had relinquished his powers to his senior aide, Jean Collin [for whose dismissal in March see p. 37366].
In January 1990 the paper's director, editor and two other journalists had received prison sentences of up to one year on having been found guilty of spreading "false information" .
SECURITY
Casmance separatists fighting for the independence of the southern province were blamed for a series of attacks in mid-1990 in which civilians as well as armed forces personnel appeared to be the targets, with 13 deaths reported by the end of July.
The attacks were attributed to the banned Mouvement des forces démocratiques de la Casamance (MFDC).
An elderly Casamance activist, Fr Augustin Diamacoun Senghor was among a large number of southerners arrested during this period.
[See also pp. 32180-81; 36548.]
Amnesty report
In a report published in May 1990 the human rights organization Amnesty International found that there was evidence of the use of torture and of deaths as a consequence; it expressed concern over the government's inaction in investigating torture allegations — the majority of which emanated from the Casamance region — and in implementing adequate safeguards.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 4.8% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$467 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$2,985 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 18.4% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$4,980 m. (1988)
Inflation rate -1.6 (1988)
Principal trading partners France, USA
On Dec. 7, 1989, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced approval of a loan equivalent to 42,550,000 special drawing rights (US$54,800,000) loan as the second annual arrangement for 1989-90 under the enhanced structural adjustment facility first made available in November 1988 [see p. 36548].
A meeting of the "Paris Club" creditor countries on Feb. 13 agreed to reschedule some US$100,000,000 of Senegal's public debt.
The draft 1990-91 budget presented to the National Assembly on April 11 balanced at 516,400 million francs CFA, which represented an increase of 1.9 per cent on the 1989-90 budget of 506,900 million francs CFA.
The civil service accounted for almost half of total expenditure.
FOREIGN
For April 1989 outbreak of violence, origins of dispute with Mauritania see p. 36579; for breaking of diplomatic relations in August 1989 see p. 36840.
A solution to the border dispute with Mauritania seemed remote by mid-1990 despite the efforts of an Organization of African Unity (OAU) mediation commission which began work in November 1989, under the auspices of the OAU chairman, President Mubarak of Egypt.
Diplomatic relations had been severed in August 1989, and air and road links were subsequently cut.
However, actual hostilities, which involved artillery fire exchanges across the disputed river boundary in January 1990 [see p. 37239]and alleged grenade attacks by Mauritania, appeared to have subsided.
In January Mauritania handed over to the International Committee of the Red Cross 23 Senegalese fishermen detained since July 1989.
Meanwhile reports in mid-June 1990 indicated that Mauritania was continuing to deport large numbers of its black population on the grounds that they had obtained their nationality fraudulently.
Most were expelled to Senegal, where more than 50,000 were registered as refugees in camps in the north, with a further 30,000-40,000 living in Senegal unregistered.
Another 25,000-30,000 had sought refuge in Mali, where the government refused to recognize them as refugees.
AFRICA
MALI
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,240,192 sq km.
Population: 7,989,000 (1988).
Capital: Bamako.
Languages: French (official), also Bambara, Fulfulde, Sonrai, Tamashek, Soninke and Dogon.
Religion: Islam (65%), traditional beliefs (30%), Christianity (5%).
Av. life expectancy: 47 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 7,300 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$230 (1988).
Currency: franc of the Communauté financière africaine (US$1.00=253.8418 francs CFA as at Oct. 29, 1990).
Formerly French Soudan, Mali achieved independence in June 1960 with Senegal, the two countries having formed the Federation of Mali in the previous year.
The Federation was effectively dissolved in August 1960, when Senegal seceded, and the title of the Republic of Mali was adopted in September of that year.
Since 1968 the republic has been ruled by a Military Committee for National Liberation with an executive President (currently Gen. Moussa Traoré) who is head of state and head of government, as well as secretary-general of the sole legal political party, the Mali People's Democratic Union (Union démocratique du peuple malien — UDPM).
There is an 82-member National Assembly elected by universal adult suffrage for a three-year term from a list of candidates drawn up by the party, based on local branch committee nominations.
Legislative elections were held in June 1988 [see p. 36086].
Gen. Moussa Traoré President; C.-in-C. of Armed Forces; Head of government; Minister of National Defence Django Cissoko Secretary-General to the Presidency Abdoulaye Diallo Public Health and Social Affairs Ngolo Traoré Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation Gen. Sekou Ly National Education Zeini Moulaye Transport and Tourism Souleymane Dembele Planning Moulaye Mohammed Haidara Agriculture Morifing Kone Environment and Animal Husbandry Amadou Deme Industry, Water Affairs and Energy Cheikh Oumar Doumbia Public Works, Housing and Construction Lt.-Col. Issa Ongoiba Territorial Administration and Basic Development Diallo Lalla Sy Employment and Civil Service Mamadou Sissoko Justice Niamanto Diarra Information and Telecommunications Tienan Coulibaly Finance and Trade Bakary Traoré Sports, Art and Culture Brig. -Gen.
Mamadou Coulibaly Minister-Delegate for National Defence 
Mali Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Brig. -Gen.
Mamadou Coulibaly, a former Army Chief of Staff, was appointed Minister-Delegate for National Defence on Sept. 12, 1989, replacing Brig. -Gen.
Abdoulay Ouologuem.
SECURITY/FOREIGN
A state of emergency imposed in the central Gao and Timbuktu regions in July 1990, apparently in response to a series of attacks by Tuaregs on administrative posts, was extended indefinitely in early August.
Reports indicated that the local nomadic population was subjected to reprisal action by the armed forces [see also p. 37703].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 9.9% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$350 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$1,928 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 27% (1989)
Gross domestic product US$1,940 m. (1988)
Gross national product US$1,800 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 1% (1989)
Principal trading partners mostly franc zone and Western Europe
On Jan. 18, 1990, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced a loan equivalent to 15,240,000 special drawing rights (approximately US$20,000,000) in recognition of the progress made in Mali's programme of economic reform, with the growth rate reaching 9.9 per cent in 1989, inflation down to 1 per cent(from 2.7 per cent in 1988, and 6.6 per cent in 1987), and plans announced for the privatization of state companies.
The loan was in support of the second annual arrangement for 1990 under a three-year structural adjustment facility for a total of SDR35,560,000 agreed with the IMF in August 1988 [see also p. 36924], of which Mali drew SDR10,160,000 in support of the first annual arrangement.
On Nov. 23, 1989, the "Paris Club" of creditor countries agreed to reschedule 4,300 million francs CFA (then approximately US$14,200,000) of principal and interest due from the end of October 1989 to December 1990.
At a meeting of the National Assembly on Dec. 30, 1990, the budget for 1990 was set at 245,392 million francs CFA in revenue and 216,021 million francs CFA in expenditure, in an effort to continue with financial adjustment.
AFRICA
THE GAMBIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 11,295 sq km.
Population: 822,000 (1988).
Capital: Banjul.
Languages English (official); Mandinka, Fula, Wolof.
Religion: Islam (85%); Christianity and animism.
Av. life expectancy: 44 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 900 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$220 (1988).
Currency: dalasi (US$1.00=GD7.5470 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The Republic of The Gambia became an independent state within the Commonwealth in February 1965, and a republic in April 1970.
Executive power is vested in the President (currently Sir Dawda Kairaba Jawara), who is elected by universal suffrage for a five-year term.
Legislative power is vested in the unicameral 36-seat House of Representatives, most recently elected for a five-year term in March 1987 [not May 1987 as stated on p. 37061], in which Jawara's Progressive People's Party (PPP) has 31 seats and the National Convention Party (NCP) five [see pp. 35109-10].
Sir Dawda Kairaba Jawara President; National Defence; C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces Bakary Bunja Darbo Vice-President; Education, Youth and Sports Omar Amadou Jallow Agriculture and Natural Resources Memba Jatta Trade, Industry and Employment Louise N'Jie Health and Social Welfare Omar Sey External Affairs Saihou S. Sabally Finance and Economic Affairs Landing Jallow Sonko Local Government and Lands Lamin Kiti Jabang Interior Hassan Jallow Justice, Attorney General James Alkali Gaye Information and Tourism Sarjo Tourah Water Resources and Environment Matthew Yaya Baldeh Works and Communications 
Gambian Cabinet
POLITICS
President Jawara dismissed Lamin Keba Saho, the Minister of Information and Tourism, on May 3, 1990, replacing him by James Alkali Gaye, a former parliamentary secretary at the External Affairs Ministry.
Sources in Banjul suggested that he was accused of mishandling the allocation of land for tourism development; he had been a controversial figure since the end of 1988 when he was alleged to have sold donated drugs to the government.
Mamadon Cadi Cham was on June 5 replaced as Minister of Works and Communications by Matthew Yaya Baldeh.
Jawara restructured two ministries in the economic sector on Aug. 13, 1990, although the ministers remained unchanged.
Saihou Sabally, hitherto Minister of Finance and Trade, became Minister of Finance and Economic Affairs, and Memba Jatta, hitherto Minister of Economic Planning and Industrial Development, became Minister of Trade, Industry and Employment.
SECURITY
On Jan. 5, 1990, Jawara pardoned nine prisoners with heavy sentences, including four imprisoned for high treason for their alleged role in an attempted 1981 coup [see pp. 31165; 32957].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 4.6% (1989 estimated)
Budget surplus US$8 m. (1989)
Total external public debt US$330 m. (1989 estimated)
Gross domestic product US$195 m. (1989 estimated)
Gross national product US$180 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 8% (1989 estimated)
Principal trading partners Ghana, Europe, USA
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) on Nov. 16, 1989, announced approval of a loan equivalent to 6,840,000 special drawing rights (SDR1=US$1.27549 as at Nov. 10, 1989) due in support of the second annual economic and financial programme under the enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF — see p. 37062).
The funds were to be disbursed in two instalments of SDR3,420,000 each.
In his mid-June 1990 budget speech Saihou Sabally, then Finance and Trade Minister, set total domestic revenue at GD552,200,000, a rise of 9.7 per cent over the previous year, with a projected deficit of DG59,400,000.
Development expenditure was set at GD195,000,000.
The government's aim was to keep the budget deficit to within 3 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), or GD 60,000,000, while building on the achievements of the 1985-90 economic recovery plan (ERP — see p. 35110).
The plan had succeeded in reducing the annual rate of inflation from 70 to 10 per cent, and had reduced the ratio of public debt to GDP from 206 to 132 per cent .
FOREIGN
Relations with Senegal — Visit by Nigerian President
Following the final withdrawal of Senegalese troops and the dissolution of the 1982 Confederation of Senegambia in September 1989 [see p. 37062], Gambia's relations with Senegal deteriorated.
On Nov. 13, 1989, External Affairs Minister Omar Sey said that there was incontrovertible evidence that Gambian citizens travelling to and from Senegal were being subjected to harassment.
He also claimed that Senegal had imposed trade sanctions and embargoes, damaging Gambian companies and parastatal organizations; Senegal had imposed a restriction limiting each person crossing into the Gambia to an allowance of 20,000 francs CFA (about US$75).
Gambian officials also blamed Senegal for a week of electricity failures in the capital Banjul, power returning to normal on Dec. 3 after supplies of gas and oil were guaranteed from Senegal.
On Dec. 15, in an attempt to reduce tension, Jawara went to Dakar, the capital of Senegal, for talks with Senegalese President Abdou Diouf.
On April 14, 1990, the Foreign Ministers of the two countries met in Dakar to discuss a new framework for co-operation.
On Feb. 17, 1990, President Ibrahim Babangida of Nigeria visited Banjul as the guest of honour for Gambia's 25th independence anniversary celebrations.
A joint statement with Jawara reaffirmed the two Presidents' commitment to the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) as an effective instrument of regional development.
AFRICA
CAPE VERDE
BASIC DATA
Area: 4,033 sq km.
Population: 352,000 (1988).
Capital: Praia.
Languages: Portuguese (official) and Creole (the local form of Portuguese).
Religion: Christianity (98% Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 66 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 1,200 (1989).
Currency: Cape Verde escudo (US$1.00=CVEs65.3765 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The Republic of Cape Verde, composed of 10 islands off the west coast of Africa, achieved independence from Portugal in July 1975 under the leadership of President Arístides Maria Pereira.
The 1980 Constitution defines Cape Verde as "a sovereign, democratic, unitary, anti-colonialist and anti-imperialist republic" .
Pereira was unanimously re-elected to the presidency in February 1981 and January 1986 by the National People's Assembly.
The President's term of office is five years, as is that of the 83-member Assembly, elected by universal suffrage (most recently in December 1985) from a single list of candidates put forward by the sole party, the African Party for the Independence of Cape Verde (Partido Africano da Independência de Cabo Verde — PAICV, founded in January 1981, when it broke away from the African Party for the Independence of Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau, whose rule in Guinea-Bissau was overthrown in 1980).
In February 1981 all plans for eventual unification with Guinea-Bissau were revoked.
Gen. Pedro Verona Rodrigues Pires Prime Minister; Defence Col. Silvino Manuel da Luz Foreign Affairs Omar Lima Transport, Trade and Tourism Maj. Joao Pereira Silva Rural Development, Fisheries and Internal Administration Ireneu Gomes Health, Labour and Social Welfare Adao Silva Rocha Industry and Energy Aguinaldo Lisboa Ramos Deputy Minister to the Prime Minister José Brito Co-operation and Planning Arnaldo Vasconcellos Franca Finance David Hopffer Cordeiro Almada Information, Culture and Sport André Corsino Tolentino Education Corsino Fortes Justice Adriano de Oliveira Lima Public Works 
Cape Verde Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Cabinet reshuffle
In a reshuffle on July 14, 1990, Maj. Osvaldo Lopes da Silva was replaced as Minister of Transport, Trade and Tourism by Omar Lima, and Pires assumed the Defence portfolio from Maj. Julio de Carvalho, who was hitherto prominent in the party leadership.
Lopes da Silva later described the reshuffle as "regionalistic" , and also criticized the government's economic policies, which he said placed excessive hope in foreign investment while ignoring the domestic needs of the population.
Moves towards multiparty system
The policy-making National Council of the PAICV announced after meeting on April 10-13, 1990, that the President would henceforth be elected by direct universal suffrage rather than as hitherto by deputies of the National People's Assembly.
The ruling party also announced that the December 1990 elections to the People's Assembly would for the first time be open to participation by other parties.
Amendments to the Constitution, which banned parties other than the PAICV, were currently being drawn up.
Earlier in the month the formation of the Movement for Democracy was announced.
This grouping of some 600 technocrats published a manifesto calling for the introduction of a multiparty system and held its first public meeting on June 3.
President Arístides Maria Pereira announced at an extraordinary congress of the PAICV on July 26, 1990, that he was stepping down as party leader as a first step towards the ending of one-party rule, declaring that the President had to be above party politics.
The congress elected deputy secretary-general and Prime Minister Pedro Pires to replace Pereira.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 23.9% (1986-87)
Overall balance of payments -US$1.65 m. (1987)
Gross domestic product US$181.06 m. (1987)
GDP per capita US$480 (1987)
Unemployment 25% (1988)
Principal trading partners Exports: Portugal, Algeria, Italy; Imports: Portugal, Netherlands, West Germany 
IFC membership
In May 1990 Cape Verde joined the International Finance Corporation (IFC) in a move designed to encourage investment from the estimated 600,000 expatriate Cape Verdeans living for the most part in the USA and Europe.
FOREIGN
Pires visited Portugal and Mozambique in March 1990 for talks on Cape Verde's political reforms, economic relations and the peace process in Angola and Mozambique.
In June 1990 Pereira visited Nouakchott, Mauritania, to meet President Taya.
AFRICA
GUINEA-BISSAU
BASIC DATA
Area: 36,125 sq km.
Population: 940,000 (1988).
Capital: Bissau.
Language: Portuguese (Crioulo is locally spoken form).
Religion: Islam and animism, small minority of Christians.
Av. life expectancy: 40 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 9,200 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$160 (1987).
Currency: Guinea-Bissau peso (US$1.00=651.6611 GB pesos as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The Republic of Guinea-Bissau gained independence from Portugal in September 1974.
The country's first President, Luiz Cabral, was deposed in a coup in November 1980 by the current head of state, Brig. -Gen. (then Col.) Joao Bernardo Vieira.
The National Assembly was dissolved, and Cape Verde members withdrew from the single party, the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (Partido Africano da Independência da Guiné e Cabo Verde — PAIGC), which until then had been the ruling party in both countries.
The Constitution, approved in May 1984, defines Guinea-Bissau as an "anti-colonialist and anti-imperialist republic, and a state of revolutionary national democracy" , in which the PAIGC defines policy in all fields.
In May 1984 a new National Assembly was established, composed of 150 members elected from among the members of eight directly elected regional councils; the Assembly was re-elected in June 1989 following approval by the voters of the PAIGC's list of candidates for the regional councils.
The Assembly elects a 15-member Council of State, to which its powers are delegated between sessions of the Assembly.
The President of the Council of State is automatically head of government and C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces.
Brig. -Gen.
Joao Bernardo Vieira Chairman of the Council of State; C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces; Head of Government; Defence; Interior Col. Iafai Camara First Deputy Chairman of Council of State; Minister of State for the Armed Forces Vasco Cabral Second Deputy Chairman of Council of State; Minister of State at the Presidency in charge of Co-ordination of the Social Sector Carlos Correia Minister of State for Rural Development and Agriculture Fidelis Cabral de Almada Minister of State at the Presidency Carmen Pereira Minister of State for Social Affairs Col. Manuel dos Santos Minister of State for Economy and Finance (vacant) National Security and Public Order Filinto de Barros Natural Resources and Industry Júlio Semedo Foreign Affairs Henriqueta Godinho Gomes Public Health Mário Cabral Justice Manuel Rabout Barcelos Education Nicandro Pereira Barreto Civil Service and Labour Luís Oliveira Sanca Commerce and Tourism Bernardino Cardoso International Co-operation Francisca Pereira Women's Affairs Zeca Martins Resident Minister in Northern Province Nicandro Pereira Barreto Resident Minister in Southern Province Mário Mendes Resident Minister in Eastern Province Vítor Freire Monteiro Fisheries Maj. Avito José da Silva Transport Alberto Lima Gomes Public Works, Construction and Town Planning Mussa Djassi Information and Telecommunications Pedro Godinho Gomes Minister-Governor of the Central Bank 
Guinea-Bissau Council of Ministers
POLITICS
March 1990 Cabinet reshuffle and other appointments — Further Cabinet changes
President Joao Bernardo Vieira announced structural Cabinet changes on March 9, 1990, aimed at improving government efficiency.
The number of ministries was increased from 19 to 24, with portfolios for Public Works, for Construction and Town Planning and for Women's affairs created; Fisheries, International Co-operation and Trade and Tourism were upgraded to full or separate ministries.
A Ministry of State for Co-ordination of the Social Sector was placed in the charge of Second Deputy Chairman of the Council of State Vasco Cabral.
At the same time Mario Ernesto Lopes was appointed Attorney General and Col. Ansumane Mane became Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces.
Also in March Joao Aurigema Cruz Pinto was appointed President of the Supreme Court with the rank of minister, replacing Rui dos Merces Barreto, who was named as an ambassador.
Alexandre Nunes Correia, Minister of the Civil Service and Labour since March 9 (and hitherto Public Health Minister), was on June 8, 1990, dismissed for reasons which were not specified, and on July 31 Maj. José Pereira was dismissed as Minister of National Security and Public Order, a post he had held since 1985.
Pereira, considered a close confidant of the President, was dismissed soon after leading a delegation to southern Senegal for a bipartite meeting on border security [see also below].
Statement on multiparty system
Vieira said on May 13, 1990, that the PAIGC had begun the process of creating conditions for the introduction of a multiparty system, adding that it was essential that this process developed in a spirit of dialogue and on a non-tribal basis.
On June 6 he told delegates at a seminar on promoting private investment that multipartyism would be established "in the near future" , warning at the same time that current conditions, notably the illiteracy rate of over 70 per cent, were "not adequate to meet the challenge of multipartyism" .
SECURITY
Amnesty for 1985 coup plotters
The Council of State on Jan. 20, 1990, granted an amnesty to 22 of those detained for their part in the coup attempt of Oct. 17, 1985 [see p. 34217]; 16 were freed unconditionally, while the remainder, who had been sentenced to death and had had their sentences commuted to 15 years' imprisonment, remained under house arrest.
Six people had been executed in 1986 for their part in the attempt.
Previous amnesties had been granted in December 1988 [see p. 37061]and in November 1989.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Current-account balance -US$29 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$43 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$423.4 m. (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 32% (1989)
Gross domestic product US$135.357 m. (1987)
Gross national product US$145 m. (1987)
Principal trading partners Exports: China, Spain, Portugal; imports: Italy, Portugal, Thailand 
Withdrawal of franc zone application
The government in January 1990 gave up its attempt to join the Union monétaire ouest africaine (UMOA), whose members' currencies were linked to the French franc, and decided to turn to Portugal for help to make its currency convertible.
Portugal agreed to provide a revolving fund credit facility, which would guarantee the conversion into Portuguese escudos of up to US$10,000,000 of local currency remittances.
Paris Club rescheduling — Austerity measures
The "Paris Club" of creditor countries announced on Oct. 26, 1989, that Belgium, France, Italy, Sweden and Switzerland — Guinea-Bissau's principal creditors — had agreed to recommend an "exceptional reduction" of the country's debt, saying this was justified both by Guinea-Bissau's implementation of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) structural adjustment programme as well as by the country's very low per capita revenue and the burden the debt placed on the economy [see p. 36331].
After talks with the IMF Vieira announced on April 12, 1990, a series of measures to control expenditure in the public sector and to centralize tax collection.
In January cuts had been implemented in the civil service to reduce the public-sector wage bill.
FOREIGN
Delegations from Senegal and Guinea-Bissau met in Sao Domingo, Guinea-Bissau, on May 29, 1990, where they reaffirmed their commitment not to harbour members of each other 's subversive movements and undertook to strengthen military co-operation.
The two sides also agreed to maintain border troops "at a reasonable distance" .
The meeting followed emergency talks held in Paris after border clashes in April and May, and an exchange of artillery fire between the border troops.
Some 17 people had been killed in the fighting.
At a meeting in Guinea-Bissau on July 25-27, 1990, the joint co-operation commission, meeting for the first time since the 1980 coup, decided that it was unable to settle the longstanding dispute over the demarcation of the maritime border, and agreed to refer it to their heads of state [see also pp. 36840].
Other foreign affairs
China severed diplomatic relations with Guinea-Bissau on June 4, 1990, in protest at its establishment on May 26 of relations with Taiwan.
Vieira paid an official visit to France on May 20-22, 1990, during which he held talks with President Mitterrand on Guinea-Bissau's border dispute with Senegal.
REFERENCES Reference article pp. 37060-61.
AFRICA
GUINEA
BASIC DATA
Area: 245,857 sq km.
Population: 6,641,000 (1988).
Capital: Conakry.
Language: French (official); Soussou, Manika and six other local languages widely spoken.
Religion: Islam (majority), animism.
Av. life expectancy: 42 years (1988).
Armed forces: 9,900 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$318 (1988).
Currency: franc guinéen (US$1.00=GF300.00 — official rate — as at Oct. 29, 1990).
Formerly French Guinea, part of French West Africa, the Republic of Guinea achieved full independence from France in October 1958.
Post-independence history was dominated by Guinea's first President, Ahmed Sekou Toure, who pursued a policy of socialist revolution and suppressed opposition to his regime.
After his death in March 1984, the armed forces seized power and the country has since been ruled by a Military Committee for National Recovery under the leadership of Brig. -Gen. (now Maj.-Gen.)
Lansana Conte.
The 1982 Constitution, which provided for an elected National Assembly, was suspended after the coup, as was the Democratic Party of Guinea, formerly the ruling and sole legal party.
Maj.-Gen.
Lansana Conte President; Head of Government; Minister of Defence, Security, Planning and Co-operation, Information Maj. Abou Camara Resident Minister in Maritime Guinea (Kindia) Lt.-Col. Sory Doumbouya Resident Minister in Middle Guinea (Labé) Maj. Alpha Oumar Barou Diallo Resident Minister in Upper Guinea (Kankan) Maj. Alhousseini Fofana Resident Minister in Forest Region (N'Zerékoré) Ministers delegated to the Presidency Maj. Henri Tofani National Defence Maj. Henri Foula Economic and Financial Control René Alseny Gomez Secretary-General to the Presidency Hervé Vincent Bangoura Information, Culture and Tourism Ministers Ibrahim Sylla Planning and International co-operation Bassirou Barry Justice; Keeper of the Seals Maj. Jean Traore Foreign Affairs Edouard Benjamin Economy and Finance Capt. Abdourahmane Diallo Agriculture and Animal Resources Capt. Mohammed Lamine Traoré Natural Resources and Environment Mbaya Sidibi Town Development and Housing Saliou Coumbassa Social Affairs and Employment Madigbe Fofana Public Health and Population Maj. Facine Toure Transport and Public Works Ousmane Sylla Industry, Trade and Crafts Mamouna Bangoura Administrative Reform and Civil Service Capt. Mamadou Baldé Interior and Decentralization Capt. Joseph Bagbo Zoumangui Youth and Sports Maj. Jean Kolipe Lama National and Higher Education and Scientific Research Lamine Bolivogui Posts and Telecommunications Amadou Tidiane Traore Secretary-General of National Islamic League 
Guinean Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Minor Cabinet reshuffle
On March 1, 1990, Minister of National Education Saliou Coumbassa exchanged portfolios with Minister of Social Affairs and Employment Lt.-Col. Jean Kolipe Lama.
Coumbassa had been criticized by students for his refusal to start a dialogue with them.
Constitution timetable
President Lansana Conte (who on April 4, 1990, was given the rank of major-general by the CMRN) said in his 1990 New Year address that the draft constitution being drawn up by a 50-member committee chaired by Foreign Minister Maj. Jean Traore would be submitted to the nation for discussion and amendment during 1990; a referendum on it would be held by the end of the year [see also p. 37060].
Earlier, Conte had defended his decision to limit to two the number of political parties which would initially be allowed to function under the promised multiparty system, saying that the CMRN rejected "both any anarchic multiparty system that divides the people, and a single party that leads to individual or group dictatorship" .
SECURITY
Rioting in Labe
The authorities denied that "ethnic rivalry" had been a factor in rioting in the town of Labe in Middle Guinea region on Oct. 29, 1989, in which six people were killed and the town's police station was set on fire.
The clashes followed the arrest and subsequent death in police custody of a 17-year-old youth accused of committing a crime.
The violence was blamed on "bandits and hooligans" exploiting the situation.
Amnesty for political prisoners
All Guineans convicted of political crimes were given an amnesty on Feb. 9, 1990.
The main beneficiaries were those convicted in May 1987 of involvement in a coup attempt led by a former Prime Minister, Col. Diarra Traore, in July 1985 [see p. 35435].
The amnesty covered some 107 Guineans, some of them in exile.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 4.1% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$150 m. (1989)
Trade balance +US$36 m. (19)
Overall balance of payments -US$130 m. (1990 forecast)
Total external public debt US$2,600 m. (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 23.6% (1989)
Gross domestic product US$2,540 m. (1988)
Gross national product US$2,110 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 30% (1990 estimate)
Principal trading partners Exports: USA, Ireland, Spain; imports: France, Belgium/Luxembourg, USA
The iron ore deposits in the Nimba mountains on the border with Côte d'Ivoire and Liberia, which had a 65-70 per cent iron content, were finally to be opened up to exploitation, it was announced in December 1989 [see p. 35436 for setting up in 1986 of iron ore project].
Care would be taken not to harm the environment in the nature reserve there, which was designated a world heritage area.
In 1988 mining represented 22 per cent of GDP and contributed nearly two-thirds of export revenue and 90 per cent of budget revenue.
It provided 55 per cent of foreign currency revenue and employed 6 per cent of the active population.
The public investment programme for 1989-91 totalled GF644,000 million distributed among 379 projects; external sources would contribute 85 per cent of the finance.
Investment was predominantly directed at infrastructure (51 per cent), rural development (25 per cent ) and social welfare (14.7 per cent ).
FOREIGN
On May 12, 1990, Guinea launched an international appeal for aid to its citizens living near the Liberian border in the south, whose food supplies had been depleted by the arrival of Liberian refugees since the outbreak of civil war in Liberia in December 1989.
Although the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees put the number of Liberian refugees at 80,000, the government said that there were at least 200,000 [see also pp. 37174; 37644].
REFERENCES Reference article pp. 37059-60.
AFRICA
SIERRA LEONE
BASIC DATA
Area: 71,740 sq km.
Population: 3,938,000 (1988).
Capital: Freetown.
Languages: English (official); Krio (Creole), Mende, Limba and Temne also widely spoken.
Religion: Animism; Moslem and Christian minorities.
Av. life expectancy: 42 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 3,100 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$240 (1988).
Currency: leone (US$1.00=Le170.4325 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The Republic of Sierra Leone became independent within the Commonwealth in April 1961, originally as a constitutional monarchy.
After a period of military rule from March 1967 to April 1968 a republican Constitution was adopted in April 1971.
The country was established as a one-party state in June 1978.
Legislative power is vested in the unicameral House of Representatives, comprising 105 members, elected for a five-year term, 10 elected paramount chiefs and 10 presidential nominees.
In elections held in May 1986, up to five candidates were permitted to contest each seat, although all candidates were required to be approved by the sole legal political organization, the All-People's Congress (APC).
Executive power is vested in the President,(currently Maj.-Gen.
Joseph Saidu Momoh) elected by popular vote for a seven-year term, after endorsement as leader of the APC and presidential candidate by the national delegates' conference of the party.
Joseph Saidu Momoh President; Minister of Defence and Public Services Abu Bakar Kamara First Vice-President Salia Jusu-Sheriff Second Vice-President Tommy Taylor-Morgan Finance Sheka Kanu Economic Planning and National Development Abdul Karim Koroma Foreign Affairs Moses Dumbuya Education, Cultural Affairs and Sports Bandala Dauda Trade (vacant) Industry Philipson Kamara Transport and Communications Wiltshire Johnson Health and Social Welfare Victor Manbu Information and Broadcasting Birch Momodu Conteh Mines Ahmed Sesay Internal Affairs Lamin Sidique Labour James Laverse Works Sheku Sesay Energy and Power Abdul Iscandri Tourism Ernest Ndo Mahina Minister of State and Leader of the House Brig.
M.S. Tarawali Minister of State and Forces Commander Patrick Johnson Minister of State and Inspector-General of Police E.T.
Kamara Minister of State for Party Affairs Abdulai Conteh Attorney-General; Justice Musa Kabia Rural Development, Social Services and Youth Mohamed Bash Taqui Agriculture, Natural Resources and Forestry Domic Musa Lands, Housing and Environment 
Sierra Leone Cabinet
POLITICS
In a Cabinet reshuffle announced by President Joseph Momoh on Nov. 28, 1989, Tommy Taylor-Morgan, hitherto Minister of State, Trade (a non-Cabinet post), was appointed Finance Minister in place of Hassan Gbassay Kanu.
Welcomed by multilateral aid institutions, the change followed allegations that the Finance Ministry had agreed on a US$13,500,000 barter deal without Cabinet approval.
Voter registration irregularities
It was reported at the end of February 1990 that the then Minister of State for the Southern Province R. H. Sam Kpakra had suspended voter registration in preparation for the 1991 elections in the constituencies of Bo Town 1, Bo West and Bo North, following claims that irregularities had taken place.
Widespread evidence of irregularities had been reported nationally, with registration clerks apparently changing the names of election officers and adding fictitious names on registration forms to allow a particular candidate to win more votes.
In some cases registration was said to be complete when no one had been entered on lists at all.
A revision of electoral lists had not taken place since 1985, contrary to the Constitution which stipulated such a revision every three years.
Demands for multiparty politics
The government and the APC resisted increasing demands in mid-1990 for a return to a multiparty system, claiming that such a change would not solve the country's economic problems and could lead to divisiveness.
Opposition to the current system was most vociferous among ethnic groups who claimed that they were disadvantaged under a system of patronage whereby members of the President's own ethnic group, the Limba, were favoured in government appointments.
The Bar Association at its annual conference on June 30 strongly urged the adoption of a multiparty system, declaring that the APC had "failed to achieve any of the goals set for itself" .
SECURITY
Unrest in the education system, prompted by arrears in teachers' salary payments, led to clashes with police in late May 1990.
On May 28 four people were killed when a demonstration in Freetown by students in support of teachers' demands was broken up by police after a police station had been stoned; earlier a meeting attempting to establish an independent teachers' union was also broken up by the authorities.
Six Sierra Leoneans and two Israelis were arrested on Jan. 15, 1990 (and released on bail), charged with economic sabotage; they included M. M. Turay, the acting deputy governor of the Bank of Sierra Leone (central bank), Adebayo Mike Butcher and Sylvester Harding, also of the Central Bank, as well as Alex Demby and James Sampha Koroma, both employees from the National Development Bank.
On Sept. 8, 1989, Emmanuel Moigua and Kalilu Titangay, members of the Pan-African Union (Panafu) group were detained for calling for a week of anti-racist and anti-Zionist action, including a campaign against the influential Israeli-managed N. R. Scippa company which was involved in diamond and gold mining and in importing rice.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -0.61%
Current-account balance -US$86 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$24.2 m.
(July 1989-April 1990)
Total external public debt US$510 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 5.9% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$1,360 m. (1988
Gross national product US$1,172 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 89% (1989-90)
Principal trading partners USA, UK, Netherlands
Announcing the 1989-90 budget on June 30, 1989, the then Finance Minister, Hassan Gbassay Kanu, doubled the official price of petrol to Le110 a gallon, in line with International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank demands for the removal of fuel subsidies.
A 50 per cent wage rise was also decreed for most civil servants.
Taylor-Morgan presented a further package of economic measures to Parliament on Feb. 20, 1990, including a further rise in the petrol price to Le250 a gallon; wage increases for civil servants of between 100 and 125 per cent; a freeze on civil service recruitment; and the abolition of import licences.
Total expenditure was increased from Le8,650 million to Le12,009 million.
Following a visit to Washington by Taylor-Morgan in early 1990, talks resumed with the IMF, aimed at negotiating the introduction of an IMF programme from September and the restoration of financing eligibility, which had been suspended in April 1988 due to arrears then totalling US$55,000,000 [see p. 36754].
Agreement was announced on June 8 on funding from the World Bank and the IMF for a three-year structural adjustment programme to begin in mid-1990.
The programme's objectives included (i) a reduction in the rate of inflation from 89 per cent in 1989/90 to 15 per cent by 1992/93;(ii) an improvement in exports;(iii) the creation of conditions favourable to efficient functioning of the private sector; and (iv) the rehabilitation of basic services.
A World Bank official reported that the government had made considerable progress in monetary and exchange rate policies.
The leone had been devalued from Le66 to Le125 to the US dollar in January; on April 25 a floating exchange rate system was introduced whereby the rate was fixed weekly by the central bank according to market conditions.
The 1990-91 budget, reported in early August 1990, made allowance for Le720,000,000 to help cushion the impact of the new austerity measures on the poorest in society.
Other measures announced included a reduction in the rate of income tax and a further immediate increase in the price of petrol.
Taylor-Morgan warned that low production, low exports, a deteriorating balance of payments and inability to service debt repayments continued to be serious problems.
FOREIGN
Returning from a five-day visit to Guinea on Feb. 23, 1990, Momoh declared that the smuggling trade between Sierra Leone and Guinea continued to be a stumbling block to the recovery of the fragile economies of the two countries.
Momoh visited China on June 6-11, 1990, reaffirming that there was no intention to establish diplomatic links with Taiwan.
AFRICA
REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
ECOWAS
Economic Community of West African States
Founded: 1975.
Executive Secretary: Abass Bundu.
Last summit: May 1990 [see pp. 37446-47]Membership: Benin, Burkina, Cape Verde, Côte d'Ivoire, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Togo.
UMOA
West African Monetary Union.
Founded: 1973.
Last summit: August 1988.
Membership: Benin, Burkina, Côte d'Ivoire, Mali, Niger, Senegal, Togo.
CEAO
West African Economic Community.
Founded: 1974.
Secretary-General: Mamadou Haidara.
Last summit: October 1989.
Membership: Benin, Burkina, Côte d'Ivoire, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal (observers: Guinea, Togo).
WEST AFRICA
COTE D'IVOIRE
BASIC DATA
Area: 322,462 sq km.
Population: 11,587,000 (1988).
Capital: Abidjan (in the process of being transferred to Yamoussoukro).
Language: French (official); several indigenous African languages.
Religion: Most inhabitants follow traditional beliefs, 23% are Moslem, 12% Christian (mostly Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 53 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 7,100 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$740 (1988).
Currency: franc of the Communauté financière africaine (US$1.00=253.8418 francs CFA as at Oct. 29, 1990).
Côte d'Ivoire, hitherto a province of French West Africa, became a fully independent republic in August 1960.
The current President, Félix Houphouët-Boigny was first elected in November of that year, and was re-elected by direct universal suffrage for a seventh five-year term of office in October 1990.
The President appoints the Council of Ministers.
Legislative power is vested in a single-chamber National Assembly, elections to which are held every five years; in the most recent elections in November 1985 the 175 seats were contested by 546 candidates of the ruling and sole legal party, the Côte d'Ivoire Democratic Party (Parti démocratique de la Côte d'Ivoire — PDCI).
Auguste Denise Minister of State Mathieu Ekra Minister of State Emile Kei Boguinard Minister of State Paul Gui Dibo Minister of State Vincent Pierre Lokrou Agriculture; Water and Forest Resources Chistophe Gbowo Animal Husbandry Jean-Jacques Bechio Civil Service Nicolas Kouandi Angba Commerce Vammoussa Bamba Construction, Transport and Public Works Jean Konan Banny Defence and Maritime Affairs Daniel Duncan Kablan Finance Siméon Ake Foreign Affairs Oumar Diarra Industry and Planning August Miremont Communications Léon Konan Koffi Interior Gen. Issouf Kone Internal Security; Drug Control Noël Nemin Justice; Attorney General Albert Vanie Bi Tra Labour and Indigenization Yed Esaïe Angoran Mines Alhassane Salif N'Diaye National Education, Scientific Research; Culture Vincent Tieko Djedje Posts and Telecommunications Odette Kouame Nguessan Primary Education Alain Frédéric Ekra Public Health and Population Yaya Ouattara Social Affairs; Youth and Sports Ange François Barry-Battesti Technical Education and Professional Training Jean-Claude Delafosse Tourism Moïse Koumoue Koffi Without portfolio Hortense Aka Anghui Women's Promotion Guy Alain Gauze Minister-Delegate to the Presidency Balla Keita Minister-Delegate to the Presidency Moise Koumoue Koffi Minister-Delegate to the Presidency
Council of Ministers
POLITICS/SECURITY
National dialogue
Some 2,000 representatives of Ivoirian institutions, trade unions and lobby groups met President Félix Houphouet-Boigny for five days of discussions on the country's economic, social and political problems on Sept. 21-26, 1989.
The "Journées Nationales de Dialogue" aired unprecedented criticism of the working of government and party institutions.
While most speakers supported the principle of the one-party state, many criticized the ruling PDCI for lack of dynamism and for inability to respond to popular disaffection.
The secondary school teachers' union Synesci criticized the country's politicians for "nepotism and tribalism" and "a mentality governed by the profit motive" .
The most trenchant criticism came from Marcel Ette, general secretary of the university teachers' union Synares, who reminded the meeting that the Constitution guaranteed individual liberties and envisaged the existence of political parties other than the PDCI.
He spoke of a climate of "self-censorship, fear and hypocrisy" based on the "ideology of the single party" .
The government's emphasis on cash crop production was criticized on the grounds that it favoured wealthy exporters rather than small farmers and had hindered industrial development.
The president of the employers' federation, the Union Patronale de Côte d'Ivoire (UPACI), Joseph Aka Anghui, cited rampant fraud, inefficient bureaucracy, price controls and high taxes as key problems affecting industry; he also complained of the failure of government bodies to meet their debts to the private sector.
Responding on Sept. 28, Houphouët-Boigny promised (i) a national commission to consider the opinions expressed and to recommend appropriate measures;(ii) consideration by the PDCI conference due in autumn 1990 of constitutional reforms; and (iii) a reshuffle of senior Cabinet posts [see below].
However he ruled out opening up the political system to a number of parties, insisting that national unity must be achieved first.
[For reversal of this decision in May 1990 following increasing social unrest, see p. 37445.]
Cabinet reshuffles
Houphouët-Boigny carried out a major government reshuffle on Oct. 16, 1989, reducing the size of the Cabinet from 39 to 29.
Three senior ministers departed from economic posts, notably the Agriculture and Rural Development Minister Denis Bra Kanon, whose responsibilities were taken on by Water and Forest Resources Minister Vincent Pierre Lokrou, a Cabinet member since 1986.
The departure of Bra Kanon, who had held the post since 1977, had been expected because of difficulties affecting the cocoa and coffee sectors.
Responsibility for commodity negotiations was entrusted to Guy-Alain Gauze, formerly delegate to the International Coffee Organization in London, with the rank of Minister-Delegate in the President's Office.
Economy and Finance Minister Abdoulaye Koné, who resigned for health reasons, was replaced by former Budget Minister Moise Koummoue Koffi.
Koffi also took over responsibility for debt rescheduling from former Minister of State Maurice Seri Gnoléba.
Camille Alliali, former Minister of State and a member of the government since 1966, a close confidante of the President who was sometimes tipped as his possible successor, also left the Cabinet, as did Public Works and Transport Minister Koffi Aoussou; the latter's responsibilities passed to Construction and Town Planning Minister Vammoussa Bamba.
Information Minister Laurent Dona Fologo was replaced by Auguste Miremont, director-general of the official Abidjan daily newspaper Fraternité Matin, with the title of Minister of Communications.
Further Cabinet changes followed in the wake of the public unrest of early 1990 and of the appointment in May of Alassane Ouattara as economic adviser in charge of the economic reform programme [see p. 37445].
On July 5, Daniel Dinkan Kablan was appointed Economy and Finance Minister, replacing Koffi, who assumed the post of Minister-Delegate to the Presidency.
New political parties
By mid-June 1990 a total of 14 parties had been authorized and a 15th had requested recognition following the decision of the PDCI on May 3, 1990, to allow opposition parties to operate [see p. 37445].
Campaigning for municipal, legislative and presidential elections due in October and November officially began on May 23.
On June 23, the leaders of four of the newly legalized parties — the Front populaire ivoirien, the Union des sociaux démocrates, the Parti ivoirien des travailleurs and Parti socialiste ivoirien, formally called for the President to step down as head of the PDCI and for the resignation of the government and its replacement with a transitional administration.
Trade balance +US$1,160 m. (1989) Overall balance of payments -US$760 m. (1989) Total external public debt US$13,500 m. (1987) Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 19.6% (1987) Gross domestic product 2,963,000 m. francs CFA (1988) Gross national product US$8,590 m. (1988) Principal trading partners Exports: Netherlands, France, United States; imports: France, Nigeria, Japan 
ECONOMY
Economic indicators GDP growth -3.2% (1989)
Crop price cuts
Substantial cuts in producer prices for cocoa, the country's main export crop, were announced on Sept. 28, 1989.
A price of 200 francs CFA per kg. was set for the 1989/90 season, half the previous season's level.
The cut was said by observers to reflect the gravity of the country's financial difficulties and the weakness of the world cocoa market.
A halving of producer prices for coffee, to 100 francs CFA per kg. was announced four days later.
The price cuts were in line with conditions set by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank.
Later in October the government confirmed a change in cocoa marketing strategy, saying that it planned to sell cocoa in relatively small quantities through the London market, with the aim of stimulating competition and securing an increase in prices, rather than seeking to obtain large-scale contracts with overseas buyers [for January 1989 cocoa deal with French trading house see p. 36413].
IMF agreement
The IMF on Nov. 20, 1989, approved a 17-month standby arrangement equivalent to 175,800,000 special drawing rights (equivalent to US$224,000,000) to support the government's economic and financial reform programme.
The detailed programme of austerity measures, produced as part of these reforms and announced in March 1990 was abandoned in April following protests and replaced in May by a new economic recovery plan [see pp. 37307; 37445].
1990 budget
A budget for 1990 totalling 619,387,000 million francs CFA, a 5.4 per cent drop on the previous year, was adopted by the Cabinet on Dec. 21, 1989.
The general administrative budget, at 489,822,000 million francs CFA, was 2.1 per cent down on the previous year's budget but 1.3 per cent above the actual figure for 1989.
The investment and equipment budget, at 129,578,000 million francs CFA, was projected at 10.6 per cent less than the previous year.
Fraternité Matin described the budget as a "crisis budget" , designed "to stem the haemorrhage caused by the loss of the precious currency that cocoa and coffee no longer bring in" .
FOREIGN
Diplomatic relations were established at ambassadorial level with Libya on Oct. 6, 1989.
REFERENCES Reference article pp. 36675-76; March, May 1990 austerity measures, social unrest pp. 37307-08; 37445; March extension of International Cocoa Agreement p. 37335; June military appointments p. 37523; September meeting of President with opposition leaders p. 37700; October PDCI congress, presidential elections p. 37767; relations with Angola p. 36885; with Liberia p. 37174; with South Africa p. 37232.
AFRICA
BURKINA
BASIC DATA
Area: 274,200 sq km.
Population: 8,546,000 (1988).
Capital: Ouagadougou.
Language: French (official); numerous indigenous languages.
Religion: Animism (majority), Islam (approximately 30%), Christianity (fewer than 10%).
Av. life expectancy: 47 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 8,700 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$230 (1988).
Currency: franc of the Communauté financière africaine (US$1.00=253.8418 francs CFA as at Oct. 29, 1990).
Burkina Faso (the Popular Republic of Burkina — known until August 1984 as Upper Volta) achieved full independence from France in 1960.
A civilian government, elected in 1978, was overthrown in a military coup in November 1980, after which the 57-member National Assembly and the Constitution were suspended.
A series of military governments followed, with a radical left-wing regime being installed by Capt. Thomas Sankara in August 1983.
He himself was overthrown and killed in October 1987 by a faction of the armed forces calling itself the Popular Front, which established itself as Burkina's source of legislative and executive power.
As at March 1990 the Popular Front comprised four national unions and seven political groups [see also p. 36309].
Capt. Blaise Compaore Chairman of the Popular Front; Head of Government; Minister of Popular Defence Roch Christian Kabore Minister of State without portfolio Thomas Sanon Economic Promotion Clément Oumarou Ouedraogo Minister-Delegate to the Coordinating Committee of the Popular Front Prosper Vocouma External Relations Mouhroussine Nacro Secondary and Higher Education and Scientific Research Kanidoua Naboho Health and Social Welfare Jacques Ouedraogo Transport and Communications Frédéric Korsaga Planning and Co-operation Beatrice Damiba Information and Culture Maurice Dieudonné Bonane Environment and Tourism Tou Neolie Kone Commerce and People's Supply Jean-Léonard Compaore Territorial Administration Alice Tiendrebeogo Primary Education and Mass Literacy Jean-Baptiste Zongo Peasant Co-operatives Antoine Komy Sambo Justice Maj. Kambou Daprou Equipment Salif Sampebogo Labour, Social Security and Civil Service Capt. Hein Theodore Kilimite Sports Bintou Sanogo Finance Albert Guigma Agriculture and Livestock Sabne Kouanda Water Resources Secretaries of State Célestin Tiendrebeogo Finance and Budget Aminata Salambere Culture (vacant) Mines Elie Sare Social Welfare Amadou Diao Livestock Alfred Nombre Secretary-General of the Government and Council of Ministers Joseph Kabore Housing and Town Planning 
Burkina Council of Ministers
POLITICS
For April 1989 Cabinet reshuffle and formation of ODP-MT see p. 36581; for September execution of coup plotters and Cabinet reshuffle see p. 36887; for December coup plot see p. 37114; for March 1990 Popular Front congress see p. 37309; for April senior government changes see p. 37366.
Provision in draft constitution for multiparty system
A draft constitution announced on Aug. 2, 1990, by Capt. Arsene Ye Bognessan, Popular Front secretary for organization, provided for a multiparty system and a state which would be "revolutionary, democratic, anti-imperialist and secular" .
The constitutional commission had also agreed that the country's President should be elected by direct universal suffrage.
Suspension of MDP
Herman Yameogo, son of the country's first President, Maurice Yameogo, was in July 1990 expelled as secretary-general of the Movement of Patriotic Democrats (Mouvement des démocrates progressifs — MDP, founded in 1987) for alleged financial irregularities and lack of democracy and for sending a letter to Compaore in May 1990 calling for political change, an act which the MDP called "irresponsible and subversive" .
The Popular Front suspended the MDP's membership, and on July 28 expelled Yameogo himself from membership of the Front.
Dismissals from Army
Capt. Laurent Sedogo, the then Minister of Peasant Co-operatives, and Lt. Francois Etienne Ouedraogo, a member of the Popular Front's executive committee, were among six officers dismissed from the armed forces on May 23, 1990, to "reinforce Army discipline" .
Jean-Baptiste Zongo was appointed as Minister of Peasant Co-operatives on July 28, 1990.
Freeing of political prisoners
All political detainees were freed in August 1989 to mark the sixth anniversary of Thomas Sankara's military coup in 1983 [see p. 32482].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.1% (1987)
Current-account balance -US$310 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$330.6 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments -US$100 m. (1988)
Budget surplus 6,680 m. francs CFA (1989)
Total external public debt US$969 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 13.3% (1987)
Gross domestic product US$1,650 m. (1987)
Gross national product US$1,960 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 4% (1988)
Principal trading partners Exports: France (30%), Taiwan (17%), Côte d'Ivoire (15%); imports: France (23%), other African countries (31%), USA (15%)
1990 budget
In February 1990 the government adopted a budget with a projected deficit of 11,442 million francs CFA; revenue was set at 98,143 million francs CFA, and expenditure at 109,585 million francs CFA.
A budgetary surplus for 1989 of 6,680 million francs CFA was reported.
FOREIGN
Compaore visited Libya on July 16-18, 1989, when he held talks with the Libyan leader, Col. Moamer al Kadhafi.
In May 1990 he visited Niger and Nigeria, and on July 12-13, 1990, with President Saibou of Niger, he paid a visit to Togo.
REFERENCES Last roundup article pp. 36196-98; April 1989 Cabinet reshuffle and formation of ODP-MT p. 36581; September execution of coup plotters and Cabinet reshuffle p. 36887; December coup plot p. 37114; March 1990 Popular Front congress p. 37309; April senior government changes p. 37366; relations with Libya p. 36572; with Togo p. 36994.
AFRICA
GHANA
BASIC DATA
Area: 238,537 sq km.
Population: 14,040,000 (1988).
Capital: Accra.
Languages: English (official); eight major national languages.
Religion: 42% Christianity; many follow traditional beliefs.
Av. life expectancy: 54 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 11,600 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$400 (1988).
Currency: cedi (US$1.00=C640.00 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The Republic of Ghana achieved independence within the Commonwealth in March 1957.
Since the overthrow of the country's first President, Kwame Nkrumah, in a coup in February 1966, Ghana has experienced long periods of military rule interspersed with short-lived civilian governments.
The Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC) took power in December 1981 under the leadership of the current Head of State, Chairman of the Provisional National Defence Council and Chief of Defence Staff Flt. -Lt.
Jerry Rawlings (who had staged a successful coup in June 1979 against the then military rulers).
The 1979 Constitution was suspended, and parliamentary institutions were abolished.
Political parties are banned.
Executive power is vested in the PNDC which rules by decree.
Elections to district assemblies with executive powers were held in December 1988 and January and February 1989.
P. V. Obeng Chairman Kwesi Botchwey Finance and Economic Planning Kwamena Ahwoi Local Government and Rural Development Commodore Steve Obimpeh Agriculture Huudu Yahaya Trade and Tourism Alhaji Mahamad Idrisu Defence Kofi Totobi Quakyi Information Ato Ahoi Fuel and Power K. B. Asante Education and Culture Capt. K. A. Bota Works and Housing Lt.-Col. Mensah Gbedemah Roads and Highways Kwame Peprah Lands and Mineral Resources Obed Y. Asamoah Foreign Affairs J. A. Danso Transport and Communications D. S. Boateng Mobilization and Social Welfare K. Saarah-Mensah Youth and Sports Col. Richard Commey Industry, Science and Technology G. E. K. Aikins Justice; Attorney-General Nana Akuoko Sarpong Health Emmanuel J. Tanoh Chieftancy Affairs Yaw Akrasi-Sarpong National Defence Committee Nii Okaidjah Adamafio Interior 
Ghana Committee of Secretaries
POLITICS
Cabinet changes
A ministerial reshuffle was announced by the ruling PNDC on Dec. 29-30, 1989.
Five posts in the council of secretaries changed hands.
Francis Acquah, Secretary (Minister) for Industry, Science and Technology, was dismissed and replaced by Col. Richard Commey.
J. A. Danso replaced E. O. Donkor as Secretary for Transport and Communications.
Navy Capt. K. A. Bota became Secretary of Works and Housing, replacing Charles Boadu.
Secretary for Mobilization and Social Welfare Huudu Yahaya moved to Trade and Tourism, to be replaced by his former deputy, D. S. Boateng.
In addition, Deputy Secretary for Health Mary Grant was appointed a member of the PNDC, and Col. Jeff Asmah, hitherto the ambassador to Libya, was made chief of staff at PNDC headquarters.
SECURITY
Inquiry into coup attempt — Further arrests
The findings of the board of inquiry into the alleged September 1989 coup plot were released on Nov. 10, 1989.
The board found that Maj. Courage Quashigah, arrested on Oct. 6, had been motivated by political ambition in planning an attempt to assassinate PNDC chairman Flt. -Lt.
Jerry Rawlings.
No indication was given, however, of whether Quashigah and others accused of involvement would be brought to trial.
In February 1990 three soldiers and two civilians were arrested in connection with the plot, including Maj. W. W. Binka, a close aide of PNDC member and security chief Capt. Kojo Tsikata.
One of those arrested, Prince Acquah, an official of the Bureau of National Investigations, escaped to Togo in June.
Another, Capt. J. S. Atengdem, was released soon after.
Armed forces appointments
Army commander Maj.-Gen.
Winston Mensah-Wood was appointed General Officer Commanding the Ghana Armed Forces on June 4, 1990.
The former Armed Forces Commander, Lt.-Gen.
Arnold Quainoo, had been removed from his post shortly after the September 1989 alleged coup attempt and his responsibilities assumed by Rawlings [see p. 36967].
Brig.
B. K. Akafia was appointed to replace Mensah-Wood as army commander and Capt. Tom Annan succeded Rear-Adml.
Ben Ohene-Kwapong as Navy Commander.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 6.1% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$250 m. (1989)
Trade balance -US$267 m. (1989)
Budget surplus C10,200 m. (1989)
Total external public debt US$3,099 m. (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 62.8% (1988)
Gross domestic product C1,387 bn.
(1989)
Gross national product US$5,610 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 25% (1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: USA, UK, West Germany; Imports: UK, Nigeria, USA 
1990 budget — Economic performance
The 1990 budget, presented by Finance and Economic Planning Secretary Kwesi Botchwey on Jan. 11, projected revenue of C272,500 million for the year, a 28.3 per cent increase on 1989, with total expenditure expected to rise 27 per cent to Ë256,700 million.
A 5 per cent GDP growth rate was projected for the year, compared with 6.1 per cent in 1989.
Increased revenue was expected to come from additional indirect taxes, including sales taxes on fuel, cars, fruit and some beverages; cars would be taxed at between 50 and 500 per cent, depending on engine capacity, and fuel prices were to rise by about 30 per cent .
Priority in development spending would be given to the health services, with the aim of achieving an equitable distribution of facilities throughout the country.
Total government revenue in 1989 was C212,400 million, a C10,200 million surplus over expenditure.
Exports brought in US$815,800,000, down from $881,000,000 the previous year, with imports rising slightly to $1,082 million.
Cocoa production increased by 58 per cent, from 190,000 tonnes in 1987/88 to 300,000 tonnes in 1988/89, although the fall in world prices [see p. 37335]hit export earnings from the crop.
Manufacturing output grew by 8 per cent, below the 10 per cent average of the previous five years, and mining by 9 per cent .
Inflation fell to 25 per cent, compared with a target of 15 per cent , from 31.4 per cent in 1988.
FOREIGN
The establishment of a permanent co-operation commission was announced at the end of the visit of President Chissano of Mozambique to Accra on April 4, 1990.
During his three-day visit at the head of a 20-member delegation, Chissano met Rawlings for discussions on issues of mutual concern, including the peace initiatives in Mozambique and Angola.
Ghana established diplomatic relations with Singapore at ambassadorial level on Oct. 11, 1989.
WEST AFRICA
TOGO
BASIC DATA
Area: 56,785 sq km.
Population: 3,362,000 (1988).
Capital: Lomé.
Languages: French, Kabiye and Ewe (all official).
Religion: Animism (50%), Christianity (35%) and Islam (15%).
Av. life expectancy: 53 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 5,900 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$370 (1988).
Currency: franc of the Communauté financière africaine (US$1.00=253.8418 francs CFA as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The Togolese Republic, a former German Protectorate and French and League of Nations/United Nations Trust Territory, became fully independent in April 1960.
The current head of state (Gen. Gnassingbe Eyadema) seized power as Army Chief of Staff in a bloodless coup in January 1967, assuming the title of President three months later.
Existing political parties were banned, and a period of military rule followed.
The Rally of the Togolese People (Rassemblement du peuple togolais — RPT) was established in November 1969 as the ruling and sole legal party; the party's political bureau, appointed by the President, is the country's chief policy making body.
A new Constitution was approved by referendum in December 1979, providing for an executive president elected by universal adult suffrage for a seven-year term, and a National Assembly, which in practice has limited powers, elected directly for a five-year term.
Presidential elections took place in December 1986, when Gen. Eyadema, the sole candidate, was re-elected for a second seven-year term.
Legislative elections were held in March 1990.
Gen. Gnassingbe Eyadema Minister of National Defence Barry Moussa Barque Planning and Mines Gbegnon Amegboh Minister-Delegate at the Presidency Koffi Edoh Technical Education and Professional Training Yagninim Bitokotipou Justice; Keeper of the Seals Tchaa-Kozah Tchalim National Education and Scientific Research Gen. Mawulikplimi Amegi Interior and Security Koudjolou Dogoh Rural Development Ayissah Agbetra Public Health Koffi Djondo State Enterprises and Industry Kwaovi Benyi Johnson Information Komlan Alipui Finance and Economy Yaovi Adodo Foreign Affairs and Co-operation Aissa Ahlokoba Social and Women's Affairs Yao Komlanvi Environment and Tourism Mensah Agbeyome Kodjo Youth, Sports and Culture Komlanvi Kloutse Trade and Transport Daoukou Pere Labour and Civil Service Souleymane Gado Equipment, Posts and Telecommunications 
Togo Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Cabinet reshuffle
A Cabinet reshuffle was announced on Feb. 13, 1990, a few weeks before the March legislative elections.
The Ministers of Rural Development, Yao Pali Tchalla, and of Equipment, Posts and Telecommunications, Nassirou Ayeva, were dismissed and the number of portfolios increased from 16 to 19.
Kwaouvi Benyi Johnson was appointed Minister of Information.
Komlanvi Kloutse was appointed Minister of the newly created Trade and Transport Ministry while Ayissah Agbetra was appointed to head the new Public Health Ministry.
Aissa Ahlokoba, president of the National Union of Togolese Women, was appointed to the portfolio of Social and Women's Affairs, hitherto the responsibility of the Ministry of Health.
Kougjolou Dogo, who had worked in the President's Office, became Rural Development Minister.
Yagninim Bitokotipou became Justice Minister, vacant since Kpotivi Laclé was dismissed on March 7, 1989 [see p. 36517], and later charged with embezzlement.
Laclé, sentenced to two years' imprisonment, was pardoned by Eyadema in early January 1990.
National Assembly membership — Proposed political reform
Three women were among the 77 deputies elected on March 4 and March 18, 1990; 69 were newcomers to the National Assembly.
The RPT national council on May 27 adopted in principle a proposal by Eyadema to separate the functions of head of state and head of the party.
The council, after hearing reports of commissions set up to canvass popular opinion, also firmly rejected a return to a multiparty system.
SECURITY
On Dec. 29, 1989, two members of the Togolese opposition, Godwin Tete and Kuevi Akue, were deported from Côte d'Ivoire.
They had been arrested on Dec. 17 and held at the premises of the Directorate of Territorial Surveillance in Abidjan accused of the possession of documents supporting a group calling itself the Democratic Convention of African People, material considered hostile to the Eyadema regime.
Current-account balance -US$122 m. (19) Total external public debt US$1,067 m. (19) Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 18.3% (1988) Gross domestic product US$1,360 m. (19) Inflation rate0% (1987) Principal trading partners France, West Germany, Netherlands 
ECONOMY
Economic indicators GDP growth 4.1% (1988)
1990 budget
On Dec. 20, 1989, the Council of Ministers heard the second reading of the draft budget for 1990.
As adopted by the government, the budget set revenue and expenditure at 92,490 million francs CFA, an overall 0.9 per cent increase on the previous year.
However, expenditure on social services and education was expected to rise by about 8 per cent.
IMF funding
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) on June 25, 1990, announced approval of a loan equivalent to 15,360,000 special drawing rights (SDR — approximately US$20,130,000) in support of the second annual arrangement under the enhanced structural adjustment facility first approved in May 1989 [see p. 36994].
During the first year the programme targets had for the most part been met.
The specific objectives for 1990 were (i) to achieve a real growth rate of 2.6 per cent of gross domestic product;(ii) to contain the rate of inflation at 3 per cent or less; and (iii) to limit a deterioration in the external current account deficit.
Thus the programme provided for improving government finance through tax reform and more efficient tax collection procedures, and ensuring payment to the government of the debt-service obligations of certain public enterprises.
Export-processing zone
A new export-processing zone near Lomé, designed to attract foreign capital and develop non-traditional exports, was expected to come into operation after the publication of enabling decrees by the Council of Ministers in May 1990.
The project was to be administered by a joint private- and public-sector company in which the government had a minority interest.
Companies operating in the zone would be exempt from import and export duties and allowed a 10-year tax exemption, after which concessionary taxes would be applied.
The United States Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) together with the US Agency for International Development (USAID) was carrying out a feasibility study of the project.
FOREIGN
Arriving in Dakar on Nov. 3, 1989, for a four-day visit, Eyadema held talks with President Diouf of Senegal on Third-World debt and North-South co-operation.
REFERENCES.
Reference article p. 36994; March 1990 legislative elections p. 37308; October demonstrations p. 37767.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 923,768 sq km.
Population: 115,315,902 (1989).
Capital: Lagos (transfer to new capital, Abuja, to be completed by 1992).
Language: English (official), Hausa, Ibo and Yoruba.
Religion: Islam, Animism and Christianity.
Av. life expectancy: 52 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 94,500 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$290 (1989).
Currency: naira (US$1.00=N7.9603 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
Nigeria achieved independence within the Commonwealth in October 1960, and the Federal Republic of Nigeria was proclaimed in 1963.
The civilian government was deposed in a military coup in December 1983, and another military coup took place in August 1985.
The principal decision-making body is the Armed Forces Ruling Council (AFRC), composed of senior officers and members of the police force; as most recently reorganized, in February 1989, it consisted of 18 members in addition to the current President, Maj.-Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, its chairman.
The 21 state Governors along with the President form the Council of States.
There is a National Council of Ministers appointed by the AFRC, which is responsible for federal administration.
A timetable providing for a return to civilian rule by 1992 was announced in July 1987; a Constituent Assembly, composed of 567 nominated and indirectly elected members, presented to Babangida on April 5, 1989, its draft of a constitution for the new Third Republic.
The ban on political parties was lifted on May 3, 1989.
Maj.-Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida President; C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces; Minister of Defence Vice-Adml. (retd) Agustus Aikhomu Vice-President Shetima Mustapha Agriculture and Natural Resources T. O. Graham-Douglas Aviation Chu Okongwu Budget and Planning Olawale Adeniji-Ige Communications Maj.-Gen. (retd) Y. Y. Kure Culture and Social Welfare Babs Fafunwa Education Bonu Shariff Musa Employment, Labour and Productivity Maj.-Gen. (retd) Ike Nwachukwu External Affairs Maj.-Gen. (retd) M. Gado Nasko Federal Capital Territory Abubakar Alhaji Finance and Economic Planning Koye Ransome Kuti Health Air Vice-Marshal (retd) Mohammed Yahaya Industry Chief Alex Akinyele Information Maj.-Gen. (retd) A. B. Mamman Internal Affairs Prince Bola Ajibola Justice; Attorney General Air Vice-Marshal (retd) Nura Imam Mines, Power and Steel Jibril Aminu Petroleum Resources Air Commodore (retd) Anthony Ikazobor Youth and Sports Gordian Ezekwe Science and Technology S. J. Ukpanah Trade Commodore (retd) Lamba Dung Gwom Transport Brig. (retd) M. T. Kontagora Works and Housing Abubakar Hashidu Water Resources Zakari Ibrahim Minister of State for External Affairs Lt.-Gen.
Sanni Abacha Minister of Defence and Chief of Defence Staff Sumaila Gwarzo Minister of State for Police Affairs 
Nigerian Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Progress towards civilian rule
Registration of membership for the two political parties set up by the government to participate in the transition to civilian rule, the Social Democratic Party (SDP) and the National Republican Convention (NRC), closed on May 5, 1990 [for their creation in October 1989 see p. 36968].
The exercise was reported to have been a success, with 12,000,000 people registering, and voting for party officials and delegates in more than 5,000 local ward elections took place on May 26, using an open ballot system.
The ban on party politics at local government level had been partially lifted with effect from May 21, and was completely lifted on June 3.
The chairman of the Transition to Civilian Rule Committee, Air Vice-Marshal (retd) Ibrahim Alfa said that the ban had been lifted to enable people to prepare for the local party congresses which were held on June 16.
Party delegates met on July 7-8 to elect state executives.
Declaration of amnesty — Human rights moves
In his New Year message on Jan. 1, 1990, President Ibrahim Babangida ordered a general amnesty for prisoners held without trial or for minor offences.
The announcement represented a victory for the Civil Liberties Organization, which the previous October had released a report drawing attention to the appalling conditions in Nigeria's prisons and claiming that hundreds of prisoners had died of malnutrition or untreated diseases.
The amnesty did not include those accused of offences relating to drugs, murder, economic sabotage or armed robbery.
Justice Minister Prince Bola Ajibola confirmed that by Feb. 12 a total of 5,200 prisoners had been released under the amnesty.
In other moves to improve the government's human rights record, Babangida instructed the Federal Investigation and Intelligence Bureau to compile a list of people held under Decree 2 of 1984, which permitted detention for six months without trial, and to speed up prosecution of those against whom evidence existed.
Changes to Decree 2 were announced on Jan. 25, 1990, reducing the period of detention permitted to six weeks and restricting the power of signing a detention order to the Chief of General Staff (previously, the inspector-general of police and Internal Affairs Minister had also been able to sign detention orders).
A panel reviewing Decree 2 cases started work on March 13, 1990, chaired by Ajibola.
Charges of subversion against two of the government's most prominent critics, a lawyer, Chief Gani Fawehinmi and a former Kaduna state Governor, Balarabe Musa [see pp. 36648; 36727; 36968], were dropped by a military tribunal in late January 1990.
Fawehinmi, charged over a magazine article in which he accused Babangida of planning to cling to power, had already been sentenced on Jan. 5 to 12 months imprisonment for contempt of court, but had been released on bail pending an appeal.
Musa had been put on trial in May 1989 for allegedly forming a political party before the ban on party politics had been lifted.
Fawehinmi's conviction on the contempt of court charge was quashed by the appeal court in July.
New Borno state Governor
Lt.-Col. Mohammed Buba Murwa was sworn in as Governor of Borno state on June 8, 1990.
Murwa, formerly deputy defence adviser at the Nigerian embassy in Washington, replaced Col. Mohammed Maina.
According to Vice-Adml.
Augustus Aikhomu, then Chief of General Staff, the actions of Maina since his appointment in December 1989, had not been "in consonance with the goals and objectives of this administration and accordingly he has been removed" .
SECURITY
Aftermath of coup attempt
Between 400 and 500 people including about 200 civilians were reported to have been arrested in the wake of the abortive April 22, 1990, coup attempt [see p. 37367].
The government also cracked down on the media, closing the Lagos daily newspaper The Punch for three weeks from April 29 and detaining the paper's deputy editor, Chris Mamah.
A number of other journalists were briefly detained.
On April 29, principal staff officer Col. Anthony Ukpo told newspaper publishers not to allow themselves to become "tools" of the government's opponents.
He said that there had been unprecedented civilian involvement in the coup attempt and that the government did not want its opponents to exploit the situation through the media.
Ukpo had earlier alleged that one of the financiers of the rebellion had been a businessman, Chief Great Ogburu, who was said to have gone into hiding.
May Day rallies planned by labour organizations were banned.
Many of those detained after the attempt were quickly released.
Ten military officers, including Maj. Gideon Orkar, the apparent leader of the attempt, went on trial charged with treason at the first session of the military tribunal set up to deal with offenders on May 21.
The tribunal, chaired by Maj.-Gen.
Ike Nwachukwu (now External Affairs Minister), held its sessions in camera, with the defendants represented by military lawyers.
Nwachukwu's statement at the opening session that the tribunal would hear the cases of both military personnel and civilians was attacked by the Civil Liberties Organization, which filed a suit in the High Court on June 2, requesting that his statement be declared illegal.
The organization said that the composition of the court grossly violated the constitutional rights of the suspects.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 3.4% (1988/89)
Current-account balance -US$1,045 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$3,230 m.
Total external public debt US$32,950 m. (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 31% (1989)
Gross domestic product US$19,587 m. (1989)
Gross national product US$31,770 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 40.9% (1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: USA, West Germany, France; Imports: USA, Japan, France 
Debt negotiations — Relations with IMF
A Nigerian delegation met the "London Club" of commercial bank creditors on March 19-20, 1990, to indicate its intention to seek new debt rescheduling arrangements.
The then Finance Minister, Chief Olu Falae, warned that Nigeria would be unable to meet the payments due on its US$5,500 million debt to London Club members.
Referring to the rescheduling agreement signed with the club in March 1989 [see p. 37140], Falae said that "Nigeria does not foresee being in a position to maintain payments at contractual levels beyond the first quarter of this year" .
Nigeria was believed to be pressing for a softening of repayment terms and a reduction of interest rates on its debt, in line with the decline in its income.
A further meeting in April, at which the London Club steering committee rejected a Nigerian proposal to convert outstanding loans into 30-year bonds with a 3 per cent interest rate, was followed by the announcement that Nigeria intended unilaterally to cut interest payments on some of its debt to that level, from the agreed level of 9.5 per cent, with effect from May 1.
The continuing negotiations with commercial bank creditors were also linked to discussions with the "Paris Club" of creditor countries and with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for a replacement to the 15-month standby arrangement which expired in April 1990 [see also p. 37140].
Creditors were hoping to persuade Nigeria to abandon its long-standing refusal to borrow from the IMF in order to make funds available for a buyback of commercial debt.
An IMF delegation visited Lagos in mid-July for discussions with the government about a new financing arrangement.
The most recent agreement with the Paris Club expired in April, but talks on a new rescheduling of official debt were not due to start until September.
Banking reorganization
The government carried out a wide-ranging shake-up of the management of 11 of the country's leading banks in July 1990.
Falae announced on July 6 that the contracts of the 134 directors involved would not be renewed, and appointed new boards to serve "for a fairly short period" .
The changes, Falae said, would allow for "fundamental reorganization of the banking industry" .
The 11 commercial and merchant banks, in which the government has a controlling stake, include the three largest Nigerian banks, First Bank of Nigeria, Union Bank of Nigeria and United Bank for Africa, regarded as among the country's best managed.
The move came amidst concern about the high levels of bad debt carried by the Nigerian banking system, particularly that held by some of the smaller banks set up in recent years.
Many banks had also suffered from government measures to curb liquidity, including the tightening of reserve and liquidity ratios in April 1989 and the requirement introduced the following month that parastatals shift their deposits from commercial banks to the Central Bank.
The latest moves led observers to speculate that the government might be seeking to encourage mergers between some of the bigger banks and some of those with large bad debt portfolios.
Inaugurating the new boards of the affected banks on July 13, Falae announced that the government planned to privatize all the banks in which it had a controlling interest, in line with the government's policy of divesting itself of state holdings.
FOREIGN
President's visit to France
Babangida visited France on Feb. 26-March 1, 1990, for talks with President Mitterrand and with French Economy and Finance Minister Pierre Bérégovoy.
The visit, the first by a Nigerian head of state, was originally scheduled for June 1989, but was postponed because of student rioting in Nigerian cities [see p. 36727].
Babangida raised the question of Nigerian eligibility for more favourable debt relief; France was reported to have offered a US$25,000,000 loan to assist the government's structural adjustment programme.
Agreements covering double taxation and the protection of French investments in Nigeria were also signed during the visit.
Relations with west African countries
Babangida visited The Gambia in mid-February 1990 as chief guest of honour at celebrations of the 25th anniversary of Gambia's independence.
He and President Jawara of Gambia pledged their support for trade liberalization within the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and noted with satisfaction the release of African National Congress deputy president Nelson Mandela.
Co-operation within ECOWAS was also discussed during the two-day visit to Lagos on May 5-6 by current ECOWAS chairman President Compaoré of Burkina.
The two leaders called on ECOWAS members to live up to their obligations to remove obstacles to intra-regional trade and the free movement of people.
A bilateral co-operation agreement, covering trade, education, cultural affairs and aviation was signed during the visit.
President Kerekou of Benin visited Lagos in late June, taking the opportunity to deny recent reports in the Nigerian press that Benin and Nigeria were planning to establish a confederation.
 "Even though Benin is a tiny country, I don't think it would like to have new borders," he said on his departure on June 26.
AFRICA
NIGER
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,267,000 sq km.
Population: 7,250,000 (1988).
Capital: Niamey.
Language: French (official); also Hausa (about 50%), Tuareg, Djerma and Fulani.
Religion: Moslem (more than 85%); traditional beliefs, small minority Christian.
Av. life expectancy: 45 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 3,300 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$310 (1988).
Currency: franc of the Communauté financière africaine (US$1.00=253.8418 francs CFA as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The Republic of Niger became independent from France in August 1960.
The Constitution was suspended in 1974 following a military coup [see pp. 26486-97], and the country was ruled by a Supreme Military Council under Seyni Kountché until his death in November 1987, when the Supreme Military Council appointed the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, Brig.
Ali Saibou, as his successor.
The Council of Ministers, appointed by the President, is largely civilian.
An elected National Development Council (CND), which in 1986 drafted a national charter to serve as the basis for a new Constitution, was superseded by a National Assembly elected in December 1989, when the CND assumed the role of an economic and social council.
A single party, the country's sole legal political grouping, known as the National Movement for a Development Society (Mouvement national pour une société de développement — MNSD), was formed in August 1988 and held its founding congress in May 1989, when President Saibou was elected as head of the country's new supreme ruling body, a half-military and half-civilian Higher Council for National Orientation (Conseil supérieure d'orientation national — CSON).
The new Constitution was adopted by referendum in September 1989.
Brig.
Ali Saibou President of the Higher Council for National Orientation; C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces; Minister of Defence Aliou Mahamidou Prime Minister Aissata Moumouni Social and Women's Affairs Capt. Abdoul Rahamane Seydou Youth, Sports and Culture Lt.-Col. Tanja Mamadou Interior Lt.-Col. Ousmane Gazere Public Health Lt.-Col. Issa Amsa National Education Maj. Ousman Issaka Equipment Maj. Amadou Moussa Gros Transport and Tourism Adamou Souna Agriculture and Animal Breeding Wassalke Boukary Finance Almoustapha Soumaila Planning Abdou Imsa Mines and Energy Karagi Ayarga Water Resources and Environment Mahamane Boukary Minister-Delegate to the Presidency in charge of Administrative Reform Ali Bandiere Justice; Keeper of the Seals Mamadou Dagra Civil Service and Labour Khamed Abdoulaye Communications Nassirou Sabou Economic Promotion Aboubakar Adamou Higher Education, Research and Technology 
Niger Council of Ministers
POLITICS
In response to an appeal by the Union des Syndicats des Travailleurs du Niger (USTN) on May Day 1990 for the introduction of a multiparty system, Mamadou Dagra, the Minister of Civil Service and Labour, said that this was not excluded by Niger's current political system, but it was an issue which should not be pursued with haste.
On May 4 President Ali Saibou said that although he was not opposed to multipartyism, such a system was premature.
He added: "Creating political parties hastily will inevitably result in the problems of regionalism or tribalism at a time when the head of state is trying to unite families and households which were torn apart by the situation created in the past." 
However, after a meeting of the CSON on June 13-15 it was announced that the Constitution would be amended "to favour a transition to political pluralism" .
Three parties were currently reported to be operating clandestinely:(i) the Moslem Integrationist Party (PIM);(ii) the United Democratic Front (FDU); and (iii) the Revolutionary Socialist Party (PSR).
SECURITY
Student and labour unrest
Student demonstrations in April and May 1990 were accompanied by acts of looting which led to the deployment of security forces outside schools and which culminated in clashes on the campus of Niamey University on June 7.
A call by students and trade unionists for a demonstration on June 9 in the capital resulted in the closure by police of the area around the National Assembly.
Saibou accused "a handful of demagogic trade unionists" of engaging in vandalism to plunge the country into chaos, and threatened action against those whom he called "union agitators" .
A two-day general strike on June 11-12, called by the USTN in protest against austerity measures advocated by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), received widespread support despite being declared illegal, with the union claiming support from 95 per cent of members.
Further protests were called off when the government on June 14 released 50 people arrested during the strike.
The austerity measures included a freeze on civil service appointments, pay and promotions.
Rebel attack in north
An attack by Niger Tuaregs on Tchin-Tabaradene, 500 km north-east of Niamey, on May 7, 1990, left 31 people dead, among them 25 of the attackers.
(A similar attack had occurred on the same sub-prefecture in May 1985 — see p. 34927.)
Two rebel leaders who were arrested were named as Mohammed Abdoulaye, Minister in charge of State Enterprises until December 1989, and Mohammed Ahmoundou a former adviser in the President's Office.
The authorities said that the attack was part of an inter-tribal war among local nomadic tribes who accused each other of having failed to join an anti-government opposition group set up in Libya.
The rebels were among more than 18,000 nomads who had returned since the beginning of the year from Algeria and Libya, having sought refuge in those countries during the drought of the mid-1980s.
They claimed that Saibou's government had failed to keep promises which it made on the conditions for their return.
There were reports of many more deaths among the local Tuareg nomad population as a result of the severity of the armed forces' reprisal operations.
[See also pp. 37703; 37800.]
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -1.2% (1980-88)
Current-account balance -US$72.8 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$61 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$1,300 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 21.1% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$2,370 m. (1988)
Gross national product US$2,190 m. (1988)
Principal trading partners France, Nigeria 
1989-90 investment budget
Planning Minister Almoustapha Soumaila on Oct. 31, 1989, announced an investment budget of 104,977 million francs CFA spread over 15 months (equivalent to 83,981 million francs CFA over 12 months).
This sum was to be financed over the 15-month period to the extent of 7.14 per cent from the general budget, 53.7 per cent from non-repayable aid, and the balance of 39.16 per cent from borrowing.
The investment budget represented a fall of 21 per cent compared with that for 1989.
The 1989 food deficit was estimated at 349,109 tonnes of grain, according to a government announcement on Nov. 3, 1989.
FOREIGN
A Niger Foreign Ministry statement announced the establishment on Nov. 7, 1989, of diplomatic relations at ambassadorial level with South Yemen.
AFRICA
BENIN
BASIC DATA
Area: 112,622 sq km.
Population: 4,450,000 (1988).
Capital: Porto-Novo.
Languages: French (official); Bariba, Fulami, Fon and Yoruba.
Religion: Traditional beliefs (majority), Christianity (15%), Islam (13%).
Av. life expectancy: 51 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 4,350 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$340 (1988).
Currency: franc of the Communauté financière africaine (US$1.00=253.8418 francs CFA as at Oct. 29, 1990).
Hitherto part of French West Africa, the Republic of Benin (known as the People's Republic of Benin until February 1990 and until 1975 as Dahomey) achieved full independence from France in 1960.
Prior to February 1990 a National Revolutionary Assembly comprising 206 People's Commissioners representing socio-professional classes was elected every five years by universal suffrage from a list of candidates put forward by the ruling party, the Benin People's Revolutionary Party (Parti de la révolution populaire du Bénin — PRPB).
The party also nominated the head of state (currently Mathieu Kerekou, who assumed office in 1972 and was most recently re-elected in August 1989), who was elected by the Assembly for a five-year term and who presided over the National Executive Council.
In line with decisions made by a policy-making National Conference in February 1990 the Constitution was suspended, the National Assembly was dissolved, and the country entered into an 11-month period of transitional government when legislative power was vested in a 50-member High Council of the Republic, to culminate in contested elections in 1991.
A draft constitution was published in May 1990 [see below].
POLITICS
Formation of opposition coalition
Representatives of four main opposition parties met in Avrankou, in Porto Novo province, and announced the founding on Jan. 15, 1990, of a united opposition grouping, the Rally of Democratic Forces.
The four parties were the National Union for Democracy and Progress (UNDP), led by former President Emile Derlin Zinsou (who returned from in exile in Paris on Feb. 7 — see also p. 37239), the Dahomean Democratic Rally (RDD), led by former President Hubert Maga, the Dahomean Democratic Union (UDD subsequently renamed the National Front for Democracy — FND), led by former President Justin Tometin Ahomadegbe, and the Democratic Republican Movement (MDR), led until his death in Paris on Dec. 3, 1989, by former President Sourou Migan Apithy, and then by Joseph Adjigon Keke.
Maga, Ahomadegbe and Keke, together with Alexandre Adande on Zinsou's behalf, met with President Kerekou on Jan. 23 to discuss the forthcoming national conference [ibid.].
The FND and the MDR on May 19, 1990, announced plans to merge and form a new National Democratic Rally (RND).
The two parties announced that they would remain within the Rally of Democratic Forces.
Formation of new party to replace PRPB
On April 30, 1990, leaders of the PRPB decided to dissolve the party and replace it with a new party to be known as the Union of the Forces of Progress (UFP) to contest the legislative elections due in February 1991.
Draft constitution — Return of opposition leader
The draft of the new constitution outlining the presidential and multiparty system agreed at the February 1990 conference on reform was presented to the High Council of the Republic on April 12, 1990, and its contents announced on May 15, prior to a referendum in late 1990.
It provided for a Supreme and a Constitutional Court, a High Court of Justice, an Economic and Social Council and a National Assembly elected under a multiparty system.
Trade union split
In February 1990 the National Federation of Workers' Unions of Benin (Union nationale des syndicats des travailleurs du Bénin — UNSTB) was weakened by the decision of the postal and telecommunications workers' union to split from the UNSTB and declare itself autonomous (the second defection after that of the Higher Education Union in August 1989).
UNSTB secretary-general Romain Vilon Guezo announced his resignation soon afterwards.
SECURITY
Extradition of marabout
Mohammed Cissé, a marabout (Moslem holy man) and close confidant of Kerekou, was extradited on July 26, 1990, from Côte d'Ivoire to Benin, to face questioning about alleged financial frauds [see also p. 37059].
Escape of coup plotters — Amnesty
Three soldiers accused of involvement in a coup attempt against Kerekou in March 1988 [see p. 36267]escaped from prison in Cotonou on Jan. 31, 1990.
The first meeting of the interim government on March 2, 1990, granted an amnesty to those detained for involvement in the 1988 coup plot and that of 1981.
Creation of new armed forces
The armed forces were reconstituted on June 5, 1990, to comprise the land forces, the Air Force, the Navy and the gendarmerie, marking the formal dissolution of all paramilitary and militia units.
Six civilian prefects were appointed on May 3 to replace the Army officers who had hitherto administered the provinces.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.8% (1980-87)
Budget deficit US$98.6 m. (1990 est.)
Total external public debt US$1.056 m. (1990)
Gross domestic product US$1,570 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 8.2% (1980-87 average)
Principal trading partners West Germany, France, Spain 
1990 budget
The budget presented by Finance Minister Idelphonse Lemon on April 21, 1990, projected a draft deficit of 28,000 million francs CFA (approximately US$98,600,000) for 1990.
Total expenditure was set provisionally at 67,000 million francs CFA and revenue at 39,000 million francs CFA.
Lemon said that all salary arrears owed to government workers from the last three months of 1988 would be paid in the second half of 1990.
Ending of teachers' strike
Cotonou University and schools throughout the country reopened on March 26, 1990, after teachers ended a year-long strike against non-payment of salaries [see also p. 37059].
CARIBBEAN
CUBA
BASIC DATA
Area: 110,860 sq km.
Population: 10,394,000 (1988).
Capital: Havana.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 76 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 180,500 (1990).
GNP per capita: Not available.
Currency: Cuban peso (US$1.00=0.7985 pesos as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The Republic of Cuba became independent in 1902, having been ceded by Spain to the United States in 1898.
The current President, Fidel Castro Ruz, has held office since the socialist revolution of January 1959.
Under the 1976 Constitution legislative authority is held by the unicameral National Assembly of People's Power, whose 510 members are indirectly elected every five years, most recently in 1986, by popularly elected local assemblies.
The National Assembly elects a 31-member Council of State to represent it between its twice-yearly ordinary sessions; the President of the Council of State is the head of state.
Executive and administrative authority is held by a Council of Ministers appointed by the National Assembly upon the recommendation of the President.
The majority of office-holders are members of the Cuban Communist Party (Partido Comunista Cubano — PCC), the only authorized political party.
Gen. Raúl Castro Ruz First Vice-President of Council of State; Minister of Revolutionary Armed Forces Carlos Rafael Rodríguez Rodríguez Vice-President of Council of State and Council of Ministers Osmany Cienfuegos Gorriarán Vice-President of the Council of State and Council of Ministers; Secretary of the Council of Ministers Antonio Esquivel Yedra Vice-President of the Council of Ministers Joel Domenech Benítez Vice-President of the Council of Ministers José Ramón Fernández Alvarez Vice-President of the Council of Ministers; Education Pedro Miret Prieto Vice-President of the Council of Ministers Gen. Ramiro Valdés Menéndez Vice-President of the Council of Ministers Jaime Crombet Hernandez Baquero Vice-President of the Council of Ministers Lionel Soto Prieto Vice-President of the Council of Ministers José López Moreno Vice-President of the Council of Ministers; President of Central Planning Board Adolfo Díaz Suárez Agriculture Marcos Portal León Basic Industries Manuel Castillo Rabassa Communications Homero Crabb Valdés Construction Jose Canete Alvarez Construction Materials Industry Armando Hart Dávalos Culture Manuel Vila Sosa Domestic Trade Capt. Jorge A. Fernández Cuervo-Vinent Fishing Industry Alejandro Rocas Iglesias Food Industry Isidoro Octavio Malmierca Peoli Foreign Relations Ricardo Cabrisas Ruiz Foreign Trade Fernando Vecino Alegret Higher Education Gen. Abelardo Colomé Ibarra Interior Carlos Amat Fores Justice Eddy Fernandez Boada Light Industry Julio Teja Pérez Public Health Marcos Lage Coello Steelworking Industry Juan Ramón Herrera Machado Sugar Industry (vacant) Transport Héctor Rodríguez Llompart President of National Bank of Cuba Ernesto Meléndez Bach President of State Committee for Economic Cooperation Rodrigo García Leon President of State Committee for Finance Francisco Linares Calvo President of State Committee for Labour and Social Security 
Principal Cuban Ministers
POLITICS
Shake-up of party organization
At an extraordinary plenum on Feb. 16, 1990, the central committee of the PCC announced a campaign to "perfect" and "revitalize" party organization.
Referring to the 1989 Ochoa drug scandal [see pp. 36731; 37069]and the "situation of socialism worldwide" , the committee declared that the PCC had to be the object, as well as the instrument, of the "rectification" campaign begun in 1986 [see also p. 35118].
The special session announced the creation of working groups to overhaul mass organizations and to strengthen participation in the municipal and provincial people's power system of government; and it proposed the National Assembly of People's Power be upgraded to play a more dynamic role in assessing government performance.
The central committee reaffirmed its commitment to one-party Marxist-Leninist rule, but stated that the latter should be "adapted to Cuban mentality, history and traditions" .
Changes in party posts
At the plenum two young cadres, Roberto Robaina González, the popular Young Communists leader, and Carlos Lage Dávila, the Machine Industry Minister and a former member of President Fidel Castro's personal staff, were elected as alternate (non-voting) members of the politburo.
Also elected as alternate members were Pedro Ross Leal, who became general secretary of the Confederation of Cuban Workers (Central de Trabajadores de Cuba-CTC) at the union's congress on Jan. 28, 1990; and Maj.-Gen.
Sixto Batista Santana, a veteran of international missions in Africa, who was also appointed co-ordinator of the Committees for the Defence of the Revolution (in place of Armando Acosta).
Both had been members of the party secretariat.
Leaving the politburo were Roberto Veiga Menéndez, former CTC leader, and José Ramírez Cruz, former leader of the National Association of Small Farmers (Asociación Nacional de Agricultores Pequeños-ANAP).
Brig. -Gen.
Sergio Pérez Lezcano was elected a full member of the central committee and appointed to the party secretariat.
Leaving the secretariat were Lionel Soto Prieto and Jaime Crombet Hernández Baquero (both becoming Council of Ministers Vice-Presidents); and José Ramón Balaguer Cabrera, who was appointed ambassador in Moscow (replacing Julio Camacho).
Assertion of commitment to socialism
Over 3,000,000 people took part in the 1990 May Day celebrations, and on July 26, the anniversary of the 1953 Moncada uprising, Castro told a mass rally that Cuba's commitment to socialism was irreversible, in spite of changes which had occurred in Eastern Europe.
New National Assembly president — Other appointments
On Feb. 20, 1990, Juan Escalona Reguera, then Justice Minister, was elected president of the National Assembly, filling the vacancy left by the death in 1988 of Flavio Bravo Pardo; Severo Aguirre, the vice-president, was to be replaced by Zoila Benitez de Mendoza.
In May it was reported that Jacinto Granda de Laserna, a section head in the PCC's department of revolutionary orientation and former editor of the Young Communist journal Juventud Rebelde, had become editor of the party daily, Granma.
He replaced Enrique Román Hernández who became head of the Cuban Institute of Radio and Television (in place of Ismael González González).
Industrial production +2.7% (1988) Total external debt US$6,600 m. (1988) Current account balance -US$203.7 m. (1989 1st quarter) Trade balance -200.8 m. pesos (1988) Principal trading partners Soviet Union and COMECON countries; Spain 
ECONOMY
Economic indicators Mercantile production +3.6% (1988)
Cuban-Soviet talks on future economic co-operation
Under an agreement signed in Havana on April 17, 1990, it was announced that the volume of Cuban-Soviet trade would increase in the next year by 8.7 per cent compared with 1989, and would be worth up to 9,200 million roubles (US$15,160 million).
The deal came at the end of the 20th annual session of the intergovernmental commission on economic co-operation between the two countries.
Leading the Soviet delegation was Deputy Premier Leonid Abalkin, President Gorbachev's main economic adviser, who confirmed that future trade agreements would be approved annually by the Supreme Soviet, thus questioning the traditional system of five-year economic plans (the current one being due to end in 1990).
While pointing to a radical overhaul of economic relations from 1991, with trade denominated in convertible currency, he denied that the Soviet Union would abandon or penalize Cuba if it did not follow Soviet-style reforms.
Soviet officials later said that subsidies (mainly involving the exchange of Soviet oil for Cuban sugar and worth up to an estimated US$3,000 million annually) would be phased out gradually rather than ended abruptly.
To study how bilateral trade could be placed on a new footing, a task force, headed by the Cuban Minister of Foreign Trade, Ricardo Cabrisas, and the Soviet Minister for External Economic Relations, Konstantin Katushev, was created.
Talks began on June 5.
Emergency economic measures
On Aug. 29, 1990, the government announced drastic energy-saving measures to reduce fuel consumption, including the introduction of rationing vouchers to achieve a 50 and 30 per cent cut in petrol and diesel supplies for the state sector and private vehicles respectively.
The move came after a 2,000,000-tonne shortfall in Soviet oil deliveries, which was normally 13 million tonnes annually.
Officially blamed by the Soviet government on a shortage of ships, the delay halted the start of production at the new Cienfuegos oil refinery.
Factory and farm managers were told to save electricity during peak hours, and households were asked to reduce electricity consumption by 10 per cent weekly or face power cuts.
Production at a new nickel plant in Moa was also halted.
On Sept. 2, tight rationing was announced on basic items such as soap, matches, detergent and canned meat.
In January 1990 delays in Soviet grain deliveries had led to price rises and the tighter rationing of basic foodstuffs.
It was reported that Cuban resales of Soviet oil, an important source of foreign currency, had dropped from a peak of almost US$600,000,000 in 1985 to US$180,000,000 in 1989.
Difficulties with Polish and East German shipping companies had also hindered Cuba's important citrus exports to other COMECON countries.
In the sugar sector — the mainstay of Cuba's economy — it was reported in June that the 1989-90 harvest had exceeded production targets to reach just over 8,000,000 tonnes in spite of bad weather.
FOREIGN
European embassy incidents
Relations with Europe became strained in July and August 1990 when, in a politically confusing series of incidents, a number of Cuban citizens sought refuge in foreign embassies in Havana.
On July 9 five dissidents entered the Czechoslovakian embassy asking to travel to Eastern Europe, and by July 11 the number of asylum seekers had risen to 14.
On July 13 another five Cubans were turned away after they had broken into the residence of the Czechoslovak chargé d'affaires and temporarily taken him hostage.
On July 16 seven asylum seekers in the embassy seized the original group of five and a number of Czechoslovak diplomats, threatening to blow the embassy up if their demand to leave Cuba was not met.
The embassy, suspecting infiltration of agents provocateurs from the Cuban security forces, had sought to isolate the seven from the rest.
The government accused Czechoslovakia (which represented Cuba's diplomatic interests in the United States) of "hypocritical inconsistency" — sheltering asylum seekers while requesting official protection to deal with the "consequences" of such an action, and additionally claimed that the episode was aimed at causing embarrassment in the run-up to the July 26 celebrations.
On July 19 three of the original five asylum seekers told Cuban television that they had been part of a plot hatched by diplomats from the US Interests Section and from the Czechoslovak, West German and Canadian embassies, all of whom denied the allegation.
On July 19, a total of 19 people sheltering at the Czechoslovak embassy surrendered to the authorities.
A crisis simultaneously erupted in relations with Spain, Cuba's main Western trading partner, which refused to hand over four men who had sought asylum in the Spanish embassy on July 18.
On July 13 the Spanish government had protested at the violation of diplomatic immunity after gun-firing police had apprehended an asylum seeker in embassy grounds.
The Spanish Foreign Minister, Francisco Fernández Ordóñez, compared Cuba's response to asylum seekers negatively with that of Albania [see p. 37618]and called for a "peaceful transition to democracy" .
On the Cuban Foreign Ministry's accusation that Fernández Ordoñez was acting like a "colonial administrator" , Spain immediately recalled its ambassador for consultations and suspended US$2,500,000 in aid, and urged the other European Community (EC) countries to do likewise.
In response, Castro challenged EC countries to match their professed commitment to human rights with visas for all Cubans wishing to emigrate.
By July 21 another 14 people had taken refuge in the Spanish embassy, with Madrid voicing concern at the ease of their entry despite a tight police cordon (which now also surrounded the Canadian and West German embassies).
On Aug. 13 Belgium became the fourth EC country to house Cuban citizens in its Embassy (Italy and Switzerland having temporarily sheltered seven).
Meeting with EC representatives on Aug. 15, a member of the PCC secretariat, Carlos Aldana Escalante, insisted that 27 Cubans still in foreign embassies should depart voluntarily and apply to leave Cuba legally.
Friction with former allies
Cuban relations with Czechoslovakia had already deteriorated sharply in March 1990 when the latter joined Poland, Bulgaria and Hungary in supporting a United Nations Human Rights Commission resolution critical of Cuba.
Castro described the action of his former communist allies as "repugnant" , saying that they would have blood on their hands in the event of US invasion.
In June he dismissed a letter from President Havel of Czechoslovakia protesting at the human rights situation in Cuba as "ignorant of our country's problems" .
In January, 1990, Radio Prague's Havana correspondent had been expelled for "unobjective" reporting.
Cuban workers and students began returning from Eastern Europe in the wake of political changes there.
In March 1990 the Soviet media carried several critical reports, with Moscow News (banned in Cuba in August 1989, along with Sputnik magazine) depicting Cuba as a degenerating police state.
Castro had earlier made indirect gibes at what he considered a retreat from socialism by elements in the Soviet Union and growing anti-communism in the crumbling Eastern bloc.
In May Supreme Soviet foreign affairs adviser Andrei Kortunov claimed that improved relations between the Soviet Union and the United States had reduced Cuba's strategic value to Moscow.
Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze had visited Havana on Oct. 4-5, 1989.
Increased tension with USA
In May the government mobilized regular forces, reservists and militia for an exercise called "Cuban Shield" , after military manoeuvres by the United States at its Guantánamo naval base and near the island.
Involving airborne and seaborne troops, warships and fighter-planes and bombers, the US manoeuvres were seen by Cuba as a rehearsal for invasion, but described by the US Defence Department as routine.
Cuban-US relations had been inflamed on Jan. 31, 1990, when a US Coast Guard patrol boat, with the administration's authorization, attacked and damaged a Cuban-chartered cargo ship, the Hermann, in the Gulf of Mexico, when its Cuban master had refused to stop for a drugs search.
Rejecting "the right of the United States to be the policeman of the Caribbean" , the government claimed that it had offered a search by the Mexican authorities.
Prensa Latina, the Cuban news agency, reported that the latter found no drugs.
In August US President Bush declared that test transmissions of Television Martí, begun in March 1990 [see p. 37370], were a success in spite of Cuban jamming, and released US$16,000,000 to fund its permanent operation.
However, the Miami Herald reported that the US government had overestimated the size of the station's audience.
In April Cuba also jammed Radio Martí, which had begun transmission in 1985 [see p. 33917].
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
HAITI
BASIC DATA
Area: 27,750 sq km.
Population: 6,254,000 (1988).
Capital: Port-au-Prince.
Languages: French and Creole.
Religion: Christianity (80% Roman Catholic); Voodoo.
Av. life expectancy: 55 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 7,400 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$360 (1988).
Currency: Gourde (US$1.00=5.00 gourdes as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The Republic of Haiti, which achieved independent status in 1804, was ruled between 1957 and 1971 by the President-for-Life François Duvalier.
His son, Jean-Claude, inherited the office in 1971 but fled the country in February 1986 after a period of prolonged popular unrest.
An interim military-civilian National Council of Government was established under Lt.-Gen.
Henri Namphy.
A new Constitution, which was drawn up in late 1986 and overwhelmingly approved in a referendum in February 1987, provided for presidential elections to be held in November 1987.
Campaigning was seriously hampered by increasing political violence, however, and the election was cancelled shortly after polling had commenced.
A fresh election was held on Jan. 17, 1988, and in spite of widespread violence and evidence of corruption, Leslie Manigat was declared the winner and was inaugurated on Feb. 7.
The government was overthrown on June 20 by an Army coup led by Namphy, who suspended the Constitution and formed a military government.
Namphy's administration was itself overthrown on Sept. 18 in a further military coup led by Brig. -Gen.
Prosper Avril.
After a period of prolonged popular opposition Avril was forced to resign as President in March 1990 and was replaced by Ertha Pascal-Trouillot, a Supreme Court justice, as laid down by the 1987 Constitution.
Also installed in March was a 19-member advisory body, the Council of State.
POLITICS/SECURITY
Initial optimism after the overthrow in March 1990 of Brig. -Gen.
Prosper Avril and the installation of Ertha Pascal-Trouillot as interim President [see pp. 37313-14]soon evaporated as the new administration proved unable to counter violence and corruption or to prevent tensions developing between the President and the Council of State, amid fears of increasing organization by pro-Duvalierist elements.
By late March divisions were appearing between members of the 12-party Unity Assembly (Group of 12 — see p. 37313) over the extent to which Pascal-Trouillot should consult with the Council of State and over the alleged influence of Duvalierists or Duvalierist sympathizers in her administration.
The 19-member Council of State, created by the Unity Assembly and representing different sectors of Haitian society, complained that Pascal-Trouillot was ignoring them and ruling "autocratically" .
Incidents such as the May 21 appointment without consultation of Violène Legagneur, a former Duvalier supporter, as Minister of Finance contributed to mutual suspicions.
Legagneur resigned the following month.
Sporadic acts of violence instigated by Duvalierists and members of the security forces continued to afflict Haiti, particularly in the rural areas, with the authorities seemingly unable to prevent them.
Many feared that the continuing insecurity would jeopardize the chances of elections being held successfully.
The Army Chief of Staff (and Foreign Minister in the Namphy government), Maj.-Gen.
Hérard Abraham fulfilled his promise to reorganize the Presidential Guard, which had served as an important prop of the Avril regime, but the Army as a whole seemed unwilling to become involved in imposing authority.
Further dissension was caused in early July by the return to Haiti of Williams Regala [see p. 37649]and of Roger Lafontant, former Minister of the Interior and Defence under Jean-Claude Duvalier.
Lafontant arrived openly from the Dominican Republic where he had been living [see p. 37073], despite orders from the Minister of the Interior, Joseph Maxi for his arrest.
On July 31 the government prevented the return of former President Leslie Manigat from exile.
Another figure of the Duvalier regime, Claude Raymond, a former general, generally held to be behind the disruption of the November 1987 elections [see pp. 35697-98], was also reported to be campaigning for the presidency, despite a constitutional ban on "notorious Duvalierists" .
In early May Pascal-Trouillot reconstituted the nine-member Provisional Electoral Council (Conseil Electoral Provisoire — CEP), which contained three members of the old CEP which had overseen the aborted 1987 elections, including its chairman Jean-Robert Sabalat.
In June Pascal-Trouillot appealed to the UN for assistance in preparing and monitoring the elections.
Although it had been initially stated that the elections would be held in September, they were then postponed to Nov. 4, with a second round if necessary on Nov. 25.
Lack of resources and of help from the government also hampered voter registration, which in August was delayed by three weeks until Sept. 3.
In September the CEP announced a further postponement of the elections until mid-December.
On Aug. 14 the Council of State disassociated itself from the government, claiming that it was "corrupt and incompetent" and had failed to deal with "terrorists" .
Many pointed to the influence within the administration of Pascal-Trouillot's friend, Jean-Pierre Moise Pierre-Louis, Minister of Public Works, whom she had appointed acting Finance Minister, against the wishes of the Council of State.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Current-account balance -US$53.9 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$127.8 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments -US$5.4 m. (1988)
Budget deficit US$63.2 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$784.8 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 16.6% (1987/88)
Gross domestic product US$1,950 m. (1987)
Gross national product US$2,240 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 9.7% (1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: USA, France, Italy; Imports: USA, Netherlands Antilles, Japan
The installation of the Pascal-Trouillot administration and progress towards elections brought some relief to the Haitian economy through the restoration of United States and other foreign aid, suspended after the January 1990 imposition of the state of siege by Avril [see p. 37182].
In April US President Bush announced the provision of US$18,000,000 in food aid and asked Congress to approve US$10,000,000 in support funds and US$3,000,000 for the electoral programme for the fiscal year 1991.
France also resumed assistance, with US$6,300,000 for road construction.
The general state of the economy remained weak, however, affected by corruption and burdened with increasing budget, trade and balance-of-payments deficits, as political events prevented a significant increase in production.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
BASIC DATA
Area: 48,072 sq km.
Population: 6,859,000 (1988).
Capital: Santo Domingo.
Languages: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 66 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 20,800 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$612.
Currency: Dominican Republic peso (US$1=RD$10.9186 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The Dominican Republic, which gained its independence from Spain in 1844 (but was occupied by the USA from 1916 to 1924), comprises 26 provinces, each administered by an appointed governor, and a Distrito Nacional containing the capital.
Under the 1924 Constitution the Republic has an executive President and a National Congress consisting of a 120-member Chamber of Deputies and a 20-member Senate, President and Congress being directly elected for a four-year term.
The Cabinet is appointed and presided over by the President.
Rafael Bello Andino Presidency Guillermo Caram Finance Joaquín Ricardo García Foreign Affairs Nicolas Almanzar Education and Culture Manuel de Jesus Pina Cacarels Agriculture Rafael Emiliano Agramonte Labour Rafael Bello Public Health and Social Welfare Marcos Subero Sajuin Public Works and Communications Ramón Martínez Moya Industry and Trade Fernando Rainieri Marrancini Tourism Manuel Estrada Medina Defence; Interior and Police Luis Julián Pérez Governor of the Central Bank 
Principal Dominican Republic Ministers
POLITICS
In the May 1990 congressional elections the ruling PRSC retained control of the Senate, winning 16 seats, compared with 12 for the Dominican Liberation Party (Partido de la Liberación Dominicana — PLD) and two for the Dominican Revolutionary Party (Partido Revolucionario Dominicano — PRD).
In the Chamber of Deputies the PRSC lost its overall majority, with the PLD winning 44 seats, the PRSC 42, the PRD 32 and the Independent Revolutionary Party (Partido Revolucionario Independiente — PRI) two seats.
Joaquín Balaguer was duly sworn in as President on Aug. 16 [see p. 37649], despite the failure to elect presidents of the two legislative chambers and a boycott by many opposition members.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth +3.8% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$127.5 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$714.5 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments +US$25 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$3,923 m. (1988)
Gross domestic product US$4,458 m. (1988)
Gross national product US$4,196.5 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 51.7% (1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: USA, Puerto Rico, Netherlands; Imports: USA, Venezuela, Japan
The country's economic situation continued to deteriorate during 1989 and 1990.
Both the trade and budget deficits continued to worsen, while an energy crisis caused by the failure to generate enough electricity and the non-payment of debt for oil to Venezuela, hampered production.
In April the peso was devalued from US$1.00=DR$6.28 to US$.00=DR$7.30, but many businessmen judged this insufficient to prevent the continuing depletion of foreign exchange reserves, worsened by Balaguer's pre-election spending on public works.
Inflation for 1990 was estimated to be 100 per cent.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
JAMAICA
BASIC DATA
Area: 10,991 sq km.
Population: 2,429,000 (1988).
Capital: Kingston.
Languages: English (official).
Religion: Christianity (majority Anglican); Rastafarianism.
Av. life expectancy: 74 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 2,800.
GNP per capita: US$1,080.
Currency: Jamaican dollar (US$1.00=J$7.8199 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The head of state of Jamaica, a fully independent member of the Commonwealth since August 1962, is the British sovereign, represented by a Governor General (currently Sir Florizel Glasspole).
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral Parliament, which consists of a 60-member House of Representatives popularly elected for up to five years, and a 21-member appointed Senate.
The Prime Minister and Cabinet are responsible to Parliament and are appointed by the Governor General acting upon its advice.
The People's National Party (PNP) was returned to power in a general election on Feb. 9, 1989, winning 45 seats and defeating the Jamaica Labour Party (JLP), which had gained office in 1980.
Michael Manley Prime Minister; Defence Percival Patterson Deputy Prime Minister; Production, Development and Planning David Coore Foreign Affairs Seymour Mullings Finance Carl Rattray Justice and Attorney General Portia Simpson Labour, Welfare and Sports K. D. Knight National Security Hugh Small Mining and Energy Horace Clark Agriculture; Commerce Easton Douglas Health Carlyle Dunkley Education Frank Pringle Tourism Bobby Pickersgill Transport Orville Ramtallie Construction Ralph Brown Local government Paul Robertson Information Douglas Manley Youth and Culture Kenneth McNeil Public Service 
Jamaica Cabinet
POLITICS
Elections to the 13 municipal councils were held on March 6, 1990.
Control of the councils remained unchanged, with the ruling PNP gaining about 60 per cent of the total vote and winning 12 councils; the opposition JLP retained control of St Thomas.
Although the PNP campaigned on local issues, the elections were widely seen as a test of the party's popularity following the devaluation and austerity measures introduced in February [see below].
Claude Clarke, the Minister for Industry and Commerce, was dismissed on Feb. 3, 1990, after a disagreement about the price increases introduced by the Minister of Finance, Seymour Mullings.
Clarke's ministerial responsibilities were divided among other members of the Cabinet.
Kenneth McNeil, Minister without Portfolio, was appointed Minister of Public Service on May 1 to oversee reforms in the civil service.
During the course of 1990 Prime Minister Michael Manley spent a period in hospital recovering from pneumonia and later again underwent surgery, leaving Percival Patterson as acting Prime Minister for several months and raising speculation about Manley's eventual retirement should his health deteriorate further.
The JLP annual conference, held on June 9-10, 1990, exposed further the dissatisfaction of some members of the party with the leadership of Edward Seaga which had surfaced after the party's defeat in the municipal elections.
The five leading members of the party at the centre of the controversy, Pearnel Charles, Errol Anderson, Karl Samuda, Edmund Bartlett and Douglas Vaz, although stating that they did not want to unseat Seaga, refused to give a public statement of unconditional loyalty to him.
In July 1990 James Smith, Minister of Labour in the previous JLP adminstration, was convicted of fraud involving misappropriation of payments for Jamaicans working on farms in North America, and was sentenced to five years' imprisonment and hard labour.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 4.6% (1989)
Current-account balance +US$76.1 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$359 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments +US$105.9 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$4,500 m. (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 38% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$3,188.2 m. (1988)
Gross national product US$2,521.7 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 17.2% (1989)
Unemployment 18% (1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: USA, UK, Canada; Imports: USA, UK, Venezuela
The Jamaican economy continued to face difficulties during 1990 caused by its high burden of debt, austerity measures, and failure to meet the targets agreed with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), particularly over foreign exchange earnings.
The Jamaican dollar was devalued on Oct. 31, 1989, from US$1.00=J$6.19 to US$1.00=J$6.50 after credit restrictions introduced in September had failed to halt problems caused by a shortage of foreign exchange.
This had been provoked in part by uncertainty following the suspension of the IMF standby agreement of September 1988 [see p. 36279]when the economy failed both the June and September 1989 tests [for waiver of December 1988 test following hurricane see p. 36930].
The devalution aided the government in its negotiations with the IMF and a new agreement was reached on March 23, 1990.
The terms remained strict, however, including a further devaluation of the Jamaican dollar to US$1.00=J$7.00.
The 14-month standby agreement authorized purchases of up to the equivalent of SDR82,000,000 (US$107,000,000).
Conditions included similar curbs on spending and on public-sector wage increases as in previous agreements.
The deficit on the balance-of-payments current account was to be reduced from 8.3 to 3.5 per cent of GDP and foreign exchange reserves were to be increased by US$220,000,000.
Prices of staple goods and fuel were duly increased by an average 19.5 per cent.
The IMF agreement allowed the government to seek further rescheduling of its debt to foreign donor countries represented by the "Paris Club" .
On April 26, 1990, it was reported that agreement had been reached for the rescheduling of US$140,000,000 of debt falling due between December 1989 and May 1991.
The debt was to be subject to a five-year moratorium.
The economy failed the March test under the IMF agreement by failing to reach the target for foreign reserves.
The government argued that this was due to loans from foreign aid donors not being paid on time and appealed for a waiver of the test.
The IMF, however, taking into account another failure in the June test, suspended further drawdowns and negotiations commenced on the conditions for further assistance, expected to include a further devaluation.
On May 10 Mullings presented a budget for 1990-91 with recurrent expenditure estimated at J$7,049 million and capital expenditure of J$3,522,800,000.
He announced that growth in GDP during 1989 had totalled 4.6 per cent, a figure higher than many had predicted.
Debt servicing would account for 39 per cent of government expenditure.
The value of exports rose significantly during 1989 to reach US$970,400,000 due partly to increased production of bauxite and alumina, aided by the reopening of the Alpart plant at Nain [see also p. 36930].
Alumina accounted for 63 per cent of the value of exports.
However, the value of imports had also grown during 1989 to reach US$1,400 million.
A detailed five-year development plan, drawn up after lengthy consultations with a wide section of interests, was presented to parliament in early June 1990.
It envisaged spending of J$17,000 million and annual GDP growth of 3 per cent.
FOREIGN
Manley visited the United States on May 2-4, 1990, for talks with President Bush and other US officials, the visit marking the improved relations between the USA and the PNP administration.
Discussions included appeals from Manley for greater US assistance to the Caribbean at a time when US preoccupations were being diverted towards Eastern Europe.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
BAHAMAS
BASIC DATA
Area: 13,939 sq km.
Population: 247,000 (1988).
Capital: Nassau.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity (Anglican, Baptist, Roman Catholic and Methodist).
Av. life expectancy: 70 yrs (1988).
Security forces: 2,750 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$10,570 (1988).
Currency: Bahamian dollar (US$1.00=B$1.00 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The head of state of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas, an independent member of the Commonwealth since July 1973, is the British sovereign, represented by a Governor General (currently Sir Henry Taylor in an acting capacity).
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral Parliament consisting of a popularly elected House of Assembly and an appointed Senate.
The Progressive Liberal Party, led by Sir Lyndon Pindling, was returned to government for a fifth successive term by the general election of June 1987, winning 31 of the 49 seats in the House of Assembly.
Sir Lynden O. Pindling Prime Minister; Tourism Sir Clement T. Maynard Deputy Prime Minister Charles Canter Health Paul L. Adderley Finance Darrell Rolle National Security Alfred T. Maycock Employment and Immigration Peter Bethel Transport Norman Gay Youth Sports and Community Affairs George Mackey Housing and National Insurance Perry Christie Agriculture, Trade and Industry Philip M. Bethel Works and Lands Bernard Nottage Education Sean McWeeney Attorney General Vincent Peet Consumer Affairs Marvin Pinder Local Government 
Bahamas Cabinet
POLITICS
By-election
In a by-election held on Nov. 24, 1989, the ruling Progressive Liberal Party (PLP) retained the parliamentary seat on Crooked Island despite allegations by the opposition of fraud.
The vacancy had been caused by the conviction and imprisonment for three months of the former MP, Wilbert Moss, on charges of offering money to a magistrate to drop a prosecution against a constituent.
Resignation of minister
On March 28, 1990, Ervin Knowles resigned as Minister of Agriculture, Trade and Industry after being accused by members of the parliamentary opposition of corruption and nepotism in his role as chairman of the Bahamas Agricultural and Industrial Corporation (BAIC).
Knowles was alleged to have favoured members of his family in BAIC contracts, while a former controller of BAIC, Anthony Woodside, claimed that false signatures had been added to documents.
Knowles was replaced by Perry Christie, who had been dismissed as Minister of Tourism in 1984 [see p.33401]and subsequently elected as an independent MP.
New FNM leader
In June Hubert Ingraham, another former minister who had been dismissed in 1984 [ibid.], was elected leader of the opposition Free National Movement (FNM) after the death on May 9, 1990, of its former leader Sir Cecil Wallace-Whitfield [for whom see also p. 35373].
Ingraham had sat as an independent MP before joining the FNM in April 1990.
In a by-election held on June 28, the FNM retained Wallace-Whitfield's former seat of Marco City on Grand Bahama.
Cabinet reshuffle
On Sept. 16, 1990, the Prime Minister, Sir Lynden Pindling, announced a Cabinet reshuffle, enlarging the Cabinet to 15 members.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$147.5 m. (1989)
Trade balance -US$859 m. (1989)
Overall balance of payments -US$25.2 m. (1989)
Budget deficit US$70 m. (1989)
Total external public debt US$105.3 m. (1989)
Gross national product US$2,488 m. (1989)
Inflation rate 5.5% (1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: USA, UK; Imports: Iran, Nigeria
In December 1989 Pindling, as the then Minister of Finance, presented a budget for 1990 with recurrent expenditure estimated at US$583,000,000 and capital expenditure at US$120,900,000.
Tax increases were introduced on a wide range of goods and services to help alleviate the projected budget deficit.
The deficit in 1989 had totalled US$70,000,000.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
ST CHRISTOPHER AND NEVIS
BASIC DATA
Area: 261.6 sq km.
Population: 43,000 (1988).
Capital: Basseterre.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity (majority Anglican).
Av. life expectancy: 69 yrs (1988).
GNP per capita: US$2,770.
Currency: East Caribbean dollar (US$1.00=EC$2.7069 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The head of state of St Christopher and Nevis, a fully independent member of the Commonwealth since 1983, is the British sovereign, represented in the islands by a Governor General (currently Sir Clement Athelstone Arrindell).
Legislative power is vested in a unicameral National Assembly consisting of a Speaker, three senators (appointed by the Governor General in accordance with the wishes of the Prime Minister and Leader of the Opposition) and 11 representatives who are popularly elected.
The Prime Minister and Cabinet are responsible to the Assembly and are appointed to office by the Governor General upon its recommendation.
The island of Nevis has its own legislature (consisting of five elected and three nominated members) and executive which has exclusive responsibility for the island's internal administration and through which its population may exercise its constitutional right to secede from the union with St Christopher.
In the general election of June 1984 the People's Action Movement (PAM) won six of the 11 elected seats in the National Assembly; it was returned to power in March 1989.
Kennedy Alphonse Simmonds Prime Minister; External Affairs; Home Affairs; Finance Michael Oliver Powell Deputy Prime Minister; Labour; Tourism Hugh Heyliger Agriculture, Lands, Housing and Development Sydney Earl Morris Education, Youth and Community Affairs, Communications, Works and Public Utilities Fitzroy Jones Trade and Industry Constance Mitcham Health and Women's Affairs Ralph Gumbs Minister Without Portfolio Joseph Parry Minister in the Office of the Prime Minister Richard Caines Minister in the Ministry of Finance Tapley Seaton Attorney General 
St Christopher and Nevis Cabinet
POLITICS
In May 1989 Denzil Douglas, 36, Leader of the Opposition in the National Assembly, was elected leader of the opposition St Kitts-Nevis Labour Party (SKLP) after the resignation of Lee Moore, who had again failed to win a seat in the general election held on March 21.
In the elections the PAM retained six seats, the SKLP and the Nevis Reformation Party (NRP) two each, and the Concerned Citizen's Movement (CCM) one.
The loss in the general election of one of the Nevis seats held by the NRP (which had retained four seats in the December 1987 elections to the Nevis island Assembly) to the CCM (which had gained the remaining elective seat) revived speculation about the eventual secession of Nevis from the federation.
Both the NRP and CCM were in favour of autonomy for Nevis, but the NRP, part of the coalition government with the PAM, did not raise the issue during the election campaign.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Current-account balance -US$19.4 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$54.2 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments +US$0.1 m. (1988)
Gross domestic product US$86 m. (1987)
Gross national product US$120 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 4.9% (1989)
Principal trading partners USA, UK, Trinidad and Tobago.
Prime Minister Kennedy Simmonds as Minister of Finance presented a budget for 1990 on Dec. 5, 1989, with recurrent expenditure estimated at EC$93,200,000 and capital expenditure of EC$65,400,000.
Taxes were raised on vehicles and electricity prices increased.
Simmonds also said that World Bank help was being sought to aid the troubled state-owned sugar industry.
Production of sugar in 1990 was estimated at 18,000 tonnes, compared with 24,700 tonnes in 1989.
Difficulties in negotiating wage rates led to the controversial recruitment of labourers from St Vincent to work during the harvest.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
BASIC DATA
Area: 441.6 sq km.
Population: 84,000 (1988).
Capital: St John's.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity (majority Anglican).
Av. life expectancy: 73 yrs (1988).
Armed Forces: 700 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$2,800 (1988).
Currency: East Caribbean dollar (US$1.00=EC$2.7069 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The head of state of Antigua and Barbuda, an independent member of the Commonwealth since 1981, is the United Kingdom sovereign, represented by a Governor-General (currently Sir Wilfred Ebenezer Jacobs) who is appointed on the advice of the Antiguan Prime Minister.
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral Parliament, the lower chamber of which is popularly elected for up to five years.
The Prime Minister and Cabinet are responsible to Parliament and are appointed to office by the Governor-General acting upon its advice.
The Antiguan Labour Party, which has been in power since 1976, won 15 of the 17 seats in the lower chamber in the general election of 1989.
Barbuda, the smaller of the country's two inhabited constituent islands, maintains a considerable degree of control over its internal affairs.
Vere C. Bird Sr. Prime Minister; Defence; Information Lester Bird Deputy Prime Minister; External Affairs; Economic Development; Tourism; Energy Christopher O'Marde Home Affairs Hilroy Humphreys Agriculture, Fisheries, Lands and Housing Reuben Harris Education, Culture, Youth Affairs and Sport John St Luce Finance Adolphus Freeland Health and Labour Keith Ford Legal Affairs; Attorney General Robin Yearwood Public Utilities; Aviation Eustace Cochrane Public Works and Communications; Hugh Marshall Trade and Industry Molwyn Joseph Without Portfolio Donald Sheppard Without Portfolio Henderson Simon Without Portfolio Lounel Stevens Cabinet Secretary 
Cabinet of Antigua and Barbuda
POLITICS
Political developments in Antigua continued in mid- and late 1990 to centre upon the arms smuggling scandal revealed in April 1990 [see p. 37449].
The judicial commission of inquiry, announced by the Prime Minister, Vere Bird Sr, on April 25, was duly set up under the chairmanship of a British QC, Louis Blom-Cooper.
Vere Bird Jr had his appointment as a minister revoked on May 10 and was replaced as Minister of Communications and Works by Eustace Cochrane (hitherto a Minister without Portfolio).
A large demonstration organized by the opposition was held on May 26 to protest at corruption and to call for the Prime Minister's resignation.
Hearings by the commission commenced on June 1, but progress was delayed by a court ruling in August declaring null and void any hearings conducted outside Antigua and Barbuda.
In evidence presented to the commission in the first few months, details were given of irregularities in the handling and documentation in Antigua of the shipment of arms from Israel and their discovery in Colombia.
The arms were said to comprise 200 Galil 7.62 mm and 200 Galil 5.56 mm assault rifles, 100 Mini-Uzis, and 250,000 rounds of ammunition.
On June 18 the Minister of Agriculture, Hilroy Humphreys, admitted receiving payments of US$9,000 of a "personal nature" from Maurice Sarfati, a businessman alleged to be linked to the supplier of the arms, Lt.-Col. Yair Klein, and also to Vere Bird Jr.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 6.4% (1989)
Trade balance -US$261 m. (1987)
Total external public debt US$245 m. (1987)
Gross domestic product US$231.3 m. (1987)
Gross national product US$230 m. (1988)
Principal trading partners Exports: Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados, USA; Imports: USA, UK, CARICOM
A budget for 1990 was presented by the Minister of Finance, John St Luce, on March 1, estimating recurrent expenditure at EC$272,000,000.
No new taxation measures were introduced.
The islands' economy had received a setback from the effects of hurricane "Hugo" in September 1989 [see p. 36891], but the tourism and construction sectors recovered quickly.
In contrast, agricultural production was affected by labour shortages and uncompetitive wages.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
DOMINICA
BASIC DATA
Area: 748.8 sq km.
Population: < 81,000 (1988).
Capital: Roseau.
Languages: English (official); French patois.
Religion: Christianity (80% Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 74 yrs (1988).
Armed forces police and coastguard services, approximately 300.
GNP per capita: US$1,650 (1988).
Currency: East Caribbean dollar (US$1.00=EC$2.7069 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The Commonwealth of Dominica became a fully independent republic within the Commonwealth in November 1978.
Executive authority is nominally vested in the President (currently Sir Clarence Augustus Seignoret) who is elected by the legislature to not more than two five-year terms in office.
In practice he acts as a constitutional head of state.
The President appoints the Prime Minister and Cabinet from among the members of the unicameral House of Assembly, which is composed of 21 elected representatives and nine appointed senators and sits for five years.
The Dominica Freedom Party (DFP), which came to power in 1980, was narrowly returned for a third term in May 1990, winning 11 seats.
(Mary) Eugenia Charles Prime Minister; Finance; Defence Charles Maynard Trade; Industry; Tourism; Lands and Survey; Brian Alleyne External Affairs Alleyne Carbon Communications; Public Works and Road Construction; Housing Heskeith Alexander Labour and Immigration Henry George Community Development; Social Affairs Rupert Sorhaindo Education Allan Guye Health Jenner Armour Attorney General Dermott Southwell Without Portfolio Maynard Joseph Agriculture 
Dominica Cabinet
POLITICS/SECURITY
Maynard Joseph, appointed Minister without Portfolio in June, was in August appointed Minister of Agriculture, replacing Charles Maynard who retained the portfolios of Trade, Industry and Tourism.
Former Prime Minister (in 1974-79) Patrick John was released from prison the day after the general election, having served only 4@1/2 years of a 12-year sentence imposed in October 1985 for conspiracy to overthrow the government [see p. 35964].
Malcolm Reid, a former deputy commander of the Dominica Defence Force (disbanded in 1981), who was convicted and imprisoned with John, was also released.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Current-account balance -US$9.4 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$23.9 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments -US$1.3 m. (1988)
Gross national product US$130 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 6.3% (1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: UK, Jamaica, OECS countries; Imports: USA, UK, CARICOM countries
On July 16, 1990, Prime Minister Eugenia Charles, as Minister of Finance, presented a budget for 1990-91 with recurrent expenditure estimated at EC$118,500,000 and capital expenditure of EC$110,200,000.
A budget surplus of EC$12,300,000 was predicted on the current account.
No new tax measures were announced.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
BASIC DATA
Area: 5,128 sq km.
Population: 1,241,000 (1988).
Capital: Port of Spain.
Languages: English (official); French, Spanish, Hindi and Chinese.
Religion: Christianity (60%), Hinduism (25%), Islam (6%).
Av. life expectancy: 70 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 2,650 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$3,350 (1988).
Currency: Trinidad and Tobago dollar (US$1.00=TT$4.2608 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago was declared in 1976, the country having been an independent member of the Commonwealth since 1962.
Under the 1976 Constitution the head of state is the President (currently Noor Mohammed Hassanali, who is elected by a parliamentary electoral college.
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral Parliament composed of a House of Representatives which is popularly elected for five years and a Senate appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister (currently Arthur Napoleon Raymond Robinson) and of the Leader of the Opposition.
In a general election held in December 1986 the National Alliance for Reconstruction (NAR) won 33 of the 36 seats in the lower house and ousted the incumbent government of the People's National Movement (PNM).
Tobago, the smaller of the country's two main constituent islands, achieved full internal self-government in early 1987.
Arthur Napoleon Raymond Robinson Prime Minister; Economy Selby Wilson Finance Selwyn Richardson Justice and National Security Lincoln Myers Environment and National Service Gloria Henry Education Sahadeo Basdeo External Affairs and International Trade Clive Pantin Health Bhoe Tewarie Industry and Enterprise and Tourism Albert Richards Labour, Employment and Manpower Resources Herbert Atwell Energy Winston Dookeran Planning and Mobilization Jennifer Johnson Sport, Culture and Youth Affairs Carson Charles Works, Infrastructure and Decentralization Anthony Smart Attorney General Emmanuel Hosein Social Development and Family Services Pamela Nicholson Settlements; Public Utilities Brinsley Samaroo Food Production and Marine Exploitation 
Trinidad and Tobago Cabinet
POLITICS
The popularity of the NAR administration and that of the Prime Minister, Arthur (Ray) Robinson, continued to wane during 1989 and 1990 in the face of economic decline and austerity measures.
In particular many pointed to growing social unrest, crime and unemployment caused in part by the government's structural adjustment policies.
Cabinet change — New president of Senate and Chairman of Tobago House of Assembly
Ken Gordon, Minister of Industry, resigned from the government and from his Senate seat on Dec. 31, 1989, in order to return to his former post as managing director of the Trinidad and Tobago Express newspaper.
(On the formation of the NAR administration in December 1986 Gordon had agreed to serve as a minister for a period of three years.)
He was replaced by Bhoe Tewarie, hitherto Minister without Portfolio, on Jan. 29, 1990.
Michael Williams, president of the Senate, resigned on March 8, 1990, complaining that his post prevented him from making comments on public issues.
He was replaced by Joseph Carter, a retired parliamentary clerk.
In October 1989 Lennox Denoon was elected Chairman of the Tobago House of Assembly to replace Jeff Davidson, who had announced his resignation on Sept. 26.
Formation of UNC and Movement of Social Transformation
On April 30, 1989, a group of former ministers led by Basdeo Panday, who had been expelled from the NAR in October 1988,[see p. 36554], announced the launch of their new political party, the United National Congress (UNC).
The UNC held its first annual convention on July 22, 1990, when Panday was elected unopposed as leader, with Rampersad Parasram as chairman and Kelvin Ramnath as general secretary.
Former minister John Humphrey, who had accused the new party of racism in favouring members of the "East" Indian community, failed to win a post.
The UNC had the support of six members of the House of Representatives compared with three for the official opposition PNM.
In September the UNC decided to seek the status of official opposition, with Panday becoming parliamentary opposition leader and the UNC nominating six appointees to the Senate to replace PNM senators.
In August 1989 the Committee for Labour Solidarity, a grouping of left-wing trade union leaders, announced the formation of a new political party, the Movement for Social Transformation.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -2.3% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$164.4 m. (1988)
Trade balance +US$389.2 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments -US$278.5 m. (1988)
Budget deficit US$167 m. (1989)
Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 4% (1989)
Total external public debt US$1,479 m. (1989)
Gross domestic product US$4,603 m. (1987)
Gross national product US$4,314 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 11.4% (1989)
Unemployment 22.4% (1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: USA, EC countries, CARICOM countries; Imports: USA, EC countries, Japan
Negative growth in Trinidad and Tobago's gross domestic product (GDP) continued during 1989 and 1990, but at a slower rate, leading to hopes that positive growth could be recorded in 1991.
GDP declined by 2.7 per cent in 1989, compared with 4.7 per cent in 1988.
The structural adjustment policies of the government, designed to reduce the budget deficit and the country's debt and to build up the depleted foreign exchange reserves were supported by the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
On Dec. 22, 1989, Selby Wilson, Minister of Finance, presented a budget for 1990 with recurrent expenditure estimated at TT$5,484 million and capital expenditure of TT$794,200,000.
Wilson announced that the government would seek a new agreement with the IMF when the existing standby arrangement, approved in January 1989 [see p. 36555], expired at the end of February 1990.
All the quarterly tests for the existing agreement had been passed easily.
Tax measures included the introduction of value added tax (VAT) on goods and services, and a reduction in the rates of personal income tax — part of the reforms in the taxation system agreed with the IMF.
It was also reported in December that a 10 per cent wage reduction for public-sector employees, introduced in the 1989 budget and strongly opposed by the trade unions, would be extended for a further year.
On Dec. 20, 1989, agreements had been reached with commercial banks for the rescheduling of short-term debts, and shortly afterwards agreements were concluded with the "Paris Club" of creditor countries to reschedule the country's debt to countries and international institutions.
On Jan. 4, 1990, the World Bank approved two loans totalling US$44,000,000 to help the structural adjustment plan by providing funds for future growth and alleviating the plan's adverse effects on the poor.
A standby arrangement of up to 85,000,000 special drawing rights (US$111,000,000) over the next 11 months was announced by the IMF on April 23, 1990; an additional SDR42,500,000 (US$55,000,000) under the compensatory and contingency financing facility (CCFF), to help alleviate pressures caused by the loss of petroleum revenue, was also made available over the same period.
Conditions included further reduction of the budget and balance-of-payments deficits and the rebuilding of foreign exchange reserves.
Other conditions included the maintenance of current policies of tax and investment liberalization.
Foreign exchange controls over about 60 per cent of merchandise imports were lifted at the end of September 1989 and in May 1990 the Senate passed a new bill to replace the Aliens Landholdings Act which had limited the areas of foreign investment and ownership in the country's economy.
The rise in the price of petroleum, caused by the August 1990 crisis in the Gulf, was expected to aid the country's economy, petroleum having contributed 41 per cent of government revenue in 1989.
A large-scale exploration effort for new reserves was to begin under the terms of a TT$300,000,000 agreement reached in November 1989 between the US company Exxon, the French company Total and the state-owned companies, Trintoc and Trintopec.
Further drilling and exploration both on land and offshore was planned by other companies.
FOREIGN
In March 1990 an agreement was signed with Venezuela over the maritime boundaries between the two nations during a three-day visit by Robinson to Caracas, the Venezuelan capital.
Under the terms of the agreement Trinidad and Tobago's maritime boundary was to be increased to 350 nautical miles.
Negotiations over a joint fishing agreement between the two countries had been disrupted by incidents between Trinidadian fishermen and Venezuelan coastguards which had led to the death of one Trinidadian in October 1989.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
GRENADA
BASIC DATA
Area: 344.5 sq.
km.
Population: 102,000 (1988).
Capital: St George's.
Languages: English (majority); French patois.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 69 yrs (1988).
GNP per capita: US$1,370.
Currency: East Caribbean dollar (US$1.00=EC$2.7069 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The head of state of Grenada, a fully independent member of the Commonwealth since February 1974, is the British sovereign represented by a Governor General (currently Sir Paul Scoon).
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral parliament, with a lifetime of up to five years, which consists of an elected House of Representatives and a 13-member appointed Senate.
In March 1979 the country's Prime Minister, Sir Eric Gairy, was overthrown by the socialist New Jewel Movement which established a People's Revolutionary Government under the leadership of Maurice Bishop.
Factional conflict within the new government, however, led to the murder of Bishop during a coup in October 1983 which resulted in the establishment of a Revolutionary Military Council.
In response to this development a military force from the USA and neighbouring Caribbean countries invaded the island and deposed the new government.
The Governor General appointed an Advisory Council to act as an interim government until a general election was held in December 1984, in which the New National Party (NNP — an amalgam of three centrist parties), under the leadership of Herbert Blaize, won 14 of the 15 seats in the House of Representatives.
Factional fighting resulted in the disintegration of the NNP government in mid-1989, but Blaize remained in office until his death in December 1989.
A general election in March 1990 was won by the centrist National Democratic Congress led by Nicholas Brathwaite.
Nicholas Brathwaite Prime Minister; External Affairs; Information; Security; Carriacou and Petit Martinique Affairs George Brizan Finance; Trade and Industry Francis Alexis Attorney General; Legal Affairs; Local Government Phinsley St Louis Works, Communications and Public Utilities Kenny Lalsingh Health and Community Development Joan Purcell Tourism, Aviation and Women's Affairs Michael Andrew Labour, Social Security and Housing Ben Jones Agriculture, Forestry, Lands and Fisheries Carlyle Glean Education, Culture, Youth Affairs and Sport 
Grenada Cabinet
POLITICS/SECURITY
A fire in St George's on April 27, 1990, destroyed the General Post Office and some government offices, including the Finance Ministry.
Speculation about the cause of the fire led the government to ask British police officers to conduct an investigation.
The loss of documents would prove a severe problem for officials in the short term, and ten days after the fire Lawrence Gibbs, a Grenada United Labour Party (GULP) member of the House of Representatives, joined the ruling NDC to show "national unity" , thus reducing GULP's representation to two.
Lawyers representing the 14 people convicted in December 1986 [see p. 34941]of the murder in 1983 of the Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and his associates [see pp. 32614-18]concluded their case before the Court of Appeal on Feb. 9, 1990 (proceedings having originally opened in March 1988-see p. 36620).
Hearings resumed in mid-June with the prosecution putting its arguments, and the appeal concluded on Sept. 19; it was expected that a verdict would be announced before the end of the year.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 5.5% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$19.2 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$61.7 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments -US$7.6 m. (1988)
Budget deficit US$4.4 m. (1989)
Total external public debt US$56.5 m. (1990)
Gross national product US$139 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 5.6% (1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: USA, UK, West Germany; Imports: USA, UK, Trinidad and Tobago
The Minister of Finance, George Brizan, presented a budget for 1990-91 on April 19, 1990.
Brizan claimed that the budget, coming so soon after the general election, could only be a "holding operation" until the NDC administration was able to undertake reforms, and he announced the creation of a committee to review the fiscal policies of the previous Blaize administration.
Recurrent expenditure was estimated at EC$160,800,000 and capital expenditure at EC$70,800,000.
On May 7 Brizan accused the previous administration of mismanagement of the country's finances, increasing the island's debt and budget deficit as spending had exceeded targets.
He also criticized the Blaize administration for the country's low credit rating.
Attempts to raise loans to pay civil servants' back pay [see below]had failed.
On May 20 he sought permission to raise a loan of EC$20,000,000 from local commercial banks to meet immediate commitments.
In December 1989 the government sold a 21 per cent holding in Grenada Telecommunications Ltd to Cable and Wireless plc, giving Cable and Wireless control of the company, to help the government to pay EC$25,000,000 in back pay demanded by civil servants, who had started a week-long strike.
The payment of the back pay had been delayed by the prorogation of Parliament by the Blaize adminstration in August [see p. 36847]to avoid a motion of no confidence.
On Dec. 14 Parliament was reconvened after assurances from the opposition, and passed a request to borrow EC$30,000,000.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
BARBADOS
BASIC DATA
Area: 430 sq km.
Population: 255,000 (1988).
Capital: Bridgetown.
Language: English.
Religion: Christianity (majority Anglican); small groups of Hindus, Moslems and Jews.
Av. life expectancy: 75 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 154 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$5,990 (1988).
Currency: Barbados dollar (US$1.00=B$2.0113 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The head of state of Barbados, a fully independent member of the Commonwealth since November 1966, is the British sovereign, represented by a Governor-General (currently Dame Nita Barrow).
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral Parliament (consisting of a House of Assembly which is popularly elected every five years, and an appointed Senate), to which the Prime Minister and Cabinet are responsible and upon whose advice they are appointed to office by the Governor General.
The Democratic Labour Party, under Errol Barrow, defeated the incumbent government of the Barbados Labour Party in the general election of May 1986, winning 24 of the 27 seats in the House of Assembly.
Following Barrow's death on June 1, 1987, his former deputy, Erskine Sandiford, took over as Prime Minister.
Erskine Sandiford Prime Minister; Finance and Economic Affairs; Civil Service Philip Greaves Deputy Prime Minister; International Transport, Telecommunications and Immigration Maurice King Foreign Affairs; Attorney General; Legal Affairs Evelyn Greaves Trade, Industry and Commerce Harcourt Lewis Agriculture, Food and Fisheries Wesley Hall Tourism and Sports Branford Taitt Health Keith Simmons Employment, Labour Relations and Community Development Harold Blackman Housing and Lands Don Blackman Transport and Works Cyril Walker Education and Culture Carl Clarke Minister of State in Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs 
Barbados Cabinet
POLITICS
On Jan. 11, 1990, Harcourt Lewis was transferred from the Prime Minister's Office to become Minister of State at the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, replacing Warwick Franklin.
His appointment illustrated the importance which management of the agricultural sector had assumed after the publication of the Landell Mills report [see below]and the allegations of mismanagement made against the Caribbean Sea Island Cotton Company (Cariscot), in which the government had a 33 per cent holding.
Cariscot, in which the Canadian company Scothalls had the majority shareholding, was alleged to have imported cotton for resale as genuine West Indian Sea Island Cotton.
Following a special audit and an investigation by the police fraud squad, the Attorney General recommended that Cariscot should be put into receivership.
In June 1990 David Commissiong resigned as a senator for the ruling Democratic Labour Party (DLP) in protest at the rejection by the party's executive council of his nomination as DLP House of Assembly candidate for the City of Bridgetown constituency.
Dame Nita Barrow, 73, sister of Errol Barrow, was appointed Governor General with effect from June 6, succeeding Sir Hugh Springer.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 3.5% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$35 m. (1989)
Trade balance -US$489.9 m. (1989)
Budget deficit US$53.5 m. (1989)
Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 4% (1989)
Total external public debt US$408.6 m. (1989)
Gross national product US$1,530 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 6.2% (1989)
Principal trading partners USA, CARICOM, UK
The Barbados economy continued to suffer from a slow-down in growth during late 1989 and 1990 in response to the tight fiscal policies introduced by the government to protect the country's foreign exchange reserves and balance of payments.
Interest rates were increased in September 1989 and restrictions placed on commercial bank lending to dampen down economic activity.
Growth in gross domestic product (GDP) in real terms was estimated at 3.5 per cent during 1989, but the Central Bank of Barbados reported a decline of 2 per cent in the first six months of 1990 and GDP was expected to show zero growth during 1990 as a whole.
Prime Minister Erskine Sandiford, as Minister of Finance, presented a budget for 1990-91, on May 2, 1990, proposing recurrent expenditure of B$1,000 million and capital expenditure of B$243 million, with an estimated deficit of B$170 million.
No new taxes were introduced and there were a number of tax concessions for businesses, but fuel prices were increased.
One of the main features of the budget was a plan for stimulating recovery in the agricultural sector, at a cost of B$63.4 million, following the recommendations of the 1989 Landell Mills study.
The study suggested diversification and rotation to boost production of other crops.
The 1990 sugar crop was again depressed, reaching only 69,300 tonnes.
REFERENCES.
Reference article pp. 37074-75.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
ST LUCIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 616 sq km.
Population: 145,000.
Capital: Castries.
Languages: English (official); French patois.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 71 yrs (1988).
GNP per capita: US$1,540 (1988).
Currency: East Caribbean dollar (US$1.00=EC$2.7069 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The head of state of St Lucia, an independent member of the Commonwealth since 1979, is the British sovereign represented by a Governor General (currently Stanislaus A. James — acting).
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral Parliament consisting of an appointed Senate and a 17-member House of Assembly which is popularly elected for a five-year term.
The Prime Minister (currently John Compton) and Cabinet are responsible to Parliament and are appointed to office by the Governor General acting upon its advice.
The general election of May 1982 was won by the United Workers' Party (UWP) which was returned in the general elections of April 6 and April 30, 1987, after winning nine of the 17 parliamentary seats in both.
The subsequent defection of a member of the St Lucia Labour Party (SLP) increased the UWP's majority to three seats [see pp. 35187-88].
John Compton Prime Minister; Finance; Home Affairs; Planning and Development George Mallet Deputy Prime Minister; of Trade, Industry and Tourism Neville Cenac Foreign Affairs Gregory Avril Communications, Works and Transport Romanus Lansiquot Health; Housing; Labour; Information and Broadcasting Parry Husbands Attorney General; Legal Affairs Stephenson King Community Affairs, Youth, Sports and Social Affairs Ferdinand Henry Agriculture, Land, Fisheries and Co-operatives Louis George Education and Culture Allan Bousquet Without Portfolio Desmond Braithwaite Minister of State in Prime Ministers Office responsible for Housing and Urban Development 
St Lucia Cabinet
POLITICS
Desmond Fostin, Minister of Communications, Works and Transport, resigned and was replaced by Gregory Avril, hitherto Minister of State in the Ministry of Agriculture, on Feb. 9, 1990, after allegations of corruption within the Ministry.
Prime Minister John Compton defended Fostin by saying that he had been subjected to unjustified attacks in the press over the poor state of the country's roads.
Trade balance -US$82.3 m. (1988) Overall balance of payments +US$6.3 m. (1988) Gross national product US$220 m. (1988) Inflation rate 4.7% (1989) Principal trading partners UK, CARICOM countries, USA
ECONOMY
Economic indicators Current-account balance -US$13.6 m. (1988)
On April 11, 1990, Compton, as Minister of Finance, presented a budget for 1990-91 with recurrent expenditure estimated at EC$236,700,000 and capital expenditure at EC$152,500,000.
Compton predicted a growth in gross domestic product (GDP) of 6 per cent for 1990, similar to that of 1989, but again warned of the dangers of an excessive economic boom.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
ST VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA
Area: 389 sq km.
Population: 122,000 (1988).
Capital: Kingstown.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity (Anglican, Methodist, Roman Catholic.
Av. life expectancy: 70 yrs (1988).
GNP per capita: US$1,100 (1988).
Currency: East Caribbean Dollar (US$1.00=EC$2.7069 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The head of state of St Vincent and the Grenadines, a fully independent member of the Commonwealth since October 1979, is the British sovereign, represented within the islands by a Governor General (currently David Jack).
Legislative authority is vested in a unicameral National Assembly which sits for five years and consists of six appointed Senators and 15 popularly elected representatives.
The Prime Minister (currently James F. Mitchell) and Cabinet are responsible to the Assembly and are appointed to office by the Governor General acting upon its advice.
The New Democratic Party won the 1984 election and was returned to power in May 1989, winning all 15 of the seats open to election.
James F. Mitchell Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs; Finance Allan Cruickshank Agriculture; Industry and Labour John Horne Education Youth and Women's Affairs Louis Jones Housing; Community Development; Local Government Burton Williams Health and Environment Parnell Campbell Information; Legal Affairs; Attorney General Jeremiah Scott Communications and Works Herbert Young Trade and Tourism Yvonne Gibson Minister of State for Education, Youth and Women's Affairs Jonathan Peters Minister of State for Trade and Tourism
St Vincent and the Grenadines Cabinet
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
ARUBA
BASIC DATA
Area: 193 sq km.
Population: 62,365 (1989).
Capital: Oranjestad.
Languages: Dutch (official); also Papiamento (majority), Spanish and English.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
GDP per capita: US$12,125 (1988).
Currency: Aruban guilder (or florin)(US$1.00=AFl1.7900 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
Aruba acquired separate status within the Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1986, pending full independence in 1996.
The form of government is embodied in the Charter of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which came into force in 1954.
The Netherlands, the Netherlands Antilles and, since 1986, Aruba have full internal independence and are united for the protection of their common interests.
In Aruba the Governor (currently Felipe B. Trompe), who represents and is appointed by the Crown, has executive power in external affairs.
Executive power in internal affairs is vested in a Council of Ministers, responsible to the 21-seat Staten (parliament), which is elected for a four-year term by universal adult suffrage, most recently in January 1989, when the People's Electoral Movement (Movimento Electoral di Pueblo — MEP) won 10 seats, and with the support of the Aruban Patriotic party (Partido Patriótico Arubano — PPA) and the National Democratic Action (Acción Democrático Nacional — ADN) formed a government [see p. 37075].
Nelson Oduber Prime Minister Gen. Edison Briesan Economy Guillermo Trinidad Finance Hendrik Croes Justice Freddy Refunjol Education; Social Welfare and Labour Elio Nicolaas Transport and Communications Henry Baarh Director, Foreign Relations Office (acting)
Aruba Council of Ministers
POLITICS
In July 1990 an Aruban delegation met the Netherlands Minister of Aruban and Antillean Affairs, Ernst Hirsh Ballin, for further talks about his proposals for a new constitutional relationship between the island and the Netherlands [see also p. 37823].
The meeting also marked a further stage in the MEP's move away from pursuing full independence in 1996.
Fears about the vulnerability of small states to external threats, drug trafficking and fraud led the administration of Premier Nelson Oduber to consider the benefits of continued Dutch citizenship and development aid in a "Commonwealth" relationship.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 13% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$28 m. (1989)
Trade balance -US$288.7 m. (1989)
Overall balance of payments -US$3.8 m. (1989)
Gross domestic product US$746.9 m. (1988 est.)
Inflation rate 4% (1989)
Principal trading partners USA, EC
The Aruban economy continued to expand rapidly, based on tourism and construction, registering growth in gross domestic product (GDP) in 1989 of 13 per cent, leading to a warning from the Central Bank about the dangers of too rapid growth.
In late 1989 the government signed an agreement with Coastal Oil of Texas for the renovation of part of the Exxon refinery closed in 1985 [see p. 33456], in the expectation of resuming operations in 1991 with an initial capacity of 150,000 barrels per day.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES
BASIC DATA
Area: 800 sq km.
Population: 191,000.
Capital: Willemstad.
Languages: Leeward Islands: Dutch and Papiamento (official); Windward Islands: English (official); also Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic in Leewards; Protestant in Windwards).
Av. life expectancy:66 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: The Netherlands is responsible for the defence of the Netherlands Antilles.
GNP per capita: US$5,300 (1988).
Currency:Netherlands Antilles guilder (or florin)(US$1.00=NAFl1.7945 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The form of government of the Netherlands Antilles is embodied in the Charter of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which came into
force in 1954.
The Netherlands, the Netherlands Antilles and, since 1986, Aruba have full internal independence and are united for the protection of their common interests.
In the Netherlands Antilles the Governor (currently Jaime Saleh), who represents and is appointed by the Crown, has executive power in external affairs.
Executive power in internal affairs is vested in a Council of Ministers, responsible to the 22-seat Staten (parliament), which is elected for a four-year term by universal adult suffrage, most recently in March 1990, when Prime Minister Maria Liberia Peters's National People's Party (Partido Nashonal di Pueblo — PNP) won seven seats and continued to lead a coalition government.
Maria Liberia Peters Prime Minister Franklin Crestian Development Co-operation Ellis Woodley Education Gilbert DePaula Finance W. V. Knoppel Justice Louis Gumbs Public Health; Transportation and Communication Stanley Inderson Social and Labour Affairs C. G. Smits Trade, Industry and Employment 
Netherlands Antilles Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Ernst Hirsh Ballin, the Netherlands Minister for Antillean and Aruban Affairs, visited the Netherlands Antilles in January 1990 and later suggested a new constitutional formula for relations between the Netherlands and the Antilles, including the proposed division of the Antilles into two groups (Curaçao and Bonaire; and the three Windward Islands).
The victory in March of the PNP and its allies in Curaçao, however, strengthened the hand of Prime Minister Maria Liberia Peters in favouring eventual autonomy for Curaçao.
The coalition of the PNP and Frente Obrero di Liberashon (FOL), plus the Union Patriotico Bonairiano (UBP) and the two representatives from St Eustatius and Saba, was reconstituted to obtain the necessary two-thirds majority in the Staten and exclude the Democratic Party of St Maarten (DP-SM), whose leader, Claude Wathey, favoured independence for his island.
It was hoped that a round table conference would be held during 1992 to discuss the new constitutional proposals which envisaged a new "commonwealth" structure.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Current-account balance -US$50 m. (1987)
Trade balance -US$690 m. (1987)
Overall balance of payments -US$29.2 m. (1987)
Budget deficit US$50.3 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$393.9 m. (1987)
Gross domestic product US$1,452 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 3.97% (1989)
Unemployment 21% (Curaçao 1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: USA, UK, Jamaica; imports: Venezuela, Nigeria, USA.
The austerity measures designed to eliminate the islands' large budget deficits and to take into account the reduction in earnings from the petroleum and financial sectors, were to be maintained.
The Curaçao island government's budget deficit was estimated at NAFl96.8 million for 1990.
Netherlands aid to the Antilles amounted to Fl225 million per year until 1993.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
BELIZE
BASIC DATA
Area: 22,965 sq.
km.
Population: 182,000 (1988).
Capital: Belmopan.
Languages: English (official), Spanish and small communities of Garifuna and Maya speakers.
Religion: Christianity (60% Roman Catholic) Av. life expectancy: 67 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 700 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$1,460 (1988).
Currency: Belizean dollar (US$1.00=Bel$2.0051 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
The head of state of Belize, an independent member of the Commonwealth since September 1981, is the British sovereign, represented by a Governor General (currently Dame Minita Elvira Gordon) who is appointed in consultation with the Prime Minister of Belize.
Legislative power is vested in the bicameral National Assembly, composed of a 28-member House of Representatives (popularly elected for five years) and an appointed Senate.
In the September 1989 general election the People's United Party (PUP) which had been in power from the granting of internal self-government in 1964 until the 1984 general election, narrowly defeated the incumbent United Democratic Party (UDP)[see pp. 36890-91].
George Price Prime Minister; Finance; Defence; Home Affairs Florencio Marin Deputy Prime Minister; Industry and Natural Resources Said Musa Foreign Affairs; Economic Development; Education Glenn Godfrey Tourism; Environment; Attorney General Michael Espat Agriculture; Fisheries Samuel Waight Works Carlos Diaz Communications; Energy Remijio Montego Minister of Social Services; Community Development Valdemar Castillo Housing; Co-operatives Theodore Aranda Health; Urban Development 
Principal Belize Ministers
POLITICS
William "Stanley" Usher, who had been elected in September 1989 as an opposition UDP representative, was expelled from the party on Dec. 13, 1989, and joined the ruling PUP; he had signalled his support for the PUP immediately after the general election.
The PUP won the local elections to the Belize City Council held on Dec. 7, 1989, securing all nine seats.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 8.3% (1989)
Current-account balance +US$11.3 m. (1989)
Trade balance -US$89 m. (1989)
Gross national product US$264 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 2.2% (annual average 1980-88)
Principal trading partners Exports: USA, UK, Trinidad and Tobago; Imports: USA, UK, Netherlands Antilles
On March 8, 1990, George Price, as Minister of Finance, presented a budget for 1990-91 with current expenditure estimated at Bel$153,900,000 and total capital expenditure of Bel$107,000,000.
No new tax measures were proposed.
Price said that the agricultural sector had performed well in 1989, with increases in production of sugar, citrus fruits and bananas.
Gross domestic product was estimated to have grown by 8.3 per cent during 1989.
An enlarged trade deficit was more than offset by remittances, capital inflows and invisible earnings in 1989 creating a balance-of-payments surplus of Bel$22,700,000.
The sugar harvest for 1990 produced a record 100,297 tonnes.
FOREIGN
Price met President Arevalo of Guatemala on the Honduran island of Roatán on Dec. 15, 1989 for further talks on the longstanding border dispute between the two countries, whereby Guatemala claimed some or all of Belize territory [see pp. 33522; 34287; 34611; 35963-64; 36999].
On assuming office in September Price had promised to continue the talks with Guatemala started under the previous UDP administration.
Another round of talks was held in Roatán on July 9, 1990; on both occasions the Belizean delegation included representatives of the government and of the opposition UDP.
It was agreed to reconvene the permanent commission to draw up a treaty between the two countries.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
UNITED KINGDOM DEPENDENT TERRITORIES
BASIC DATA
Anguilla
Area: 96 sq km.Population: 7,000 (est. (1989).
Capital: The Valley.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity (majority Anglican or Methodist).
Av. life expectancy: 70 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: Defence is the responsibility of the UK government.
Currency: East Caribbean dollar (US$1.00=EC$2.7069 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
Governor: Brian Canty.
Chief Minister: Emile R. Gumbs.
Bermuda
Area: 53 sq km.Population: 56,000 (1988).
Capital: Hamilton.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity.
Armed forces: 750 (1989).
Currency:Bermuda dollar (US$1.00=B$1.00 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
Governor: Sir Desmond Langley.
Premier: Sir John Swan.
British Virgin Islands
Area: 153 sq km.Population: 12,197 (1987).
Capital: Road Town.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity (majority Methodist).
Av. life expectancy: 70 yrs. (1988).
Armed forces: Defence is the responsibility of the UK government.
GDP per capita: US$8,323 (1987).
Currency: United States dollar.
Governor: John Mark Ambrose Herdman.
Chief Minister: H. Lavity Stoutt.
Cayman Islands
Area:259 sq km.
Population:25,355 (1989).
Capital: George Town.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity.
Armed forces: Defence is the responsibility of the UK government.
GDP per capita: US$16,800(1988).
Currency: Cayman Islands dollar (US$1.00=C$0.8300 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
Governor: Alan Scott.
Montserrat
Area: 102 sq km.Population: 11,900 (1987).
Capital: Plymouth.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity.
Av. life expectancy: 70 yrs. (1988).
Armed forces: Defence is the responsibility of the UK government.
GDP per capita: US$3,532 (1987).
Currency: East Caribbean dollar (US$1.00=EC$2.7069 as at Oct. 29, 1990).
Governor: David G. P. Taylor.
Chief Minister: John A. Osborne.
Turks and Caicos Islands
Area: 430 sq km.Population: 13,000 (official estimate 1989).
Capital: Cockburn Town.
Language: English (official); Creole.
Religion: Christianity (majority Baptist).
Armed forces: Defence is the responsibility of the UK government.
Currency: United States dollar.
Governor: Michael Bradley.
Chief Minister: Oswald O. Skippings.
ANGUILLA
Following the report in early 1990 by accountants Coopers and Lybrand into the activities of offshore financial businesses in the UK's Caribbean dependent territories, it was agreed in talks in May between UK government officials and the Chief Minister, Emile Gumbs, that Anguilla's Constitution would be amended (by Order in Council within the next few months) to allow the Governor to assume responsibility for the offshore financial sector.
A review of offshore banks was also started and was expected to lead to several banks losing their licences to operate.
The proposed amendments also made provision for the appointment of a Deputy Governor who would replace the Permanent Secretary for Finance as a member of the Executive Council and of the House of Assembly.
BERMUDA
The Premier and leader of the ruling United Bermuda Party (UBP), John Swan, received a knighthood in the 1990 New Year honours list.
In January Mike Winfield, a government senator, was appointed to a new post of Minister of Management and Information Services.
Sidney Stallard, Minister for Community Affairs, resigned in April for personal reasons and was replaced by Leonard Gibbons.
On Feb. 22, 1990, the Minister of Finance, David Saul, presented a budget for 1990 with an estimated expenditure of US$370,000,000 and a deficit of $23,100,000, and including several major capital expenditure projects.
Taxes and customs duties were raised sharply, but were later scaled down after protests and because of fears of rising inflation.
BRITISH VIRGIN ISLANDS
On Feb. 20, 1990, Chief Minister Lavity Stoutt as Minister of Finance presented a budget for 1990 with recurrent expenditure of US$37,900,000.
CAYMAN ISLANDS
The economy of the Cayman Islands continued to grow during 1989 and 1990, building on the 16 per cent growth in gross domestic product (GDP) in real terms recorded in 1988.
The territory's important financial industry continued to expand, reaching a total of 538 registered banks and over 20,000 companies in 1989.
In December the Governor, Alan Scott, stated that the UK government regarded the Cayman offshore industry as properly run and that there would be no requirement for a change to the Constitution as in Montserrat and Anguilla.
However, the UK government agreed later in the year to a request from opposition members of the Legislative Council for a review of the Constitution.
The request followed the passing on July 4 by the Council of a government resolution by which the finance committee would become a committee of the whole house, including all 12 elected members and the three appointed officials.
Because the Executive Council, consisting of the three officials and four elected members of the Legislative Council, did not have majority support from the elected members of the Legislative Council, its budget proposals were radically amended by the finance committee.
The three officials were bound by collective responsibility to vote in accord with the four elected Executive Council members; the July 4 resolution was passed by their seven votes plus that of one backbencher, with five backbenchers voting against and two absent.
MONTSERRAT
Montserrat's new Constitution, proposed after the scandal in its offshore financial sector was implemented in mid-February 1990.
In return for accepting the Governor's supervision of the financial sector, a provision was included recognizing Montserrat's right to self-determination and an article giving certain legislative powers to the Governor was dropped [see p. 37145].
A new Governor, David Taylor, was sworn in on May 22, 1990, succeeding Christopher Turner, whose relations with the Chief Minister, John Osborne, had become extremely strained at the end of 1989.
The economy gradually recovered from the devastation caused by hurricane "Hugo" in September 1989 [see p. 36891], and housing was repaired and basic infrastructure restored.
The UK government announced on Dec. 1 that a further £1,200,000 in aid was being provided for reconstruction work, making a total of £4,200,000.
TURKS AND CAICOS ISLANDS
The Chief Minister, Oswald Skippings, presented a budget for 1990-91 on March 13, 1990, with estimated recurrent expenditure of US$26,000,000.
No new taxation measures were introduced.
Tourism, the islands' principal economic activity, continued to grow.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
UNITED STATES VIRGIN ISLANDS
BASIC DATA
Area: 354.8 sq km.
Population: 106,000 (1987).
Capital: Charlotte Amalie.
Languages: English.
Religion: Christianity.
GNP per capita: US$9,450 (1988).
Currency: United States dollar.
POLITICS
The proposed referendum on the future status of the United States Virgin Islands (USVI), due to be held on Nov. 14, 1989, was postponed after the damage caused to the islands on Sept. 17-23 by hurricane "Hugo" [see p. 36891].
The referendum had been organized to offer a choice between six different options, plus the existing status quo, ranging from full independence to incorporation as a state of the USA.
The majority of public opinion seemed to favour the retention of the islands' current status, with a measure of greater autonomy.
Lorraine Berry, head of the status commission and leader of the Democratic Party majority in the legislature, stated that neither statehood nor independence would serve the islands' best interests.
In February 1990 the Governor, Alexander Farrelly, stated that the territory would seek associate membership of the Organization of East Caribbean States (OECS).
The neighbouring British Virgin Islands had become an associate member of the OECS in 1984.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Trade balance -US$1,312 m. (1987)
Budget deficit US$50 m. (1989)
Unemployment 4%
Principal trading partners USA, Puerto Rico
Hurricane "Hugo" in September 1989 damaged 97 per cent of housing on the island of St Croix, while the loss of the cruise ship pier at Frederiksted and damage to hotels threatened the winter tourist season.
Damage on all three main inhabited islands was estimated at US$1,000 million.
The USVI government appealed for a community disaster loan of US$41,000,000 to help offset the loss of revenue from business taxes.
The Amerada Hess Corporation oil refinery, with a capacity of 545,000 barrels per day, was also severely damaged.
National Guardsmen and military police flown in from the USA to help stem looting in the immediate aftermath of the hurricane were withdrawn gradually towards the end of the year.
The decision by US President Bush in early November 1989 to reject a petition from the Timex Corporation challenging the duty-free import of watch movements for assembly in the Virgin Islands ensured the survival of about 600 jobs on St Croix.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
PUERTO RICO
BASIC DATA
Area: 8,959 sq.
km.
Population: 3,292,000 (1988).
Capital:San Juan.
Languages: Spanish, English.
Religion: Christianity (85% Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 75 (1988) GDP per capita: US$5,653 (1989).
Currency: United States dollar.
The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, which was ceded by Spain to the United States of America in 1898, has since 1952 been a state in "free association" with the USA and has a Resident Commissioner who is a non-voting member of the US House of Representatives.
Executive power on the island is exercised by an elected Governor (currently Rafael Hernández Colon) assisted by an appointed Cabinet.
Legislative power is vested in the bicameral Legislative Assembly.
POLITICS
In January Antonio J. Colorado, a former Administrator of the Economic Development Administration and a major campaigner in the lobbying to retain Section 936 [see below], was appointed Secretary of State, the leader of the Cabinet.
A formal application for observer status at meetings of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) was made on April 6, 1990 and approved at the heads of government meeting in Kingston, Jamaica, in July [see p. 37648].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 3.6% (1989)
Gross national product US$20,051 m. (1989)
Inflation rate 3.4% (1989)
Principal trading partners USA, Dominican Republic, Japan
Governor Rafael Hernández Colón, in presenting on Feb. 20, 1990, his state of the Commonwealth address and the budget for the fiscal year 1990-91, announced the sale of the state-owned telephone company to finance two trust funds providing money for education and for development.
It was hoped that the sale would raise US$2,000 million.
The move was condemned by the trade unions as endangering jobs and led to a one-day general strike on March 28.
Hernández Colón stated that the budget deficit for 1990 was an estimated US$200 million.
This had been caused in part by the introduction of tax reforms without measures to take account of the loss in revenue.
Further implementation of the tax reforms were delayed, against the wishes of many members of the ruling Popular Democratic Party (Partido Popular Democrático — PPD) in the legislature.
In April 1990 the US Congressional Budget Office published a report which claimed that adoption of statehood could cost Puerto Rico 100,000 jobs and 73 per cent of its investment from US companies by the end of the decade, through the loss of Puerto Rico's generous tax incentives under Section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code.
On the other hand, as a state the island would be entitled to receive US$3,600 million annually in federal funds for Medicare and other social welfare programmes.
In mid-1990 it was announced that June 4, 1991, had been chosen as the date for the referendum on future constitutional status.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS AND ISSUES
CARICOM
BASIC DATA
The Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM) was formed by the Treaty of Chaguaramas in 1973 as a movement towards unity in the Caribbean; it replaced the Caribbean Free Trade Association, founded in 1965.
Members: Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Montserrat, St Christopher and Nevis, St Lucia, St Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago.
Associate Members: British Virgin Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands.
Observers: Dominican Republic, Haiti, Mexico, Puerto Rico, Surinam, Venezuela.
In November 1989 a three-year Export Development Project was launched to help encourage trade within the region, including with non-CARICOM countries, by sponsoring trade fairs, providing marketing information and helping trade development.
Trade within CARICOM increased by 20 per cent during 1989 to reach a total value of US$436,000,000, aided by the gradual dismantling of trade barriers, particularly in Trinidad and Tobago.
OECS
The heads of government of the Organization of East Caribbean States (OECS, an associate institution of CARICOM) met in Dominica at the end of May 1990.
Decisions included further study of proposals for political union between the islands (in particular between Dominica, Grenada, St Lucia and St Vincent and the Grenadines; the other three OECS member states were Antigua and Barbuda, Montserrat and St Christopher and Nevis).
Travel requirements between member states were eased in 1990.
The OECS also agreed to investigate closer economic ties with the French overseas departments of Martinique and Guadeloupe.
At a further ministerial meeting in August and after a heads of government meeting in Grenada in September, the four Windward islands agreed to create a regional constituent assembly to discuss unity plans and to prepare for a referendum to be held in mid-1991.
CBI
A United States bill prolonging the provisions of the US aid and development programme known as the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI) which had been given legislative expression in the Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act of 1983 [see pp. 31565-71; 32622; 33849-50]was passed by President Bush on Aug. 20, 1990.
The measures, known as CBI II, made permanent the legislation to allow certain products duty-free into the USA.
However, intensive lobbying from domestic US interests ensured that the bill excluded most of the main products of the Caribbean region, severely limiting its effectiveness.
Textiles were excluded and there was no significant increases in the sugar quota to make up for cuts in recent years.
EUROPE
GERMANY
GERMAN UNIFICATION
Within a year of the departure in October 1989 of Erich Honecker as its head of state, the German Democratic Republic (East Germany or GDR) ceased to exist, following unification with the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany or FRG), on Oct. 3, 1990 [see pp. 37761-63].
Demonstrations began in Leipzig, Berlin and other East German cities in the autumn of 1989 amid the process of democratization which was sweeping through Eastern Europe on the heels of Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev's glasnost and perestroika in the Soviet Union.
Because of the country's particular situation, however, the eventual outcome in the GDR was likely to diverge from the rest of the region.
In this Special Reference Feature a chronology outlines the key events leading to unification and cross refers to articles in the monthly News Digest section where developments have been given extensive coverage.
Longer term developments in East Germany up to October 1990 are covered here.
Data is given on key issues such as the status of Berlin.
Pages 37831-35 include extracts from the key treaties on unification.
May 7.
Protests at rigging of GDR local elections [p. 36665].
August-September.
Over 30,000 East Germans leave for the West via Hungary (especially after the lifting of border exit restrictions there on Sept. 11) and via the West German embassies in Prague and Warsaw [pp. 36894-95].
Sept. 19.
New Forum formed [p. 36895].
Oct. 7.
Gorbachev attends ceremony to mark 40th anniversary of establishment of GDR [p. 36962].
Oct. 9.
The weekly demonstration in Leipzig by 50,000 people is not broken up by troops despite police violence in Berlin the previous day [ibid.].
Oct. 18.
Successive massive pro-democracy demonstrations prompt the resignation of Erich Honecker after 18 years in power.
Egon Krenz replaces him [pp. 36961-63].
Nov. 8.
New Forum legalized [pp. 37024-25].
Nov. 9.
Travel restrictions are abolished and over 2,000,000 East Germans flood through the Berlin Wall over the next two days [pp. 37024-25].
Nov. 17.
In a new government led by Hans Modrow, in place of Krenz, nearly half the members are non-communists [pp. 37024-26].
Nov. 28.
West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl proposes a German confederation [p. 37025-26].
Dec. 1.
Volkskammer abolishes the SED's constitutionally guaranteed leading role [p. 37107].
Dec. 6.
Krenz resigns as SED party leader and head of state [pp. 37107-09].
Dec. 7.
The first of 16 sessions of round table talks is held [p. 37108].
Jan. 15.
Protesters ransack "Stasi" headquarters; government announces programme for a "transition to an efficient market economy" [p. 37171].
Jan. 28.
Parties across the political spectrum agree to form a government of national responsibility which takes office on Feb. 5 still led by Modrow [pp. 37170-72; 37260].
Feb. 6.
Faced with continuing East German arrivals Kohl calls for immediate negotiations on economic and monetary union [p. 37259].
Feb. 13.
The four wartime allies and two Germanies agree to hold talks on the security implications of unification [pp. 37259-61].
March 18.
The Christian Democrats and their allies win a landslide victory in the GDR's first free and secret general election [pp. 37300-03].
April 12.
Lothar de Maizière of the CDU is sworn in at the head of a grand coalition government [pp. 37378-80].
May 5.
First round of two-plus-four talks in Bonn [p. 37466-67].
May 6.
Local elections in the GDR [p. 37267].
May 18.
The two Germanies sign a state treaty on economic, monetary and social union [pp. 37466-67; 37831].
June 21.
Both German parliaments approve a resolution recognising the inviolability of the Oder-Neisse border with Poland [p. 37536].
June 22.
Second round of two-plus-four talks in Berlin [p. 37535].
July 1.
Economic and monetary union is introduced provoking protests as economic conditions deteriorate [p. 37660].
July 15-16.
Gorbachev and Kohl, after talks in Stavropol, reach agreement that a united Germany is free to join whichever bloc it wishes, allowing agreement on external aspects of unification at the third round of two-plus-four talks on July 17 in Paris, which were also attended by the Polish Foreign Minister [p. 37659].
Aug. 31.
The unification treaty is signed after growing pressure on de Maizière's Cabinet leads the SPD to leave the government [pp. 37659-61; 37832-33].
Sept. 12.
The Treaty on the Final Settlement with respect to Germany is signed at the fourth and final two-plus-four session in Moscow [pp. 37717-18; 37834].
Sept. 13.
Signature of 20-year German-Soviet co-operation treaty [pp. 37717-18; 37835].
Oct. 3.
Unification [pp. 37761-63].
West East Combined Area (sq km) 248,709 108,333 357,041 Population (million) 62,679,035 16,433,796 79,112,831* Population (per sq km , 1989) 247 154 219 Life expectancy (years 1988) Males 72 69 71 Females 78 75 77 GDP growth (1989) 4% 2.3%+ GDP per head (1989, US$) 19,300 4,500 16,200 1990 projections GNP (DM000 million) 2,440 270 2,710 Exports (US$000 million)-— 406 Imports (US$000 million)-— 314 Foreign trade balance (US$000 million)-— +92 Current account balance (US$000 million)— +60 *343,854 East Germans settled in West Germany in 1989 as compared with 39,832 in 1988 [see pp. 37677; 37170; 36627].
Many of those leaving were professionals and included 4,000 middle-ranking medical specialists and 1,500 doctors and dentists.
+The GDR's lowest growth rate in the decade, 1.7 percentage points less than planned.
GDP fell by 3 per cent in the final quarter of the year.
Only 70 state enterprises exceeded their planned profit target in the year.
Population figures from Federal Statistical Office, Wiesbaden. 1990 projections as published in the Financial Times of Oct. 29, 1990.
EVENTS LEADING TO GERMAN UNIFICATION
1989
1990
Statistics on Germany
Fate of political organizations of old regime
Socialist Unity Party (SED).
Renamed the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS) in February 1990 [see pp. 37260-61], the party's membership fell from 2,300,000 in early 1989 to 1,400,000 by January 1990 and to 350,500 by June 1990.
As required in May 1990 [see p. 37467], the PDS submitted to the government a report on the party's assets on July 23.
After the expropriation of funds amounting to 3,200,000 Ostmark and DM75,300,000, the party's assets totalled 3,100 million Ostmark (approximately US$1,850 million).
Since the beginning of 1990 PDS assets had been reduced by 65.6 per cent.
On Oct. 30 the party declared its assets currently to be worth DM4,000 million as result of increases in property values.
Over 150 police raided the PDS headquarters without a search warrant early on Oct. 18-19 to investigate allegations that the party had transferred DM107,000,000 to accounts belonging to a Soviet company, Putnik, in Norway and the Netherlands without the required authorization.
On Oct. 26 a further search was made and Wolfgang Pöhl, the party treasurer, and another party official were arrested the same day under suspicion of embezzling party funds.
Pöhl, who resigned his post shortly before his arrest, admitted that he had transferred the money "to save PDS assets from likely expropriation" .
Minor parties of National Front.
Four parties had previously collaborated with the SED within the National Front:(i) the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) which merged with the West German CDU on Oct. 1 [see p. 37761];(ii) the Democratic Farmers' Party of Germany (DBD), whose chair, Günther Maleuda, resigned on June 25 and was temporarily replaced by Ulrich Junghanns pending a merger with the CDU;(iii) the Liberal Democratic Party of Germany (LDPD), which renamed itself the Liberal Democratic Party and joined the new League of Free Democrats in February 1990 and merged with the West German FDP in August [see p. 37661]; and (iv) the National Democratic Party of Germany (NDPD) which joined the League of Free Democrats in March [see pp. 37260; 37302].
Confederation of Free Trade Unions (Freier Deutscher Gewerkschaftsbund — FDGB).
At a congress on Jan. 31, 1990, the FDGB again elected new leadership [see p. 37024 for initial replacement of Harry Tisch as FDGB chair].
It voted on May 9, 1990, to dissolve itself.
SDP changes
At an extraordinary conference in Halle on June 9, 1990, the Social Democratic Party (SPD), which had been re-formed in October 1989 [see p. 36962], elected Wolfgang Thierse as chair.
Thierse replaced Markus Meckel, the then Foreign Minister, who had been standing in since the March resignation of Ibrahim Böhme [see p. 37302].
The East and West German SPD were merged on Sept. 27-28 [see p. 37718].
Electoral law for December 1990 elections
On Oct. 5 the Bundestag (lower house of German parliament) approved a new electoral law, as did the Bundesrat (upper house) on Oct. 8.
The change became necessary when the Federal Constitutional Court ruled on Sept. 30 that an agreement reached in August 1990 [see p. 37661]was unconstitutional.
The Court found that the application of a 5 per cent hurdle throughout Germany (below which parties could not win representation) would disadvantage smaller parties.
Parties from the former GDR with no western sister party would have had to win 23 per cent of the vote in the five eastern Länder to win representation.
The new law provided for separate 5 per cent hurdles in the territories of the former GDR and FRG in the Dec. 2, 1990, general election, after which existing FRG law would apply.
The Times of Oct. 6 noted that in the old FRG a party would have to win 2,250,000 votes to win representation as compared with only 550,000 in the former GDR where the electorate was one quarter the size of that in the old FRG.
The Constitutional Court ruled on Oct. 31 that foreigners could not vote in local elections since the Basic Law recognised only "members of the German people" as German citizens.
The ruling countered moves in both Hamburg and Schleswig-Holstein to enfranchise certain categories of foreigners in local elections.
Similar regulations had allowed foreigners to vote in the five eastern Länder.
[See p. 37676 for similar earlier ruling.]
Investigations into electoral fraud under old regime
On Jan. 23, 1990, investigative proceedings were begun into 11 instances of suspected election fraud at the May 1989 local elections [see p. 36665].
Legal proceedings were opened against various mayors including the reformist mayor of Dresden, Wolfgang Berghofer, although Berghofer himself was not personally suspected of election manipulation (in May he went to work for the office planning and construction company Häussler in Stuttgart).
On July 20 the former mayor of East Berlin, Eberhard Krack, and 12 associates were indicted for electoral fraud.
In a statement on Feb. 14 Honecker admitted his "political responsibility" for the "falsification of the election return of May 7, 1989" and on Feb. 20 Krenz conceded that he also shared political responsibility in his position as chair of the central electoral commission.
Despite the rigging admissions and in disregard of a call from the round table discussions (set up in December 1989 — see p. 37108), the Council of State decided on Feb. 14 that it would not annul the election results for fear of the "far reaching effects" of such a move.
Withdrawal of history books — Public holiday and town name changes
In December 1989 East German schools withdrew school history books which glorified now disgraced former leaders.
The Education Ministry announced on Feb. 7, 1990, that Russian would no longer be obligatory in schools.
The mandatory study of Marxism-Leninism at university was also dropped.
In 1990 May Day was simply celebrated as a public holiday and on June 17 the anniversary of the 1953 uprising was celebrated for the first time.
After unification Oct. 3 replaced June 17 as a national holiday.
In a referendum on April 22 inhabitants of Karl-Marx-Stadt voted to revert to the town's former name of Chemnitz.
Media reforms
By late 1989, as state control of the media was dismantled, newspapers were adopting a more critical and aggressively investigative style, for instance in uncovering corruption among former leaders.
A New Forum weekly newspaper, Die Andere ( "The Other One" ), was first published in late January 1990 with West German funding but folded in early March.
The independent East German Die Andere Leipziger Zeitung started publishing on Feb. 1.
Wolfgang Spickermann on Nov. 16, 1989, became the new chief editor of the already existing Neues Deutschland [see also p. 37025]which on Dec. 18 appeared in a redesigned form, the words "socialist daily newspaper" replacing "central organ of the Socialist Unity Party" .
By May 1990 circulation had fallen to 450,000 from a peak of 1,000,000.
In all the SED relinquished ownership of 15 newspaper publishing houses.
Western publishing houses sought to enter the East German market.
By mid-1990 the West German mass circulation Bildzeitung sold around 1,000,000 copies daily and nearly 300 West German daily and weekly publications were sold in East Germany.
The chief West German companies investing in East German publishing were Axel Springer, Bauer, Burda and Grüner & Jahr.
Dissolution of "Stasi" — Other security developments
Although some progress had been made by January 1990 in dissolving the Ministry for State Security (the "Stasi" )[see pp. 37107-08; 37170], the extent to which prominent people had been involved with the Stasi remained a contentious issue [ibid.].
In May New Forum demanded that people be given access to their personal files, but Peter-Michael Diestel, then Internal Affairs Minister, said on May 16 that he opposed such a move as he did not want to spread "a denunciatory atmosphere" in society again.
In late May a new government commission on the further dissolution of the Stasi was set up, chaired by Diestel.
His position was itself controversial since he argued that former Stasi members should be integrated into the police force and the Interior Ministry to avoid their becoming a potential terrorist threat.
He nevertheless continued to retain the confidence of de Maizière.
[For Diestel's resignation from the German Social Union (DSU) in July and subsequent membership of CDU see p. 37661.]
On May 3, 1990, Gen. Peter Koch, who had been appointed in December 1989 to oversee the Stasi's dissolution, committed suicide.
Allegations that he had prevaricated in his duties and had illegally appropriated DM40,000 had led to his dismissal in January.
On July 26 Erich Mielke, 82, the former Minister for State Security, was arrested and charged with preparing internment camps for dissidents and harbouring terrorists [see below].
Mielke had been arrested in December 1989 [see p. 37107]but then released on health grounds.
His rearrest was upon the recommendation of an independent doctors' commission.
Both Mielke and Tisch (who was under investigation for abuse of confidence and embezzlement and was formally arrested on July 20 for disloyalty detrimental to national property) were moved to a West Berlin prison hospital on Oct. 4.
On Aug. 15, 1990, Martin Kirchner, general secretary of the CDU, was suspended from office as a result of allegations that he had been one of the most senior paid informers of the Stasi.
In early January 1990 the West German magazine Der Spiegel claimed that the East German government had since the mid-1970s trained members of the West German Communist Party (DKP) to carry out destabilizing terrorist attacks in West Germany.
West German security sources claimed on March 8 that the Soviet State Security Committee (KGB) was hoping to recruit new members among dismissed Stasi informers.
It was also claimed that files were being handed to the Soviet authorities thus countering efforts by a citizen's committee to supervise the dismantling of the Stasi.
Arrests of West German extremists in East Germany
During June 1990 East German police arrested nine people suspected of extremist attacks in West Germany on behalf of the Red Army Faction (RAF).
On June 21 the West German police announced that they had started investigations into allegations that Honecker and Mielke had actively colluded in offering RAF activists refuge in East Germany.
Susanne Albrecht, wanted for the 1977 murder of the banker Jürgen Ponto [see pp. 28917-18], and Inge Viett, wanted for the 1974 murder of the judge Günter von Drenkmann [see p. 27019], were respectively arrested on June 6 and June 12, 1990, in East Berlin.
On June 15 Monika Helbing, Ekkehard Freiherr von Seckendorff-Gudent, Werner Lotze and Christine Dümlein (all wanted in connection with other attacks) were also held, as was Sigrid Sternebeck on June 16.
On June 18 Silke Maier-Witt (wanted in connection with the 1977 murder of the industry federation leader Hanns-Martin Schleyer — ibid.) and Henning Beer (wanted after a bomb attack in Ramstein in 1981) were arrested in Neubrandenburg.
During July Albrecht, Beer, Lotze, Maier-Witt, Sternebeck and Viett were all handed over to the West German authorities; Seckendorff-Gudent was released after allegations against him were dropped.
Espionage
Unification brought a spate of arrests for espionage.
Gabriella Gast, 47, who had worked for the Federal Counterintelligence Agency (Bundesnachrichtendienst — BND) since 1973 and had access to the weekly intelligence report sent to Kohl, was arrested as announced on Oct. 2.
Werner Grossmann, the former East German foreign intelligence chief was arrested on Oct. 3.
(In late 1990 Grossmann had replaced Markus Wolf, whose whereabouts were unknown and for whom an arrest warrant had been issued.)
On Oct. 6 Klaus Kuron, 54, who had worked since 1962 for the Office for the Protection of the Constitution (Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz — BfV), gave himself up to the authorities and was formally arrested shortly afterwards.
He admitted receiving a total of DM500,000 since he became a double agent in 1982.
On Oct. 10 Kuron's two superiors at the BfV, Stefan E., 36, and Günther N., 54, were arrested.
At least 13 other arrests were made as a result of Kuron's arrest.
On Oct. 19 Col. Joachim Krase, the former deputy chief of the military counterintelligence Service (Militärischer Abschirmdienst — MAD) was also confirmed as a Stasi agent.
The Guardian on Oct. 23 reported that (FRG) security services now believed that a dirty tricks campaign against Lt.-Gen.
Günter Kiessling in 1983, which led to his dismissal and later his reinstatement [see pp. 32927-28; 33239], had been engineered largely by the MAD.
Krase, who was sacked by the Defence Ministry in 1984 for incompetence over the affair and died in 1988, had prepared the MAD reports which led the then Defence Minister Manfred Wörner to dismiss Kiessling.
After unification Konrad Porzner, a longstanding SPD member of the Bundestag, was appointed head of the BND.
He replaced Hans-Georg Wieck, a diplomat, who had led the BND since 1985.
A general amnesty for the 4,000-5,000 Stasi spies still thought to be active in West Germany, originally approved by the West German Cabinet on Aug. 31 and then delayed, had not taken place as of late October 1990.
A general amnesty in East Germany had taken place on Dec. 6, 1989 [see p. 36963 for limited October 1989 amnesty].
Key espionage cases prior to unification are outlined below.
On Dec. 22, 1989, a senior West German official announced that 28 West German secret agents and 90 political prisoners (mostly imprisoned for trying to flee the country) had been released from East German prisons and sent to West Germany in exchange for the release of two former senior West German government secretaries, Elke Falk [see p. 36046]and Margret Hocke, who had "spied for love" , and two East German agents.
Tip-offs by former Stasi officers who had fled to West Germany led to a spate of arrests during 1990.
Those sentenced for espionage included three people arrested in March 1989 and sentenced on Feb. 15, 1990, for computer hacking for the Soviet KGB.
They were given suspended prison sentences of up to two years on the grounds that they had caused no serious damage.
Honecker — Corruption investigations
Honecker (arrested in December but released on Jan. 4, 1990 — see p. 37107) was moved to a Berlin prison on Jan. 29 upon his release from hospital [see p. 37172].
He was then taken in by a Lutheran pastor in Lobetal north of Berlin but moved to a government guest house in late March because of local opposition to his presence.
He was hospitalized again on April 3 in a Soviet military hospital outside Berlin.
On Feb. 26 the Chief Prosecutor announced that charges of diversion of public funds against Honecker were being dropped since he had not had access to an account holding money paid by West Germany to buy the freedom of East German political prisoners.
Access to this account was only available to Alexander Schalck-Golodkowski, former Secretary of State at the Foreign Trade Ministry [see also pp. 37107; 37172].
(On July 31 Diestel announced that the freedom of 33,000 East German political prisoners had been brought by West Germany since 1964 initially at a price of around DM40,000 each and since the late 1970s at a price of DM95,847.)
On March 26 the state prosecutor announced that charges of treason against Honecker would not be brought for lack of evidence but that he would face lesser charges of corruption and abuse of power.
Treason charges against former politburo members Mielke [see also above], Günter Mittag and Joachim Herrmann would also be dropped.
The official East German news agency ADN reported on June 29, 1990, that the state prosecutor had laid charges of murder against Honecker in connection with the "shoot-to-kill" policy adopted toward escape attempts to the West during his period in office.
On Aug. 10 the state prosecutor said that investigative proceedings against Honecker were being extended to include homicide and grievous bodily harm in connection with this policy.
Investigations into police violence at October 1989 demonstrations
As a result of the violent suppression of protests in Berlin on Oct. 7-8, 1998, a commission of inquiry had by March 9, 1990, brought charges against 165 people for wrongful imprisonment, deliberate bodily harm or insult.
[See p. 36963 for security forces' admission that they had "exceeded their authority" .]
The decision to countermand Honecker's order to use any necessary force to suppress the crucial demonstration in Leipzig on Oct. 9 was initially credited to Egon Krenz, who succeeded Honecker as SED party leader on Oct. 18 [see p. 36962].
However, Kurt Masur, the conductor of the Leipzig Gewandhaus orchestra and a leading organizer of the demonstrations there, in November attributed the avoidance of violence to a last-minute appeal by local communists and church leaders.
In an interview published in three West European newspapers on Dec. 14, Willy Brandt, the former West German Chancellor who was in Moscow immediately before Honecker was deposed, maintained that a "bloodbath" had been prevented by Soviet Army officers, working within the senior echelons of the East German National People's Army (NVA).
Armed forces
On Oct. 3 the NVA was dissolved and a new grouping within the Bundeswehr, the Bundeswehr (Ost), was established, commanded by Lt.-Gen.
Jörg Schönbohm [see p. 37761].
Before unification the political changes had already prompted radical changes within the NVA.
On Nov. 18, 1989, it had been announced that the functions of the SED and the NVA would be split, although the NVA would retain political officers.
In May 1990 border troops were transferred from the Defence to the Interior Ministry.
There were also wide-ranging personnel changes in the upper echelons of the armed forces and the police.
During December 1989 new heads were appointed to the NVA, the Navy and the Air Force.
On Dec. 29 Manfred Grätz was appointed Chief of General Staff.
The political and structural changes in society and the NVA affected troop morale.
By Oct. 3 of the remaining 90,000 soldiers in the NVA some 50,000 would join the Bundeswehr of the FRG (the reduction reflecting Germany's commitment to reduce its overall troop numbers to 370,000 — see pp. 37659).
[For withdrawal of Soviet troops from East Germany and SED "security 2000" proposals in late 1989 see p. 37225; for April 1990 announcement of defence cuts see p. 37379.]
Investigations into mass graves of Stalinist victims
In addition to mass graves alleged to contain the bodies of prisoners from Soviet secret service (NKVD) internment camps discovered in March 1990 [see p. 37302], further graves were discovered in April, July and September.
An official investigation into the issue was opened by the state prosecutor on April 2.
According to a report by the Aug. 13 Working Group published on June 14 around 70,000 people died in internment camps run by the NKVD in Eastern Germany in 1945-50.
The Group said that a further 20,000 died as a result of their internment out of an overall total of 150,000 NKVD prisoners.
In all the Group estimated that 300,000 people had served prison sentences of two or more years in East Germany since 1945.
Human rights
With the fall of the Honecker government many former dissidents were rehabilitated including philosopher Rudolf Bahro, publisher Walter Janka and former SED party members Robert Havemann, Rudolf Herrnstadt and Lex Ende.
In January 1990 a Human Rights League was set up, basing itself on the League for Human Rights established in 1922 and banned by the Nazis in 1933.
On March 30 a branch of the human rights organization Amnesty International was set up in East Berlin.
East European migrants in East Germany — Growing racism
Anti-foreigner sentiment was expressed in riots and demonstrations in the spring.
There were 180,000 guestworkers in East Germany including 40,000 Vietnamese as well as Mozambicans and Cubans; 40,000 North Koreans had been recalled by their government when demonstrations threatened the old regime.
Furthermore, over 50,000 East Europeans (mostly from Romania) arrived in East Berlin during May 1990 in advance of the introduction of German economic and monetary union on July 1.
According to the Washington Post of Oct. 21 the number of guestworkers living in the former GDR had gone down to 85,000 and the German government was offering US$2,000 and a free flight home if they would leave.
On April 20, 1990, for the first time in East Germany, the anniversary of Hitler's birth was celebrated by right-wing groups in East Berlin's Alexanderplatz.
Jewish cemeteries were also defaced on several occasions.
On Oct. 20, 300-500 neo-Nazis held a rally in Dresden.
Relations with Israel — World Jewish Congress
In the past the GDR had never established diplomatic relations with Israel, partly because the regime refused to admit that the GDR was responsible for war crimes or in any way a successor to the Third Reich.
In December 1989 the then Foreign Minister, Oskar Fischer, expressed his government's desire to establish relations at a meeting with the chair of the Berlin Jewish community.
On Jan. 28, 1990, the then State Secretary for Church Affairs, Kurt Löffler, made the first visit to Israel by an East German government official.
In April 1990 the newly elected Volkskammer (unicameral parliament) recognised joint responsibility for the holocaust [see p. 37379].
In June de Maizière said that East Germany was prepared to negotiate on material compensation for Nazi war crimes.
On May 6-8, 1990, the World Jewish Congress met on German soil for first time since its foundation in 1936.
After the meeting in West Berlin delegates visited the Wannsee villa (in a West Berlin suburb) where on Jan. 20, 1942, the Nazis had worked out their "final solution" for the extermination of the Jews.
GDR trade performance prior to unification
East German export deficits to other Comecon members reached 275,000,000 transferable roubles by the end of 1989.
In 1989 exports to Western countries rose by 9.5 per cent as against 1988, but there was a deficit of approximately US$1,000 million because of a 6.6 per cent increase in imports.
In the first quarter of 1990 industrial production fell by 4.7 per cent compared with the same period in 1989 while agricultural production fell by 14 per cent.
Treuhandanstalt
By late October 1990 200 of the 8,000 state-owned enterprises in the former GDR had been privatized by the Treuhandanstalt, to which the privatization process had been entrusted [see pp. 37536; 37660].
A further 300 would be privatized by the end of 1990 and 1,500 more by the end of 1991; many others would be wound up.
The largest investment in East Germany was being made by Volkswagen AG, which planned to invest DM5,000 million over four years by expanding through its own subsidiaries.
Mercedes-Benz, the vehicle manufacturing arm of Daimler-Benz AG, announced on Oct. 11 that it was to invest between DM2,000 million and DM3,000 million over 2-3 years.
In order to avoid potential debt and environmental liabilities by association with former GDR companies, Mercedes-Benz was buying a 25 per cent share in and management control of LKW-Montagsgesellschaft, a new company being set up by Treuhandanstalt.
The biggest of the East German firms already wound up by late October 1990 was the Dresden-based Pentacom, which had employed 5,600 mostly skilled workers to produce the hard-currency-earning Praktica camera, but was unable to survive commercially without state subsidies.
Energy and environment
In addition to industrial pollution especially from the chemicals industry, the state of the East German nuclear energy industry was a source of particular concern during 1990.
On Nov. 25, 1989, a new block at the Greifswald nuclear power station was closed down before it began operations and in May 1990 the entire station was temporarily closed on safety grounds.
In January 1990 it was disclosed that in 1976 a meltdown at Greifswald had only narrowly been averted.
On Oct. 21 it was announced that the last of the nuclear reactors at Greifswald would be shut down by mid-December 1990, three other reactors there having already been closed during 1990.
Two other reactors at the site built to higher standards would be closed down in 1991 [see also p. 37659].
Pollution from brown coal, the country's other major power source, was acute.
The country had the highest sulphur dioxide emission per head of population in Europe [see p. 36792]and according to the Financial Times of Feb. 21, 1990, one power station burning brown coal in Cottbus produced more pollution annually than Norway and Denmark together.
An Energy Saving Plan published in April 1990 aimed to reduce brown coal consumption by over one-third and to equip power stations with anti-pollutant technology.
In December West Germany offered to contribute DM1,000 million towards the cost of 17 environmental projects (six of which had already been agreed in July 1989) and to find jobs for 65,000 workers in seriously polluting factories which had to be shut down.
In February 1990 a treaty was signed between Denmark and East Germany aimed at combating oil and chemical pollution of the Baltic.
An East Berlin section of the international environmental organization, Greenpeace, was founded in February.
On Oct. 8 Germany signed a treaty with Czechoslovakia to clean up the river Elbe which rises in Czechoslovakia.
BERLIN
West Berliners' voting rights
On April 25, 1990, the three Western allies announced that they had agreed to allow West Berliners to vote in West German elections for the first time since 1949 (hitherto the West Berlin city legislature had sent 22 non-voting delegates to the Bundestag and had similar status within the Bundesrat).
On May 24 the Bundestag approved legislation to this effect.
West Berlin delegates first exercised their full voting rights in the Bundestag in the vote approving the state treaty on economic and monetary union [see pp. 37535-36].
The first joint meeting of the East Berlin city government and the West Berlin Senate took place on June 12, 1990, in the East Berlin town hall.
Elections in Berlin as a whole would take place on Dec. 2, 1990, on the same day as the general election.
Direct German flights between East and West
In August 1989 the first direct flight by a German national carrier between East and West Germany (from Frankfurt/Main to Leipzig) was made after the Four Powers decided in July to allow the West German airline Lufthansa to make direct commercial flights on a trial basis.
In mid-February 1990 the Powers announced that German flights to Berlin would also be allowed and on Aug. 5 a plane made the first Lufthansa flight to a Berlin airport since 1945 landing at Schönefeld airport (on the outskirts of East Berlin).
From Oct. 28, for the first time in 45 years, Lufthansa began operating a regular service out of(West Berlin's) Tegel airport with nearly 400 flights a week.
[See p. 36626 for extension of flying rights to West Berlin to French, UK and US airlines other than the three carriers which until then had held sole operating rights.]
On Jan. 19, 1990, the East German airline Interflug and Lufthansa announced a co-operation agreement to improve services, to build a new airport in Berlin by 2000, to found a joint charter company and to co-operate on catering and software training.
However, in August the West German federal cartel office blocked plans by Lufthansa to acquire control of passenger and freight services at Schönefeld airport and on Oct. 16 Lufthansa announced that it would drop the bid.
EUROPE
GERMANY
TREATY ON ECONOMIC AND MONETARY UNION
Treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany [FRG]and the German Democratic Republic [GDR]establishing a
Monetary, Economic and Social Union
Signed on May 18, 1990 see pp. 37466-67].
Chapter I. Basic principles
Article 1.
Subject of the treaty.
(1) The contracting parties shall establish a monetary, economic and social union.
(2) Starting on July 1, 1990, the contracting parties shall constitute a monetary union comprising a unified currency area and with the Deutsche Mark as the common currency.
The Deutsche Bundesbank shall be the central bank in this currency area…
(3) The basis of the economic union shall be the social market economy as the common economic system of the two contracting parties.
It shall be determined particularly by private ownership, competition, free pricing and, as a basic principle, complete freedom of movement of labour, capital, goods and services; this shall not preclude the legal admission of special forms of ownership, providing for the participation of public authorities or other legal entities in trade and commerce as long as private legal entities are not subject to discrimination.
It shall take into account the requirements of environmental protection.
(4) The social union together with the monetary and economic union shall form one entity.
It shall be characterized in particular by a system of labour law that corresponds to the social market economy and a comprehensive system of social security based on merit and social justice.
Article 2.
Principles (1) The contracting parties are committed to a free, democratic federal and social basic order governed by the rule of law.
To ensure the rights laid down in or following from this treaty, they shall especially guarantee freedom of contract, freedom to exercise a trade, freedom of establishment and occupation, and freedom of movement of Germans in the entire currency area, freedom to form associations to safeguard and enhance working and economic conditions and…ownership of land and means of production by private investors…
Chapter II.
Provisions concerning monetary union
Article 10.
Prerequisites and principles.
(1) Through the establishment of a monetary union between the contracting parties, the Deutsche Mark shall be the means of payment, unit of account and means of deposit in the entire currency area.
To this end, the monetary responsibility of the Deutsche Bundesbank as the sole issuing bank for this currency shall be extended to the entire currency area.
The issuance of coin shall be the exclusive right of the FRG.
(2) Enjoyment of the advantages of monetary union presupposes a stable monetary value for the economy of the GDR, while currency stability must be maintained in the FRG.
The contracting parties shall therefore choose conversion modalities which do not cause any inflationary tendencies in the entire area of the monetary union and which at the same time increase the competitiveness of enterprises in the GDR.
(3) The Deutsche Bundesbank,…independent of instructions from the governments of the contracting parties, shall regulate the circulation of money and credit supply in the entire currency area with the aim of safeguarding the currency.
(4) Monetary control presupposes that the GDR establishes a free-market credit system.
This shall include a system of commercial banks operating according to private-sector principles, with competing private, co-operative and public-law banks, as well a free money and a free capital market and non-regulated interest-rate fixing on financial markets.
(5) To achieve the aims described in paragraphs 1 to 4 above, the contracting parties shall,…agree on the following principles for monetary union:
— With effect from July 1, 1990, the Deutsche Mark shall be introduced as currency in the GDR.
The banknotes issued by the Deutsche Bundesbank…shall be sole legal tender form July 1, 1990.
— Wages, salaries, grants, pensions, rents and leases as well as other recurring payments shall be converted at a rate of one to one.
— All other claims and liabilities denominated in Mark of the GDR shall be converted to Deutsche Mark at the rate of two to one.
— The conversion of bank notes and coin denominated in Mark of the GDR shall only be possible for persons or agencies domiciled in the GDR via accounts with financial institutions in the GDR into which the cash amounts to be converted may be paid.
— Deposits with financial institutions held by individuals domiciled in the GDR shall be converted upon application at a rate of one to one up to certain limits, there being a differentiation according to the age of the beneficiaries…
Chapter III.
Provisions concerning economic union
Article 11.
Economic policy foundations (1) The GDR shall ensure that is economic and financial policy measures are in harmony with the social market system.
Such measures shall be introduced in such a way that…they are at the same time conducive to price stability, a high level of employment and foreign trade equilibrium, and thus steady and adequate economic growth.
(2) The GDR shall create the basic conditions for the development of market forces and private initiative in order to promote structural change, the creation of modern jobs, a broad basis of small and medium-sized companies and liberal professions, as well as environmental protection…
(3) The GDR, taking into consideration the foreign trade relations that have evolved with the member countries of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance [Comecon], shall progressively bring its policy into line with the law and the economic policy goals of the European Communities…
Article 16.
Protection of the Environment.
The protection of human beings, animals and plants, soil, water, air, the climate and landscape as well as cultural and other material property against harmful environmental influences is a major objective of both contracting parties.
They shall pursue this objective on the basis of prevention, the polluter-pays principle, and co-operation…
Chapter IV.
Provisions concerning social union
Article 17.
Principles of Labour law.
In the GDR freedom of association, autonomy in collective bargaining, legislation relating to industrial action, corporate legal structure, codetermination at board level and protection against dismissal shall apply in line with the law of the FRG…
Article 18.
Principles of social insurance.
The GDR shall introduce a structured system of social insurance…
Article 19.
Unemployment insurance and employment promotion.
The GDR shall introduce a system of unemployment insurance…which shall be in line with the provisions of the Employment Promotion Act of the FRG.
Special importance shall be attached to an active labour market policy, such as vocational training and retraining.
Consideration shall be given to the interests of women and disabled persons…
Article 20.
Pension insurance.
The GDR shall introduce all necessary measures to adapt its pension law to the pension insurance law of the FRG, which is based on the principle of wage and contribution-related benefits…
Article 21.
Health Insurance.
The GDR shall introduce all necessary measures to adapt its health insurance law to that of the FRG…
[Chapter V concerned provisions relating to the budget and finance.].
(DM000,000) 1989 January-June 1990 FRG exports to GDR 8,100 7,860 GDR exports to FRG 7,200 3,925 *For 1988 trade figures see p. 36627.
Intra-German trade 1989-90*
UNIFICATION TREATY 
Treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic on the Establishment of
German Unity
Signed on Aug. 31, 1990 [see p. 37661].
The Federal Republic of Germany [FRG]and the German Democratic Republic [GDR],
Resolved to achieve in free self-determination the unity of Germany in peace and freedom as an equal partner in the community of nations,
Mindful of the desire of the people in both parts of Germany to live together in peace and freedom in a democratic and social federal state governed by the rule of law,
In grateful respect to those who peacefully helped freedom prevail and who have unswervingly adhered to the task of establishing German unity and are achieving it,
Aware of the continuity of German history and bearing in mind the special responsibility arising from our past for a democratic development in Germany committed to respect for human rights and to peace,
Seeking through German unity to contribute to the unification of Europe and to the building of a peaceful European order in which borders no longer divide and which ensures that all European nations can live together in a spirit of mutual trust,
Aware that the inviolability of frontiers and of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of all states in Europe within their frontiers constitutes a fundamental condition for peace,
Have agreed to conclude a Treaty on the Establishment of German Unity, containing the following provisions:
Chapter 1.
Effect of Accession
Article 1.
Länder. (1) Upon the accession of the GDR to the FRG in accordance with Article 23 of the Basic Law taking effect on Oct. 3, 1990, the Länder of Brandenburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt and Thuringia shall become Länder of the FRG…
(2) The 23 boroughs of Berlin shall form Land Berlin.
Article 2.
Capital city, Day of German Unity.
(1) The capital of Germany shall be Berlin.
The seat of the parliament and government shall be decided after the establishment of German unity.
(2) Oct. 3 shall be a public holiday known as the Day of German Unity.
Chapter II.
Basic Law
Article 3.
Entry into Force of the Basic Law.
Upon the accession taking effect, the Basic Law of the FRG…shall enter into force in the Länder of Brandenburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt and Thuringia and in that part of Land Berlin where it has not been valid to date, subject to the amendments arising from Article 4, unless otherwise provided in this Treaty.
Article 4.
Amendments to the Basic Law resulting from accession.
The Basic Law of the FRG shall be amended as follows:
1.
The preamble will be worded as follows: "Conscious of their responsibility before God and men, animated by the resolve to serve world peace as an equal partner in a united Europe, the German people have adopted, by virtue of their constituent power, this Basic Law.
The Germans in the Länder of Baden-Württemberg, Bavaria, Berlin, Brandenburg, Bremen, Hamburg, Hesse, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia, Rhineland-Palatinate, Saarland, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, Schleswig-Holstein and Thuringia have achieved the unity and freedom of Germany in free self-determination.
This Basic Law is thus valid for the entire German people."
2.
Article 23 [concerning the area of applicability of the Basic Law]will be rescinded.
3.
Article 51 (2)[concerning voting rights for the Länder in the Bundesrat]will be formulated as follows: "Each Land shall have at least three votes; Länder with more than 2,000,000 inhabitants shall have four, Länder with more than 6,000,000 inhabitants five, Länder with more than 7,000,000 inhabitants six votes." 
4.
The existing text of Article 135a [covering old liabilities]will become paragraph 1.
The following paragraph will be added after paragraph 1: "(2) Paragraph 1 above shall be applied to liabilities of the GDR or its legal entities as well as to liabilities of the Federation or other corporate bodies and institutions under public law which are connected with the transfer of properties of the GDR to the federation, Länder and communes (Gemeinden), and to liabilities arising from measures taken by the GDR or its legal entities." 
5.
The following new Article 143 shall be inserted in the Basic Law: "Article 143. (1) Law in the territory specified in Article 3 of the Unification Treaty may deviate from provisions of this Basic Law for a period not extending beyond Dec. 31, 1992…
Deviations must not violate Article 19 (2)[concerning restriction of basic rights]and must be compatible with the principles set out in Article 79 (3)[concerning amendment of the Basic Law].
(2) Deviations from sections II, VIII, VIIIa, IX, X and XI are permissible for a period not extending beyond Dec. 31, 1995. (3) Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2 above, Article 41 of the Unification Treaty and the rules for its implementation shall remain valid in so far as they provide for the irreversibility of interferences with property in the territory specified in Article 3 of the said treaty".
6.
Article 146 [concerning the duration of validity of the Basic Law]shall read as follows: "This Basic Law, which is valid for the entire German people following the achievement of the unity and freedom of Germany, shall cease to be in force on the day on which a constitution adopted by a free decision of the German people comes into force." 
Article 5.
Future amendments to the Constitution.
The governments of the two contracting parties recommend to the legislative bodies of the united Germany that within two years they should deal with the questions regarding amendments or additions to the Basic Law as raised in connection with German unification…
[Article 6 provided that Article 131 of the Basic Law — concerning the legal position of former members of the public service — should not "for the time being" apply to the former GDR.]
Article 7.
Financial system.
(1) The financial system of the FRG shall be extended to the territory specified in Article 3 unless otherwise provided in this treaty.
(2)…
The Land share of turnover throughout Germany shall be divided up into an eastern component and a western component in such a way that the average share of turnover tax per inhabitant in the Länder of Brandenburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt and Thuringia amounts in 1991 to 55 per cent in 1992 to 6O per cent in 1993 to 65 per cent in 1994 to 7O per cent of the average share of turnover tax per inhabitant in the Länder of Baden-Württemberg, Bavaria, Bremen, Hesse, Hamburg, Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia, Rhineland-Palatinate, Saarland and Schleswig-Holstein.
The share of the Land of Berlin shall be calculated in advance on the basis of the number of inhabitants.
The provisions contained in this paragraph shall be reviewed for 1993 in the light of the conditions obtaining at the time…
(5) Following the establishment of German unity the annual allocations from the German Unity Fund shall be distributed as follows:
1.
Eighty-five per cent in special assistance to the Länder Brandenburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt and Thuringia as well as to Land Berlin to cover their general financial requirements and divided up among these Länder in proportion to their number of inhabitants, excluding the inhabitants of Berlin (West), and
2.
Fifteen per cent to meet public requirements at a central level in the territory of the aforementioned Länder…
Chapter III.
Harmonization of law
[Article 8 concerned the extension of federal law to the former GDR; Article 9 concerned exceptions when law of the GDR is to remain valid, and Article 10 concerned the application of the law of the European Communities.]
Chapter IV.
International treaties and agreements
Article 11.
Treaties of the FRG.
The contracting parties proceed on the understanding that international treaties and agreements to which the FRG is a contracting party, including treaties establishing membership of international organizations or institutions, shall retain their validity and that the rights and obligations arising therefrom…shall also relate to the territory specified in Article 3 of this treaty…
Article 12.
Treaties of the GDR.
The contracting parties are agreed that, in connection with the establishment of German unity, international treaties of the GDR shall be discussed with the contracting partners concerned…
Chapter V. Public administration and the administration of justice
[Article 13 concerned the future status of administrative bodies and their institutions and the transfer of their competences to the Länder; Article 14 concerned joint institutions of the Länder; Article 15 concerned transitional arrangements for Land administration, and Article 16 concerned a transitional provision pending the constitution of a single Land government for Berlin.]
Article 17.
Rehabilitation.
The contracting parties affirm their intention to create without delay a legal foundation permitting the rehabilitation of all persons who have been victims of a politically motivated punitive measure or any court decision contrary to the rule of law or constitutional principles.
The rehabilitation of these victims of the iniquitous SED regime shall be accompanied by appropriate arrangements for compensation…
[Article 18 concerned continued validity of court decisions; Article 19 concerned continued validity of decisions taken by public administraive bodies; and Article 20 concerned legal status of persons in public service.
Chapter VI.
Public assets and debts
[Article 21 concerned the transfer to the federation, Länder or other lower level of government as appropriate of administrative assets of the GDR.
Administrative assets "primarily used for the purposes of the former Ministry of State Security/National Security Office" would "accrue to the Trust Agency unless they have already been given over to new social or public purposes since the above mentioned date" .
Article 22 contained similar provisions concerning financial assets.]
Article 23.
Debt arrangements.
(1) Upon accession taking effect, the total debts of the central budget of the GDR which have accumulated up to this date shall be taken over by a federal Special Fund without legal capacity, which will meet the obligations arising from debt servicing.
The Special Fund shall be empowered to raise loans:(i) to pay off debts of the Special Fund,(ii) to cover due interest and loan procurement costs,(iii) to purchase debt titles of the Special Fund for purposes of market cultivation.
(2) The Federal Minister of Finance shall administer the Special Fund.
The Special Fund may, in his name, conduct legal transactions, sue and be sued…
The federation shall act as guarantor for the liabilities of the Special Fund.
(3) From the day of the accession until Dec. 31, 1993, the federation and the Trust Agency shall each repay half of the interest payments made by the Special Fund…
(4) With effect from Jan. 1, 1994, the federation and the Länder named in Article 1 of this treaty as well as the Trust Agency shall take over the total debts which have accrued to the Special Fund up to Dec. 31, 1993, in accordance with Article 27 (3)(concerning borrowing and debts) of the Treaty of May 18, 1990, between the FRG and the GDR establishing a Monetary, Economic and Social Union…
(5) The Special Fund shall be abolished at the end of 1993…
[Article 24 concerned settlement of claims and liabilities vis-à-vis foreign countries and the FRG; Article 25 concerned assets held in trust; Article 26 concerned the Special Fund of the Deutsche Reichsbahn; Article 27 concerned the Special Fund of the Deutsche Post; and Article 28 concerned economic assistance.]
Article 29.
Foreign trade relations.
The established foreign trade relations of the GDR, in particular the existing contractual obligations vis-à-vis countries of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance [Comecon], shall enjoy protection of confidence.
They shall be developed further and expanded, taking into consideration the interests of all parties concerned and having regard for the principles of a market economy as well as the competence of the European Communities…
Chapter VII.
Labour, social welfare, family, women, public health and environmental protection
Article 30.
Labour and social welfare.
(1) It shall be the task of the all-German legislator (i) to recodify in a uniform manner and as soon as possible the law on employment contracts and the provisions on working hours under public law, including the admissibility of work on Sundays and public holidays, and the specific industrial safety regulations for women;(ii) to bring public law on industrial safety into line with present-day requirements in accordance with the law of the European Communities and the concurrent part of the industrial safety law of the GDR.
[Further paragraphs provided for early retirement at 57 and for women at 55 in the former GDR under certain conditions.]
Article 31.
Family and women.
(1) It shall be the task of the all-German legislator to develop further the legislation on equal rights for men and women.
(2) In view of different legal and institutional starting positions with regard to the employment of mothers and fathers, its shall be the task of the all-German legislator to shape the legal situation in such as way as to allow a reconciliation of family and occupational life.
(3) In order to ensure that day care centres for children continue to operate in the territory specified under Article 3 of this treaty, the federation shall contribute to the costs of these centres for a transitional period up to June 30, 1991.
(4) It shall be the task of the all-German legislator to introduce regulations no later than Dec. 31, 1992, which ensure better protection of unborn life and provide a better solution in conformity with the constitution of conflict situations faced by pregnant women — notably through legally guaranteed entitlements for women, first and foremost to advice and public support — than is the case in either part of Germany at present.
In order to achieve these objectives, a network of advice centres run by various agencies and offering blanket coverage shall be set up without delay with financial assistance from the federation in the territory specified in Article 3 of this treaty…
[Article 32 concerned voluntary organizations; and Article 33 concerned public health.]
Article 34.
Protection of the Environment…it shall be the task of the legislators to protect the natural basis of man's existence, with due regard for prevention, the polluter-pays principle and co-operation, and to promote uniform ecological conditions of a high standard at least equivalent to that reached in the FRG…
Chapter VIII.
Culture, Education and Science, Sport
[Article 35 concerned culture.
Article 36, on broadcasting, provided that the Rundfunk der DDR (GDR Radio) and the Deutscher Fernsehfunk (German Television) should be dissolved by Dec. 31, 1991.
Articles 37, 38, 39 concerned education, science and research, and sport respectively.]
[Chapter IX, containing five articles, dealt with transitional and final provisions and included the June 15, 1990, agreement on property issues — see p. 37536 — as part of the treaty.]
Area (sq km) Population* Seats in new (old) Bundersrat Land capital Baden-Württemberg 373,751 9,618,696 6 (5) Stuttgart Bavaria 70,553 11,220,735 6 (5) Munich Berlin 883 3,409,737 4 (4) Berlin Brandenburg 29,059 2,641,152 4 (0) Potsdam Bremen 404 673,684 3 (3) Bremen Hamburg 755 1,626,220 3 (3) Hamburg Hessen 21,144 5,660,619 4 (4) Wiesbaden Mecklenburg- Western Pomerania 23,838 1,963,909 4 (0) Schwering Lower Saxony 47,439 7,283,75 6 (5) Hanover North Rhine- Westphalia 34,068 17,103,588 6 (5) Düsseldorf Rhineland-Palatinate 19,848 3,701,661 4 (4) Mainz Saarland 2,569 1,064,906 3 (3) Saarbrücken Saxony 18,337 4,900,675 4 (0) Dresden Saxony-Anhalt 20,445 2,964,971 4 (0) Magdeburg Schleswig-Holstein 15,728 2,594,606 4 (4) Kiel Thuringia 16,251 2,683,877 4 (0) Erfurt *Population as of Dec. 31, 1989, from Federal Statistical Office, Wiesbaden.
Berlin population figure: 2,130,525, 1,279,212.
The 16 German Länder
TWO-PLUS-FOUR TREATY
Treaty on the Final Settlement with respect to Germany
Signed on Sept. 12, 1990 [see pp. 37717-18].
The Federal Republic of Germany [FRG], the German Democratic Republic [GDR], the French Republic, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics [USSR], the UK and the USA.
conscious…that their peoples have been living together in peace since 1945;
mindful of the recent historic changes in Europe, which make it possible to overcome the division of the continent;…
recalling the principles of the CSCE Final Act signed in Helsinki;
recognizing that those principles have laid firm foundations for the establishment of a just and lasting peaceful order in Europe;
determined to take account of everyone's security interests;…
confirming their readiness to reinforce security, in particular by adopting effective arms control, disarmament and confidence-building measures; their willingness not to regard each another as adversaries but to work for a relationship of trust and co-operation; and accordingly their readiness to consider positively the setting up of appropriate institutional arrangements within the framework of the CSCE;
welcoming the fact that the German…people have expressed their will to bring about the unity of Germany as a state so that they will be able to serve the peace of the world as an equal and sovereign partner in a united Europe;
convinced that the unification of Germany as a state with definitive borders is a significant contribution to peace and stability in Europe;…
recognizing that…the rights and responsibilities of the Four Powers relating to Berlin and Germany as a whole lose their function…have agreed as follows:
Article 1.
(1) The united Germany shall comprise the territory of the FRG, the GDR and the whole of Berlin.
Its external borders shall be the borders of the FRG and the GDR and shall be definitive from the date on which the present treaty comes into force.
The confirmation of the definitive nature of the borders of the united Germany is an essential element in the peaceful order of Europe.
(2) The united Germany and the Republic of Poland shall confirm the existing border between them in a treaty that is binding under international law.
(3) The united Germany has no territorial claims whatsoever against other states and shall not assert any in the future.
(4) the governments of the FRG and the GDR shall ensure that the constitution of the united Germany does not contain any provision incompatible with these principles [see Unification Treaty for necessary changes to Basic Law of FRG]…
Article 2.
The governments of the FRG and the GDR reaffirm their declarations that only peace shall emanate from German soil.
According to the constitution of the united Germany, acts tending to and undertaken with the intent to disturb the peaceful relations between nations, especially to prepare for aggressive war, are unconstitutional and a punishable offence.
The governments of the FRG and the GDR declare that the united Germany shall never employ any of its weapons except in accordance with its constitution and the Charter of the United Nations.
Article 3. (1) The governments of the FRG and the GDR reaffirm their renunciation of the manufacture and possession of and control over nuclear, biological and chemical weapons.
They declare that the united Germany, too, shall abide by these commitments.
In particular, rights and obligations arising from the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons of July 1, 1968, will continue to apply to the united Germany.
(2) The government of the FRG, acting in full agreement with the GDR, made the following declaration on Aug. 30, 1990, in Vienna at the Negotiations on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe [CFE]: "The government of the FRG undertakes to reduce the personnel strength of the armed forces of the united Germany to 370,000 (ground, air and naval forces) within three to four years.
This reduction will commence on the entry into force of the first CFE agreement.
Within the scope of this overall ceiling no more than 345,000 will belong to the ground and air forces which, pursuant to the agreed mandate, alone are the subject of the [CFE]negotiations"…
The government of the GDR has expressly associated itself with this statement…
Article 4. (1) The governments of the FRG and the GDR and the USSR state that the united Germany and the USSR will settle by treaty the conditions for and duration of the presence of Soviet armed forces on the territory of the present GDR and of Berlin, as well as the conduct of the withdrawal of these armed forces, which will be completed by the end of 1994…
Article 5. (1) Until the completion of the withdrawal of the Soviet armed forces from the territory of the present GDR and of Berlin in accordance with Article 4 of the present treaty, only German territorial defence units which are not integrated into the alliance structures to which German armed forces in the rest of German territory are assigned will be stationed in that territory as armed forces of the united Germany.
During that period and subject to the provisions of paragraph 2 of this Article, armed forces of other states will not be stationed in that territory during this time or carry out any other military activity there.
(2) For the duration of the presence of Soviet armed forces in the territory of the present GDR and of Berlin, armed forces of the French Republic, the UK, and the USA will, upon German request, remain stationed in Berlin by agreement to this effect between the government of the united Germany and the governments of the states concerned.
The number of troops and the amount of equipment of all non-German armed forces stationed in Berlin will not be greater than at the time of signature of the present treaty.
New categories of weapons will not be introduced there by non-German armed forces.
The government of the united Germany will conclude with the governments of those states which have armed forces stationed in Berlin treaties with conditions which are fair, taking into account the relations existing with the states concerned.
(3) Following the completion of the withdrawal of Soviet armed forces from the territory of the present GDR and Berlin, units of German armed forces assigned to military alliance structures in the same way as those in the rest of German territory may also be stationed in that part of Germany, but without nuclear weapon carriers.
Foreign armed forces and nuclear weapons or their carriers will not be stationed in that part of Germany or deployed there.
Article 6.
The right of the united Germany to belong to alliances, with all the rights and responsibilities arising therefrom, shall not be affected by the present treaty.
Article 7. (1) The French Republic, the USSR, the UK, and the USA hereby terminate their rights and responsibilities relating to Berlin and to Germany as a whole.
As a result, the corresponding, related quadripartite agreements, decisions and practices are terminated and all related Four Power institutions are dissolved.
(2) The united Germany shall have accordingly full sovereignty over its internal and external affairs.
[Article 8 concerns ratification of the treaty.]
Agreed minute to the treaty.
Any questions with respect to the application of the word "deployed" as used in the last sentence of paragraph 3 of Article 5 will be decided by the government of the united Germany in a reasonable and responsible way taking into account the security interests of each contracting party as set forth in the preamble.
A Joint letter from the Foreign Ministers of the two Germanies to the other four signatories noted that the the joint declaration of June 15, 1990, by these two governments on the settlement of outstanding property matters [see p. 37536], specified that"The expropriations effected on the basis of occupation law or sovereignty (between 1945 and 1949) are irreversible.
The governments of the Soviet Union and the GDR do not see any means of reversing the measures taken then.
The government of the FRG…is of the opinion that a final decision on any public compensation must be reserved for a future all-German parliament."
2.
They also stated that the monuments and war graves "dedicated to the victims of war and tyranny which have been erected on German soil will be respected and will enjoy the protection of German law" , and that in the united Germany"the free democratic basic order will be protected by the constitution…
Parties which, by reason of their aims or the behaviour of their adherents, seek to impair or abolish the free democratic basic order as well as associations which are directed against the constitutional order or the concept of international understanding can be prohibited.
This also applies to parties and associations with National Socialist aims."
GERMAN-SOVIET CO-OPERATION TREATY
Treaty on Good-neighbourliness, Partnership and Co-operation between the Federal Republic of Germany [FRG]and the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics [USSR]
Signed on Sept. 13, 1990 [see p. 37718].
The FRG and the USSR…in the wish to make a final break with the past and make, through understanding and reconciliation, a weighty contribution to overcoming the division of Europe,
convinced of the need to construct a new Europe, united by shared values, and create a lasting and just European peace order including stable security structures,
in the conviction that human rights and basic freedoms are of great significance as part of the all-European legacy and that respecting them is a fundamental precondition for progress in the construction of this peace order,…
taking into account the signing of the Treaty on the Final Settlement on Germany of Sept. 12, 1990,…have agreed as follows:
Article 1.
The FRG and the USSR are guided in the shaping of their relations by the following principles: They respect each other 's sovereign equality, territorial integrity and political independence.
They place man with his dignity and his rights, concern for the survival of mankind and the preservation of the natural environment at the centre of their policy.
They reaffirm the right of all peoples and states to shape their destiny freely and without external interference and shape their political, economic, social and cultural development according to their own wishes.
They espouse the principle that any war, whether nuclear or conventional, must be reliably prevented and that peace must be maintained and shaped.
They grant priority to general rules of international law in domestic and international politics and affirm their determination conscientiously to fulfil their treaty obligations…
Article 2.
The FRG and the USSR undertake unreservedly to respect the territorial integrity of all states in Europe within their present borders.
They declare that they have no territorial claims against anyone and that they will not make such claims in the future.
Today and in the future they regard the borders of all states in Europe as inviolable as they stand on the day of the signing of this treaty.
Article 3.
The FRG and the USSR reaffirm that they will refrain from threats of the use of force which are directed against the territorial integrity or political independence of the other side…
They will solve their disputes solely by peaceful means and never use any of their weapons except for individual or collective self-defence.
They will never and under any circumstances be the first to use armed force against each other or against third states…
If one of the two states should become the target of aggression, then the other side will give the aggressor no military aid or other support and will take all measures to end the conflict using the principles and procedures of the United Nations and other structures of collective security.
Article 4.
The FRG and the USSR will work towards the fundamental reduction of armed forces and armaments through binding, effectively verifiable agreements…
Article 5.
Both sides will to their ability support the process of security and co-operation in Europe on the basis of the [1975]Helsinki Final Act…particularly through the establishment of permanent institutions and bodies.
Article 6.
The FRG and the USSR have agreed to hold regular consultations…
Consultations at the highest political level shall take place as often as required, and at least once a year.
The foreign ministers shall meet at least twice a year.
The defence ministers shall hold regular meetings.
Meetings shall take place between the responsible ministers of the two states as necessary on topics of mutual interest…
Article 7.
Should a situation arise which, in the view of one side, represents a threat to peace or a violation of peace, or may give rise to dangerous international complications, then both sides shall contact each other immediately and strive to…achieve understanding on the measures appropriate to improve or overcome the situation.
Article 8.
The FRG and the USSR have agreed considerably to develop and deepen their bilateral co-operation, especially in the economic, industrial and scientific-technological sectors and in the sector of environmental protection…
To this end they shall conclude a comprehensive treaty on the development of co-operation in the sphere of the economy, industry, science and technology and, insofar as they are needed, separate agreements for particular sectors…
Article 9.
The FRG and the USSR shall further develop and deepen economic co-operation for mutual benefit.
For citizens, enterprises and state and non-state institutions of the other side they will create favourable frameworks for entrepreneurial and other economic activity…
Article 10.
On the basis of the agreement on July 22, 1986, on scientific and technological co-operation, both sides shall further develop exchanges in this field and conduct joint projects…
Article 11…
Both sides affirm their determination to continue and intensify their co-operation in the field of environmental protection on the basis of their agreement of Oct. 25, 1988.
They wish to share in solving important problems relating to environmental protection, investigate damaging effects on the environment and develop measures to prevent them.
They shall take part in the development of co-ordinated strategies and concepts for an environmental policy that crosses state borders in an international and in particular in a European framework.
Article 12.
Both sides shall strive for a expansion of [bilateral]transport links…between the FRG and the USSR, making use of the most modern technologies.
Article 13.
Both sides shall strive considerably to simplify, on the basis of reciprocity, the visa procedures for journeys by citizens of the two countries, primarily for business, economic and cultural purposes and for the purposes of scientific and technological co-operation.
Article 14.
Both sides support comprehensive contacts between people from both countries and the development of co-operation between parties, trade unions, foundations, schools, colleges, sports organizations, churches and social institutions, women's, environmental and other social organizations and associations…
Article 15.
The FRG and the USSR…shall considerably develop cultural co-operation.
Both sides shall give real substance to the agreement on the creation and work of cultural centres and fully exploit them.
Both sides reaffirm their readiness to allow all interested people comprehensive access to the languages and culture of the other side and shall promote state and private initiatives.
Both sides come out strongly in favour of developing possibilities for learning the language of the other country in schools, colleges and other educational institutions…
[Article 16 concerned the preservation of cultural assets of the other party on their territory and the return of those cultural treasures illegally removed or misappropriated, which are on their territory.
Article 17 stressed "the particular significance of humanitarian co-operation" .]
Article 18.
The government of the FRG declares that the memorials set up on German soil which are dedicated to Soviet victims of the [Second World]War and of the tyranny shall be respected and placed under the protection of German laws.
The same applies to the Soviet war graves…
The government of the USSR guarantees access to the graves of Germans on Soviet territory, their preservation and maintainance…
Article 19.
The FRG and the USSR shall intensify the exchange of legal aid in matters concerning civil and family law [and]…in criminal matters…
The responsible authorities in the FRG and the USSR shall work together in combating organized crime, terrorism, crimes involving drugs, illegal interference in civilian air traffic and marine traffic, the creation or circulation of forged money and smuggling…
Article 20.
Both governments shall increase their co-operation within the framework of international organizations…
Article 21.
This treaty does not impinge upon the rights and obligations arising from valid bilateral and multilateral agreements concluded by both sides with other states.
[Article 22 concerned ratification of the treaty which was to be valid for 20 years.
After this the treaty would be tacitly extended for five years at a time insofar as one of the signatories did not give one year's notice of cancelling the treaty.]