

EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
All-union referendum
The all-union referendum on the preservation of the Soviet Union took place on March 17.
Voters were asked: "Do you consider it necessary to preserve the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as a renewed federation of equal, sovereign republics, in which human rights and the freedoms of all nationalities will be fully guaranteed?" 
The referendum had no legal force, but was intended as a test of popular support for the draft Union Treaty, the question being a summary of its first article.
The latest draft of the Treaty, placing greater emphasis on republican rights than the original draft published in November 1990 [see p. 37903], had been approved by the Federation Council on March 6 (albeit with Armenia, Georgia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Moldavia boycotting the meeting, and Azerbaijan and two of the 20 autonomous republics refusing to sign the finalized version).
It was released for consideration by republican parliaments.
Voter turnout across the Soviet Union for the referendum was put officially at 80 per cent, although the figure of 185,647,355 registered electors did not include the vast majority of the people of voting age in six republics which were officially boycotting the referendum.
The "yes" vote was 76.4 per cent of voters taking part, and the "no" vote 21.7 per cent.
This meant that a "yes" vote was cast by just over 61 per cent of registered electors, and around 56 per cent of all Soviet citizens of voting age.
Refusal by six republics to participate
The parliaments of Armenian, Georgia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Moldavia had announced in the weeks immediately preceding the referendum that they would take no part in organizing the holding of the referendum.
In the three Baltic republics and in Georgia it had been decided that to participate would be to acknowledge Soviet constitutional legitimacy, thereby forfeiting the key argument in their independence campaigns, namely that they had been illegally occupied and annexed to the Soviet Union.
Armenia was refusing to participate on the basis of fears that the new Union Treaty would enshrine neighbouring Azerbaijan's right to the disputed Nagorny Karabakh region.
Moldavia refused to hold the referendum on the grounds that it would worsen ethnic tensions in the republic.
The USSR Supreme Soviet, in a resolution of Feb. 25, declared that the decision by republican authorities not to hold the referendum violated citizens' civil rights by denying them the right to vote.
The Supreme Soviet ordered the authorities in those republics to set up referendum organizing commissions without delay, and ruled that alternative referendums on independence being held in some of those republics [see p. 38014 and below]did not constitute a legitimate substitute for the all-union referendum.
Anticipating a continuing lack of co-operation from the republics, however, the Supreme Soviet gave factories, associations (including the Communist Party), military units and local councils the right to set up polling stations.
Gorbachev's referendum appeals
Twice in the six weeks before the referendum President Mikhail Gorbachev went on nationwide television and radio to appeal for a "yes" vote.
His second broadcast, on March 15, was surprising both for its exaggeratedly emotional tone, and for its blatantly Russian perspective.
Gorbachev began by stressing that a "yes" vote would "preserve the integrity of the state which is a thousand years old" .
Later he quoted Grand Prince Yaroslav the Wise, an 11th century ruler of Kievan Rus (the earliest unified Russian state), on the need to "live in peace, brother heeding brother" .
He stressed that a "yes" vote would preserve the unity of the Soviet Union, but not "the old order with the domination of the centre and the lack of republics' rights" .
A "yes" vote, he said, would "make it possible to put an end to the devastating processes taking place in our society [i.e. the continuing rivalry and conflict between the republics and centre]and make a resolute turn towards the restoration of normal conditions of life and work" .
He went on to warn that the break-up of the country would entail "unimaginable misfortune and unhappiness" , and would imperil the whole world order.
Results
Of the nine republics which officially took part in the referendum, five (Azerbaijan, Byelorussia, Kirghizia, Tadjikistan and Turkmenia) asked only the question as set by the USSR Congress of People's Deputies.
In Kazakhstan the question was modified unilaterally by the republic's Supreme Soviet on the initiative of President Nursultan Nazarbayev.
In the Russian Federation, the Ukraine and Uzbekistan additional questions were put to voters, on the initiative of the republican Supreme Soviets and regional councils.
March 17 referendum results, by participating republic
Azerbaijan.
Population: 7,020,000 (2.5% of USSR total); Registered electorate: 3,866,659; Turnout: 75.1%; Yes: 93.3%; No: 5.8%; Percentage of eligible voters voting yes: 69.7%.
Byelorussia.
Population: 10,149,000 (3.6% of USSR total); Registered electorate: 7,354,796; Turnout: 83.3%; Yes: 82.7%; No: 16.1%; Percentage of eligible voters voting yes: 68.9%.
Kazakhstan.
Population: 16,463,000 (5.8% of USSR total); Registered electorate: 9,999,433; Turnout: 88.2%; Question altered to: "Do you consider it necessary to preserve the USSR as a union of equal sovereign states?" 
Yes: 94.1%; No: 5%; Percentage of eligible voters voting yes: 83.6%.
Kirghizia.
Population: 4,258,000 (1.5% of USSR total); Registered electorate: 2,341,646; Turnout: 92.9%; Yes: 94.6%; No: 4.0%; Percentage of eligible voters voting yes: 87.7%.
Russian Federation.
Population: 147,386,000 (51.4% of USSR total); Registered electorate: 105,643,364; Turnout: 75.4%; Yes: 71.3%; No: 26.4%; Percentage of eligible voters voting yes: 52.8%.
Additional question, all regions except Chechen-Ingush, North Ossetian, Tatar and Tuva ASSRs; Ryazan, Smolensk and Tambov oblasti; and Stavropol kray: "Do you support the introduction of the post of President of the RSFSR, elected by a vote of all the people?" 
Yes: 69.85%; No: 28.01%.
Other additional questions: in Moscow, concerning direct mayoral election (85 per cent in favour); in Kamchatka, concerning restoration of closed status for region (majority in favour); in Mari ASSR, concerning legalization of private property (majority in favour); in southern Sakhalin and Kuril Islands, concerning return of disputed islands to Japan (89 per cent against).
Tadjikistan.
Population: 5,090,000 (1.8% of USSR total); Registered electorate: 2,549,096; Turnout: 94.4%; Yes: 96.2%; No: 3.1%; Percentage of eligible voters voting yes: 90.2%.
Turkmenia.
Population: 3,512,000 (1.3% of USSR total); Registered electorate: 1,847,310; Turnout: 97.7%; Yes: 97.9%; No: 1.7%; Percentage of eligible voters voting yes: 95.7%.
Ukraine.
Population: 51,449,000 (18% of USSR total); Registered electorate: 37,732,178; Turnout: 83.5%; Yes: 70.2%; No: 28%; Percentage of eligible voters voting yes: 58.1%.
Additional question: "Do you want the Ukraine to be part of a Union of Soviet Sovereign States on the basis of its declaration of sovereignty?" 
Yes: 80.16%; No: 17.98%.
Additional question, West Ukraine (Lvov, Ternopol and Ivano Frankovsk oblasti) only: "Do you want the Ukraine to be an independent state?" 
Yes: 90%.
Uzbekistan.
Population: 19,808,000 (6.9% of USSR total); Registered electorate: 10,287,938; Turnout: 95.4%; Yes: 93.7%; No: 5.2%; Percentage of eligible voters voting yes: 89%.
Additional question: "Do you agree that Uzbekistan should remain part of a renewed union (federation) as an equal sovereign republic?" 
Yes: more than 94%.
Results in boycotting republics
Armenia.
Population: 3,304,000 (1.1% of USSR total); Registered electorate: 4,923 (registration took place only among non-Armenian workers rebuilding Spitak, site of the 1988 earthquake); Turnout: 72.1%; Yes: 71.6%; No: 27.2%.
Estonia.
Population: 1,566,000 (0.5% of USSR total); Registered electorate: 299,681 (registration was organized in the predominantly Russian towns in the north-east); Turnout: 74.2%; Yes: 95%; No: 4.5%.
Georgia.
Population: 5,396,000 (1.9% of USSR total); Registered electorate: 364,013 (registration took place in the Abkhaz ASSR, with 318,317 electors, and in Ossete-controlled areas of South Ossetia); Turnout: 57.84% (52.3% in Abkhaz ASSR; 96.3% in South Ossetia); Yes: 98.9%; No: 0.75%.
Latvia.
Population: 2,667,000 (0.9% of USSR total); Registered electorate: 670,828 (registration took place in factories and districts where Russians, Ukrainians and Byelorussians predominated); Turnout: 65%; Yes: 95.1%; No: 4.1%.
Lithuania.
Population: 3,673,000 (1.3% of USSR total); Registered electorate: 582,262 (registration took place in predominantly Russian and Polish districts); Turnout: 86.1%; Yes: 98.9%; No: 0.9%.
Moldavia.
Population: 4,332,000 (1.5% of USSR total); Registered electorate: 841,507 (polling was organized by local authorities in the Russian-populated Dnestr valley and Gagauz-populated southern districts, and among Russians in Kishinev and Beltsy); Turnout: 83.3%; Yes: 98.3%; No: 1.3%.
The overall results within individual republics disguised considerable regional variations.
Particularly striking were the poor results in the major cities: in Moscow the turnout was only 67 per cent of voters, and barely 50 per cent of those voted in favour of the union.
There was an almost identical result in Leningrad, while in Kiev the "yes" vote in the all-union referendum was only 44.6 per cent.
In Sverdlovsk, home city of Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin, the "yes" vote was 34 per cent, while in Lvov, the centre of Ukrainian nationalism, it was 25 per cent .
The Soviet leadership claimed the overall result as a victory.
However, foreign commentators were almost unanimous in assessing that the less-than-ringing endorsement for the preservation of the union, especially in the Russian Federation and the Ukraine, represented a blow to Gorbachev's authority (many people had looked upon the referendum as little short of a vote of confidence in Gorbachev).
Commentators contrasted this with the boost given to Yeltsin, his arch rival, by the support in the separate Russian Federation referendum for a directly elected Russian President.
Independence referendums in Latvia, Estonia and Georgia
As in Lithuania in February, the refusal of the Latvian, Estonian and Georgian governments to take part in the all-union referendum was reinforced by the holding of their own national referendums.
Estonia and Latvia went to the polls on March 3, and Georgia on March 31.
Armenia was planning to hold a similar referendum in September.
In Latvia voters were asked: "Are you for a democratic and independent Latvian republic?" 
According to official final results announced on March 6, turnout was 87.56 per cent of eligible voters (i.e. all permanent residents of Latvia aged over 18, members of the armed forces stationed in the republic being excluded).
Of these 73.68 per cent voted "yes" .
In Estonia voters were asked: "Do you want the restoration of the state independence of the Estonian republic?" 
The official final results announced on March 4 showed that turnout had been 82.86 per cent of voters, of whom 77.83 per cent had voted "yes" .
The size of the "yes" vote was greeted with delight by officials in both republics.
The overall level of support for independence among the republics' ethnic-Russian and other minorities was higher than expected, especially in Latvia (minorities constituted over 36 per cent of Estonia's population and around 47 per cent of Latvia's).
Nevertheless, it was impossible to ignore the fact that the overall percentage of registered electors voting in favour, at 64.51 per cent in Latvia and 64.49 per cent in Estonia, fell short of the two-thirds majority which would have meant victory if the referendums had been held according to the April 1990 USSR legislation on the secession of a republic [see pp. 37361-62].
In Georgia, where the referendum was held at the same time as elections for local councils, voters were asked: "Do you agree that the state independence of Georgia should be restored on the basis of the independence act of May 26, 1918?" 
According to preliminary results announced on April 1, with only two of the 71 constituencies undeclared, there had been a 90.5 per cent turnout of the around 3,400,000 registered electors, of whom 98.93 per cent had voted "yes" .
Ethnic Georgians, who constituted just under 70 per cent of the republic's population, were assumed to have voted almost unanimously in favour.
However, the overwhelming "yes" vote could only have been achieved with the additional support of the larger of the republic's minority groups such as the Armenians (9 per cent of the population), Azerbaijanis (5 per cent) and even the Russians (7.4 per cent ).
In Abkhazia, the Abkhaz population which favoured seceding from Georgia and remaining part of the Soviet Union boycotted the referendum, but the fact that the Abkhaz were a minority in their own autonomous republic was reflected in the 60 per cent turnout of voters, of whom 97.65 per cent voted "yes" .
No results were announced from the troubled South Ossetia region, where the Ossete majority which opposed Georgian independence and sought to secede was engaged in a bloody conflict with Georgian paramilitary groups [for latest developments in South Ossetia see p. 38104].
Gorbachev-Yeltsin rivalry
Yeltsin had campaigned for a "no" vote in the referendum.
He continued to take the position that the individual republics should first establish real political and economic sovereignty, and only then decide whether membership of a union would be advantageous.
In a broadcast on Radio Russia on March 15 he complained that the real purpose of the referendum was to "gain support for the present leadership" , adding: "The aim is to preserve the imperial, unitary state of the union, to preserve the system by renewing it just on the surface." 
On Yeltsin's initiative, representatives of the Russian Federation, Byelorussia, Kazakhstan and the Ukraine on Feb. 4 had begun talks aimed at establishing what would be in effect an alternative union to that proposed in the draft Union Treaty.
In a statement on Feb. 5 the Russian Federation Foreign Ministry had declared that the four republics had agreed that a union treaty must be based on "declarations of state sovereignty and bilateral treaties adopted and concluded by the supreme bodies of legal power in the republics" .
Addressing a rally on March 9 organized by the Democratic Russia group, Yeltsin called on his fellow radicals to "declare war on the leadership of the country, which has led us into a quagmire" .
Urging a united front of left-wing opposition parties to oust Communist Party officials still controlling regional and local government, he continued: "This year will be decisive.
Either democracy will be extinguished, or the democrats will not only survive, but conquer."
Yeltsin's comments brought an immediate rebuke from USSR Supreme Soviet chairman Anatoly Lukyanov, but on March 11 the USSR Supreme Soviet refrained from formal censure, deputies deciding that to do so would be likely to boost Yeltsin's popularity still further.
On the previous day there had been rallies in many parts of the Russian Federation in support of Yeltsin (who was under threat of a no confidence vote in the Russian Congress of People's Deputies as a result of an attack on Gorbachev in February — see p. 38013), and in opposition to Gorbachev and the Union Treaty.
In Moscow at least 150,000 people packed into Manezh Square, beside the Kremlin.
Nevertheless, on March 14 Yeltsin conceded that his call to "declare war" , and other strong language used in the speech, had been unwise.
He excused himself by saying that his remarks had been made spontaneously.
In comments which appeared directed principally at Yeltsin, Gorbachev in an address to the Byelorussian Academy of Sciences on Feb. 26 had openly acknowledged that a power struggle was under way, and warned that the Soviet Union could collapse into civil war unless radicals curbed their opposition.
In a remarkable inversion of Soviet vocabulary, he accused radicals of pressing for power using the "neo-Bolshevik tactic" of taking the political struggle on to the streets.
Earlier that same day Gorbachev had told workers at the Minsk tractor works that Yeltsin's political aims "diverge from the goals of perestroika" .
Apparently responding to the suggestion of a conservative shift in his policies, however, Gorbachev during the last engagement of his Byelorussian tour on Feb. 28 told a meeting in Mogilev that a centrist political coalition, avoiding the extreme positions of both radicals and hardliners, was needed to resolve the country's problems.
over Moscow police
Holding of pro-Yeltsin Moscow demonstration despite USSR government ban — Imposition of central government control
The USSR Supreme Soviet on March 21 adopted a decree asking the Moscow city soviet to ban mass demonstrations planned to take place in Moscow on March 28.
Democratic Russia had requested permission to hold a rally in Manezh Square to coincide with the opening of the extraordinary Russian Federation Congress session called to debate Yeltsin's conduct as President [the outcome of the Congress session will be covered in the April News Digest].
Officially, the ban was requested on the grounds that holding demonstrations on a working day would imperil public order and might disrupt the normal work of enterprises and public transport.
In defiance, on March 24 the executive committee of the Moscow city soviet authorized the Manezh Square rally.
The USSR Cabinet responded on the following day by banning all rallies in Moscow until April 15.
Moreover, Gorbachev on March 25 decreed that "in view of the need to ensure public order in the capital" a new main police directorate would be established for Moscow city and oblast which would be directly subordinate to the USSR Interior Ministry and headed by USSR First Deputy Interior Minister Ivan Shilov.
The effect of the decree was to wrest control of Moscow's police force from the city soviet and the regional soviet.
The demonstration went ahead on March 28 amid high tension, and in the face of a huge police and troop presence.
However, the confrontation which many people feared might produce bloody street clashes passed off peacefully.
On the previous day Moscow's deputy police chief had warned that force would be used to prevent the demonstration taking place.
Armoured cars had appeared near the city centre and police barriers had been placed around Red Square, which was next to Manezh Square.
From early on March 28 the whole of Moscow city centre appeared to be under siege, with lorries and armoured cars blocking all approaches to the Kremlin, water-cannon trucks, mounted police and troops in gas masks stationed in backstreets, and troops on street corners keeping shoppers and sightseers away from the Kremlin.
The number of police and troops was put at 50,000.
Undeterred, at least 100,000 demonstrators assembled in Mayakovsky Square, around 1 km from the Kremlin.
After hearing pro-Yeltsin and anti-Gorbachev speeches they set off towards the Kremlin down Tverskaya (formerly Gorky Street), Moscow's main thoroughfare.
However, at Pushkin Square, about 500 metres from Manezh Square, the demonstrators were confronted by a cordon of troops and trucks.
Although demonstrators taunted the troops, no attempt was made to breach the cordon, and shortly afterwards the demonstrators began to disperse.
This outcome left both sides claiming victory.
Meanwhile, inside the Kremlin, the Russian Federation congress condemned the central government's show of force, and voted to reject as invalid the ban on Moscow demonstrations.
It also voted to send Russian First Vice-President Ruslan Khasbulatov to make an appeal to Gorbachev to withdraw the police and troops.
Khasbulatov returned to announce that Gorbachev had agreed to withdraw the troops on the following day.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Presidential crisis following Serbian crackdown
The Yugoslav federation entered a period of severe political crisis in mid-March, following the violent suppression on March 9 of an anti-communist demonstration in Belgrade, the federal capital and capital of Serbia, largest and most influential of the six republics in the federation.
As recriminations mounted in the following days, the Serbian president and leader of the ruling hardline Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS), Slobodan Milosevic, made what appeared to be an attempt to undermine the authority of the country's Collective Federal Presidency.
The resignation on March 15 of Borisav Jovic, the Serbian representative on the Collective State Presidency who was the President of the Presidency for the year ending May 1991, was widely assumed to have been inspired by Milosevic.
This manoeuvre, followed by the resignations of the representatives of Vojvodina and Montenegro, and the dismissal of the Kosovo representative, appeared to be a ploy by which to force the Yugoslav People's Army (JNA, with its Serb-dominated officer corps) to intervene and take over authority at federal level.
Demonstrations in Belgrade
Demonstration were called for March 9 in Belgrade by opposition groups led by Vuk Draskovic, the chairman of the Serbian Renaissance Movement which opposed Milosevic's confrontational policies toward non-communist organisations.
Ignoring a ban which the Serbian government had imposed on March 7, some 100,000 people poured on to the streets of Belgrade to demand the resignations not only of the Milosevic administration but also of the senior officials of the Belgrade television network, tightly controlled by the SPS.
They were met, however, by riot police, and by army officers using tanks and armoured cars.
In the ensuing fighting a student and a policeman were killed and over 90 people were injured.
Draskovic was among 636 people arrested.
Draskovic was released on March 12 following further demonstrations on his behalf, and the charges against him were quashed.
Demonstrations continued until March 14, when nearly all the other people arrested on March 9 were released.
Serbia's Interior Minister, Darmilo Bogdanovic, who had ordered the troops into Belgrade, offered his resignation on March 13, and the head of Belgrade television also left his post.
Draskovic kept up his demands, however, for the resignation of the whole Serbian government, which he blamed as a body for the violent end to the March 9 disturbances.
His demands were taken up by a group of academics and intellectuals who also accused Milosevic of seeking to provoke intercommunal strife and to destabilize the Yugoslav federation.
The shootings brought to a climax the long-standing complaints by opposition groups in Serbia that the Milosevic government had embarked on a course of confrontation not only with non-communists but also, more ominously, with other ethnic groups in Yugoslavia.
A further stimulus for the demonstrations was the deteriorating economic situation in Serbia, and it was becoming increasingly clear that the SPS would be unable to keep its election promises concerning the economy [see pp. 37923; 37973].
Resignation of Jovic
Jovic resigned his position on March 15, in response to a refusal by the Presidency to sanction Serbian demands for the introduction of unspecified "emergency measures" by the armed forces.
Jovic, who had been roundly defeated in a heated debate with other leaders, said that he could no longer "be an accomplice in decisions which are helping to destroy our country while tying the hands of the army" .
He was replaced in an acting capacity by his arch-rival, the anti-communist Croatian Stipe Mesic, who had hitherto been Deputy President and who had anyway been due to succeed Jovic in May 1991.
Subsequent withdrawals from the eight-member collective Presidency left it with only four members participating, and thus effectively inquorate, a development which most observers saw as being Milosevic's deliberate intention.
The representative for the Serbian autonomous province of Kosovo, the ethnic Albanian Riza Sapunziju, was recalled on March 16 because of what was termed his "anti-Serbian activities" — Sapunziju having opposed Milosevic's calls in the Serbian assembly for a military intervention.
The Serbian Assembly approved a law on March 18 which abolished the functions of the Kosovo presidency (but see below for their restoration).
In support of Jovic's resignation Jugoslav Kostic, the representative of the other autonomous Serbian province, Vojvodina, announced his withdrawal from the Collective State Presidency on March 16 on the grounds that he no longer recognised its authority.
Nenad Bucin, the representative for Montenegro and a strong supporter of the Serbian cause, similarly declared a boycott of the Collective State Presidency, stating that he could "not reconcile himself to the processes of deliberate disintegration" going on in the country.
Refusal by army to intervene — Withdrawal of Serbian resignations
Milosevic said on March 16 that the presidency of Yugoslavia had "long since stopped functioning" , and that the country had "entered the final stage of its agony" .
This statement was generally interpreted as meaning that only military action could save the Yugoslav federation.
The Collective State Presidency held, technically, the post of C.-in-C. of the armed forces, and it was believed that Milosevic was counting on forcing the army to intervene, a development which he would expect to bolster his own flagging domestic support.
The prospect of an army intervention caused great alarm in many parts of Yugoslavia.
The Slovene president Milan Kucan said on March 19 that if the army sought a pretext to interfere in the republic's political affairs, Slovenia would immediately secede from the federation [see p. 38019], while the speaker of the Slovene parliament threatened immediate secession in the event of military action.
Franjo Tudjman, the president of Croatia, called on March 19 for direct presidential-level talks on the growing constitutional crisis.
During this period the European Communities exerted pressure by warning that any military intervention would entail the cancellation of EC credits and assistance to Yugoslavia, as had happened in the early 1980s when Turkey had declared martial law [see pp. 30541-55].
A £2,800 million package of EC credits was reported to have been frozen.
The general staff of the armed forces issued a statement on March 19 categorically rejecting any involvement in political debate about the country's future, and thus ending speculation about an imminent coup.
Making clear the role of the armed forces in keeping cicil order when necessary, however, the statement said that the armed forces would "under no circumstances allow intranational armed clashes" to develop in Yugoslavia, and that no inter-republican dispute would be allowed to escalate into violence.
Any threat to any of Yugoslavia's internal or external borders would be repelled.
With the Collective State Presidency continuing to sit, albeit inquorate, and with the armed forces continuing to recognize its legitimacy, the Serbian leadership recognized the failure of its manoeuvring.
Accordingly, the Serbian assembly voted on March 20 to reject Jovic's resignation, and to restore all Serbian representation on the Collective State Presidency.
Jovic formally withdrew his resignation at the next meeting of the Federal Presidency on March 21.
Sejdo Bajramovic was appointed to succeed Sapunziju as the representative for Kosovo (whose functions, dismantled only on March 18, had been summarily restored).
Nenad Bucin did not rescind his resignation, but in accordance with constitutional provisions Momir Bulatovic, the president of the Montenegrin presidency, took over in an acting capacity as Montenegro representative on the Collective State Presidency.
REFERENCES.
Reference article pp. 37511-14; Serbian-Croatian tensions pp. 38019; 37973.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Southern rebellion — Impact of Gulf war — Internal political developments
In the immediate aftermath of the Iraqi army's defeat at the hands of the United States-led coalition in late February [see pp. 37982-86], Iraqi civilians and opposition guerrilla groups launched a series of widespread uprisings against the government of President Saddam Hussein.
Two separate major rebellions were centred in the predominantly Shia southern provinces of Iraq and in the Kurdish northern provinces.
By the end of March the Iraqi armed forces had suppressed the southern rebellion and had recaptured a number of northern towns from Kurdish guerrillas.
The advance of the Iraqi army into the northern provinces in late March forced vast numbers of Kurdish civilians to flee towards the frontiers of Turkey and Iran [full details of the Kurdish rebellion will be given in the April News Digest].
The ability of the Iraqi armed forces to crush the southern rebellion, and the non-interference by US-led coalition forces, gave rise to some criticism that the US government lacked a set of coherent policies towards the post-war Middle East.
The suspension of military action on Feb. 28 [see p. 37986]had left US-led coalition forces in occupation of some 15 per cent of Iraqi territory.
Some analysts speculated that the US stance of refusing assistance to the rebels, after previously having encouraged Iraqis to throw off Saddam Hussein's leadership, reflected US concern to avoid the disintegration of Iraq in the aftermath of the Gulf war.
The US government refused rebel demands for military assistance on the grounds that it would be wrong to involve itself in Iraq's internal affairs.
Nevertheless, the USA did make some efforts to modify the brutal conduct of the Iraqi armed forces during their campaign against the rebels.
In particular, citing interim ceasefire arrangements forbidding Iraqi use of fixed-wing military aircraft (but not helicopters), US pilots on March 22 and March 24 shot down two Iraqi fighter jets operating over northern Iraq.
The first signs of a popular revolt against Saddam came from the southern city of Basra on March 1.
Local leaders of the ruling Ba'ath Party and members of the security force were immediate targets for demonstrating crowds, and in addition fighting broke out between rival army units in and around the city.
The unrest in Basra swiftly spread to other southern towns and cities, including Nasiriyah and the Shia holy cities of Karbala and Najaf.
What had originated as a spontaneous civilian outburst now began to be depicted in the international media as a revolt by Iraq's majority Shia community, most of whom lived in the southern part of the country.
An Iranian-backed Shia group, the Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SAIRI), led by Hojatolislam Seyyed Mohammed Bakr al-Hakim, quickly emerged as the leading organized force behind the rebellion.
Reports claimed that demonstrators in the south were calling for the establishment of an Islamic government in Iraq headed by Hakim.
Quelling of rebellion by government forces
By March 5 troops loyal to Saddam Hussein appeared to be achieving some success against the rebels.
Elite Republican Guard troops deployed tanks and heavy artillery against lightly armed guerrilla units.
US officials monitoring the rebellion admitted that the fighting was very brutal and bloody, with heavy civilian casualties.
As well as launching his military counteroffensive against the rebels, Saddam Hussein dispatched a number of his most trusted supporters to the south to rally troops and Ba'athist officials.
On March 6 pay bonuses were announced for all soldiers and an amnesty was declared for deserters and draft dodgers.
Also on March 6 Saddam appointed the hardline Local Government Minister, Ali Hassan Al-Majid, as Interior Minister, with orders to suppress the rebellion [see below].
Despite the military superiority of the government forces, the rebels continued to hold on to territory in the south.
In particular the government forces encountered problems in maintaining control of a town once rebel forces had been defeated; when armed units moved on to another troubled area, rebels could regain control.
A SAIRI statement from Beirut on March 9 claimed that over 30,000 people had died during the uprising and that fighting was still raging throughout the south.
There were reports on March 12 that Najaf and Karbala had been recaptured by government forces after heavy fighting during which large numbers of civilians had died.
Meanwhile there were also reports on March 12 that unrest had broken out in the Shia districts of Baghdad (Saddam City and Shuala) and that curfews had been imposed.
Refugees interviewed in US-occupied southern Iraq on March 15 claimed that government forces were close to completing their takeover of Basra.
According to the reports the government forces had acted with great ruthlessness and had executed large numbers of guerrillas and civilians.
On March 21 foreign journalists were taken by the Iraqi authorities to Karbala.
A correspondent for the Reuters news agency described a scene of desolation, reporting that the city's streets had been strewn with rotting corpses.
Despite such reports, rebel radio stations in Iran, Syria and Lebanon continued to claim that their supporters occupied a number of southern towns.
However, most media sources were reporting by mid- and late-March that the southern rebellion had been effectively subdued by Saddam's forces.
Deterioration in relations with Iran
Relations between Iraq and Iran deteriorated seriously during March as the Iraqi government accused the Iranians of supporting the southern rebellion.
Relations deteriorated further in late March as hundreds of thousands of Iraqi Kurdish refugees headed for the Iranian border.
On March 4 the English-language Tehran Times, which reflected the views of the Iranian government, published an editorial which contained strong backing for the Iraqi rebels.
Overt statements of support for SAIRI and the rebellion were not tempered by a March 5-6 visit to Tehran by the then Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Sa'adoun Hammadi.
During his visit Hammadi reportedly attempted to persuade Iran to press SAIRI into accepting some form of power-sharing deal.
Iran marked March 18 as a day of national mourning for the "massacre of the Iraqi people" and the "desecration" of the holy shrines in Najaf and Kerbala.
The presiding board of the Majlis (the Iranian legislature) held an extraordinary session on March 24 to discuss the situation in Iraq.
The board condemned the Iraqi government for its alleged mistreatment of the Shia religious leader in Najaf, Grand Ayatollah Abou Qassim al-Khoei, and concluded that Iran fully supported "the uprising of the Iraqi Moslem nation" .
On March 20 Saadi Mahdi Saleh, the Speaker of the Iraqi National Assembly, accused Iran of sending armed forces across the border to attack Iraqi cities, a claim firmly denied in Tehran.
Beirut conference of opposition groups
Iraqi opposition groups held a conference in Beirut, the Lebanese capital, on March 11-13.
The conference was attended by some 400 delegates representing as many as 30 Iraqi opposition groups.
All 17 members of the Iraqi National Joint Action Committee (INJAC) formed in Damascus in December 1990 [see p. 37927]were represented at the conference.
Of the non-INJAC groups represented at the conference the most significant were two London-based groups, the Nationalist Iraqi Constitution (led by Salah Omar Ali) and the Free Iraqi Congress (led by Saad Saleh Jaber).
Kayreddin Hasib, a Jordanian-based Sunni dissident who attended the conference, was described by the Middle East Economic Digest of April 5 as a "potentially significant figure" and "one of the few possible political leaders who could win support in the Iraqi Sunni heartlands" .
The conference unanimously approved four recommendations which were issued in a final statement delivered on March 13.
First, it called for international support for the Iraqi "uprising" and appealed to the Iraqi army to join the ranks of the rebels.
Second, it called for the development of an "organizational and structural framework" for uniting the Iraqi opposition.
Third, it defined the immediate tasks of the Iraqi people once Saddam Hussein had been overthrown, including the formation of a provisional coalition government from among the opposition forces, which would find a "just solution" to the Kurdish question and guarantee the rights of nationalist minorities such as the Turkomen and the Assyrians.
Fourth, it stipulated that once Saddam Hussein had been overthrown "direct and free" elections would be held to a constituent council, which would in turn draw up a new constitution.
Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Revolution of Iraq (SAIRI) Hojatolislam Seyyed Mohammed Bakr al-Hakim
Members of Iraqi National Joint Action Committee Grouping Leader
*Movement of the Iraqi MujaheddinSaid Mohammad al-Haidari; Hojatolislam Seyyed Mohammed Bakr al-Hakim
*Islamic Movement in IraqShaikh Mohammad Mahdi-al-Kalisi
*Al-Daawah al-IslamiyahShaikh al-Assefie
*Jund Al-ImanAbu Zaid
*Islamic Action OrganizationShaikh Taqi Modaressi
*Islamic Scholars OrganizationShaikh al-Naseri Islamic AllianceAbu Yasser al-Alousi
**Democratic Party of Kurdistan (DPK) Masoud Barzani
**Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) Jalal Talabani
**Kurdistan Socialist PartyRassoul Mamand
**Kurdistan People's Democratic PartySami Abdul-Rahman Iraqi Communist PartyAziz Mohammed Dissident Ba'athistsSalah Umar Ali al-Tikriti Democratic GatheringSaleh Douglah Iraqi Socialist PartyMudber Louis Independent NationalsGen.
Hassan al-Naquib
*Member of SAIRI.
**Member of Kurdistan Iraqi Front along with Kurdish Socialist Party, Assyrian Democratic Party and Revolutionary Proletariat Kurdistan Party.
Source: Middle East Economic Digest.
Impact of bombing campaign
The massive bombing campaign launched against Iraq by the US-led coalition during January and February had a devastating impact on the country's infrastructure.
A report released in late March by a UN relief team which had recently visited Iraq stated that the bombing had caused "near-apocalyptic results" and had relegated Iraq to a "pre-industrial age" .
The report expressed serious concerns over the lack of medicines, food, fuel, transport, clean water supplies and operating sewage systems.
Other reports in March stressed the need for a crash immunization programme to ward off the threat of epidemics.
On March 19 the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) appealed for action to "avert a major nutritional crisis" , warning of possible starvation in Iraq if measures were not taken quickly to distribute foodstuffs.
A few days before issuing this warning the ICRC had sent more than 600 tonnes of food and medicine to Baghdad.
US congressional report on agriculture
A US Congressional Research Service report cited in the Middle East Economic Digest of March 22 stated that current food stocks in Iraq were at a record low.
The report claimed that although measures introduced at the outset of the conflict, such as special incentives for planting food crops, would ensure a good grain harvest in 1991, the destruction of the country's infrastructure during the bombing would seriously hamper collection and distribution, so that urban areas would suffer from severe shortages of wheat.
Easing of UN sanctions — EC humanitarian aid
On March 23 the UN Security Council sanctions committee agreed to ease restrictions imposed on the exporting of food to Iraq [for resolution 661 of Aug. 6, 1990, imposing mandatory sanctions see p. 37639].
Two days later European Community (EC) Agriculture Ministers meeting in Belgium agreed to send humanitarian aid, including food and medical supplies, to Iraq.
Launch of reconstruction campaign
The Iraqi authorities claimed to have launched a major reconstruction campaign in early March.
By March 8 all of Baghdad was reported to be receiving night-time electricity.
However, the damage to the capital's generating equipment had been so severe that some Western estimates claimed that it would take a year to restore full supplies to the country.
The Oil Ministry announced on March 6 that damage assessment was under way and that it had embarked on a large-scale rehabilitation effort to restore buildings, pipelines and damaged reservoirs.
On the same day, work began on reconstructing and rebuilding telecommunications buildings and the following day a campaign was launched to repair damaged roads and bridges.
Primary and secondary schools reopened in government-controlled areas of Iraq on March 23.
Internal political affairs
Appointment of new Interior Minister
On March 5 Saddam Hussein appointed his cousin, Ali Hasan al-Majid, to replace Samir Muhammad Abdul Wahhab as Interior Minister.
The Local Government portfolio hitherto held by Majid was abolished and its departments were incorporated into the Interior Ministry.
It was officially announced that Wahhab would "devote his efforts to [Ba'ath]party activity" .
By appointing Majid as Interior Minister, President Saddam placed him in charge of crushing the southern rebellion.
Majid had a brutal reputation, earned during his suppression of the 1988 Kurdish rebellion and his period as governor of Kuwait following the August 1990 invasion.
Saddam Hussein's "new phase" speech
In a major speech delivered to the country on March 16, Saddam attempted to counter the growing anti-government fervour by promising to institute major political reforms.
The speech was greeted with derision by opposition leaders.
The time had arrived, Saddam said, to "begin building the pillars of the new phase" , despite the difficulties which Iraq was currently experiencing.
Decisions taken in 1990 to construct a "democratic" society, based on "constitution, law, institutions and pluralism" , were "irrevocable and final" [see p. 37627 for July 1990 approval of new draft constitution].
Appointment of new Vice-President and new Cabinet
On March 22 Saddam Hussein promoted Taha Yasin Ramadhan, from his post of First Deputy Prime Minister to Vice-President.
It was not made clear whether Ramadan replaced the incumbent Vice-President, Taha Mohieddin Maarouf, the sole Kurd in the Iraqi leadership.
Saddam Hussein appointed a new Council of Ministers on March 23.
Sa'adoun Hammadi, hitherto Deputy Prime Minister, was appointed as Prime Minister, a position hitherto held by Saddam himself.
The appointment of Hammadi, a Shia, was described by the Middle East Economic Digest of April 12 as "a gesture of presidential goodwill towards the Shia community" .
In a speech on March 30 Hammadi pledged that his government would introduce major democratic reforms.
Other changes included the appointment of a new Foreign Minister, Ahmad Husayn Khudayyir, to replace Tariq Aziz, who remained a Deputy Prime Minister.
Saddam Hussein delivered a speech on March 26 at the ceremony to swear in the new Council of Ministers in which he acknowledged that the forthcoming period would be a difficult one for the new ministers; he said that they would be given between four and six months to demonstrate whether or not they were capable of doing their job properly.
New Iraqi Council of Ministers
**Sa'adoun HammadiPrime Minister
**Tariq AzizDeputy Prime Minister
**Mohammad Hamzah al-ZubaidiDeputy Prime Minister
**Ali Hasan al-MajidInterior
*Ahmad Husayn KhudayyirForeign Affairs Abdul Wahab Mahmoud al-SabbaghAgriculture and Irrigation Abdullah Fadil AbbasWaqfs (Religious Endowments) and Religious Affairs Samal Majid FarajPlanning Mohammad Mehdi SalehTrade Brig. -Gen.
Hussein KamilIndustry and Military Industrialization; Oil (acting) Umeed Madhat MubarakLabour and Social Affairs Abdel-Salem Mohammed SaeedHealth Lt.-Gen.
Saadi Tu'ma Abbas al-JaburiDefence
*Hamid Yusuf HammadiInformation and Culture
*Shabib Lazim al-MalikiJustice
*Hikmat Abdullah al-BazzazEducation
*Abd al-Razzaq Qasim al-HashimiHigher Education and Scientific Research
*Mahmud Dhiyab al-AhmedHousing and Reconstruction
*Majid Abd Ja'farFinance
*Abd al-Sattar Ahmed al-Ma'iniTransport and Communications Arshad Ahmed az-ZibariMinister of State
*Usamah Abd al-Razzaq Hummadi al-HithiMinister of State for Oil Affairs
*Muhammad Said Kazim al-SahhafMinister of State for Foreign Affairs Gen. Abdel-Jabbar Khalil ShanshalMinister of State for Military Affairs
*New appointment.
**Altered portfolios.
AFRICA
MALI
Overthrow of Moussa Traoré
Intensifying popular pressure for reform throughout January and February [see pp. 37947; 37995]culminated in March in bloody rioting and repression — leaving at least 150 civilians dead — and, on March 26, in the overthrow and arrest of President Moussa Traoré.
Faced with the mounting demands for multiparty democracy, Traoré had been quoted on March 2 as promising that his ruling Mali People's Democratic Union (UDPM) would discuss the issue at its congress on March 28.
On March 3 several tens of thousands of people demonstrated peacefully in the capital, Bamako, in support of multiparty politics and an end to "rule by violence" .
The marches were organized by five associations: the Alliance for Democracy in Mali (ADEMA), the National Committee for Democratic Association Initiative (CNID), the Free and Democratic Youth (JLD), the Youth Association for Democracy and Progress (AJDP), and the Association of Young Graduates Initiating and Seeking Employment (ADIDE).
There were demands for the release of those arrested during the January riots [see p. 37947].
Police dispersed the crowds with teargas, and tanks were stationed in the city.
On March 17 marching crowds turned out again, this time to mark the anniversary of the death, allegedly under torture, of a student leader, Abdoul Karim Camara, in 1980 [see p. 30560].
Demonstrations in Bamako on March 22 became riots, and the army opened fire.
Radiodiffusion-Television Malienne reported that 27 people died on March 22 and 23, but the Agence France-Presse news agency put the figure at "more than 80 dead" .
On March 22 Traoré broadcast an appeal for calm, and announced an overnight curfew in main centres.
Opposition groups met on March 23 and demanded the President's resignation.
On March 24, France-Inter reported that the army had again opened fire on demonstrators, and that 65 people had died in a shopping centre which troops set ablaze after demonstrators took refuge there.
Several thousand people massed in the streets of Bamako, and opposition groups said that 148 had been killed and hundreds wounded in the three days.
Hospitals were reported "overflowing" with dead and wounded.
Independent reports said that at least 170 had died.
Also on March 24, the embattled Traoré told opposition leaders that he would not resign, but promised early elections.
Trade union leader Bakary Karambo and lawyer and leading human rights activist Demba Diallo, responded by calling for an immediate, indefinite general strike until the UDPN gave up power.
Traoré later ordered the lifting of the state of emergency and the curfew.
Arrest of Traoré by army — Formation of transitional National Reconciliation Council
Traoré and his wife Mariam were arrested by soldiers at a military air base near Bamako in the early hours of March 26, apparently attempting to leave the country.
An announcement the same day on the national radio said that Traoré's government had been dissolved and a 17-member National Reconciliation Council (CNR) formed under the chairmanship of Lt.-Col. Amadou Toumani Toure, commander of the parachute regiment.
Toure said that multiparty democracy was "a priority" and would be achieved "as soon as possible" .
Wild street celebrations turned to looting and several unpopular officials were reportedly lynched.
The curfew and the state of emergency were reimposed.
Some rioters were said to have been shot, and hospital sources said that 40 people died on March 26, and 19 on March 27.
Popular activists were said to be resentful of the army takeover, expressing fears that the achievement of multiparty democracy might be further delayed.
It was recalled that Traoré had also promised political pluralism when he seized power in 1968, had gone on to rule despotically for 22 years, imposing a one-party system.
It was noted that by March 27, state radio was referring to Toure as "the President" .
AFRICA
SAO TOMÉ AND PRINCIPE
Election of new President
Miguel Trovoada, an independent opposition leader who had returned from exile to the islands in May 1990 [see p. 37674], was elected President on March 3, 1991.
The previous President, Manuel Pinto da Costa, did not contest the election, having announced on Feb. 2 his decision to retire from politics, following the unexpected defeat of his Movement for the Liberation of Sao Tomé and Príncipe — Social Democratic Party (MLSTP-PSD) in the country's first multiparty elections, held on Jan. 20 [see p. 37949].
The two other presidential candidates, Alfonso Santos of the Christian Democratic Front and Guadalupe de Seita, an independent, announced at the end of February that they were withdrawing from the ballot, complaining that government funds had been made available for the Trovoada campaign.
Trovoada, a 54-year-old lawyer (whose name was previously given as Trouvoada), served as Prime Minister from 1975 to 1979, but was imprisoned for 21 months after a quarrel with Pinto da Costa, who subsequently allowed him to leave the country in 1981.
Final results published on March 13 when Trovoada was officially proclaimed President-elect showed that close to 60 per cent of the 60,000 registered electors had voted, giving him 81.8 per cent of the ballot.
He was to be sworn in as President on April 3.
AFRICA
BENIN
Presidential elections
In line with constitutional arrangements agreed at the February 1990 conference on reform [see p. 37812], the country went to the polls on March 10 to elect a president.
The 13 candidates included President Mathieu Kerekou, an avowed Marxist who had been in power since his military coup of 1972, and his Prime Minister, Nicéphore Soglo, a former World Bank official.
The 50-member High Council of the Republic (HCR), the transitional government established by the February 1990 conference, officially confirmed the results of the first round on March 14.
On a 56 per cent turnout, they gave Soglo 36.16 per cent of the votes, Kerekou 27.33 per cent, and their closest contender, Albert Tevoedjre, 14.24 per cent , provoking a second-round runoff between Kerekou and Soglo on March 24.
Radio Cotonou reported that the first round took place "in a calm and serious atmosphere" .
In a broadcast on radio Cotonou on March 5, Interior, Public Security and Territorial Administration Minister Florentin Feliho had said that he had information of a plot to create "serious incidents" aimed at disrupting the elections, including assassinations of leading "civilian, military and religious personalities" , and openly criticized Kerekou's regime.
The media, freed of censorship following the February 1990 changes, vilified several of the candidates, while warning of attempts to incite violence and disruption.
Soglo emerged victorious in the second round of voting on March 24, the first time in mainland Africa that a head of state had been removed from power through the ballot box.
[In Cape Verde the incumbent President had been defeated in February — see pp. 37994-95 — and his successor was sworn in on March 22 — see this page.]
Incomplete official voting figures announced on March 25 gave Soglo 67.6 per cent of votes, Kerekou 32.2 per cent, with an estimated 64 per cent turnout.
The totals excluded the expected several hundred votes of Beninese living abroad, and the count in the northern town of Parakou, where 43,000 people had been registered to vote.
An estimated 20,000 southerners had fled from Parakou after one person was killed and 15 were reportedly wounded in election-day clashes with local people backing Kerekou.
His regime had enjoyed almost universal support in the poor, largely agrarian north, his home area, but was widely unpopular in the more heavily populated south where the repressive methods of his 18-year rule had been most keenly felt.
On March 17 he had apologised publicly to the "victims of deplorable and regrettable incidents" under his regime, stating that he now had "a profound, sincere and irreversible" commitment to reform.
The President-elect was due to be sworn in on April 1, but the ceremony was delayed when on March 28 he was flown to France for urgent hospital treatment.
A spokesman said that Soglo was suffering from fatigue following an attack of typhoid fever.
AFRICA
CAPE VERDE
Inauguration of new President
Antonio Mascarenhas Monteiro was sworn in on March 22 as Cape Verde's first freely elected President, the elections on Feb. 17 [see p. 37994]having recorded the first ever electoral defeat for an African head of state.
[For election defeat of incumbent President Mathieu Kerekou in Benin on March 24 and for the victory of Miguel Trovoada in the Sao Tomé and Príncipe presidential elections on March 3 see this page.]
The ceremony was attended by Portuguese-speaking African leaders and by Portuguese President Mario Soares, who said on arrival on March 21 that the functioning of the democratic process in Cape Verde was "an example for other regions of Africa" .
On April 5 the new Prime Minister, Carlos Veiga, said that his government would take steps to struggle against "sub-human living conditions" , concentrating its efforts on fishing, tourism, services production and industry.
Its foreign policy would defend the objectives of the Non-aligned Movement, the UN and the Organization of African Unity (OAU), and would pay special attention to relationships with Portuguese-speaking African countries, Brazil, Portugal and the European Communities (EC).
AFRICA
TOGO
Pro-democracy protests — Accelerated reform programme
Student and opposition movements, refusing to accept the slow pace of democratization offered by the regime of President Gnassingbe Eyadema, mounted several days of campus and street demonstrations during the first two weeks of March.
Pro- and anti-government students fought each other, provoking violent intervention by troops and gendarmes in the streets of Lomé, the capital, and other centres.
Classes were suspended on March 12.
Four days of disorder followed, with demonstrators openly calling for the end of Eyadema's 24-year single-party regime.
There were numerous arrests and injuries, as well as unconfirmed stories of killings.
On March 16, a policeman and a 12-year-old boy died during violence in Lomé, heightening public displeasure with the authorities.
Ten opposition groupings met together on March 14 and formed the Front of Associations for Renewal (FAR) under the leadership of a lawyer, Yawo Agboyibo.
Agboyibo obtained a meeting with Eyadema on March 17, and the following day Eyadema met the leaders of all 10 groupings.
He agreed to sweeping reforms, a rapid transition to multiparty politics, consultations with the opposition, and an amnesty for political offenders.
The FAR leaders called off a threatened 48-hour strike and urged students to abandon further planned demonstrations, although there were indications that public unrest was continuing.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Stalemate at all-party conference
The three rival factions in the 14-month civil war, the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) led by Charles Taylor, the Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia (INPFL) of Prince Yormie Johnson, and the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL — the rump of the pre-civil war national army) headed by Gen. Hezekiah Bowen, agreed in Lomé, Togo, on March 1 to attend a national conference in Monrovia, the Liberian capital, on March 15.
A joint declaration signed on March 1 by the three leaders followed three days of "reconciliation talks" , at which Capt. Blaise Compaore, the Burkinabe head of state, was understood to have exerted his personal influence with Taylor, reportedly the most intransigent of the faction leaders.
Taylor was subsequently reported to have denied that he wanted to head a proposed interim government, an insistence which had been perceived as a major obstacle in the peace process [see p. 37994].
However, on his return to Monrovia, Taylor told reporters that he would emerge from the March 15 conference as "Liberia's number one" .
The three groups' stated support for the conference aroused high hopes, and on March 14 Amos Sawyer, interim president installed by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) standing mediation committee, called in a broadcast for "magnanimity of spirit" and a national reconciliation.
The conference duly opened on March 15, with delegations from 14 Liberian interest groups attending: the six recognised political parties, the three civil war factions, the three religious communities, trade unions and students.
Foreign ministers of seven mediating ECOWAS states attended, but those of Côte d'Ivoire and Burkina were conspicuously absent.
Also absent was Taylor, to the anger of some delegations who accused him of delaying proceedings while he strengthened his bid for the interim presidency.
On March 16, Nigeria's External Affairs Minister, Maj.-Gen. (retd) Ike Nwachukwu, drove to Kakata, in a NPFL-held zone north of Monrovia, to urge Taylor to attend.
By March 19 Taylor had still not appeared and the Togolese Foreign Minister, Yaovi Adodo, was despatched to Kakata, also to no avail.
Taylor was reported to have criticized the composition of the conference, demanding the participation of elected representatives of Liberia's 13 counties, of which his faction claimed to control 12.
He was also believed to favour the installation of a three-member ruling council pending elections after 12-18 months.
With Taylor continuing absent from the talks "for security reasons" , debate became bogged down in procedural squabbles and by the NPFL delegation's complaint that the front was under-represented at the conference.
The mood was further soured when the conference's co-chairman, the Most Rev. Michael Francis, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Monrovia, published a strongly-worded article in a local newspaper, Torchlight, attacking the rebel fighters, which infuriated Taylor's faction.
Sporadic outbreaks of fighting reported during March were mainly attributed to unruly rebel troops.
Sierra Leone announced that it was sending 2,000 men to the border area after rebels from Liberia killed 25 people during raids.
There were reports of renewed incursions by armed Liberians into Côte d'Ivoire, which also stepped up border patrols after several reported killings in early March.
AFRICA
NIGER
Preparations for national conference
President Ali Saibou was re-elected chairman of the ruling National Movement for a Development Society (MNSD) at the Movement's Congress on March 12-18, pending the outcome of a national conference in May to introduce political reforms.
In line with reforms announced during November 1990 [see p. 37841], 15 political parties were reported to have received provisional recognition from the Interior Ministry by March 11.
The congress called on the government to reopen schools and Niamey University, closed following rioting on Feb. 27.
On March 23 a rally was held by 12 parties in central Niamey to protest against the MNSD's unilateral choice of May as the time for a national conference.
About 2,000 people were said to have participated.
A bill formally legalizing the new parties was not expected to be enacted before April.
New Interior Minister
President Saibou on March 11 replaced Lt.-Col. Tanja Mamadou as Interior Minster, appointing Abara Djika.
AFRICA
GUINEA-BISSAU
Minor cabinet reshuffle
Brig. -Gen.
Joao Bernardo Vieira carried out a minor Cabinet reshuffle on March 10, appointing Vasco Cabral, Second Deputy Chairman of the Council of State and Minister of State in charge of Co-ordination of the Social Sector, to the Justice Ministry.
The former Justice Minister, Mário Cabral, was given the Civil Service and Labour portfolio, replacing Nicandro Pereira Barreto.
AFRICA
MAURITANIA
Release of political prisoners
Over 60 people detained in connection with a November 1990 coup attempt were released on March 2.
Five days later a general amnesty for prisoners held on security charges was announced.
Those released on March 2 included military officers and civil servants who had been accused of taking advantage of the campaign for the December 1990 municipal elections to organize an attempted coup against the regime of President Moaouia Ould Sidi Mohamed Taya.
A number of them had worked in Nouadhibou, Mauritania's second largest town.
Some prisoners benefiting from the general amnesty of March 7 had been detained following earlier incidents in October 1987 and October 1988.
Government sources said that in total between 250 and 300 black Mauritanians would be released.
The leader of the African Liberation Forces of Mauritania (FLAM), which was accused of involvement in the 1987 coup attempt [see p. 36139], gave an anonymous interview in Dakar to the Agence France-Presse news agency, reported on March 20.
He said that 33 black Mauritanians belonging to FLAM had benefited from the recent amnesties, which were the result of "French pressure" .
AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Appointment of Prime Minister
Edouard Frank, formerly Minister in charge of the Cabinet Secretariat, was, by a presidential decree issued in Bangui on March 15, appointed Prime Minister and head of government.
A commentary broadcast on March 18 on Radio Centrafricaine said that the decision to appoint a Prime Minister reflected President André Kolingba's "determination to pursue the democratic process" , and was in line with the statement of President Mitterrand of France at the 1990 Franco-African conference in La Baule [see p. 37524].
(Mitterrand was widely interpreted at the conference as having warned that francophone African states which did not adopt multiparty democracy would be less favourably considered in France's future allocation of aid.)
The ruling Central African Democratic Assembly (Rassemblement Démocratique Centrafricain-RDC) had on May 14, 1990 rejected demands for multiparty democracy.
In a radio broadcast on March 20, the new Prime Minister announced the appointment of a government of 18 ministers and seven secretaries of state.
Edouard FrankPrime Minister Thierry BingabaEconomy, Finance, Planning and International Co-operation Pejot PekanJustice, Keeper of the Seals Ismaila NimagaSocial Security and Territorial Administration Laurent Gomina-PampaliForeign Affairs Michel BrenidjetPrimary, Secondary and Technical Education, Youth and Sports Jean-Marie BassiaHigher Education Pierre Gonifei GaibounanouTransport and Civil Aviation, Posts and Telecommunications Christian-Bernard YamoleCivil Service, Labour, Social Security and Professional Training Georgette MongletPublic Health and Social Affairs Casimir AmakpioRural Development Jean TchombegoPosts and Telecommunications Dieudonné NanaPublic Works and Territorial Development Omoua AkirebiMines and Energy, Geology and Water Resources Raymond MbitikonTourism, Water, Forests, Wildlife and Fisheries Enzi Paytine OyigouwaFinance, Commerce, Industry, Small and Medium-Scale Enterprises Timothée MarbouaMinister in charge, General Secretariat of Government and Relations with Parliament Tony Da SilvaCommunication, Arts and Culture
CAR Council of Ministers
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Government's land reform bills
The government introduced in Parliament on March 12 a policy paper and tabled draft legislation intended to repeal 187 laws and innumerable regulations enforcing white ownership of 87 per cent of South Africa's land.
Abolition of the laws would fulfil, by June 1992, President F. W. de Klerk's promise to Parliament on Feb. 1 to repeal all remaining apartheid legislation [see p. 37991].
 "Anybody will be able to buy any land anywhere in South Africa," Hernus Kriel, the Minister of Planning and Provincial Affairs, told Parliament.
However, the proposed legislation would rule out reparations to the 3,500,000 blacks forcibly evicted and moved to "homelands" over the past 30 years.
The proposed legislation was presented in the form of five draft laws.
(1) The Abolition of Racially Based Land Measures Bill would give blacks equal property rights, and would repeal the Group Areas Act of 1966, the Land Acts of 1913 and 1936 restricting black farming to 13 per cent of the country, and the Black Communities Development Act, which had provided for the establishment of black townships.
(2) The Upgrading of Land Tenure Rights Bill would enable 300,000 black householders to convert their existing 99-year leases to full ownership of their homes, and would set up a single property register, while government land loaned to rural tribes for communal farming would be transferred to ownership by those tribes.
(3) The Residential Environment Bill would enable residents to set minimum standards for existing suburbs, although racially discriminatory measures would be excluded.
(4) The Less Formal Township Establishment Bill would speed up the creation and approval of new settlements, mainly squatter camps and shanties, ensuring minimum facilities.
(5) The Rural Development Bill would encourage farm development and the creation of new towns in rural areas.
The government's policy paper contained provisions for state-aided settlement schemes to encourage black farmers to set up on 485,000 hectares of government land.
It would reject any redistribution of white-owned land, but would allow blacks to buy freehold land from whites.
Domestic and foreign reaction
The white official parliamentary opposition Conservative Party leader, Andries Treurnicht, said in a strongly worded statement that de Klerk's plans for change had plunged whites into "a struggle for our freedom" to defend "our people's claim to its own country and right to self-government" .
The African National Congress (ANC) condemned the draft legislation, saying that it was "outraged" by the government's refusal to return land to blacks who had been forcibly evicted.
A statement from the ANC Land Commission said that the legislation would serve only to "codify the current state of dispossession under the cover of free market proposals" .
The president of the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), Clarence Makwetu, said that the proposals were nothing more than the "dressing up of land apartheid in new clothes" .
According to the Washington Post of March 13, once the five laws were enacted, United States President Bush was expected to begin rolling back financial, economic and other sanctions imposed by Congress in the 1986 Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act.
A United Kingdom Foreign Office spokesman welcomed the development and said that he expected the European Communities (EC) to move "swiftly" to lift its bans on the import of South African iron, steel and of gold coins.
ANC-government relations
On March 11 the ANC launched a signature campaign demanding a constituent assembly and an interim government.
Working in conjunction with the South African Communist Party (SACP) and the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU), the ANC planned to conduct the campaign by means of house-to-house visits, completing it on June 16, a senior ANC official, Mzwai Piliso, told a news conference.
Piliso said that only the National Party rejected the proposal for a constituent assembly, and that the government feared the participation of the masses in deciding the constitution of a future South Africa.
An ANC statement on March 1 had criticized the Law and Order Minister, Adriaan Vlok, for unilaterally restructuring the police force without reference to recent proposals made to the government by the ANC.
The restructuring included the dissolution of the security police, and its reintegration as a new division to be known as Crime Combating and Investigation.
Vlok said that the move was a further effort to "remove the police from the political playing field" .
Upsurge in township violence
An ANC delegation led by Walter Sisulu met Vlok and Defence Minister Gen. Magnus Malan in Cape Town on March 13 to discuss the worsening security situation in the townships.
Sisulu said that the ANC believed that a "third force" was stirring up violence in the townships between ANC supporters and those of the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party led by Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi.
More than 100 people were thought to have been killed in faction fighting in Natal and in townships around Johannesburg during March, mostly between supporters of the ANC and of Inkatha but also involving the security forces.
An estimated 5,000 people were thought to have died in township violence since 1986, more than 1,200 of them since August 1990.
On March 26 the South African Council of Churches issued a call for a national council of "leaders of the affected communities" to meet within a week, arguing that the violence had gone beyond the control of the ANC and Inkatha.
Repeated calls for restraint had been made by the ANC and Inkatha local and national leaderships, urging observance of the Jan. 29 joint peace appeal [see pp. 37951-52], but such appeals appeared to have little effect.
Buthelezi and the ANC deputy president, Nelson Mandela, meeting in Durban on March 30 amid media claims that both their own and their organizations' authority had been diminished by the events, issued a new five-point plan to try to control the situation.
On the same day eight bodies of victims of new violence were found in Natal.
Other widely reported developments during March, in what appeared increasingly like a battle for political control of the townships, included the reported killing of at least 60 people in Alexandra township, near Johannesburg.
In one incident in Alexandra, gunmen appearing to be Inkatha supporters slaughtered 15 mourners at a funeral, including seven members of the pro-ANC Congress of South African Students (COSAS).
Earlier, pro-ANC mobs were said to have hunted Zulu-speaking workers from an Alexandra hostel whom they accused of starting violence on March 10 in which 28 people died.
The government, responding to criticism of the role of the police, ordered a judicial inquiry into an incident on March 24 when 13 people, including a policeman, were killed in the Transvaal township of Daveytown.
Police claimed that they were forced to open fire when the crowd attacked them, whereas the ANC said that several of its supporters, grouped to defend themselves from a pro-Inkatha attack, had been shot down by the police.
Vlok announced on March 11 that the townships of Alexandra, Tembisa, Meadowlands, Diepkloof, Soweto and Dobsonville had been declared unrest areas and place under curfew between the hours of 9.00 p.m. and 4.00 a.m.
Dissolution of UDF
The United Democratic Front (UDF), the umbrella organization for some 600 anti-apartheid organizations since August 1983, announced on March 4 that it was to cease its activities immediately and would formally disband in August.
The announcement, which followed a meeting of 364 UDF leaders, was widely seen as marking the end of an era in the anti-apartheid struggle.
Following the re-legalization of anti-apartheid groups in January 1990, the UDF appeared redundant.
It had been formed to act as a co-ordinating body for banned organizations, and had played a leading role in the 1984-86 uprisings in black townships.
End of ban on protest meetings
Justice Minister Kobie (H. J.) Coetsee announced on March 22 that the ban on unauthorised political and protest meetings without written permission from a magistrate, which had been renewed each year since 1976, would lapse on March 31.
He said that written permission would still be required for marches.
Request for UN help over repatriation
It was announced on March 22 that the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) would be asked to help in returning 40,000 political exiles to South Africa from countries with which Pretoria did not have diplomatic relations.
A first planeload of ANC exiles returned home from Zambia on March 7, and a further 550 were expected during the ensuing weeks.
Government sources said that another 6,000 exiles had applied to return.
Recognition by IOC
South Africa was readmitted to the Olympic Games on March 27, subject to its being able to satisfy within 30 days conditions laid down by the International Olympic Committee (IOC).
These included the abolition of apartheid laws, the non-racial unification of sports bodies, and normalization of relations with sports bodies elsewhere in Africa.
The country had been banned from the games since 1970.
Death penalty moratorium
A statement by the Justice Department on March 2 said that press reports had created an "untrue impression" that an announcement in Parliament by Justice Minister Coetsee on Feb. 26 concerning the carrying out of the death sentence had brought to an end the moratorium on executions.
The reports had caused widespread public outcry, and many organizations including the ANC had issued statements condemning the announcement.
The moratorium had initially been introduced in November 1989, pending a revision of the legislation on death sentences.
The Criminal Law Amendment Act which came into effect on July 27, 1990, provided notably for a right of appeal of all those condemned to death (including those already on death row before the new law came into effect).
Paul Bezuidenhout, due to be hanged on March 5 following the rejection of his appeal the previous September, was granted a stay of execution by the Supreme Court.
Presentation of 1991-92 budget
Finance Minister Barend du Plessis presented a budget on March 20 offering large tax incentives to business, with the emphasis on promoting growth (GDP having fallen by 1 per cent in 1990 with a further fall expected in 1991).
Expenditure would total R85,000 million (US$1=R2.63), with cuts in defence spending, but an increase of 15 per cent in social spending.
To help fund the increases in social spending, representing 38.2 per cent of the total budget, value added tax would be raised and would be introduced for the first time on all foodstuffs.
The VAT increase was expected to cost consumers some R2,000 million a year.
The police force, in response to the explosion of crime during 1990, was to receive R4,600 million, a 53 per cent increase over the previous year, and 5 per cent of the total budget.
The ANC strongly criticized the budget, calling the level of social expenditure proposed "hopelessly inadequate" and alleging that it reflected "ongoing apartheid priorities" .
Cabinet reshuffle
On March 13, de Klerk announced a government reshuffle following the appointment of Kent Durr (hitherto Minister of Trade and Industry and of Tourism) as ambassador to the UK.
On March 18 the Minister of Administration and Economic Co-Ordination, W. J. de Villiers, died.
Further Cabinet changes were announced on March 28, to take effect formally from April 8.
Summary of South African Cabinet changes
*George S. BartlettMinerals and Energy
**G.
(Org) MaraisTrade and Industry, Tourism
*Jacob de VilliersDevelopment Aid, Public Works and Land Affairs
*D.W. de VilliersPublic Enterprises and Economic Co-ordination
**A.I.
(Kraai) van NiekerkAgriculture
*Piet WelgemoedAdministration and Transport
*Member of previous Cabinet with different responsibilities.
**New Cabinet member.
Welgemoed was initially given a deputy ministerial post in the March 13 changes, before being brought into the Cabinet as announced on March 28.
AFRICA
NAMIBIA
Government changes
A minor Cabinet reshuffle was carried out on Feb. 19 — the first since Namibia's independence on March 21, 1991 [see pp. 37296-97]— when two new ministries were created.
The major change was the creation of a Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources, under Helmut Angula, hitherto Deputy Minister for Mines and Energy.
Pendukini Ithana, hitherto Deputy Minister of Wildlife, Conservation and Tourism, was appointed Minister of Youth and Sports, bringing a second woman into the Cabinet.
Five new Deputy Ministers were also appointed.
Talks on Walvis Bay issue
Foreign Affairs Minister Theo-Ben Gurirab led a 32-member delegation to talks in Cape Town, South Africa, on March 14 with a South African delegation headed by Foreign Affairs Minister Roelof ( "Pik" ) Botha on the issue of the South African Walvis Bay enclave and the offshore Penguin Island group.
The Namibian delegation was accompanied by Tanzanian and Ghanaian observers.
Gurirab had insisted before the talks that Namibia would settle for nothing less than South Africa's agreement in principle to cede the territories.
South African government sources indicated, however, that they might concede only some form of joint administration of the Walvis Bay enclave, which included the only deep-water port on Namibia's coast.
The talks ended without agreement, the two Ministers unable to agree a joint statement.
Addressing reporters on his return to Windhoek on March 15, Gurirab referred to UN Security Council Resolution 432 of 1978 calling for the reintegration of Walvis Bay into Namibia.
The UN, he said, remained "one of the pillars of our case" .
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Lisbon talks — Latest peace proposals
Talks took place on March 4-5 in Lisbon involving Soviet, United States and Portuguese mediators in Angola's 15-year civil war.
[For postponement of talks in January and stalling in early February see pp. 37992-93.]
New proposals were said to encompass a truce, multiparty elections, the creation of a single army and the holding of a seventh round of negotiations at the end of March.
A statement said that the two sides — the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA-PT) government and the US-backed National Union for Total Independence of Angola (UNITA)— should bring to the negotiating table "realistic proposals" for a period within which elections should be held.
The two sides had repeatedly failed to agree on the timing of a truce, a date for elections, and the ending of the one-party system.
UNITA had demanded that elections be held within a year after the signing of a ceasefire, and rejected President José Eduardo dos Santos's proposal for a 36-month delay.
Intensified diplomatic contacts during February and early March involved UNITA, MPLA-PT, Soviet and US officials and appeared to create optimism.
On March 7, the Angolan Foreign Minister, Pedro de Castro Van-Dúnem "Loy" , said in Germany that the MPLA-PT would study a US proposal for elections to be held 15 months after a ceasefire.
Dos Santos told the opening session of the Angolan People's Assembly on March 20 that the session would introduce the framework for multiparty democracy.
He also referred to a government proposal to sign a ceasefire on April 15.
UNITA concluded its seventh congress on March 17, having re-elected Jonas Savimbi as its president, and stated that it would sign a ceasefire agreement as soon as a date was set for multiparty elections.
The statement also said that UNITA would publish its election manifesto before May.
Savimbi was quoted as telling the congress that the war was over "from a philosophical and spiritual point of view" .
He promised a ceasefire signing "very, very soon" .
The government agreed on March 12 subject, it said, to US guarantees of non-interference by UNITA, to permit the resumption of UN food and medical relief convoys to several hundred thousand civilians facing deprivation in southern areas.
The UN programme had been halted in December after the government alleged that UNITA forces were disrupting the convoys.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Replacement of one transitional government by another
With several leading opposition figures clamouring for his resignation and calling for a national conference, President Mobutu Sese Seko on March 15 named a new Prime Minister, Mulumba Lukeji, replacing Lunda Bululu who had resigned the day before.
Lunda, who had held the office for under 11 months, said he was stepping down "to allow the head of state to set up an enlarged transitional government" .
Mulumba's 51-member cabinet was due to be sworn in on April 1.
However, the five main opposition parties refused to accept any role in his government, whose main task was thought to be to supervise the shift to multiparty politics and the adoption of a new constitution during 1991.
A leading opposition figure and former Foreign Affairs Minister, Nguza Karl i Bond [see pp. 37446; 37950], said that it was "unacceptable to have a Prime Minister appointed by presidential decree" .
The permanent committee of Zaïre's bishops had on March 2 criticized the "blocking" of democratisation and called for a national conference.
The state-owned Voix du Zaïre radio announced on March 7 that Mobutu had signed an order instituting a constitutional conference following his meeting at N'Sele, a suburb of the capital Kinshasa, on Feb. 26 with representatives of 53 of Zaïre's 66 political parties.
Some major parties quickly rejected the whole idea of the planned conference, regarding it as undemocratic, and called for a genuine national conference to draw up a new constitution.
AFRICA
RWANDA
Continuing fighting — Peace initiative
Renewed fighting between government forces and Uganda-based rebels of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (FPR) was reported in early March, despite an apparently successful attempt in February to conclude a ceasefire agreement [see pp. 37993-94].
A Radio Rwanda bulletin on March 6 said that rebels had attacked twice in the northern Ruhengeri prefecture in the previous two days, suffering some 250 dead and "hundreds" wounded.
The report alleged that Katyusha rockets were fired from inside Uganda.
Further attacks were reported in the following days.
In a peace initiative brokered by Zaïre's President Mobutu Sese Seko, a draft ceasefire agreement was reported to have been signed between the Rwandan government and the FPR in Zaïre on March 18 and was due to come into force at the end of March.
President Juvénal Habyarimana on March 14 gave rebels a 15-day deadline to lay down their arms and accept an amnesty, which was reported on March 19 to have been rejected, amid further reports of fighting.
AFRICA
KENYA
Charging of civil rights lawyer — Official criticism of Law society chairman
Gitobu Imanyara, a civil rights lawyer and editor of the Nairobi Law Monthly, was charged with sedition on March 5, and was refused bail.
It was understood that the main focus of police interrogation had related to the publication in the Nairobi Law Monthly of the manifesto of Oginga Odinga's new National Democratic Party (NDP — see p. 37995), and Imanyara's advocacy of multiparty democracy.
The actual sedition charge, however, reportedly arose from an article on tribalism, in which Imanyara wrote that some readers had contacted him to allege that undue favouritism was being shown in official quarters towards particular groups.
Many public corporations, the article alleged, were headed by members of President Daniel arap Moi's Kalenjin tribe.
Copies of the magazine had been seized by security police in late February [see p. 37995], and police searched the offices and the editor's home.
A Nairobi lawyer, Martha Njoka, claimed that she was assaulted by a special branch superintendent when she went to a police station to trace Imanyara.
A British citizen, Dominic Martin, who printed the magazine, was charged with "editing a publication without posting the necessary notice" .
Following the arrest of Imanyara, the United States State Department had issued a press statement on March 1, calling for his immediate release.
Kenya's Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation Minister Wilson Ndolo Ayah responded by accusing the USA of treating Kenya as a "colonial puppet" .
In the National Assembly on March 20, several ministers and other MPs attacked the US ambassador, Nicholas Hempstone, for "activities tantamount to subversion" , Kenya Television Network reported.
The newly elected chairman of the Law Society of Kenya, Paul Muite, called in his inaugural address on March 10 for the legalization of Odinga's party, for political pluralism and for the release of three political prisoners.
On March 13, however, the Registrar-General rejected the NDP's request for registration.
Muite came under violent criticism in the pro-government media.
A radio report on March 11 quoted President Moi as deploring the politicization of the Law Society of Kenya, and accusing Muite of inciting taxi drivers and street hawkers to riot.
The national television and radio stations reported on March 13 that lawyers all over the country were demanding Muite's resignation, and articles in three national newspapers accused him of maligning Kenya's former President, Jomo Kenyatta.
AFRICA
CHAD
New government and "national charter" 
Col. Idriss Déby, head of state since the overthrow in December 1990 of Hissène Habré, on March 4 announced that he had appointed Jean Alingue Bawoyeu as Prime Minister.
The composition of a new government of 29 ministers and secretaries of state was announced on March 5, the official radio station noting that there were 16 newcomers.
The new government was created under the terms of a new "national charter" adopted on Feb. 28; the Cabinet and an advisory Council of the Republic replaced the provisional Council of State created in December.
The charter, which effectively signalled the postponement of any move to introduce a multiparty system, also confirmed Déby's own position as President.
Drawn up by a panel of civilian and military experts, the charter was to remain in force for a 30-month interim period, at the end of which a referendum would be held on a new constitution for Chad.
Alingue Bawoyeu, a 54-year-old southern Christian, had been National Assembly president under the Habré regime.
According to the Africa Economic Digest of March 18 a number of key posts went to members of the southern tribes under-represented under Habré.
Nadjita Bessoumal, who became Minister of State for Public Works and Transport, was described as a southerner with close links to the Libyan leader, Col. Moamer al Kadhafi.
On March 3 a Libyan-based opposition group, the National Movement of Chadian Renovators, claimed in a communiqué to the Agence France-Presse news agency that the national charter was "anti-democratic" and that a national conference should be called to draw up a "genuine draft constitution" and an election timetable.
On March 18 two organizations which had opposed Habré — the Chadian People's Revolution and the Original National Front for the Liberation of Chad (Frolinat originel)— amalgamated with Déby's Patriotic Salvation Movement.
Jean Alingue BawoyeuPrime Minister Maldom Bada AbbasMinister of State for Interior Nadjita BeassoumalMinister of State for Public Works and Transport Ahmad SounguiExternal Relations Djibrine DassertDefence Hassan Fadoul KittirPlanning and Co-operation Youssouf TogoimiJustice, Keeper of the Seals Abderamane KokoNational Education Habib DoutoumMines, Energy and Water Resources Bambe DansalaRural Development Gali Gatta NgotheEconomy and Finance Mahamat Zene Ali FadelLivestock Mahamat Saleh AhmatInformation, Culture and Tourism Mahamat Malloum KadrePublic Health and Social Affairs Djidi BicharaPost and Telecommunications Koumbaria Laomaye MekonyoCivil Service and Labour
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Opposition to USC regime
A conference called by interim President Ali Mahdi Mohammed to discuss a new constitution was postponed as groups continued to withhold recognition from his provisional government, formed by the Hawiye-dominated United Somali Congress (USC, active in central Somalia).
The "conference of national reconciliation" , initially scheduled by the USC for Feb. 28, was postponed, first until March 14 and then indefinitely, when it became clear that other groups involved in the overthrow of former President Siyad Barre would not participate.
On March 2 USC leaders held talks with members of the Somali Patriotic Movement (SPM), which under Col. Omar Sheiss controlled areas in the south.
On March 7 Mogadishu radio reported that a USC-sponsored "peace committee" would travel to the Gedo region (the south-western homeland of Siyad Barre) to explain that the area "would not come under attack as long as the former dictator left the region" .
A Le Monde report of Feb. 12 had cited refugee sources in Kenya to the effect that ex-President Barre had handed over arms to the SPM in the south.
An SPM spokesperson said on March 13, however, that clashes were continuing with the "remnants" of Siyad Barre's forces in the south of the country.
The SPM had amalgamated with other groups of the Darod clan under the umbrella title of the Somali National Front (SNF).
SPM forces were later reported to be closing in on the capital from the south, with help from the Somali Salvation Democratic Front (SSDF), which claimed by March 21 to have defeated USC forces near Ceel Buur, 350 km north-east of Mogadishu.
An estimated 600,000 people, reportedly largely Darod refugees from Mogadishu, reached the southern town of Kismayu in February and early March.
In the north, according to Le Monde of Feb. 27, Somali National Movement (SNM) leaders were considering demanding a revision of the 1960 act of union, which had linked former British Somaliland in the north with the former Italian colony in the south.
In Mogadishu on March 14 over 1,000 people protested against the lack of public services and demanded the confiscation of illegal firearms.
Aid officials and provisional government spokespersons appealed for urgent medical and food aid.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Combined offensive by rebel groups
From March 2 the Tigre People's Liberation Front (TPLF) and their allies, grouped under the title of the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF), claimed to have gained control of the Gojam region north-west of Addis Ababa, as part of a successful offensive launched on Feb. 23.
The fighting centred on the Gojam and Gondar regions as rebel forces moved southwards towards the capital.
Government radio also reported fighting in the Shoa and Wollo regions, and the Oromo Liberation Army (OLA) clashed with the Ethiopian army in Welega (west of Addis Ababa) on March 2-8.
By March 8-9 the EPRDF claimed that Gondar town and the surrounding region were in their hands.
Heavy government casualties continued to be reported.
EPRDF forces captured Mezezo in the Shoa region on March 19, bringing them within 50 km of Addis Ababa.
The Tigrean-led EPRDF alliance, formed in late 1989, brought together the TPLF, the Ethiopian People's Democratic Movement (EPDM), and the OPDO (the Oromo People's Democratic Organization).
It advocated a united Ethiopia, with special consideration given to the Eritrean question.
The Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) had meanwhile captured Tio on the Red Sea coast on March 2, and Edd by March 11, coming within 160 km of Assab, the port through which the capital received most of its fuel supplies.
On March 13 Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Tesfaye Dinka said that "almost immediately" after the Feb. 21-22 talks on Eritrea [see p. 37996]rebel groups had launched the offensive on several fronts, although the government was "still committed to pursuing the peace process" .
AFRICA
AFRICA
Famine warnings
UN bodies and government and relief agencies continued to draw attention in February and March to an unprecedentedly largescale need for emergency food relief in sub-Saharan Africa.
The situation was especially critical in Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia, Mozambique and Angola — all countries in which armed conflicts were exacerbating food distribution problems.
Amounts of aid pledged still fell far short of what was required.
On Feb. 28 the UN World Food Programme (WFP) made a fresh appeal for emergency aid for Sudan and Ethiopia to avert a threatened "disaster of monumental proportions" .
On the same day, the League of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in Geneva launched an appeal for US$64,000,000 for emergency aid to these two countries.
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) on March 15 drew attention to the critical food supply situation in the Sudan, the Horn of Africa, Angola and Liberia.
In Somalia equipment to restore water supplies was urgently needed and the country had only two months of food stocks left, according to the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) country director for Somalia on March 5.
On March 20 the Commission of the European Communities (EC) was reported to have allocated a further F8,500,000 francs (US$1,500,000) for food aid to Sudan.
UN officials were quoted as saying that the Sudanese government had allowed the international relief operation to be recommenced following pressure from donor governments.
At a World Bank meeting which opened in Paris on March 27 the main donor countries for Africa discussed the co-ordination of relief efforts and the effect of debt on African efforts to cope with the deteriorating food situation.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
UNITED STATES
Interim funding for savings and loan institutions
The continuing crisis of confidence among US savings and loan institutions (mutual funds, or "thrifts" ) was temporarily relieved on March 14, as the House of Representatives accepted a compromise proposal from the administration for the provision of some $30,000 million of interim funding for the industry, an amount which was expected to secure the situation for six months.
The money was awarded to the Resolution Trust Corporation, the government agency responsible for buying up failed savings and loan institutions and for guaranteeing depositors' savings.
The Resolution Trust Corporation had been started in 1989, financed by $50,000 million of government capital and an unspecified sum raised by selling special bonds to the banking industry.
Its need for additional funding had become apparent as the national banking crisis worsened in January 1991 [see p. 37953].
When the administration sought the money from Congress, however, some Democrats argued that it should come either from tax increases or from cuts in other spending programmes.
Nevertheless, the House on March 13 rejected four alternative proposals, agreeing o the following day to accept the administration's compromise plan, in return for which the administration agreed to step up its low-cost housing programme.
The rescue plan was approved by the Senate on March 22 and was signed by President George Bush on March 23.
Further uncertainty surrounded the administration's proposal to increase the borrowing limit of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC — the government body which underwrote the security of most but not all private bank deposits) from its current $8,400 million to $70,000 million, in the light of the continuing spate of bank failures.
Opponents of this proposal, who included the Comptroller General, Charles Bowsher, argued that a borrowing limit above that of $25,000 million originally sought by the FDIC would threaten to draw the federal government further into debt, because the FDIC would be unlikely to be able to honour such a high level of debt on its own, and could itself be compelled eventually to turn to the government for rescue funding.
Prosecutions over BNL bank loans to Iraq
Two employees of the Atlanta, Georgia, branch of the Italian-based Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL), named as Paul von Wedel (the deputy chief of the branch) and Mrs Leigh New, pleaded guilty on March 8 to charges of conspiracy to commit fraud and to deceive the Federal Reserve Bank and the Treasury.
Both charges could entail fines and possible prison sentences.
They were, however, guaranteed state immunity from any new charges after they agreed to co-operate with the government investigation.
Altogether, four employees of the Iraqi government and three employees of the BNL had been brought to trial on Feb. 28, following more than 18 months of investigations by US officials into illegal loans made by US banking institutions to Iraq.
The Prosecutor-General had accused the defendants not only of helping to organize the advance of some $4,000 million of US loans to Iraq, in contravention of US sanctions, between 1987 and 1990, but also of fraud, money laundering and conspiracy.
In particular, it was alleged that the BNL branch in Atlanta had knowingly transferred funds for military projects, including the development of Iraq's Condor 2 missile project, a scheme allegedly designed to develop a missile capable of delivering a nuclear warhead.
As the official investigation got under way, there were allegations that senior US officials had known for some time of BNL's dealings with Iraq.
Charles Rose, the chairman of a House of Representatives agriculture subcommittee, claimed in the House on March 14 that BNL had loaned part of the money to Rafidain under the pretence that it formed part of a $514,000,000 government-approved export credit guarantee scheme for agricultural development in Iraq.
According to Rose, members of the Department of Agriculture's Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) had known of this, and had written memoranda expressing worries that it might be discovered.
He also alleged that the disappearance of Agriculture Department files relating to the BNL-Rafidain connection gave further indications of a cover-up within the administration.
Prosecutors on March 18 opened another investigation into claims that Christopher Drogoul, the former head of BNL's branch in Atlanta, had personally telephoned a US company on Aug. 7, 1990 (i.e. after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait), to offer help with circumventing the newly implemented US sanctions against Iraq.
Meanwhile, BNL was ordered on March 11 to raise its US reserve deposits by $5,200,000, in order to help cover itself against the liabilities incurred by some of its staff in the course of the affair.
Louisiana governor's defection to Republicans
Charles E. (Buddy) Roemer, the Governor of Louisiana, announced on March 11 that he was defecting from the Democratic to the Republican Party.
At a ceremony in Baton Rouge, Roemer said he had become increasingly convinced that the Republican Party was becoming open to new ideas, new thinking and new people, and was most open to team building.
He added, however, that changes had to occur within the Republican Party, including the greater involvement of women and minority groups.
Elected Governor in 1987, Roemer had previously been one of the southern Democrats in the House of Representatives who rebelled against their party and supported President Reagan's tax cuts.
As Governor he had encountered the opposition of the Democrat majority in the state legislature over tax and budgetary reforms and over his decision to veto a state abortion law in 1990.
Supreme Court refusal to limit damages
The Supreme Court on March 4 upheld a $1,000,000 jury award to Cleopatra Haslip, an Alabama woman who had been the victim of an insurance fraud.
The judgment reflected a refusal by the court to limit punitive damage awards.
An insurance company's agent had pocketed premiums paid to him by Haslip, so that she was unable to pay medical bills following hospitalization.
The insurance company had claimed that the system for calculating punitive awards — to punish wrongdoers and deter future misconduct — was so irrational that it violated the company's constitutional right to be treated fairly.
In the court's majority (7-1) opinion, however, Justice Harry A. Blackmun wrote that although the punitive damages were more than four times the amount given to compensate Haslip for her injuries, and more than 200 times her out-of-pocket expenses, the award did "not cross the line into the area of constitutional impropriety" .
The court's action left the determination of damages mainly in the hands of state legislators, judges and juries.
Business groups had repeatedly pressed for punitive damages to be limited, complaining of the increasing size and frequency of such awards.
A 1989 attempt to limit damages had failed to prove that they were against that part of the Constitution prohibiting excessive fines.
Administration proposals to tackle crime
Addressing both houses of Congress on the subject of the Gulf war on March 6, President George Bush placed a crime bill near the top of his domestic agenda, and he continued to link the issue of crime with that of the Gulf war when he sent a package of legislative proposals to Congress on March 11.
Calling upon Congress to honour the nation's veterans by giving them "an America where it is safe to walk on the streets" , Bush challenged Congress to pass his proposed crime bill within 100 days.
Figures released on March 24 in a preliminary report of the Bureau of Justice Statistics estimated that the number of victims of violent crime rose to 2,300,000 in 1990.
While personal and household crimes fell, the report showed a rise in the number of assaults completed with injury, attempted robbery, and personal larceny.
On March 14 the federal Health Department had released figures showing that more American teenage males died as result of gunshot wounds than from all natural causes combined.
The firearms death rate among teenagers increased by over 40 per cent between 1984 and 1988.
The administration's proposals included increasing mandatory sentences for crimes involving the use of semi-automatic and other firearms, and reviving the federal death penalty to cover a broad range of crimes ranging from treason, espionage, terrorism, and crimes using "weapons of mass destruction" , through to serious drug offenses.
In addition, the administration called for changes in court rules to permit the use of illegally seized evidence, provided that the police had acted "in good faith" in seizing it.
The number of times convicted federal prisoners could appeal was also to be limited.
Most of the proposals had been contained in a similar package in 1989.
The Democrats in Congress had then been willing to accept such measures provided that the President would agree to more federal funding for local law enforcement and controls on the sale of assault weapons.
Bush had refused to accept such conditions, and the package had failed to progress.
The National Rifle Association, the powerful lobby which had successfully blocked most gun controls, announced its support for a national computerised system to check prospective gun-buyers for possible criminal records.
There was also growing support for legislation to impose a seven-day waiting period to enable checks to be made on prospective gun purchasers.
Police racial violence
Police violence against members of racial minorities became a national issue following the widespread broadcast on television of an amateur video showing white Los Angeles policemen brutally beating a black man who had been stopped for an alleged driving offence on March 3.
The victim, Rodney G. King, suffered fractures to the skull, a crushed eye socket and a broken ankle, and possible permanent brain damage.
His lawyer filed a lawsuit against Los Angeles city for $56,000,000 in damages.
Admitting that the incident "brought shame and dishonour upon the police profession" , the Los Angeles police chief, Daryl F. Gates, nevertheless refused to accede to demands for his resignation.
He described the March 3 attack as an "aberration" , although transcripts of radio conversations between the police officers involved and their control included references to other violent incidents and contained a number of derogatory racial remarks.
Bush on March 21 described the incident as "outrageous" , and said that "what I saw [on the video]made me sick" .
Although he refused to speak against Gates, who had supported his election, Bush announced that Attorney General Thornburgh had begun a national review of the 15,000 complaints made to the federal government concerning acts of police brutality over the previous six years.
Five police officers in New York City were indicted on murder charges in March, following the death of a 21-year-old Hispanic man on Feb. 5.
Death of Lee Atwater
The general chairman of the Republican Party, Lee Atwater, the leading exponent of modern "negative campaigning" , died on March 29 at the age of 40.
Atwater had become increasingly incapacitated by an inoperable brain tumour during the last year of his life.
In January 1990 he had been replaced as chairman of the Republican National Committee (RNC) by Clayton Yeutter, and had been given the largely ceremonial title of general chairman.
Atwater, born in Atlanta, Georgia, became involved in Republican politics while a student at the University of South Carolina and worked in the successful 1980 and 1984 presidential campaigns of Ronald Reagan.
Chosen to manage the 1988 campaign of George Bush, he deployed a notoriously vicious "negative campaigning" style, concentrating Republican resources on relentlessly discrediting the character and distorting the record of the Democrat nominee, Michael Dukakis [see p. 36339].
Following Bush's victory, Atwater became chairman of the RNC and maintained his reputation for uncompromising aggression with a series of attacks upon Democrat leaders in Congress.
A crude attempt to smear the Speaker of the House, Tom Foley, as a homosexual, led to Atwater being reprimanded by Bush in June 1989 [see p. 36730].
In the final months of his life Atwater expressed remorse for some of the methods which he had employed during his career.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Liberal proposals for autonomy for Quebec
In the course of its provincial party convention on March 9-10, the ruling Liberal Party in Quebec adopted the Allaire report which called for almost full political autonomy for the province, contrary to the proposals put forward in the Meech Lake Accord [for collapse of which in June 1990 see p. 37519]and despite the opposition of the party leader and Quebec Premier, Robert Bourassa.
The Allaire report proposed that the province should have autonomy in 22 areas currently controlled wholly or partially by the federal government in Ottawa, and that federal government should be responsible only for defence, foreign policy, customs and some fiscal matters.
A proposal to guarantee the rights of English-speakers in Quebec, especially in cultural matters and social services, was also adopted.
Nonetheless, some members of the party, including former leader Claude Ryan, opposed the recommendations, and Ryan indicated that he might resign his present post as Quebec Minister of Education.
In his closing speech to the convention on March 10, Bourassa called for a compromise which would allow the French-speaking province to develop within the federal status.
He suggested that there should be a new relationship with the rest of Canada based on the economic interdependence of Quebec with Ontario and a common system of currency and taxation.
Proposed timing for referendum on Quebec independence
On March 27 the Quebec commission, chaired by prominent business leaders Michel Belanger and Jean Campeau, recommended that a referendum on independence be held no later than October 1992.
Bourassa had told the Liberal Party conference that there would be no referendum on the province's future status before late 1992, but the separatist Parti Quebecois had urged the commission to set a deadline in 1991.
On March 29 the federal Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney, who had already directed a group of senior civil servants to review the structure of federal and provincial government, rejected the Quebec commission's proposals.
He insisted that only the federal parliament "shall establish the time frames, and not the legislature or political party of any province" .
AMERICAS
CARIBBEAN
CARICOM Triennial Conference
The first planned triennial Caribbean Community (CARICOM) conference on the economic future and development of the region was held in Port of Spain (Trinidad) on Feb. 27-March 1 under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago, Arthur (Ray) Robinson.
In addition to government leaders and representatives, those present included Sir Shridath (Sonny) Ramphal, chairman of the West Indian Commission and former Secretary-General of the Commonwealth, and representatives from regional non-governmental, employers' and trade union organizations.
Participants expressed frustration that CARICOM decisions were frequently not put into practice because of inadequate resources.
A document entitled the Port of Spain Consensus was released, which identified the need for (i) education and training;(ii) preservation of the environment and the development of human resources;(iii) fostering of democratic traditions and processes;(iv) regional economic integration and co-operation; and (v) research and development, particularly in science and technology, with a recommendation that governments in the region should allocate 1 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) to research and development over five years.
AMERICAS
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
Cabinet crisis and reshuffle
As a result of continuing discord within the ruling Antigua Labour Party (ALP) Prime Minister Vere Bird reshuffled his cabinet on March 15, increasing his own direct responsibilities.
After the resignation of John St Luce as Finance Minister on Feb. 22, the Prime Minister had taken on the Finance portfolio himself and presented the 1991 budget to Parliament on March 7, giving only an outline of the proposals instead of a detailed budget speech.
This procedure was denounced as "unconstitutional" by a group of ministers including St Luce, the Prime Minister's son Lester Bird (Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of External Affairs and Minister of Economic Development and Tourism), Hugh Marshall (Minister of Trade, Industry and Energy), Robin Yearwood (Minister of Public Utilities), Eustace Cochrane (Minister of Public Works and Communications) and Henderson Simon (Minister without Portfolio), all of whom called on the Prime Minister to resign.
On March 15 Prime Minister Bird announced his proposed Cabinet reshuffle, but Lester Bird (offered the Finance portfolio), Marshall (offered a new Caribbean and OAS Affairs portfolio) and Simon refused to take part in the reorganized government, necessitating further changes.
Antigua and Barbuda Cabinet
**Vere C. Bird Sr.Prime Minister; External Affairs
**Christopher O'MardeHome Affairs and Social Services Hilroy HumphreysAgriculture, Fisheries, Lands and Housing Reuben HarrisEducation, Culture, and Youth Affairs
*Molwyn JosephFinance and Trade Adolphus FreelandHealth and Labour Keith FordLegal Affairs; Attorney General
*Robin YearwoodPublic Utilities, Transport and Energy Eustace CochranePublic Works and Communications;
*Rodney WilliamsEconomic Development, Industry and Tourism
*New Cabinet member.
**Changed responsibilities.
AMERICAS
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Resignation of party leaders
The veteran leaders of both of the country's main parties, who had been personal political rivals since the 1960s, resigned their party posts during February-March.
President Joaquín Balaguer Ricardo, 84, declared on Feb. 27 that the Social Christian Reformist Party (PRSC), which he had formed in 1964, should elect a new leader to allow him time for other commitments.
Juan Bosch Gaviño, 82, on March 15 told the Dominican Liberation Party (PLD), which he had formed in 1973 after breaking from the Dominican Revolutionary Party (PRD), that he had decided not only to resign as party leader but also to withdraw his party membership, because of the bitter fighting between the right and left wings of the party.
AMERICAS
JAMAICA
Controversy over death penalty
Execution warrants for March 7 were issued for two prisoners on death row, despite international calls for clemency.
In the event a stay of execution was granted on March 6.
The two men, Ivan Morgan and Earl Pratt, had been convicted of a political murder committed in October 1977.
In 1987 they had been informed only 45 minutes before they were expecting to hang that a stay of execution had been granted 20 hours earlier.
In the following year they again faced imminent execution before a reprieve was announced.
The UN Human Rights Commission had declared that the Jamaican government had violated their rights, subjecting them to "cruel, inhuman and degrading" treatment in contravention of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Jamaica was a signatory.
There had been no hangings since 1988 in Jamaica, where there were some 250 other prisoners currently on death row.
AMERICAS
CENTRAL AMERICA
San José VII meeting
The San José Group of Foreign Ministers of the five Central American countries together with Panama met their counterparts from the 12 European Community (EC) member countries in Managua, the Nicaraguan capital, on March 18-19 for the seventh annual meeting on EC-Central American co-operation, which was also attended by the Foreign Ministers of Colombia, Venezuela and Mexico.
The Central American participants called for the liberalization of the banana market in view of the possible drop in banana exports once the European single market was established at the end of 1992.
They urged the EC to extend the generalized system of preferences (GSP) to a range of products from the region, and thereby effectively to allow them duty-free entry to the European market.
Products from the former colonies of EC member states, they pointed out, were covered under the Lomé Convention, and similar measures had recently been agreed for the Andean Pact countries.
(Abel Matutes, the EC Commissioner for Latin America, noted that access arrangements in respect of Andean Pact countries were "temporary and exceptional" to help eradicate drug trafficking, but agreed that the Central American countries should be compensated for losses incurred as the result of the concessions, particularly as regards coffee.)
The EC stated in the final declaration that it expected to implement an offer to remove or reduce duties on tropical products "once a satisfactory balanced conclusion has been reached in the Uruguay Round" .
Matutes pointed out that the region received more economic aid per capita from the EC than any other region of the world.
During 1991-95, he said, aid to the region would increase by about 80 per cent compared with the previous five-year period.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Legislative and local elections — Peace negotiations
Elections took place on March 10 to an enlarged 84-seat Legislative Assembly, and to seats on 262 local councils.
The new Assembly was due to be inaugurated on June 1.
Official results published on March 22 after considerable delays showed that the ruling right-wing Nationalist Republican Alliance (Arena) remained the largest single party, with 44.3 per cent of the vote, but had won only 39 seats, losing its absolute majority in the assembly (where it had previously held 32 of the 60 seats).
The Christian Democratic Party (PDC) won 28 per cent and 26 seats, the right-wing National Conciliation Party (PCN) 9 per cent and nine seats and the left-wing Democratic Convergence (CD) 12.2 per cent and eight seats, although earlier estimates had suggested that the CD, which took part for the first time in a legislative election, had overtaken the PCN into third place.
Both the Nationalist Democratic Union (UDN) and the Authentic Democratic Christian Movement (MADC) won one seat each.
In the local elections Arena won control on 175 of the 262 councils.
The overall abstention rate was reported to be as high as 55 per cent of the electorate of 2,200,000.
For the first time since the civil war began in 1979 the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN), the main guerrilla organization, decided not to disrupt or urge a boycott of the elections and in fact declared a three-day truce on March 9-11.
Voting was prevented or disrupted in some areas by military operations when soldiers took advantage of the truce.
Widespread irregularities were reported, especially in rural areas.
Despite a post-election resumption of fighting, a breakthrough in negotiations appeared imminent following the March round of the UN-sponsored peace talks between the government and the FMLN (which had been taking place at monthly intervals over the past year).
Death of Guillermo Ungo
Guillermo Manuel Ungo, a veteran politician of the left and a vice-president of the Socialist International, died in Mexico City on Feb. 28.
In the 1972 presidential elections he was vice-presidential candidate for the coalition headed by Jose Napoleon Duarte, who was widely held to have won although a military candidate was declared the winner.
Ungo went briefly into exile, but in 1979 he returned to take a seat on a civilian-military junta, resigning after three months [see pp. 30045-46; 30322].
Later the same year he became president of the left-oriented Democratic Revolutionary Front (the political wing of the FMLN), which he led from exile in Panama until 1987.
Returning to El Salvador in that year he merged the Nationalis Revolutionary Movement (MNR, founded by Ungo in the mid-1960s) into the Democratic Convergence coalition, standing as its presidential candidate in March 1989 [see p. 36520].
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Announcement of austerity measures and devaluation
The government on March 2 announced severe economic and austerity measures following talks with the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank.
The main measure affected the new gold cordoba, introduced in 1990 at parity with the dollar, and now devalued to US$1.00=5 cordobas.
The existing currency, the new cordoba, would go out of circulation as of May 1, and was meanwhile also devalued to 5,000,000 per gold cordoba.
Prices of basic foods such as rice and beans, and also the price of petrol, were to be increased by up to 400 per cent.
The wages of public sector employees were increased by up to 200 per cent, with 350 per cent increases for health and education workers.
According to Antonio Lacayo Oyanguren, the Minister of the Presidency who announced the increases, regular currency devaluations would cease henceforth and no more money would be printed without firm backing.
He said that the control of inflation, which had reached an annualized rate of 13,000 per cent in 1990, was the most pressing economic problem.
AMERICAS
PANAMA
New political party
A new party known as the Pro-Democracy and Liberty Movement (Movimiento Pro-Democracia y Libertad — MPDL) was formed in March by leaders of the National Civic Crusade (CCN), among them Arrigo Guardia and Miguel Antonio Bernal.
The aim of the party was to provide an alternative to the existing coalition and opposition parties, to establish a "functional and participative democracy" and to convene a constitutional assembly to restructure the republic.
MEXICO
Closure of Mexico City oil refinery
In an effort to combat the chronic air pollution affecting Mexico City, the Mexican government on March 18 ordered the immediate closure of the country's largest oil refinery, responsible for emissions of carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide, benzene and other pollutants.
The decision was announced by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari in a speech to mark the 53rd anniversary of the nationalization of the Mexican oil industry.
The refinery's 175-hectare site was to be transformed into parkland.
Situated on the edge of the capital, the 18 de Marzo refinery, which was built in 1933, accounted for some 7 per cent of Mexico's refining capacity.
Its closure was estimated as reducing capacity by approximately 100,000 barrels per day (bpd), at an annual cost to the economy of US$500 million.
Oil industry officials said that Mexico would have to import some petrol products until a new 300,000 bpd plant was completed.
The decision came against a background of growing public anxiety over the capital's air pollution levels, which had reached nearly four times the recommended limits as set by the World Health Organization.
On March 10 the authorities issued a warning to people to stay indoors after concentrations of low-level ozone reached record levels.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
SURINAM
Report of peace accord
A preliminary peace accord was reportedly reached on March 26 between the regime which had taken power in Surinam following the December 1990 military coup [see pp. 37912-13]and the guerrilla Surinamese Liberation Army (SLA) led by Ronnie Brunswijk.
Brunswijk was reported to have signed the agreement at a meeting with army C.-in-C.
Col. Désiré "Desi" Bouterse in Drietabbetje, a town on an island on the river Tapanahony in eastern Surinam.
A peace agreement signed at Kourou in French Guiana in June 1989 [see p. 36811]had been denounced at the time by Bouterse and had never been implemented.
AMERICAS
ECUADOR
Dismissal of Minister for Energy and Mines following congressional hearing
Donald Castillo was appointed on March 13 as Minister of Energy and Mines.
His predecessor, Diego Tamariz, who had held the post since 1988, was dismissed on March 12 after a National Congress hearing had found him responsible for the "incorrect and illegal" handling of the country's oil and electrification affairs.
In October 1989 Congress had, for the second time, initiated impeachment proceedings against Tamariz for administrative irregularities [see p. 37482].
At the June 1990 elections [see p. 37529]the parties backing the government of President Rodrigo Borja Cevallos had lost their majority in the Congress, and a congressional crisis had resulted from the impeachment of the Minister of Public Works and Communications in October 1990 [see pp. 37771-72].
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Ending of EPL guerrilla struggle
On March 1 the Popular Liberation Army (EPL), after 23 years of clandestine struggle, became the second major guerrilla group to lay down arms and enter political life as a party, formally changing its name to the Hope, Peace and Liberty party (with the same Spanish acronym, EPL).
[For the March 1990 integration of the April 19 Movement (M-19) into the legal political process, see p. 37311; for January 1991 signing of agreement — also covering the Workers' Revolutionary party (PRT)— see p. 37958.]
At six ceremonies across the country, nearly 2,000 EPL combatants handed over their weapons to a commission led by the Socialist International and the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party.
The largest gathering was in Urabá, a major banana growing area, where Antonio Navarro, charismatic leader of the M-19, was also present to receive the ex-fighters.
The EPL, once of strict Maoist orientation, was to receive two of the 73 seats in the Constitutional Assembly where it would join the M-19-led Democratic Alliance (AD)[for opening of Constitutional Assembly see p. 38001].
Its fighters would be amnestied, would have special access to education, health care, land and credit, and would receive a monthly payment for six months while they looked for employment and adapted to civilian life.
On March 7, Radio Cadena Nacional reported that the Quintín Lame guerrilla movement would lay down its arms on May 31, as agreed with the government's peace adviser, following the reported signing of a peace agreement on March 6.
It would be represented in the Constitutional Assembly by Carlos Andrade.
Continuing FARC and ELN guerrilla offensive
Meanwhile, the two strongest guerrilla movements, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the National Liberation Army (ELN) continued a joint offensive begun on Feb. 5 [see p. 38001].
At the beginning of March it was reported that seven FARC guerrillas and three Brazilian soldiers had been killed in border clashes near the Brazilian town of Tabatinga in the Amazon region.
Brazilian and Colombian army officers subsequently met in the Colombian border town of Letícia to discuss joint action against the rebels.
On March 7, Colombian television reported that five policeman had been killed in an FARC attack on a police garrison in El Retorno in the San José del Guaviare municipality.
On March 20 heavy fighting was reported throughout Colombia, and 23 guerrillas and 11 government soldiers and policemen were killed in the south-western town of Paispamba.
The state oil company ECOPETROL reported on March 3 the suspension of oil exports after an ELN attack on pipelines.
The government on March 11 rejected an offer of peace talks with the FARC and ELN through their Simón Bolívar National Guerrilla Co-ordinating Board (CNG).
On March 5 the leader of the left-wing Patriotic Union (UP), Carlos Romero, accused the military of involvement in the repressive activities of paramilitary groups, adding that so far 50 UP members had been killed and 13 had disappeared in 1991.
On March 10, the killing of congressman Dario Aluma was reported in a wave of violence near Calí.
PERU
Resignation of Health Minister over cholera epidemic
Health Minister Carlos Vidal Layseca resigned on March 18 after weeks of disagreement with President Alberto Fujimori over government policy towards the cholera epidemic [for outbreak of epidemic see p. 38002].
Fujimori and Fisheries Minister Felix Canal had appeared on television and in public eating ceviche, the national dish of uncooked fish and seafood marinated in lime, despite claims by the Health Ministry and international medical organizations that raw fish was a major source of infection.
Vidal, whose portfolio was taken over by Victor Yamamoto Miyakawa, accused the government of trying to cover up the seriousness of the disease's spread.
According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), the epidemic had claimed 609 lives and affected 97,715 people by the end of March, with some 37,000 receiving hospital treatment and most victims concentrated in the departments of Cajamarca and Ayacucho.
Visiting Peru, WHO director-general Hiroshi Nakajima claimed that the incidence of cholera was on the wane, despite other predictions by local and foreign experts.
At an Andean Pact-sponsored meeting in Lima, the Peruvian capital, on Feb. 28 the Health Ministers of Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Venezuela and Peru appealed for international funds to support a Latin American medical alliance to combat the epidemic.
They also agreed a common strategy to end Latin American restrictions on most Peruvian fish exports.
At the beginning of March it was reported that the epidemic had spread to Ecuador where 20 cases were registered, including one death, that of a woman living near the border.
Ecuador announced a ban on fishing for shrimps, while Brazil stepped up screening and monitoring at its rivers and at its border with Peru.
New Attorney General
On March 2 Pedro Mendes Jurado became the new Attorney General; he stated that he would step up the battle against terrorism and drug trafficking.
The previous day the United States had suspended US$94,900,000 in aid, alleging that Peru had made insufficient efforts to control drug trafficking.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
Appointments
The appointment on Feb. 26 of Col. Faustino Rico Toro as the new head of the Special Force for the Fight against Drug Trafficking (FELCN) sparked off a controversy within the country, which resulted in the eventual resignation of the Chief of Police and the Interior Minister.
After pressure from the US authorities Col. Rico Toro stepped down on March 4 and was replaced on March 14 by Gen. Elias Gutiérrez.
When the government originally announced that Rico Toro would replace Col. Lucio Añez Rivera at the FELCN there were protests in the Congress; Rico Toro had been the chief of army intelligence in the 1980-81 government of Gen. Luís García Meza, notorious for its involvement with the country's large-scale organized drug trade; moreover, he had in the past argued for the legalization of the coca industry.
The appointment was defended by the Interior Minister, Guillermo Capobianco Rivera, who stressed Rico Toro's military professionalism, and in answer to questions from the press President Jaime Paz Zamora stated that "the government knows what it is doing" .
It appeared that the crucial factor in Rico Toro's subsequent decision to resign was a threat from the United States, made by the US ambassador to Bolivia, Robert Gelbard, that some US$100,000,000 of military and economic aid would be suspended unless his appointment was withdrawn.
The affair gave renewed vigour to a running debate over the links between high-ranking members of the government and the production of coca.
Since the collapse of world tin prices, coca had been Bolivia's only major export, albeit illegal.
On March 4 the Miami Herald cited US officials in a report which specifically named Capobianco and the Chief of Police, Gen. Felipe Carvajal, as recipients of money from coca producers.
Carvajal resigned on March 12, informing the President that he did so in order to protect "the image of the nation, its people and the police, whose reputation is being soiled by sinister interests" .
He was replaced by Gen. Jaime Cespedes.
Capobianco, who was a close associate of Paz Zamora, resigned on the following day, and was replaced by Carlos Armando Saavedra Bruno.
Another member of the García Meza administration in 1980-81, Col. Luis Arce Gómez, was on March 22 sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment by a court in Miami on two drug-trafficking charges (for conclusion of trial on Jan. 9, see p. 37958).
CHILE
Rettig report on human rights violations
On March 4 President Patricio Aylwin Azócar released the report, delivered to him in early February, of the government's Truth and Reconciliation Commission (CVR) on human rights violations committed between September 1973 and March 1990 under the right-wing military regime of Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte.
The CVR, also known as the Rettig Commission after its chairman Raúl Rettig, a former Supreme Court judge, had been set up in April 1990 and had taken over 4,000 testimonies during its research.
Its 1,900-page report covered (i) the months after the September 1973 military coup against the left-wing Allende government;(ii) the mass terror of 1974-77 carried out through the National Intelligence Directorate (DINA) secret police, which provided what the report called "central co-ordination revealing a will to exterminate a category of people…[to whom the regime]attributed a high degree of political dangerousness" ; and (ii) the post-1977 period of institutionalized repression.
The report documented the death of 2,279 people, including 1,068 people who were executed, died under torture or were shot in firing squads, and 957 disappeared prisoners, whose fate was unclarified but who were presumed dead.
A chapter was included on 90 members of the security forces killed by the regime's opponents.
Victims were named but the report did not give details of those responsible, its remit being to document repression rather than to carry out a judicial investigation.
Presidential address — Reactions to report
In a national address on television on March 4, Aylwin rejected the claims of Pinochet and his supporters that Chile had been in state of civil war and that human rights violations were an inevitable cost.
The armed forces, he said, had been in complete control of the country within days of the 1973 coup.
He criticized the judiciary for having lacked the "moral courage" to protect civil liberties, and on behalf of the Chilean state he asked the victims' relatives for forgiveness.
Aylwin had been leader of the Christian Democratic Party in 1973, when it had joined in calling on the military to intervene, but he now acknowledged that all political forces which had preferred confrontation to dialogue at that time, were responsible for creating the conditions in which human rights violations eventually took place.
The Independent Democratic Union (UDI), the party most associated with Pinochet, rejected the report as a distortion of history.
The main right-wing opposition party, National Renewal (RN), criticized the description of the political circumstances existing at the time of the coup, but otherwise gave the report a favourable reception, as did the parties of Aylwin's centre-left government and the mainstream left.
The Group of Relatives of Disappeared Prisoners, while welcoming the report, called on Aylwin to nullify any legislation declaring disappeared prisoners dead.
The C.-in-C. of the Air Force, Gen. Fernando Matthei Aubel, issued a statement on behalf of the air force on March 8, welcoming the report and offering support for the government's policy of reconciliation.
A similar, albeit less enthusiastic, response was given by the military police (Carabiñeros) on March 22.
Pinochet, C.-in-C. of the Army, speaking before 1,500 officers at Santiago's Military Academy on March 29, described the report as having no "historical or legal validity" and opposed government plans to provide compensation for the families of the victims of repression.
Former DINA director Gen. (retd) Manuel Contreras declared on television that the report was "Marxist propaganda" .
The government called a session of the National Security Council (NSC, comprising the four heads of the armed forces and police, the President, the President of the Senate, the President of the Supreme Court, and the Comptroller-General), which met on March 27 and agreed that each branch of the armed forces would make its own report public.
BRAZIL
National reconstruction plan
Marking his first anniversary in power, President Ferdinand Collor de Mello announced a National Reconstruction Plan on March 14, aimed at restoring public confidence in his government's determination to secure stable economic growth in the medium term, and in its flagging efforts to control inflation [for March 1990, February 1991 anti-inflation plans see pp. 37312; 38002].
The latest plan emphasised promoting growth by reducing state intervention and increasing the role of private investment.
State monopolies in the ports, telecommunications and fuel sectors would be abolished and agricultural and industrial subsidies ended.
Domestic and foreign investment would be treated equally.
A reform of the public sector would also include further job cuts.
Addressing social policy, the plan contemplated workers' profit-sharing schemes, increased taxation (including higher taxes for the rich), compulsory retirement at 60, pension reforms, and educational reforms.
Congress began on March 24 its debate on the plan, whose implementation would require several amendments of the 1988 constitution.
At the end of January the government had launched its long-postponed programme of privatizing 100 state companies, intended to raise US$7,000 million in 1991 and up to US$18,000 million by the end of 1992.
The first four sales involved indebted companies in the steel, petrochemical and public transport sectors.
Resignation of Infrastructure Minister
On March 25 the Minister for Infrastructure, Ozires Silva, resigned.
Silva, who reportedly resented the increasing centralization of government economic decision-making in the hands of Economy Minister Zélia Cardoso de Mello, was the most important figure to leave the Collor government to date, his ministry the most powerful (in budgetary terms) after that of the economy.
Silva was replaced by Eduardo Teixeira, head of the state oil company PETROBRAS since October 1990 [see p. 37852]and a close collaborator with Economy Minister Cardoso in the development of the government's anti-inflation plans.
Assassination of rural union leaders
International concern over the spate of killings of rural union leaders was further heightened by the wounding in an assassination attempt on March 4 of Carlos Cabral, president of the Farmworkers' Union in Rio Maria in the jungle state of Pará (and the son-in-law of the union's founder, Joao Canuto, who had himself been assassinated in 1985).
His predecessor, Expedito Ribeiro de Souza, had been shot dead on Feb. 2; police arrested a suspect who claimed that he had been hired by a local landowner to carry out the killing.
On March 8, Pará union leader Sebastiao Ribeiro de Silva was shot dead and another unionist, José Alves de Souza, was wounded the previous day.
ARGENTINA
Austral linkage to US dollar
In an effort to stabilize the economy and foster growth, the House of Deputies approved an urgent government bill on March 27, making the austral freely convertible against the US dollar.
The bill had been presented on March 20 by Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo after inflation had risen to 27 per cent in February.
The so-called "dollarization" of the economy would require the austral money supply to be backed by foreign exchange or gold reserves at the Central Bank, thus preventing the government from printing money to cover fiscal deficits and fuelling inflationary pressures.
Under the legislation the currency would be fixed at US$1.00=10,000 australs from April 1, an exchange rate described by the opposition Radical Civic Union (UCR) as artificially strengthening the local currency for electoral purposes.
The UCR therefore voted against the legislation, despite its support for the principle of convertibility.
The government's latest programme also included an end to the indexation of wages to inflation, and a cut in the average import tariff from 22 per cent to 9.4 per cent, designed to improve the productivity and competitiveness of local industry.
The introduction of convertibility received a positive response in the financial markets at the end of March.
There was a sharp fall in interest rates, while the foreign exchange market stabilized, and the month-on-month inflation rate fell to half its February level.
Abolition of agricultural export taxes
In an effort to boost agricultural exports, the Economy Minister reached a "fiscal pact" with two of the main farmers' organizations, the Argentine Rural Society (SRA) and the Argentine Rural Confederation (CRA), on March 18.
In return for the abolition of export taxes, the CRA and the SRA, representing large- and medium-sized farms, would seek to persuade their members to stop evasion of value added tax and of property and incomes taxes, as well as to raise productivity.
Government moves over airline privatization problem
In February and March the Menem administration moved to prevent the collapse of the privatized national airline, Aerolíneas Argentinas, sold in November 1990 in a $2,300 million cash and debt-for-equity swap to a consortium led by the Spanish airline Iberia [see pp. 37608; 37773].
The problem arose when the Argentinian investors led by Austral, the country's largest private carrier, failed to raise sufficient financing within the three-month limit fixed by the government.
Iberia then raised its stake from 20 to 49 per cent.
Majority foreign ownership was not permitted under Argentinian law, and the fact that the Iberia stake had now come so close to the maximum threshold, was seen as imperilling the whole privatization process.
By mid-March, negotiations between the government, Iberia and Austral had led Austral to withdraw from the deal, but the Argentinian Amadeo Rivas and Construcciones Devicenzo groups increased their total stake to 36 per cent.
Iberia was left with 30 per cent.
Visit to Falklands by relatives of war dead
On March 18, the United Kingdom government for the first time gave permission for 375 relatives of Argentinian soldiers killed in the 1982 Falklands war to visit their graves on the islands.
The event was seen as a further thaw in relations between the two countries, following the restoration of diplomatic ties in February 1990 [see p. 37245].
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
Mercosur treaty on South American Common Market
Presidents Carlos Saúl Menem of Argentina, Fernando Collor de Mello of Brazil, Andrés Rodríguez of Paraguay and Luis Alberto Lacalle Herrera of Uruguay signed an accord in Asunción, the Paraguayan capital, on March 26, 1991, aimed at creating in the region a common market, known as Mercosur, with its headquarters in Uruguay.
A timetable was set for achieving free movement of goods and services within the Mercosur area by Dec. 31, 1994.
Spurred by the emergence of other regional trading blocs, Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay — whose current governments were all broadly centre-right and committed to free markets — sought to take advantage of the "Enterprise for the Americas" initiative announced by United States President Bush in June 1990, providing for US investment and official debt relief in an Americas-wide free-trade zone [see p. 37526].
The United States was to negotiate a framework agreement with the four countries.
The Mercosur countries, comprising a market of 192,000,000 people, had a combined gross national product of US$420,000 million, or more than half the total for the whole of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Trade between the four countries currently amounted to US$5,500 million annually.
The Asunción treaty committed the participants to a first tariff cut, of 47 per cent, in June 1991, following ratification of the treaty by the member countries' parliaments.
Argentina and Brazil would go on to eliminate tariffs to Mercosur countries by the end of 1994, while Paraguay and Uruguay were allowed an extra year to harmonize.
The four countries would co-ordinate policies on agriculture, industry and transport, as well as over financial and monetary issues.
Under a series of bilateral co-operation agreements (most recently that signed in 1988 — see p. 36206) Brazil and Argentina had increased the volume of trade between them, to the extent that Brazil had replaced the United States as Argentina's largest trading partner.
In July 1990 President Collor and President Menem met in Buenos Aires, the Argentinian capital, and decided to expand their bilateral agreements to involve other countries.
Paraguay and Uruguay then became involved.
Chile, however, had declined an invitation to join the Mercosur process in mid-1990, opting for bilateral free-trade agreements with the USA and Mexico instead.
Chile's external tariffs were already well below the levels which the Mercosur countries contemplated in their initial cuts.
Negotiations over Chilean membership of the group were due to resume in the second half of 1991.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
NPC session — Economy
The fourth session of the seventh National People's Congress (NPC) or parliament opened in Beijing on March 25.
Earlier, a two-day meeting of the NPC Standing Committee had described the session as aiming "to promote political stability and economic growth and ensure the smooth implementation of the 10-year programme of social and economic development [1991-2000], and the eighth five-year plan [1991-96]." 
In a three-hour government work report delivered on the first day of the two-week session, Premier Li Peng presented the draft outline of the five-and 10-year plans.
Li's report reiterated the commitment to economic reform and opening up, and advocated freeing the majority of prices, while maintaining the primacy of state ownership and the "socialist planned commodity economy" [see also p. 37917].
Stressing the importance of political stability, he declared: "Socialist China will stand rock-solid in the East." 
According to foreign correspondents in Beijing, China's "elder statesman" leader Deng Xiaoping, and the disgraced former party leader Zhao Ziyang, were both absent from the platform.
Budget report — 1990 deficit and 1991 forecast
The budget report given by the Finance Minister, Wang Bingqian, on March 26 revealed a record deficit for 1990 of 15,000 yuan, or 6,000 million yuan more than estimated.
If foreign and domestic borrowing was excluded from revenue, the deficit was 50,900 million yuan, according to Western analysts (US$1.00=5.3064 yuan as at March 25, 1991).
Blaming the poor economic performance of enterprises, Wang spoke of "an extremely grim situation and an arduous task" with serious implications for political and economic stability.
He said that tax collection would be improved, sales tax raised from 3 per cent to 5 per cent, and some tax revenues switched from local to central government, but he forecast a budgetary deficit for 1991 of 13,300 million yuan, saying that deficit spending would continue for at least another five years.
Wang also announced an increase of nearly 12 per cent in military spending for 1991, the second increase in two years, saying that the extra money was needed for the modernization of weapons and equipment.
Seventh five-year plan achievements
A communiqué of the State Statistical Bureau on March 12 gave details of the achievements of the seventh five-year plan (1986-1990).
The figures showed many plan targets being exceeded.
Crude oil and timber quotas, however, were not met due to "resource restriction" .
Despite large increases over the sixth five-year plan period, agricultural production remained "comparatively low" due to a reduction in arable land area, soil degradation and insufficient irrigation.
Construction showed a massive increase, with 121 key projects completed and commissioned including 8 new coal pits and the Gezhouba dam project in Hubei.
Transport and communications infrastructure was improved, but still could not meet increased demand.
The value of imports came to US$486,400 million, as against exports worth $232,500 million.
Product mix improved with the export of more manufactures and the import of fewer luxury consumer goods.
The communiqué noted the main problems of the period as follows: "Ideological and political education was neglected, we were over-anxious for quick results in economic development, overheated economy and inflation were caused, the national economy was over-decentralized in some aspects, and the state's overall regulation and control ability was weakened." 
plannedactual (per cent) GNP7.57.8 National income6.77.5 GVIAO*6.711 Agriculture4-64.6 Industry7.513.1 heavy12.2 light14.1 state-run7.3 collective17.6 joint and foreign74 Retail sales14** Per capita income 2.5***
Seventh five-year plan 1986-90 Average per annum increase
*Gross value of industrial and agricultural output.
**3.4 after price adjustment
***After adjustment 
Pilot project for freeing grain prices
In a first step towards removing massive food subsidies, a pilot project to replace state subsidised grain rationing with a free market was to begin on April 1, according to the Financial Times of March 12.
The experiment would be conducted in Guanghan township, Sichuan Province, which had successfully piloted the dismantling of the commune system in 1978.
Grain prices were expected to triple, and workers were to receive a temporary cash supplement in place of their grain ration at low fixed prices.
The reform aimed to test consumer reaction to higher prices, and to stimulate farmers' enthusiasm for grain production.
Dismissals of ministers
According to the People's Daily of March 3, Qian Yongchang, Minister of Communications, and Lin Hanxiong, Minister of Construction, were dismissed for corruption and discipline violation respectively.
Hou Jie, Vice-Minister of Water Resources, and Huang Zhendong, president of the State Communications Investment Corp., were named as their respective replacements.
Xinhua (the New China News Agency) reported on March 3 that Xu Jiatun, who had been replaced in February 1990 as head of Xinhua's Hong Kong branch and thus as China's de facto representative in Hong Kong [see p. 37185], had been expelled from the Chinese Communist Party and had lost his seat on the party's central advisory commission for "deserting the party and the people" and going abroad without permission.
Xu had visited the United States in April 1990.
A new 31-member "central committee for the comprehensive management of public security" , headed by politburo standing committee member Qiao Shi, was set up on March 22 to liaise with the party central committee and the State Council in supervising work to improve public order and social stability.
Rejection of dissidents' appeals
The appeals of Wang Juntao, Chen Zeming and Ren Wanding, three intellectuals sentenced earlier in connection with the June 1989 Tiananmen Square demonstrations [see also p. 38008], were dismissed on March 18 by the Beijing People's Higher Court.
Foreign correspondents in Beijing reported on March 7 that lawyers defending Wang Juntao had abandoned his appeal under official pressure, leaving his wife to conduct his defence alone.
Foreign correspondents in Beijing also reported that on April 1, relatives of Wang Juntao and Chen Zeming had petitioned the ongoing session of the National People's Congress.
They said that Chen Zeming's parents had previously written to the Supreme Court calling for a retrial of the two men and questioning the independence of the courts.
On March 4 three Hong Kong residents were imprisoned in Guangzhou for helping activists to escape.
Luo Haixing, a businessman, and Li Peicheng received five-year prison terms, while Li Longqing was jailed for four years.
In Beijing, foreign correspondents said that in early March Zhang Yafei, a university graduate, was given a seven-year sentence for "counter-revolutionary incitement and propaganda" and "organizing and leading a counter-revolutionary group" during the 1989 demonstrations.
Western press reports from Xian on March 18 said that three intellectuals were sentenced to prison terms of three to five years, including Li Guiren, editor of the Shaanxi province Hua Yue Publishing House, which had published works by the dissident journalist Liu Binyan [see also p. 37338].
Chinese judicial officials told visiting US lawyers on March 20 that there would be no more trials of dissidents.
Visit of Dalai Lama to UK — Unrest in Tibet
The exiled Tibetan spiritual leader, His Holiness Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, paid a private five-day visit to the United Kingdom from March 17 during which he met Prince Charles, the Lord Chancellor Lord Mackay of Clashfern, and the opposition Labour Pary leader, Neil Kinnock.
Meetings with the Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary were refused, leading the Dalai Lama to warn the UK against being "unnecessarily over-cautious" in its dealings with China.
Calling the UK's attitude to Tibet "not satisfactory" , the Dalai Lama drew parallels between Tibet and Kuwait and the Baltic states.
He also advised Tibetans against non-violent resistance to Chinese rule, which he said would be too dangerous.
On March 14 and again on March 28, the Chinese Foreign Ministry protested strongly against the visit and the meetings with members of the UK government.
There were reports of a Chinese clampdown in Tibet during March.
The Monlam or Great Prayer Festival was banned, to prevent protests commemorating the 1959 uprising.
The Barkhor, the path around the central Jokhang Temple in Lhasa and the focus of previous protests, was reportedly bulldozed on March 2, and five monks were subsequently arrested for demonstrating.
The Dalai Lama had said on March 10 that unless China responded soon to his proposals made in June 1988 at the European Parliament in Strasbourg, he would consider himself not bound by the five-point peace plan, although he remained committed to negotiations with China.
The proposals had envisaged an autonomous Tibet, with China responsible for defence and foreign affairs.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Visit by senior Chinese official — Applications for UK passports
Lu Ping, the director of the Chinese Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, paid a four-day official visit to Hong Kong on March 3-6.
In a series of meetings with officials on issues related to the transfer of the colony to China in 1997, he stressed his government's committment to strengthening relations between the United Kingdom and China and between Hong Kong and China.
Invited by the colony's governor, Lu was the most senior Chinese official to visit Hong Kong since the military suppression of the pro-democracy movement in China in June 1989 [see pp. 36720-22], which had caused major strains between Hong Kong and the UK on the one hand and China on the other.
In a later address to the Hong Kong chamber of commerce Lu also sought to reassure the business community and international investors that Hong Kong would remain a free port and an international financial centre after 1997 and that its prosperity would be maintained and investments protected.
This was widely seen as the most positive statement by a senior Chinese official on the territory's future since 1989.
The deadline passed on Feb. 28 for Hong Kong citizens to apply for a "first tranche" of allocations of UK passports under the British Nationality (Hong Kong) Act, introduced in April 1990 as a confidence-building measure after the unrest in China in the previous year [see p. 37376], and enacted in July.
The number of applications — 57,900 — was far lower than the anticipated 300,000.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Party approval of national unification programme
The central standing committee of the ruling Kuomintang on March 6 endorsed a national unification programme formulated by the National Unification Council headed by President Lee Teng-hui.
Lee and the Prime Minister, Gen. Hau Pei-tsun, also a member of the drafting committee, said during the debate that consensus on unification with the mainland should be reached first within Taiwan, and then on both sides of the Taiwan Strait.
The secretary-general of the KMT, James Soong, said on March 8 that the government had no timetable for unification.
A commentator's article in the mainland People's Daily of March 18 welcomed the new programme, especially its proposal for direct postal, trade and shipping services between Taiwan and the mainland, but referred to "quite a few questionable points" , including the Taiwan government's demand for recognition as an independent and equal political entity, and its preconditions for unification: democracy, free economy, equal society and the rationalization of the armed forces.
Ministerial resignation offer
It was reported on March 8 that an offer of resignation by Communications Minister Clement Chang, over his family's involvement in an insider stock trading scandal, was not to be accepted by Hau until the Ministries of Finance and Justice had completed further investigations.
Chang's daughter, Chang Chia-yi, and another official of Tamkang University, were said to have bought 5,000,000 shares in an unlisted insurance company for US$22,000,000, estimated to be one-sixth to one-eighth of the market price.
The shares were sold by the Hualung Textile Group, of which Chang's wife, Chiang Wen-tze, was a director.
She and the company's chairman, Weng You-ming, were being sued for breach of trust in the sale.
Chang denied all knowledge of the deal.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Second round of normalization talks with Japan
The second round of talks on normalizing diplomatic relations between North Korea and Japan ended in Tokyo on March 12 after two days with no progress on the issues of compensation and inspection of nuclear facilities, as had been the case in the first round held on Jan. 30-31 in the North Korean capital Pyongyang.
The delegation led by Vice Foreign Minister Chon In-chol was the first North Korean government delegation to visit Japan.
North Korea reiterated its demand for compensation not only for Japan's colonization of Korea from 1910 to 1945, but also for damage suffered in the post-war period, for which Japan disclaimed responsibility.
Following the talks, Chon indicated to Japanese press organizations that North Korea would be flexible over the form of compensation it would accept, adding that he was "optimistic" about normalization.
Japan urged repayment by North Korea of accumulated debts of 80,000 million yen (US$580 million), and repeated earlier calls for North Korea to open its nuclear facilities to inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
North Korea countered by declaring that South Korean nuclear facilities should also be subject to inspection.
The two sides agreed at an additional, unofficial meeting on March 13 to hold a third round of talks in May in Beijing.
On March 5, the Japanese Foreign Ministry announced that as from April 1 it was lifting the ban on travel to North Korea.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
DLP victory in local assembly elections
The first local assembly elections in 30 years, held on March 26, resulted in a clear victory for the ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP), despite a low voter turnout of 55 per cent which the opposition portrayed as an indicator of disillusionment with the government.
(Turnout at the 1988 general election was 75.8 per cent.)
The elections took place for seats in the local assemblies in the country's smaller "basic units" (small cities, counties and municipal wards).
Local assembly elections in "large units" (major cities and provinces) would be held separately, by the end of June.
The opposition Party for Peace and Democracy (PPD) protested that this violated a previous agreement to hold local elections simultaneously in large and small areas.
Political parties were not formally authorized to field candidates in small constituencies in local elections.
DLP members won 49 per cent of the 4,304 seats; the largely pro-government independent candidates received 32.4 per cent; and the PPD won only 18.8 per cent .
Only in South Cholla province did the PPD command widespread support.
President Roh Tae Woo, who described the elections as the fairest ever, had said earlier, in a nationally televised address on March 5 when he announced the polling date, that they marked a turning point in local autonomy and "a starting point leading to various democratic societies and to a genuine separation of powers" .
PPD merger
It was reported on March 22 that Kim Dae Jung, the PPD leader, had announced a merger with a dissident group led by Mrs Lee Woo Jung, a human rights activist,
Arrest of government officials in pollution case
It was reported on March 25 that seven government officials from the Taegu environment office had been charged with negligence or forgery after the Doosan Electro-Materials Corp. had released hundreds of tonnes of toxic waste into the Naktog River, the source of drinking water for millions of people.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Approval of Gulf aid package
Japan on March 13 provided the Gulf Peace Fund with $8,600 million in accordance with its pledge of aid to the United States-led coalition in the Gulf war.
The House of Councillors (upper house of the Diet) had approved the additional amount on March 6, the House of Representatives having agreed it on Feb. 28.
The contribution brought Japan's total aid to about $13,000 million including $2,000 million in aid to affected countries within the Gulf region.
Japan was thus one of the largest financial contributors to the coalition, along with the USA, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.
The aid was approved only after prolonged controversy centring on the anti-militarist nature of Japan's 1947 Constitution, and followed the dropping of Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu's original proposals to send Self-Defence Force (SDF) personnel to the Gulf [see pp. 37758; 37859-60; 38010-11].
The ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) in March asked the government to draft a new bill by April authorizing Japanese military personnel to assist UN peacekeeping operations.
To ensure more support, the LDP suggested that only retired members of the SDF and reservists be used.
The head of the Defence Agency's Bureau of Defence Policy, Shigeru Hatakeyama, announced on March 13 that Japan was increasing its financial support for US forces within the country by $269 million in the fiscal year 1991.
He said that Japan would pay $3,300 million towards the overall cost of US troops, representing a 8.3 per cent increase on 1990.
Nakayama visit to United States
Taro Nakayama, the Foreign Minister, began a four-day visit to Washington on March 20.
After his meetings with US President Bush and US Secretary of State James Baker on March 21, both sides stressed that relations between the two countries were good.
There had been earlier criticism in the USA that Japan had failed to send either combat or medical personnel to the Gulf, and US treasury officials had publicly accused Japan of being very slow in sending its promised financial aid.
In Japan, there had been criticism that Japanese officials were not adequately consulted during the Gulf crisis.
Nakayama stressed, however, that the March 13 decision to increase Japanese financial support for US forces in his country was evidence of Japan's commitment to bilateral relations.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MACAO
New Governor
Mario Soares, the recently re-elected President of Portugal, appointed Gen. Vasco Rocha Vieira as the new Governor of Macao on March 21.
Gen. Vieira, who had previously served as a minister for the Azores Islands, replaced the interim Governor, Franciso Murteira Nabo, who had been appointed in September 1990 following the resignation of Carlos Melancia over corruption allegations [see p. 37714].
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Interim Constitution, new Prime Minister and NLA
During March the armed forces, which had seized power in a military coup on Feb. 23 [see pp. 38003-04], established a timetable for a return to civilian rule.
However, the ruling junta (the National Peace-Keeping Council — NPKC), ensured that it would determine the shape of the future political system and if necessary would employ harsh measures to retain full control of the country prior to a fresh general election.
The Prime Minister deposed in the Feb. 23 coup, Maj.-Gen.
Chatichai Choonhaven, was released from military detention on March 9 and left Thailand for a "holiday" in Europe three days later.
Former Deputy Prime Minister Gen. Arthit Kamlang-Ek was also released from detention on March 9 and he too left Thailand for a "holiday" , on March 16.
Approval of interim Constitution
On March 1 King Bhumibol Adulyadej formally approved a new interim Constitution which had been drawn up by the NPKC.
An earlier draft had been rejected by the King who had requested a number of minor alterations.
Under the terms of the new Constitution the NPKC was transformed into a National Peace Keeping Assembly (NPKA).
The Constitution provided for the appointment of a National Legislative Assembly, which would in turn appoint a committee to draft a full constitution in six months.
A general election would be held by the end of 1991, or 120 days into 1992 if there was a delay in approval of the new constitution.
The interim Constitution provided for the appointment of an interim Prime Minister, who could be removed summarily by the NPKA.
Article 27 of the interim Constitution provided the NPKA, and the interim Prime Minister, with summary powers to "do what is necessary to deal with" those undermining national peace or security or threatening the monarchy, national economy or administration, public order or morality, national resources or public health.
On a number of occasions during March members of the NPKA indicated that they wanted the new constitution to introduce a clear separation of powers between the executive and the legislature.
By forcing MPs to give up their seats if they joined the Cabinet, the NPKA believed that it could eliminate vote-buying and other corrupt practices.
Appointment of interim Prime Minister and Cabinet
The NPKA on March 2 appointed Anand Panyarachun, a former diplomat turned businessman, as interim Prime Minister.
On March 6 Anand appointed an interim Cabinet composed mainly of businessmen and technocrats.
However, the key Ministries of Defence and of the Interior went to NPKA members.
The NPKA chair, Gen. Sunthorn Kongsompong, stated on March 7 that the armed forces would not interfere in the affairs of the new Cabinet.
Anand PanyarachunPrime Minister Sanoh UnakulDeputy Prime Minister Police Gen. Pow SarasinDeputy Prime Minister Meechai RuchuphanDeputy Prime Minister Kasem S. KasemsriMinister attached to Prime Minister's Office Paichitr UathaweekulMinister attached to Prime Minister's Office Mechai ViravaidyaMinister attached to Prime Minister's Office Saisuree JutikulMinister attached to Prime Minister's Office Adm.
Praphat KritsanachanDefence Suthee SingsanehFinance Arsa SarasinForeign Affairs Anat ArbhabhiramaAgriculture and Co-operatives Nukul PrachuabmohTransport and Communications
New Thai caretaker Cabinet
*Amaret Sila-onCommerce Gen. Issarapong NoonpakdiInterior Prapass UaychaiJustice Sa-nga SabhasriScience, Technology and Energy Kaw SawasdipanichEducation Pairoj NingsanondPublic Health Sippanond KetudatIndustry Kasem SuwannagulUniversity Affairs
*Retained post held in Chatichai Cabinet.
Appointment of National Legislative Assembly
On March 15 the King formally appointed a 292-member National Legislative Assembly (NLA), the membership having been named by the NPKA.
The NLA included 149 retired and active military officers, many of them Class 5 graduates from Chulachomklao Royal Military Academy as was NPKA Vice-Chair and coup leader Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon.
The NLA also included 70 bureaucrats, 36 members from business and banking circles and 12 former MPs.
The NLA, which held its first session on March 29, came under attack from various politicians who claimed that its members were unqualified for the task of drawing up a new constitution.
Plan to abolish state enterprise unions
Representatives from state enterprise unions defied a ban on political gatherings and convened in Bangkok on March 21 to protest at an NPKA plan to amend the Labour Relations Act and dissolve all 61 state enterprise unions and prevent new ones from being formed.
At a press conference on March 15 Gen. Suchinda had made it clear that the neutralization of the state-enterprise labour movement had been one of the prime objectives behind the military takeover.
Anti-corruption investigation — Crackdown on crime and sex industry
The Asset Verification Committee (AVC) formed in the aftermath of the coup to investigate allegations of corruption in the Chatichai government [see p. 38004]continued its work during March.
On March 4 it was announced that Chatichai's financial situation was also under investigation.
On March 1 Samak Sundaravej announced his intention to resign as leader of the Prachakorn Thai Party in protest at the AVC investigation into his financial affairs.
On March 5 the police department undertook to take tough action against the country's top criminal "godfathers" (chao phor).
A police source said on March 15 that a list of some 200 "godfathers" had been drawn up, and that it included a number of former MPs and Cabinet ministers.
Minister in the Prime Minister's Office Meechai Viravaidya announced on March 25 a major crackdown on the country's prodigious "sex industry" .
Meechai told reporters that so-called "sex tourists" were no longer welcome in Thailand, and warned them to remain in their own countries "and exploit their own women and children" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
UN peace plan — Diplomatic manoeuvring — Chinese arms supplies — Fighting — Food shortages
Major speech on UN peace plan by Hun Sen
Hun Sen, the Premier of the State of Cambodia (SOC), delivered a major speech in Phnom Penh, the capital, on March 7 in which he clearly outlined his government's objections to the deadlocked UN peace plan.
According to Hun Sen, the government, while accepting most of the plan, wanted it to include "concrete measures" to prevent the return to power of the "genocidal" Pol Pot regime (the Khmer Rouge regime of 1976-79).
The government disagreed with the plan's provisions for the dissolution of the SOC administration and of the armed forces prior to a UN-supervised general election.
Instead, Hun Sen proposed that the political and military status quo be maintained until after the elections.
Hun Sen went on to call for a meeting of the all-party Supreme National Council (SNC) in Bangkok.
He proposed the implementation of a voluntary ceasefire; an end to foreign military aid to all warring factions; agreement on ending the transport of weapons through Thailand, Vietnam and Laos; and the dispatch of UN fact-finding teams to rebel-controlled areas.
Indication of resumption of Chinese arms supplies to Khmers Rouges — NGC meeting in Beijing
A Chinese foreign ministry spokesman indicated on March 7 that China had resumed supplies of arms to the Khmers Rouges.
China had announced in November 1990 that it had recently halted such arms supplies [see p. 37858].
The leaders of the rebel National Government of Cambodia (NGC, comprising the Khmers Rouges, the Sihanoukists and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front — KPNLF) met in Beijing on March 12-14.
According to the Economist of March 16 the three groups presented arms "shopping lists" to the Chinese authorities.
The Sihanoukists and the KPNLF in particular were believed to be short of artillery shells.
Visit to China by US and Soviet officials — Fresh Indonesian and Japanese initiatives
Richard Solomon, United States Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and the Pacific, visited China, Japan, Indonesia and Thailand during mid-March in an attempt to revive the stalled UN peace plan.
His visit to China coincided with a visit by his Soviet counterpart, Deputy Foreign Minister Igor Rogachev.
Solomon and Rogachev were both reported to have expressed concern about China's apparent volte-face over military assistance to the Khmers Rouges.
Following the Solomon visit Ali Alatas, the Indonesian Foreign Minister, contacted Roland Dumas, his French counterpart and co-chair of the Paris International Conference on Cambodia (PICC), to propose a new meeting of the rival factions in Jakarta in mid-April.
The Japanese also launched in March a fresh initiative which called, among other things, for the creation of a special commission to monitor Khmer Rouge activities.
Fighting — Alleged Vietnamese troop involvement
SOC forces launched a large-scale assault against KPNLF positions along the Thai border in early March.
Thmar Puok, the centre of an area of civil development programmes funded by the US Agency for International Development, came under attack during the assault.
Meanwhile SOC forces were reported to have used Soviet-supplied helicopter gunships for the first time in March in an attack on Khmer Rouge positions around Pailin.
The Independent of March 2 reported that a "large number" of Vietnamese combat units had been deployed in Cambodia during the past two months to halt Khmer Rouge advances.
The report, from a correspondent in Bangkok, stated that this was the first occasion since the Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia in September 1989 [see pp. 36881-82]that Vietnamese forces had been used in anything more than an emergency capacity.
Food shortage — Sharp cut in Soviet aid
On March 29 the SOC government appealed to non-governmental and international organizations to provide food aid.
The government said that the country faced a shortage of 1,000,000 tonnes of rice as a result of a poor harvest in 1990 caused by drought and an insufficient supply of fertilizer.
A SOC Commerce Ministry official said in an interview on March 12 that Soviet economic aid to Cambodia for 1991 had been reduced by 80 per cent to about US$170,000,000.
The official said that the cuts would "bring difficulty to the whole economy" and stated that the government was looking for private foreign companies to become involved in joint ventures in an attempt to reduce the country's budget deficit.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Visit by Thai Army commander — Agreement to withdraw troops from disputed border areas
Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon, C.-in-C. of the Thai Army and a leader of the February coup in Thailand [see pp. 38003-04], visited Laos on March 11-12 for talks with the Lao Chief of General Staff, Gen. Sisavat Keobounphanh, and with Premier Kaysone Phomvihane and Defence Minister Gen. Khamtay Siphandon.
During the talks an agreement was reached to withdraw all armed forces from both countries from disputed areas on the Lao-Thai border, namely the districts surrounding the village of Ban Rom Klao, the scene of heavy fighting in late 1987 and early 1988 [see p. 36292], and the three villages of Ban Mai, Ban Klang and Ban Sawang, the scene of fighting in 1984 [see p. 33662].
The withdrawal of forces began on March 13 and was completed by March 19.
ASIA — PACIFIC
Malaysia
Modification of New Economic Policy
Following the expiry of the government's New Economic Policy (NEP) in December 1990, Prime Minister Datuk Seri Mahathir Mohamed on March 1 released a working paper outlining a revised set of economic and social policies.
According to officials, the new policies would maintain the principle of social engineering but be less discriminatory against non-Malays, with the aim of benefiting all ethnic groups in the country and foreign investors.
The working paper stated the need for "some affirmative action" for indigenous Malays or bumiputras, but Mahathir stressed creating equal opportunities through improved education and training, rather than the quota system of the NEP.
Rapid economic growth, he said, would ensure the fulfilment of the aspirations of all races.
The working paper set the goal of an eight-fold increase in national income by 2020, relying on further privatization and deregulation and on more training.
Mahathir also said that foreign investment would continue to be encouraged.
The day before its publication, the working paper was presented to a closed session of the newly formed Malaysian Business Council.
Details of the new policies would be announced in June 1991.
Release of Sabah Chief Minister's aide
Maximus Ongkili, senior aide of Datuk Seri Joseph Pairin Kitingan, the Sabah Chief Minister, was unconditionally released from police custody on March 2.
As deputy chief of Sabah's Institute for Development Studies, whose activities were viewed by the central government as a threat to the integrity of the Malaysian Federation, Ongkili had been held for 59 days under the Internal Security Act on suspicion of carrying out actions prejudicial to national security.
ASIA — PACIFIC
ASEAN
Economic seminar in Bali
Sultan Sir Hassanal Bolkiah of Brunei, President Suharto of Indonesia, Malaysian Prime Minister Datuk Seri Mahathir Mohamed and Singapore's Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong met in Bali on March 3-5 for what was described as neither an informal summit meeting nor a mini-summit, but a seminar, with the theme "ASEAN and the world economy" .
The conference, sponsored by Indonesia's Centre for Strategic and International Studies and the United States' Asia Society, was attended by more than 1,000 Asian and American delegates.
The ASEAN leaders called for increased economic co-operation and sought an increase in foreign investment in ASEAN countries.
Mahathir warned of possible US pressure to gain trade concessions, in an attempt to strengthen its economy after the Gulf war, although former US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger told the conference that the USA would not seek world domination.
Japanese officials promised continued aid and investment in ASEAN countries, and in a letter to President Aquino of the Philippines on March 4, Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu said that Japan's policy of co-operation with the region would not change.
A major topic of discussion at the Bali conference was Mahathir's proposal, made in January on the eve of a visit by Kaifu, for an East Asian Economic Grouping (EAEG).
Mahathir said that the formation of such a group would benefit rather than stifle world trade.
He also said that Japanese membership of EAEG would not hurt the group's credibility; it was the EAEG as a whole which would wield leverage, he said, and not its individual members.
Suharto, however, opposed the formation of a new trade bloc, expressing strong reservations about the Malaysian proposal, and other ASEAN member countries also apparently preferred to focus on support for the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation Council (APEC), formed in November 1989 [see p. 37044].
On March 4 it was announced that APEC was holding further discussions on the inclusion of China, Taiwan and Hong Kong, having reached a consensus on the need to admit all the "three Chinas" to the group [see pp. 37613; 37656].
While in Bali the ASEAN leaders agreed that their forthcoming summit in Singapore would proceed as planned.
Mahathir also suggested that ASEAN leaders should meet more often as a group.
On March 14 the Malaysian Foreign Minister, Omar Abu Hassan, said that ASEAN had agreed in principle to accept the Soviet Union as a dialogue partner, and was also considering China, Vietnam and Burma in the same capacity.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Resignation of Shekhar government — Calling of elections
The attempt of the Chandra Shekhar (S) faction of Janata Dal to continue its minority government, in office since November 1990 [see p. 37854], ended on March 6 when Shekhar resigned, unwilling to meet any longer the political price demanded by Rajiv Gandhi's Congress (I) party for its parliamentary support.
Both Shekhar and Gandhi had recently emphasized the need for stability in government, particularly in view of negotiations under way with the International Monetary Fund [see p. 38006].
The precipitating event was Gandhi's March 4 demand for "adequate action" against those who arranged surveillance of his New Delhi home by two Haryana policemen, found "snooping" on meetings between Gandhi and Janata Dal (S) dissidents.
Congress (I) demanded the resignation of the Haryana government, of its former Chief Minister and current Janata Dal (S) general secretary Om Prakash Chauthala, and of Communications Minister Sanjay Singh.
A Congress boycott of parliament in support of these demands, backed by the Bharatiya Janata Party which was protesting about a telephone tapping issue, left the lower house, the Lok Sabha, inquorate on March 5.
Shekhar initially apologised over the surveillance and offered a joint parliamentary inquiry.
When Congress (I) deemed this insufficient Shekhar, apparently concluding that Gandhi was anyway planning sooner or later to form his own Congress (I) administration, submitted his resignation.
Recommending fresh elections, he described his decision in a broadcast on March 7 as intended "to save the dignity of the nation" .
Parliament adjourned on March 7 until March 11, with President Ramaswamy Venkataraman, having accepted Shekhar's resignation, nevertheless delaying his decision on whether to call elections.
A dissolution of Parliament would leave uncompleted the passage of the Constitution (75th Amendment) Bill necessary for a further extension of president's rule in Punjab.
It would also leave India with no budgetary provision (a continuing resolution, to allow four months' expenditure after the current financial year end on March 31, had been introduced on March 4 after the Congress (I) had in late February denied Shekhar's government its backing for a full budget bill — ibid.).
Critics claimed, however, that the delay, ostensibly on these grounds, in practice allowed scope for Gandhi and a deeply divided Congress (I) party to see whether a government could be patched together.
On March 10 Gandhi formally requested fresh elections.
The Lok Sabha reconvened to complete essential business on March 11-12, the Rajya Sabha (upper house) finished business on March 13, and one hour later the President dissolved Parliament, ordering that it be reconstituted by June 5.
Shekhar was asked to continue as caretaker Prime Minister, pending elections in late May.
Polling days, not specified until April 12, were to be May 20, 23 and 26.
The last business completed by both houses, besides passage of the continuing resolution on the budget, the Constitution (75th Amendment) Bill and resolutions to extend president's rule in Punjab and Assam [see below], also included a measure increasing parliamentary pensions by 150 per cent.
The Haryana state government was reorganized on March 23 with Chauthala once again controversially, and briefly, taking formal charge as Chief Minister [for his resignations in May and July 1990 see pp. 37452; 37610]and with former Chief Minister Hukam Singh as his deputy.
Unable to command a stable majority, however, Chauthala on March 26 recommended state elections to coincide with the Lok Sabha poll.
Developments in other states and territories
State election dates: The Communist-led governments of West Bengal and Kerala on March 18 and March 21 respectively approved decisions to hold elections in May simultaneously with those to the Lok Sabha, and the West Bengal State Assembly was dissolved on March 31.
A similar decision had been made in respect of Uttar Pradesh by the time the poll date was announced in April [see also above for Haryana].
Tamil Nadu, currently under president's rule [see pp. 37964; 38006], and the union territory of Pondicherry would also have their elections coinciding with the Lok Sabha poll, the chief election commissioner announced on March 20.
Non-participation in Lok Sabha polling.
The election date announcement on April 12 included confirmation of postponement to an unspecified later date, for security reasons, of polling in Punjab (where president's rule was formally extended on March 13 for a further six months — see above for need to pass constitutional amendment allowing this before Parliament was dissolved), in Assam, where president's rule was also extended on March 13 for a further six months from the end of May, and in Jammu and Kashmir, president's rule there having been extended for six more months from March 3, as approved by Parliament on Feb. 27.
Changes in governors.
Assam's Governor, D. D. Thakur, resigned on March 15, having been criticised by Rajiv Gandhi on March 13 for failing to tackle the insurgency threat; he was replaced by Loknath Mishra, while his responsibilities in Arunachal Pradesh were taken over by Surendra Nath Dwiwedi, appointed as Governor on March 20.
In Bihar Mohammed Shafi Qureshi, a former union minister (most recently of Civil Aviation and Tourism in 1979-80), was named as Governor on March 14.
In Goa a former union minister, B. P. Singh, was appointed Governor on March 15.
Security.
In Assam, where the militant United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) was resisting the army's "Operation Bajrang" offensive, records indicated 97 ULFA killings since Nov. 27, 1990, directed particularly at Congress (I) politicians [see pp. 37854-55; 38006].
The Front declared a unilateral ceasefire on March 4, but demanded that all political groupings make clear by the end of the month their standpoint on Assam independence and "New Delhi's colonialism" .
In Jammu and Kashmir, local politician's daughter Nahida Imtiaz Soz, kidnapped in Srinagar on Feb. 27 by the Jammu and Kashmir Student Liberation Front, was freed on March 8 in return for the release of an imprisoned "Pakistani-trained militant" , Mushtaq Ahmed; three policemen had also been abducted in an effort to secure the release of five separatist activists.
Violent clashes between Moslem separatists and Indian security forces included incidents on March 10 in which 11 people died, and a week later when 17 were killed; some 1,000 arrests were made.
On March 20 the Indian authorities rejected Pakistani government charges of human rights violations, claiming that they were based on a "terrorist disinformation campaign" ; the most dramatic allegation related to the mass rape on Feb. 23 of 30-60 women and girls when 800 troops of the 4th Rajput Rifles had sealed off the village of Kunan Poshpura.
India and Pakistan both reportedly reinforced border troops on March 26 after three days of clashes at Keran in the Kashmir valley and at Rajouri and Poonch in Jammu.
Census
First results of India's 1991 census, released on March 25, revealed a March 1 total of 843,930,861 people or some 160,600,000 more than in 1981.
The trend could see India overtake China (estimated population 1,160 million but rising less rapidly) by the year 2011 as the world's most populous country.
[For 1981 census see p. 31260.]
The male/female ratio was 1,000 to 929, suggesting continuing relative neglect of girl babies.
Literacy was recorded as 52.11 per cent(43.56 per cent in 1981).
The biggest cities were Greater Bombay (12,570,000), Calcutta (10,860,000), fast-growing New Delhi (8,380,000) and Madras (5,360,000).
A national income survey also released in March showed that 29.2 per cent of the population in 1987-88 lived below the official poverty line (consumption of some US$11 per month), as compared with 43.8 per cent a decade earlier.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Formation of government by Begum Zia
Begum Khaleda Zia, leader of the centre-right Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP), was sworn in on March 20 as the first woman Prime Minister of Bangladesh.
The appointment ended three weeks of political uncertainty during which Sheikh Hasina Wajed, leader of the second-largest party, the Awami League, challenged Begum Zia to demonstrate her majority at the first session of the newly elected Jatiya Sangsad (National Assembly), scheduled for April 5.
Election results
Official results for the 300 directly elected members of the Jatiya Sangsad were published on March 8 [for election and preliminary results see pp. 38006-07].
With six constituencies requiring re-polling because of the death of candidates or allegations of electoral fraud, the results gave the BNP 32 per cent of the vote and 138 seats and the Awami League also 32 per cent but only 85 seats (it later won three of the six re-polled seats).
The Jatiya Party of the former President Lt.-Gen. (retd) Hussain Mohammed Ershad won 35 seats, the Jamaat-i Islami 18 seats, the Communist party and other small parties allied to the Awami League 12 seats, other small parties three and independents three.
The total turnout was estimated at about 52 per cent of the electorate.
The BNP, short of a clear majority on its own, obtained sufficient pledges of support in subsequent negotiations with smaller parties, including the Jamaat-i Islami.
The BNP was also expected to take at least 28 of the 30 reserved seats for women, to be elected by the Jatiya Sangsad in April.
Government priorities — Ministerial appointments
After the brief swearing-in ceremony at the presidential palace, Begum Zia, the widow of Maj.-Gen.
Ziaur Rahman, President from April 1977 until his assassination in May 1981, said that the first and foremost task of her government would be to restore the economy and rebuild the financial and other institutions "destroyed by nine years of autocratic regime" .
She also said that she favoured a presidential system of government.
If her party backed her, she said, she would stand in presidential elections later in the year.
Meanwhile, she and her colleagues would take responsibility for ministries under a government formally headed by the acting President, Chief Justice Shehabuddin Ahmed, who administered the oath of office to Begum Zia, 11 other Cabinet members, and 21 ministers of state, all belonging to the BNP.
Begum Khaleda ZiaPrime Minister, Establishment, Information, Energy and Mineral Resources Mirza Gholam HafizLaw and Justice Badruddoja ChowdhuryEducation Maj.-Gen. (retd) Majedul HaqAgriculture, Irrigation, Flood Control and Water Resources A. S. M. Mustafizur RahmanForeign Affairs Saifur RahmanFinance and Planning Abdul Salam TalukderLocal Government, Rural Development and Co-operatives Col. (retd) Oli AhmedCommunications, Railways, Roads and Highways Keramat AliCommerce M. K. AnwarShipping Shamsul Islam KhanIndustry Chowdhury Kamal Ibne YusufHealth and Family Planning
New Bangladesh Cabinet
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Cabinet changes over Gulf policy and Sharia
The Minister for Local Government, Rural Development and Special Education, Maulana Abdul Sattar Khan Niazi, resigned on March 4 after being criticized by Prime Minister Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif for not supporting the government's policies over the Gulf war.
Niazi, whose Jamiat Ulama-i Pakistan (Niazi) party (JUP) would nevertheless remain a member of the ruling Islamic Democratic Alliance (IDA), objected to Sharif's pro-United States policy, and also accused him of failing to enforce the Islamic Sharia code as Pakistan's supreme law, one of the IDA's election pledges.
Although Sharif controlled a sufficient parliamentary majority to pass the necessary legislation, he had argued in favour of reaching a consensus in order to avoid deepening social divisions in the country.
On March 9 Chaudhary Amir Hussain was appointed as the new Minister of State for Law, Justice and Parliamentary Reforms.
The post was formerly handled by the Education Minister, Fakhar Hussain, who proved unpopular with right-wing religious parties over the issue of the introduction of the Sharia.
An independent deputy, Muhammad Ajmal Khan, was appointed to the Cabinet as Minister of State for Sports.
The governor of Baluchistan, Gen. (retd) Muhammad Musa, died in Quetta on March 12.
Senate elections
The IDA made substantial gains in indirect elections held on March 14 for 42 members of the National Senate (upper house), chosen by the four provincial assemblies and the National Assembly.
The IDA won 23 seats and other smaller parties and independents, most aligned with Sharif's government, won 14.
The opposition Pakistan People's Party (PPP) won only five seats and accused the government of intimidation and vote-rigging, claiming notably that five PPP members of the Sind Legislative Assembly had effectively been "kidnapped" by the police.
(The elections were accompanied by a government crackdown on the PPP leading to the imprisonment of at least 1,200 of its supporters.)
Both PPP and IDA politicians criticized "blatant horse-trading" for Senate seats, which, they said, threatened to undermine democracy and give the army an excuse to intervene again.
Hijacking of Airbus
Four Pakistanis hijacked a Singapore Airlines Airbus while on a flight from Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian capital, to Singapore on March 26, but were shot dead by commandos in Singapore on March 27 after eight hours of negotiations.
There were no casualties among the 118 passengers.
The hijackers had demanded the release of a number of people held in Pakistan, including Asif Ali Zardari, husband of the PPP leader and former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto.
They had ordered the plane to fly to Australia, but had offered to free passengers once the aircraft was refuelled.
Both the PPP and the coalition government accused each other of masterminding the hijack.
The PPP called for an independent inquiry to clear the damage to its reputation caused by assertions that the hijackers were members of Al Zulfiqar, an armed resistance group with PPP connections which had operated in the 1980s and was involved in a hijacking in 1981 [see pp. 31071-72].
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Assassination of Wijeratne
A bomb attack in Colombo on March 2 killed the government's hardline security chief, Minister of State for Defence Ranjan Wijeratne, 59, his driver and five bodyguards, and some 25 others in the street where his motorcade was passing.
The government accused the Tamil rebel Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE or Tamil Tigers) of responsibility, confirming this conclusion on March 14.
The LTTE, in a statement on March 4, denied involvement but said that the Tamil people would welcome the death of Wijeratne, who had promised to "wipe the Tigers off the face of the earth" .
Wijeratne's other enemies included the Janata Vimukti Peramuna (JVP), the Sinhalese group whose southern-based insurgency he had effectively destroyed in a ferocious campaign in late 1989 [see pp. 37042 and 37353], and the gambling industry, a casino operator having been deported in February.
A government reshuffle on March 6 allocated Wijeratne's defence portfolio (nominally as Deputy Minister to President Ranasinghe Premadasa) to the more conciliatory Prime Minister Dingiri Banda Wijetunge, and Wijeratne's other portfolio of Plantation Industries to Rupasena Karunatilleke, whose previous Ports and Shipping portfolio went to Alick Aluvihare, leaving Posts and Telecommunications to A.M.S. Adhikari.
Gamini Athukorale was promoted to Cabinet rank in charge of Lands, Irrigation and Mahaweli Development, succeeding P. Dayaratne, who in turn took over Reconstruction, Rehabilitation and Social Welfare from Adhikari.
Fighting — Preparation for local elections
An LTTE attack on two army camps on the Mannar peninsula in the north-west on March 19-23 ended in a major defeat for the guerrillas, according to official reports, with 23 soldiers killed as against some 300-500 guerrillas dead, and 100 more killed in a clash nearby on March 30.
Some emergency regulations restricting political meetings and propaganda were relaxed (except in the northern and eastern provinces) with effect from March 29, so that campaigning could proceed for the May 11 local elections in seven provinces.
Premadasa on March 23 appealed to the LTTE to "enter the democratic process" , promising that "if the LTTE gives up violence, the government will lose no time in holding fresh elections to the North-Eastern Provincial Council and to the local government institutions in that province" .
Bradman Weerakoon, Premadasa's adviser on international affairs, announced on March 20 that the human rights organization Amnesty International could send researchers to Sri Lanka, which had "nothing to hide" on human rights.
Amnesty, denounced by Wijeratne in 1990 as a "terrorist organization" , had hitherto been denied access to Sri Lanka, most recently at the height of the JVP insurgency in 1989 [for December 1989, September 1990 Amnesty reports see pp. 37353; 37711].
ASIA — PACIFIC
TONGA
Street protests
Some 2,000 people took part on March 8 in what were described as the biggest demonstrations in Tonga in living memory, in protest at a decision to grant citizenship to more than 400 foreigners.
The demonstration march through the streets of the capital, Nuku'Alofa, was led by the Roman Catholic Bishop of Tonga, the Rt.
Rev. Patelisio Punou-Ki-Hihifo Finau, and opposition members of parliament.
Demonstrators were angered by a government announcement in February that King Taufa'ahau Tupou IV had agreed to amend the law, thereby giving Tongan citizenship to 426 foreigners who had bought Tongan passports.
Among the 426 was Imelda Marcos, widow of the former Philippines President Ferdinand Marcos.
The sale of Tongan passports, for US$10,000 or more, which had begun in 1984, was declared illegal by parliament in 1988.
Most purchasers had been from south-east Asia.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Appointments to Security Council — Other appointments
The Security Council, created in the December 1990 leadership restructuring, was constituted on March 7 when the USSR Supreme Soviet approved eight nominations by President Mikhail Gorbachev.
In a list headed by Vice-President Gennady Yanayev and Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov, and consisting almost exclusively of senior government figures, the only surprise was Vadim Bakatin, the former Interior Minister dismissed in December 1990 [see p. 37902], who was identified by commentators as the only liberal on the Council.
Some commentators also noted that the Council included only one non-Russian, the ethnic-Latvian (but Moscow-born) current Interior Minister, Boris Pugo.
One nominee for Security Council membership, senior Gorbachev aide Valery Boldin, on March 7 failed twice to secure the required endorsement by an absolute majority of Supreme Soviet deputies.
Yevgeny Primakov, the Deputy Foreign Minister recently prominent in Soviet mediation efforts to end the Gulf Conflict, was similarly rejected in a first round of voting, but was endorsed after he had been renominated.
Bessmertnykh, Gen. Vladimir Kryuchkov, Yevgeny Primakov, Boris Pugo, Marshal Dmitry Yazov.
USSR Security Council Gennady Yanayev, Valentin Pavlov, Vadim Bakatin, Aleksandr
Further Cabinet appointments
Legislation regulating the work and determining the powers of the new Cabinet of Ministers was passed by the USSR Supreme Soviet on March 20.
According to a Moscow Radio World Service report on Feb. 25 the Cabinet was to consist of 55 members, compared with 69 members in the former Council of Ministers (earlier reports had suggested that the Cabinet would include only around 15 ministers, plus the republican heads of government — see p. 37904).
The Supreme Soviet between Feb. 28 and Mar. 20 elected 23 more members of the Cabinet following nomination by Gorbachev.
Most of the new members had held the same portfolios in the Council of Ministers, including Marshal Dmitry Yazov as Defence Minister, Sergei Lushchikov as Justice Minister, and Gen. Vladimir Kryuchkov as chair of the State Security Committee (KGB).
New appointees were Fedor Senko and Vladimir Shcherbakov as Deputy Premiers, Vyacheslav Chernoivanov as Agriculture Minister, Gennady Kudryavtsev as Communications Minister, and Vladimir Orlov as Finance Minister.
In addition, Igor Prostyakov replaced Mikhail Shkabardnya as Cabinet Chief Administrator on March 21 [the completed list of Cabinet members will be published in a future News Digest].
New presidential advisers
The Financial Times of March 1 reported that Gorbachev had appointed as his economic adviser Oleg Ozherelev, hitherto an official of the central committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) and formerly dean of the economics faculty at Leningrad University.
It also noted comments by Gorbachev, quoted in the newspaper Sovietskaya Rossiya, that he was retaining as an adviser his former CPSU politburo ally Aleksandr Yakovlev.
On March 7 the official news agency Tass reported the appointment of Georgy Ostroumov as a presidential aide.
New ambassador to USA — Posting for Gerasimov
United States officials announced on March 19 that the new Soviet ambassador to Washington was to be Viktor Komplektov.
United States Secretary of State James Baker had been notified of the appointment while in Moscow on March 14-16 for talks with Gorbachev and Bessmertnykh, and it had been formally approved by the US administration on March 18.
Komplektov, a veteran diplomat specializing in US affairs and a Deputy Foreign Minister since 1982, was described by the Washington Post of March 20 as more conservative than Bessmertnykh, his predecessor in the post.
Gennady Gerasimov, Foreign Ministry spokesman until November 1990 [see p. 37864], on March 11 took up the post of Soviet ambassador to Portugal.
Sentencing for flag burning
Valeria Novodvorskaya, a leader of the opposition Democratic Union, was sentenced by a Moscow court on March 1 to two years in a labour camp for "insulting the state flag" , after burning a USSR flag during a demonstration in Moscow's Pushkin Square in September 1990.
She was given leave to appeal.
The court cleared Novodvorskaya of a separate charge of "insulting the honour and dignity of the USSR President" .
In the first case of its kind since the introduction of that offence by the USSR Supreme Soviet on May 14, 1990, she pleaded guilty to charges that on several occasions she had insulted Gorbachev, for example by calling him a "fascist criminal" and comparing him to Hitler.
The judge threw out the charge, however, after ruling that Novodvorskaya had not used obscene language.
Sentencing of hijacker — Extradition of fugitive to USA
Oleg Kozlov, who in June 1990 had hijacked a Soviet internal flight with 54 passengers on board to Helsinki, was sentenced by a court in Latvia on March 14 to five years in a labour camp.
In the first case of its kind since the Soviet Union's accession to Interpol in 1990, the Soviet authorities on March 10 allowed the extradition of a fugitive wanted in the United States in connection with a US$10,000,000 medical insurance fraud.
Felix Kolbovsky, a Russian-born US citizen, had fled to his native country after charges had been filed in August 1990.
Developments in republics
Georgia: Situation in South Ossetia
Georgian President Zviad Gamsakhurdia and Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin, meeting on March 23 in the Georgian town of Kazbegi, agreed to set up by April 10 a joint Georgian-Russian militia detachment to police Georgia's troubled South Ossetia region.
The detachments were to be entrusted with disarming the rival Georgian and Ossete paramilitary groups which since December 1990 had been engaged in what Yeltsin described as a "mini-civil war" .
It was agreed that the Georgian and Russian governments, together with the government of the North Ossetian autonomous republic (inside the Russian Federation), would work for the resettlement of the tens of thousands of refugees displaced from South Ossetia by the conflict, and for the "restoration of the lawful local government bodies" .
Throughout March the conflict continued unabated, with numerous gun battles being reported in the besieged regional capital, Tskhinvali, and surrounding villages.
After four days of almost continuous shooting around Tskhinvali a ceasefire was negotiated on March 20 by USSR Interior Ministry officials, but this broke down almost immediately.
At least 15 people were reported killed in the course of the month.
In the most serious incident four Georgians were reportedly doused with petrol and burned alive by Ossetes after being ambushed outside Tskhinvali; another three Georgians were shot dead by USSR Interior Ministry troops whom they had attempted to ambush.
Desperate food shortages continued in Tskhinvali, and it was reported at the end of March that the town's vital road link to North Ossetia had been cut by Georgian armed bands.
On March 29 Moscow radio reported that almost all Ossete villages in South Ossetia had been razed by Georgian militants, and on the following day there were ominous reports from officials in North Ossetia that 12,000 armed Georgians were massing for an assault on Tskhinvali and surrounding districts still under Ossete control.
Kirghizia: Sentencing of Osh rioters
The Kirghiz Supreme Court in Bishkek (formerly Frunze) on March 19 sentenced Ataman Tashaliyev, a former deputy to the Kirghiz Supreme Soviet, to 12 years' imprisonment for leading the June 1990 pogrom against Uzbek residents of the town of Uzgen.
This had been among the most violent events reported during several weeks' of clashes between Kirghiz and Uzbeks in Kirghizia's Osh oblast (region)[see pp. 37540-41; 37618].
At a separate trial ending on March 1 in Osh city three men were sentenced to prison terms of between 11 and 14 years for their involvement in the intercommunal violence.
Lithuania: Seizure of Defence Minister — Shootings
Soviet OMON special police (commonly known as the "Black Berets" ) in the early hours of March 18 seized Audris Butkevicius, head of the Lithuanian Defence Department (de facto republican Defence Minister).
His official car was intercepted in the centre of Vilnius, and he was taken in handcuffs to the OMON headquarters outside the city, where he was held for questioning for nearly 12 hours before being released.
An official of the Lithuanian Supreme Council claimed on March 18 that Antas Petrauskas Lithuania's Soviet-appointed state procurator [see p. 37361], had been seeking to pursue an investigation against Butkevicius on charges of illegal weapons' possession.
The official claimed that Petrauskas had received orders from Moscow to release Butkevicius.
On March 20 members of the OMON opened fire with automatic weapons on a bus carrying members of the Lithuanian defence force, injuring at least two of the seven men on board.
The shooting took place after two OMON units trying to intercept the bus had chased it into the centre of Vilnius.
Ukraine: Return of Uniate Primate
Cardinal Miroslav Lubachivsky, 77, the spiritual leader of up to 5,000,000 Ukrainian (Eastern Rite) Catholics (commonly known as Uniates), returned on March 30 to take up residence in Lvov in the West Ukraine after 52 years in exile in Rome.
On the following day he celebrated Palm Sunday mass at Lvov's Cathedral of St George.
His return represented a landmark in the rehabilitation of the Uniate Church, which for more than 40 years had been the world's largest banned religious organization.
The Uniates practised Eastern Orthodox rites but recognized papal authority.
Outlawed by Stalin in 1946 because of suspected links with Ukrainian nationalism, and forcibly incorporated into the Russian Orthodox Church, the Uniate Church had continued in secret.
In December 1989, coinciding with an improvement in Soviet-Vatican relations, Uniate congregations had been allowed legally to register [see p. 37129], and while the Uniate Church still did not formally enjoy full legal status most obstacles to its operating legally had been removed by the October 1990 Soviet law on freedom of worship [see pp. 37787-88].
Rescinding of bank withdrawal limit
It was reported on March 8 that the USSR Cabinet had decided to rescind the Rbs500-a-month limit on withdrawals from private savings bank accounts.
The limit had been imposed on Jan. 22 when the controversial withdrawal of high-denomination banknotes was announced.
Release of EC aid
On March 5 the Council of (Foreign) Ministers of the European Communities (EC) and the European Parliament voted to release food aid and credit for the Soviet Union which had been frozen in January in protest at the Soviet military crackdown in the Baltic republics [see pp. 37944-45].
The amount released represented 750 million European currency units (ECU) out of a total of ECU1,150 million (approximately US$1,535 million) in food and technical assistance approved at the December 1990 EC summit in Rome [see p. 37906].
A visit by the Luxembourg, Italian and Netherlands Foreign Ministers (currently the "troika" representing the EC Council of Ministers) to Moscow on Feb. 16-17 (at which the Gulf crisis was also discussed) had registered an improvement in relations.
Afterwards Jacques Poos, the Luxembourg Foreign Minister, declared that President Gorbachev said that "he would continue on the path to reform even if he sometimes had to take a detour" .
On Feb. 19 EC Foreign Ministers accordingly asked the Commission to resume work on preparing the aid package.
During a visit to Moscow French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas had on Feb. 12 offered credits to the Soviet Union worth F3,000 million (US$610 million).
Major's visit to Moscow
John Major on March 5 paid his first visit to Moscow as United Kingdom Prime Minister.
After a four-hour meeting with Gorbachev, in which the main topics of discussion were the Gulf and developments in the republics, Tass described the two leaders as having established a "good personal contact" .
Major also met Soviet Defence Minister Marshal Dmitry Yazov, Soviet Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov, representatives of the Baltic republics and opposition leaders.
UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd, also on March 19-22 visiting the Soviet Union, announced that a UK consulate would be opened in Kiev, and held talks with Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin and with Soviet Foreign Minister Aleksandr Bessmertnykh as well as with Gorbachev.
Chinese aid to Soviet Union
On March 15 at the end of a five-day visit to China, Soviet Deputy Premier Yury Maslyukov signed a commodity loan agreement with his counterpart Tian Jiyun.
Under the agreement China would provide the Soviet Union with a commodity loan worth 1,000 million Swiss francs (US$730 million) allowing the country to purchase Chinese grain, meat, tea, tobacco, peanuts, textiles and light industrial products.
The loan was to be repaid in raw material and industrial products over four years from 1993.
The "unprecedented offer" was described by the Independent of March 16 as reversing "the historic relationship between Moscow and Beijing, which…in the 1950s was heavily dependent on Soviet money, technology and political guidance" .
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Mass exodus of refugees
The arrival of around 20,000 ship-borne Albanians in southern Italian ports (mainly Brindisi, Otranto and Bari) from March 1 to 7 caused the Italian authorities severe embarrassment.
The migration seemed largely spontaneous, fuelled by rumours of opportunities abroad and the supposedly imminent imposition of travel restrictions in Albania.
Both the Albanian government and the opposition parties denounced the departures as an attempt to disrupt the March 31 elections.
On Feb. 9 Albanian police had prevented some 5,000 would-be emigrants from sailing from Durrës, the port (30 km west of Tirana, the Albanian capital) from which a group of Albanians been allowed to leave for Brindisi in July 1990 [see p. 37618].
On Feb. 28 a ship was boarded by 200 people at Vlorë and sailed for Italy.
On March 2-3 cargo vessels and fishing boats seized in Durrës and other Albanian ports took some 900 Albanians to Brindisi and Otranto.
By March 8 an estimated 20,000 Albanians had travelled this route in around 15 vessels.
In Brindisi, with 4,000 people crowded aboard moored boats and 3,000 on the dockside, the local authorities were overwhelmed by the scale of the migration.
Townspeople donated food and clothing while the Italian government was criticized by opposition parties for its inaction.
The Italian Cabinet on March 8 ordered the navy to prevent more boats from reaching Brindisi.
Vito Lattanzio, Italian Minister for Civil Protection, was made responsible for emergency measures and on March 9 the food and shelter supplied by central government began to reach Brindisi.
On March 10 refugees began to be moved to camps near Palermo, Naples, Venice and other towns, while 2,000 returned voluntarily to Durrës, where the Albanian authorities had undertaken to receive them sympathetically.
Violent clashes in Albania
About 3,000 people converged on foreign embassies in Tirana on March 6, believing that they would be opened to asylum-seekers (as in July 1990).
Policemen who were stoned by the crowd used live ammunition to disperse it, killing at least one person.
On March 7 Albanian troops took control of Durrës, where — as well as in Tirana, Vlorë and smaller ports — thousands were still hoping to board ships.
On March 9 several people were killed in Durrës when police took over a ship holding 2,000 people.
On the same day over 1,000 ethnic Serbs and Montenegrins crossed the northern border into Yugoslavia, followed by smaller groups on subsequent days.
Albanian reactions
The government denied rumours that travel would be restricted in the lead-up to the March 31 elections.
On March 2 it was announced that a new Committee for Employment and Emigration would assist the Foreign Ministry in exploring openings for Albanians to work abroad.
The Albanian Council of Ministers on March 5 said that "enemies" of the country were seeking to hamper the "normal conduct of the election campaign" .
The opposition Democratic Party (DP) suggested that the exodus was staged and that the ruling Albanian Party of Labour (PLA) welcomed the departure of non-communist voters.
A DP communiqué of March 11 looked forward to a time when Albanians would not "need to undertake dangerous adventures in search of a better future" .
Italian-Albanian relations — Pardon for political prisoners — Discussions on aid
Claudio Martelli, the Italian Deputy Prime Minister, visited Tirana on March 11, meeting the Chair of Albania's provisional Council of Ministers, Fatos Nano [for Feb. 22 appointment of government pending March 31 elections see p. 38016].
Nano said that through Italian mediation Albania hoped to become a full member of the European Communities.
Martelli raised during his visit the issue of Albania's political prisoners [see pp. 37746; 37972].
A general pardon for all remaining political prisoners, announced on March 12, was followed by the release of 175 people by March 17.
At talks between the Albanian Foreign Affairs Minister Muhamet Kapllani and his Italian counterpart Gianni De Michelis on March 13, a three-year programme of economic aid from Italy to Albania was discussed.
A shipload of food and medical aid from Italy reached Albania on March 19, one day after the Albanian government had placed all food distribution in the country under police control in an attempt to counteract speculation.
(Prior to the mass exodus of Albanians to Italy, the Italian government had been thought to be delaying the delivery of food aid to avoid giving a pre-election boost to the communist regime's popularity.)
Resumption of diplomatic ties with United States
Kapllani signed an agreement in Washington on March 15 restoring diplomatic relations between the United States and Albania, suspended since 1946.
The accord resulted from informal talks held over the previous year.
According to State Department spokesman Richard Boucher, Albanian opposition leaders had urged the resumption of ties.
Holding of multiparty elections
Albania's first free multiparty elections were held on March 31, with a second round scheduled for April 7 in constituencies where there was no outright winner.
The PLA faced competition from four new parties: the DP, the Republican Party, the Ecology Party and the Agrarian Party.
Candidates were also fielded by a number of other organizations (including the Omonia organization representing ethnic Greeks, the Party of National Unity, the Women's Union, the trade unions, the Youth Union, the Democratic Front, the National Veterans' Committee) and there were 17 independent candidates.
The DP fielded candidates in all 250 constituencies, and the Republican Party 165.
According to the Reuters news agency over half the candidates belonged to the PLA or associated organizations, although only 243 were formally identified as PLA candidates.
The DP, founded in December 1990 [see p. 37924]with a programme which included private land ownership and the depoliticization of the army, received most attention from the foreign media.
On March 13 its leaders held talks with US State Department officials in Washington.
In the lead-up to the elections the authorities reiterated their commitment to a free ballot, extending facilities to foreign observers.
DP supporters nevertheless made accusations of ballot-rigging in the March 31 polling.
Results of the first round indicated that the PLA had obtained over 60 per cent of the vote and had won 160 seats outright, even before the run-off elections.
The dominance of the PLA in the countryside was more than sufficient to outweigh the DP's victories in urban areas, and the DP leader Sali Berisha conceded defeat on April 1.
Among several humiliating results for the PLA in urban areas, however, was the defeat of President Ramiz Alia in the seat he contested in a Tirana constituency, where provisional figures recorded the DP candidate winning 62.5 per cent to Alia's 32 per cent.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Dispute over Turkish language teaching in schools
The Education Ministry's proposal on Feb. 14 to introduce Turkish as an optional school subject in some regions from March 1 almost immediately sparked protests in the south-east and north-east.
On March 8 the National Assembly voted to postpone the introduction of Turkish classes until the beginning of the academic year in the autumn.
In early February thousands of ethnic Turkish children in the south-east had boycotted school, demanding that the Turkish language be included on the curriculum.
After the Feb. 14 decision on classes, Bulgarian nationalist parents in turn kept their children home, organizing relay hunger-strikes and sit-ins in municipal offices, while hundreds of teachers went on strike in support.
Opposition to Turkish classes was strongest in the Kurdzhali district in the south-east, where in January 1990 nationalists had opposed the restoration of Turkish-speakers' rights [see pp. 37192-93].
Shumen and Razgrad districts in the north-east saw similar protests.
The National Radical Party opposed Turkish classes as a betrayal of national interests, while the leading opposition parties — the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) and the (largely ethnic Turkish) Movement for Rights and Freedoms — maintained that they were a constitutional right.
On March 9 Prime Minister Dimitur Popov made a lengthy television speech endorsing the introduction of Turkish classes the following autumn.
Noting that minority rights were protected by the UN charter, he linked the issue to the continuing process of democratization in Bulgaria.
The UDF claimed that those tolerating local opposition to Turkish classes were the same people who had instigated the repression of Turkish-speakers after 1984.
Violence against Vietnamese workers
One Vietnamese was killed and four received gunshot wounds in an incident at a foreign workers' hostel in Sofia on March 17.
A Vietnamese was said to have attacked a taxi driver in a black market-related dispute, although other reports spoke of a police operation against black-marketeers.
The Vietnamese Foreign Ministry demanded an investigation and asked the Bulgarian government to comply with undertakings to provide flights home for Vietnamese workers once their contracts expired.
On March 28 such flights were resumed for the first time since the outbreak of war in the Gulf.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
VPN split — Slovak separatism issue
The internal power struggle over constitutional and economic reform within Slovakia's ruling Public Against Violence (VPN or PAV) came to a head on March 6 when the Prime Minister, Vladimir Meciar, announced the formation of a separate minority faction, to be known as Platform for a Democratic Slovakia.
He claimed to have the support of at least one-third of VPN's deputies in the republican and federal parliaments.
The move, effectively splitting the VPN, followed the splitting in February of Civic Forum, the VPN's sister organization in the Czech Lands and coalition partner at federal level [see p. 38017].
Despite the December 1990 agreement on the division of powers between the federal government and the country's two constituent republics [see p. 37922], calls for greater autonomy and independence had continued to grow in Slovakia, and Meciar had given them increasingly explicit support, setting up an office of foreign affairs (headed by his close ally Milan Knazno) and leading Slovak delegations abroad.
These initiatives brought Meciar closer to the policies of the Christian Democrats, the junior partners in the coalition.
Accusing the VPN leadership of "not defending the interests of Slovakia" , Meciar declared that the new formation would support a new constitution based on a formal state treaty between the two republics and a slowing of the pace of reforms to create a market economy.
The majority in the VPN executive council in turn accused Meciar of fanning damaging nationalist sentiments and acting undemocratically.
In a resolution adopted on March 16 the council declared that Meciar and Knazno no longer enjoyed the party's confidence.
The Slovak parliament on March 19 agreed to investigate the activities of the Interior Ministry since November 1989 (i.e. under Meciar, who was Slovak Interior Minister before becoming Prime Minister in June 1990), and the visits abroad by Slovak delegations.
Critics accused Meciar, a former communist who had joined VPN at the time of the revolution, of using information from secret police files to intimidate political rivals and of acting unconstitutionally by making official foreign visits.
Pro-independence demonstrations
On March 5 leading nationalist political and cultural groups in Slovakia issued a declaration, published in the newspaper Pravda, rejecting the current constitutional arrangements (under which defence, foreign policy and economic strategy remained under federal control) and calling for a fully sovereign Slovakia.
Nationalist groups also organized a series of demonstrations in Bratislava in the week leading up to March 14, the anniversary of the foundation of the independent Slovak republic under German protection in 1939.
On March 11 an estimated 50,000 protesters supported a petition calling on Slovakia's parliament and government to adopt "immediately" a declaration of sovereignty.
On March 14 President Vaclav Havel, who had come to Bratislava to urge Slovaks to remain within the federation, was physically threatened by demonstrators.
Submission of draft constitution — Proposal for referendum on secession
Leaders of all of Czechoslovakia's main political groupings and institutions reached agreement on the framework for a new constitution at a meeting on March 4.
Its main principles would be:(i) Czechoslovakia would be a federative state consisting of the two sovereign and equal republics of the Czech Lands and Slovakia;(ii) the two republics would be linked voluntarily by the free will of their citizens, as expressed in a joint declaration of coexistence;(iii) the fundamental document of the state would be the federal constitution; and (iv) all powers not explicitly given to the federation in the constitution would belong to the republics.
The participants received a working draft of the federal constitution from Havel and working drafts of the Czech and Slovak constitutions.
It was agreed that these would be made available to the relevant political bodies and the public for consultation and amendment.
Most controversial was the submission by the Christian Democrats that the two republics should be linked by a formal state treaty (as between two sovereign states, on the basis of international law) rather than by a political declaration.
This proposal, already rejected by Havel and Czech political forces and the pro-federation wing of the VPN, subsequently gained the backing of Meciar's Platform for a Democratic Slovakia [see above].
Responding to the growing separatist agitation in Slovakia, Havel acknowledged in a nationwide broadcast on March 10 that Czechoslovakia might eventually split into two states.
Accepting that "if the Slovaks want to live in an independent state, they have the right to do so" , he said nevertheless that he saw "no indication" that a majority of Slovaks wanted to secede, and he urged them to remain within the federation and not to succumb to "nationalist narrowmindedness" .
Reiterating earlier calls from Czech leaders, he proposed that a referendum be held on the issue.
New Slovak National Party leader
Jozef Prokes was elected leader of the Slovak National Party at its second congress on March 23.
He succeeded Vitazoslav Moric, who had resigned in December 1990.
The congress also adopted new statutes which defined the party as based on Christian principles and its objective as an independent Slovakia.
Naming of alleged secret police
On March 22 a special parliamentary commission named 10 current members of parliament as having collaborated with the former State Security (StB), disbanded two months after the collapse of the communist regime in November 1989 [see pp. 37026-27; 37255].
In a heated debate in parliament, most of the deputies concerned denied the allegation, arguing variously that their names had appeared in StB files by mistake, as a result of blackmail or as part of an attempt to frame them.
Several said that they would seek redress through the courts.
Compiled from information contained in StB and police files, the list of alleged informers comprised four members of the Communist Party, three from the ruling Civic Forum, two from the Society for Moravia and Silesia and one from the People's Party.
The most prominent were Jan Kavan, a Civic Forum deputy who had lived in exile from 1968 until the 1989 revolution, and Jan Bartoncik, a former leader of the People's Party.
It was also reported that another four deputies had resigned their seats when they were told that they would be identified by the commission.
The commission, originally set up to investigate the violent suppression of the demonstration on Nov. 17, 1989, which triggered the revolution [for its report see p. 37737], had examined files on elected deputies in both the federal and the two republican parliaments.
Its allegations were the latest in a series of accusations of collaboration with the secret police which had surfaced since the revolution and had led to a number of resignations and arrests of politicians and officials [see pp. 37382; 37464; 37542; 38018].
Abolition of state media monopoly
Parliament on March 20 passed legislation allowing the establishment of independent radio and television stations and news agencies, thus ending the state broadcasting monopoly which had applied since the early 1950s.
Under the new law the Czech and Slovak republics would be able to issue news-gathering and broadcasting licences to private individuals with immediate effect.
EUROPE
POLAND
Debt write-offs
In March Poland embarked on a concerted effort to reduce its huge foreign governmental and commercial debts of $48,500 million.
The Finance Ministry announced on March 1 that payment of interest arrears to the "London Club" of creditor banks would be frozen until the banks agreed to reduce its debt of US$11,000 million.
The banks were demanding that Poland pay $250 million in interest arrears as a precondition to any agreement.
On March 15 the "Paris Club" of 17 creditor countries agreed in an unprecedented move to write off 50 per cent of Poland's $33,000 million debt to foreign government creditors.
This was be done in two stages.
The first stage, accounting for 30 per cent of the reduction, would cut Poland's interest payments by 80 per cent over three years.
The debt would then be reduced by a further 20 per cent in the fourth year if a three-year agreement with the IMF had run its course successfully.
(Under a preliminary agreement reached in February the IMF was to provide over $2,000 million for Poland's restructuring programme.)
The Paris Club agreed that individual members could make further cuts of 10 per cent or more on a bilateral basis.
Germany, having written off almost DM6,000 million of Polish debts during the preceding decade, would now have to write off DM4,500 million (about US$2,750 million), while France was owed $5,200 million.
On March 20, during President Lech Walesa's visit to the United States, President Bush promised a 70 per cent cut in Poland's $2,900 million official debt to the USA.
 "We want your economic transformation to succeed, your new democracy to flourish," said Bush.
Before the visit Walesa had said: "We are not coming to beg,…but this revolution we pilot must be successful — in economic as well as political terms." 
In a visit to Moscow in April Walesa was expected to ask the Soviet Union to follow Western creditors' lead and reduce Poland's $1,700 million debt to the Soviet Union.
Sejm rejection of Walesa's call for May elections
In a letter to the Sejm (parliament) on March 7 President Walesa urged its dissolution in advance of elections on May 26.
Walesa wrote: "Time has already rejected the outdated round table contract [under which the former ruling PUWP and its allies were guaranteed 65 per cent of parliamentary seats — see pp. 36722-24 for June 1989 elections under this system]…
Today it cramps national energy and demoralizes public life…
It is high time that all the elected authorities of the republic originate from the free choice of its citizens."
Walesa's call was supported by the Citizens' Parliamentary Club, a pro-Walesa parliamentary caucus, and by the Centre Alliance and the Green Party, but was opposed by the Democratic Party and the Democratic Left parliamentary groups which argued that the dissolution issue should be broached only after the electoral law and constitutional amendments had been adopted.
During a parliamentary session on March 7-9 Walesa suffered his first major legislative setback when he was defeated by substantial majorities in several votes.
The Sejm (i) rejected his proposed constitutional changes;(ii) voted to send the presidential draft electoral law to the Constitutional Commission for further examination;(iii) rejected the date of May 26 which he had proposed for the parliamentary elections; and (iv) instead approved the holding of parliamentary elections by Oct. 31, 1991.
On March 13, however, Sejm Speaker Mikolaj Kozakiewicz said that the final decision on the timing of the elections belonged to the President.
New parties
A Christian democratic Centre Alliance, claiming some 20,000 members and modelled on Germany's Christian Democratic Union, held its first congress in Warsaw on March 2.
Led by Jaroslaw Kaczynski, Head of the President's Chancellery, the new party formalized the grouping which first emerged from Solidarity in May 1990 [see p. 37546]and was supported by Walesa and the Polish Episcopate.
Its programme favoured a strong, independent Polish state with a modern market economy based on private ownership, and drew on Poland's national and historical tradition and identity.
On March 14 Stanislaw Tyminski, the presidential candidate defeated in December 1990, announced the formation of a new political party, called Party X (after the "X" on a ballot paper).
Some 40,000 people reportedly wanted to join the new party.
Ministerial appointment
On March 12, after accepting the resignation of Jacek Merkel as Minister of State in charge of defence and national security affairs, Walesa appointed to the post Lech Kaczynski, a key presidential aide and twin brother of Jaroslaw Kaczynski.
The secretary-general of the Democratic Union, Piotr Nowina-Konopka, criticized the decision, saying that it was unacceptable that one twin should be responsible for defence and national security while the other, as head of Walesa's presidential office, was advocating the dissolution of parliament and wanted to organize public pressure to this end.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Trials of former Securitate and politburo members
On March 18 the Romanian Supreme Court convicted Col.-Gen.
Iulian Vlad, 59, the head of the now disbanded Securitate secret police and Secretary of State at the Ministry of the Interior under the regime of President Ceausescu until Dec. 22, 1989, on charges of taking the dissident Dumitru Mazilu into custody illegally on Dec. 21, 1989.
On March 21 the court sentenced Vlad to 3 @/1/2; years' imprisonment.
Four other militia and Securitate members also received prison sentences.
Vlad, arrested in late December 1989, was alleged with others to have complied with orders to fire on demonstrators in Bucharest and other cities given by Ceausescu at politburo meetings on Dec. 17 and 22, 1989.
Charges of "complicity in genocide" were formally brought on Sept. 10, 1990.
Vlad, denying the charges, told the court that he had instructed one of his colleagues not to open fire.
The court adjourned the case on Oct. 19, 1990, on the grounds that the charge of complicity in genocide could not be substantiated, after 40 witnesses had been examined who all stressed that Vlad's position of formal approval of Ceausescu's orders had been prompted by fear.
On Nov. 27 the lesser charges, of illegal arrest and detention of demonstrators, had accordingly been substituted.
On March 25 the Bucharest military court passed judgment in the case of 21 former politburo members whose trial had opened on July 21, 1990.
Thirteen of those charged were convicted of the crime of "favouring the criminal" (i.e. Ceausescu), as opposed to the original charge of "participation in genocide" which was dropped.
Six others were acquitted of genocide and the remaining two were given prison sentences for the lesser crime of negligence of duty.
Three of the defendants were additionally convicted of violating arms and ammunition regulations.
Those given prison sentences for "favouring the criminal" were: Stefan Andrei, Lina Ciobanu, Silviu Curticeanu, Ludovic Fazekas, Suzana Gadea, Mihai Gere, Ana Muresan, Paul Niculescu-Mazil, Dumitru Popescu, Ion Radu, Ion Stoian, Ioan Toma, and Ioan Totu.
Popescu, a former propaganda chief, and Totu, a former Foreign Minister, were given the longest prison sentences, of 5@1/2 years each, while the others received sentences of two to 4@1/2 years.
At the start of the trial 24 former politburo members had been accused of "participation in genocide" for their part in the politburo meetings of Dec. 17 and 22, 1989, as a result of which 1,033 people had been killed and 2,198 injured.
All the defendants pleaded not guilty.
One of the accused, Nicolae Giosan, a former Parliamentary Speaker, died in prison on July 30, 1990, and two others, Constantin Dalescu and Georghe Radulescu, were committed to mental hospitals.
The trial was postponed on three occasions and the defendants complained of intimidation during investigations.
On March 26 the prosecutors appealed to the Supreme Court because of what they considered the excessively lenient judgments.
Describing the acquittals as "illegal in some cases" , they said that they would press for a finding of aggravated murder rather than one of genocide.
NSF convention
On March 16-17 the National Salvation Front (NSF) held its first national convention since coming to power in December 1989.
A reform programme presented by Prime Minister Petre Roman and entitled "A Future for Romania" was intended to establish a social democratic party committed to the market economy.
Despite a divisive debate Roman's programme and a revised party statute were adopted by a large majority.
Roman was endorsed as party leader and Ion Aurel Stoica elected executive chairman of a new steering college, comprising the Cabinet and 15 others chosen by Roman.
During the congress two factions criticized the programme and on March 18 nine NSF deputies withdrew from the parliamentary group.
One faction was led by a young radical senator, Dan Iosif, who had participated in the demonstrations which toppled Ceausescu, and who now spoke of the "total collapse of the Front" .
Another faction was led by the conservative former NSF secretary Velicu Redina, who declared that he would set up a new social democratic NSF.
The split was, however, described by Roman as "insignificant" and his programme was approved by 988 of the 1,119 voting delegates with 58 votes against and 66 abstentions.
On March 20 the opposition National Convention for the Restoration of Democracy [see p. 37922]criticized the government for failing to uphold the pledges of its own programme and called for the formation of a government enjoying the nation's confidence, which would institute real political change.
Cancelling of Brasov demonstrators' sentences
The Supreme Court on March 4 formally recognized that 61 workers sentenced in December 1987 for their role in the Brasov riots had been political prisoners of the former Communist regime.
The Brasov riots on Nov. 15, 1987 [see p. 35845]were now commemorated in Romania as a landmark in the history of anti-Ceausescu action [see p. 37866].
However, the prison sentences on the 61, originally imposed for "hooliganism" , offending good manners and upsetting public order, had merely been annulled in February 1990; they were now formally reclassified as having been convictions for the political offence of "propaganda against the socialist system" .
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Inter-ethnic tensions at Pakrac
Continuing inter-communal and ethnic tensions between Serbia and Croatia [see pp. 37973, 38019]reached a new peak on March 1-2, when violent clashes broke out between the Croatian authorities and members of the local ethnic Serbian majority in Pakrac, a town close to the borders with Bosnia and Vojvodina.
The riots were put down by the Yugoslav National Army (JNA), with support from Serbia, in an apparent rebuttal of the Croatian authorities; observers noted that this was the first time that the JNA, whose officer corps was dominated by ethnic Serbs, had been used to put down violence outside Serbia itself.
[See pp. 38080-81 for March 1991 crisis involving the apparent attempt by Serbia's president Slobodan Milosevic to precipitate a takeover of federal power by the JNA.]
Pakrac formed part of Croatia's Knin province, which had unilaterally declared itself on Feb. 28 to be the "Serbian Autonomous Region of Krajina" , in contravention of Croatian law [see p. 38019], pronouncing itself in favour of union with Serbia and Montenegro, and with the Serbian population of neighbouring Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The unrest of March 1 occurred when the ethnic Serbian police reservists in the newly-declared "Autonomous Region" attempted to take formal control of the town and to disarm their ethnic Croatian colleagues, in accordance with a decision adopted by the Pakrac municipal authority on Feb. 22.
Thousands of ethnic Serbs came on to the streets in their support.
The Croatian authorities responded by sending in some 200 heavily armed Croatian riot police, and rejected claims that six people had been killed in the ensuing fighting.
On March 2 the current President of Yugoslavia's Collective State Presidency, the Serbian representative Borisav Jovic, apparently acting without consulting other members of the Collective State Presidency, approved the JNA intervention in what he called an attempt "to prevent escalation of intercommunal clashes" .
The troops quickly established their dominance over the Croatian special police, who withdrew from the town on March 3, leaving the Serbian authorities of the "Autonomous Region" in control.
The security situation in Pakrac had eased by March 5, but sporadic clashes continued in the outlying areas for some days, and there were two isolated bombing incidents on March 18 in parts of the town still occupied by JNA troops.
Meanwhile, some 20,000 Serbs in the area were reported to have fled across the Croatian borders to the neighbouring autonomous province of Vojvodina, part of Serbia, in an effort to escape the fighting.
Milosevic (the Serbian president) said on March 19 that, unless Croatian paramilitary units in Croatia were disarmed, Serbia would arm the Serbs in the region, "so that they are not left defenceless against Croatian aggression" .
The self-appointed executive council of the "autonomous region" of Krajina adopted on March 16 a formal decision to break away from Croatia permanently, but declared that it would remain a constituent element of the Yugoslav federation.
Further Slovene moves towards secession
In the republic of Slovenia, whose referendum of December 1990 had affirmed its right to secede from Yugoslavia [see pp. 37924; 38019], the republic's Assembly approved on March 7 a law allowing Slovene conscripts to refuse to serve in the JNA, and to opt instead for the Slovene Territorial Defence units or the Slovene police.
Slovenia was intending to sever all links with the Yugoslavian Federation on June 23.
On March 5 the Slovene presidency had condemned Jovic's action in sending the JNA into Pakrac.
Cabinet changes in Macedonia
The Macedonian Assembly elected on March 20 a new government led by Nikola Kljusev, while Blaze Ristovski, Jovan Andonov and Bekir Zuta were elected as Deputy Premiers, Risto Damjanovski became Minister of Defence, and Jordan Mjalkov took over the Interior Ministry.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Revised 1991 draft budget — Increased taxes
On March 12 Finance Minister Theo Waigel presented a revised 1991 draft budget to the Bundestag (lower house of parliament), replacing a draft budget presented on Nov. 14, 1990, before the Dec. 2 all-German elections [see pp. 37904-05; for budget introduced in August 1990 and subsequently withdrawn see p. 37660].
The greater than expected cost of unifying the two Germanies [see below], as well as Germany's contribution to the Gulf war and aid to the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe had obliged Waigel substantially to amend his earlier drafts.
The new budget included increased taxes, despite Chancellor Helmut Kohl's claims during the election campaign that taxes would not have to be raised to cover the cost of unification [see p. 37904].
In late 1990 Waigel had announced spending cuts and revenue increases totalling DM35,000 million, the largest element of which was a DM18,000 million overall increase in unemployment benefit contributions from April 1, 1991, to be borne equally by employers and employees.
Increased telephone charges would raise a further DM2,000 million.
By early February 1991 he had conceded that taxes would have to be raised if Germany's 1991 borrowing requirement were to be kept to DM140,000 million or 5 per cent of GNP (of which the federal government share would be DM70,000 million).
The new draft budget provided for a further increase in revenue of DM48,000 million during 1991 and 1992 (US$1.00=DM1.5788 as at March 11, 1991).
This was to come from a temporary one-year 7.5 per cent income and corporation tax surcharge from July 1, 1991, a 25 pfennig tax increase per litre of ordinary grade petrol (plus similar increases in taxes on diesel, heating oil and gas) and tax increases on tobacco and insurance premiums.
Public-sector pay settlement
On the weekend of March 16-17 after a week of strikes the public-sector trade union ÖTV reached agreement with the federal government on a 6 per cent pay increase to be backdated to Jan. 1, 1991.
Similar agreements were reached that weekend with railworkers and post and telecommunications staff.
Attempts to alleviate economic crisis in eastern Germany — Renewed protests
During February and March the economic situation in the new Länder (states) of former East Germany deteriorated further as unemployment escalated and regional and local governments were threatened with bankruptcy.
On Feb. 12 Economy Minister Jürgen Möllemann conceded: "I have to admit that we underestimated the problems." 
He said that unresolved claims on land and property had held back investment and that trade with the Soviet Union and eastern bloc had collapsed.
By the end of February unemployment in the eastern Länder had risen to 786,992 or 8.9 per cent of the workforce [for September 1990 figures see p. 37761].
In addition 1,900,000 were on short-time and around 300,000 were commuting to jobs in western Germany (where unemployment fell slightly by the end of February to 1,870,000 or 7 per cent of the workforce).
A "joint programme for eastern regeneration" (Gemeinschaftswerk Aufschwung Ost), presented by Möllemann on Feb. 12, was approved by the federal Cabinet on March 8.
It injected a further DM24,000 million over two years into the eastern economy.
The programme was designed to create 278,000 new jobs, support local authorities, finance infrastructure projects and extend incentives to new investors.
On March 8 Labour Minister Norbert Blüm announced the government's intention to extend by six months (to end-1991) its "short-time" policy, whereby employees for whom there was little or no work nevertheless received 70 per cent of their salary rather than be made redundant.
The number of employees on short-time work in eastern Germany had increased rapidly following economic and monetary union on July 1, 1990, and affected some 20 per cent of the work-force by the end of September 1990.
On the question of unresolved property claims (numbering 1,200,000, of which 10,000 were for businesses) the Cabinet agreed on March 12 that until the end of 1992 investors who created or sustained jobs should be given priority over previous owners [for agreement on property rights and ownership regulations in unification treaty see pp. 37536; 37661].
On March 13 the EC Commission approved structural assistance for the five eastern Länder during 1991-93 worth 3,000 million European currency units (approximately US$3,900 million), which would help modernize the infrastructure and industry and reduce environmental damage.
German contribution to US costs in Gulf war
After a meeting on March 26 with US Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, Waigel announced that US$1,680 million, the final instalment of Germany's contribution to the USA's costs in the Gulf war, would be paid on schedule the following day.
In total Germany had guaranteed US$6,572 million.
Dropping of planned Stasi amnesty — Exoneration of De Maizière
On March 19 the federal Cabinet decided not to implement a planned amnesty for former East German agents of the Ministry for State Security ( "Stasi" )[see p. 37828].
It was announced on Feb. 22 that a government inquiry into the position of former East German Prime Minister Lothar De Maizière, who had been obliged to resign from the German Cabinet in December 1990 because of alleged connections with the Stasi [see p. 37905], had failed to prove that De Maizière had spied for the Stasi.
Two senior investigators into Stasi connections were dismissed in early March after publicly criticizing the government's exoneration of De Maizière.
Approval of two-plus-four treaty — Honecker's transfer to Soviet Union
On March 4 the Supreme Soviet of the USSR ratified the "two-plus-four" Treaty on the Final Settlement with respect to Germany and the German-Soviet Co-operation Treaty [see pp. 37834-35].
Two treaties on the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Germany and transitional measures for the withdrawal were approved in principle on the same date and ratified on April 2.
The two-plus-four treaty had been ratified by Germany and the United States in October 1990 [see p. 37762], by the United Kingdom in November [see p. 37867]and by France on Dec. 13.
German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher visited Moscow on March 17-18.
During his visit he presented a formal protest that the former East German leader Erich Honecker, 78, and his wife Margot Honecker had been transferred from a Soviet military hospital outside Berlin to Moscow "for medical reasons" .
Honecker's transfer — made without German permission on March 13 — had been made public on March 14.
A warrant for Honecker's arrest to face manslaughter charges [see pp. 37828-29]had been confirmed by a Berlin court on Nov. 30, 1990, and the last of three appeals against the order had been lost the week before.
Abandonment of Kalkar fast-breeder nuclear reactor
The German government on March 21 announced the abandonment of the Kalkar prototype fast-breeder nuclear reactor project, after nearly 20 years of opposition from environmentalists, farmers and the Social Democrat administration of the Land of North-Rhine Westphalia.
Construction work on the reactor, intended to generate electricity both for domestic use and for sale to Belgium and the Netherlands, had commenced in 1972, and it had been due to start operating in 1979.
A sustained campaign of legal action and demonstrations had delayed the start-up date until 1986.
Following the Chernobyl nuclear disaster in the Soviet Union in that year [see p. 34460], the North-Rhine Westphalia administration refused to give it the necessary licence to operate [see also p. 34444].
Since 1986 the plant had continued to function in pre-nuclear "warm-up" mode, while the federal government attempted unsuccessfully to persuade the Land administration to reconsider its opposition.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Verdicts in Lucona affair
After a 14-month trial, Udo Proksch, the owner of Vienna's most famous coffee house and a former confidant of some of the country's leading politicians, was found guilty on March 11 of the murder of six crew members of the cargo ship Lucona, which blew up off the Maldives in January 1977.
Proksch was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment for the murders and for attempted fraud, the ship having been loaded with scrap metal but insured as carrying uranium-processing equipment valued at US$15,000,000.
Johan Edelmaier, a former army major, was acquitted of the charge that he had provided the explosives.
The Lucona affair [see pp. 36404; 37688]made headlines in Austria largely because of its political overtones.
A report by a parliamentary commission on the affair published in June 1990 had been highly critical of the collusion of three senior government ministers, Karl Blecha and Leopold Gratz of the Socialist Party (SPÖ) and Harald Öfner of the Freedom Party (FPÖ), in covering up the insurance fraud [see p. 37688].
Blecha and Gratz had resigned over the affair in January 1989 [see p. 36404], while Öfner had left political office in 1986.
A warrant for Proksch's arrest had eventually been issued in March 1988.
He had initially fled to the Philippines but was detained at Vienna airport in October 1989.
In February 1991 an American salvage company hired by the Austrian authorities had located the wreck of the Lucona.
Films taken by a submersible robot established that the ship had sunk as a result of a large explosion.
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
Reduction of voting age
In a national referendum on March 3, voters overwhelmingly approved a constitutional amendment reducing the voting age in federal elections from 20 to 18 years.
Some 73 per cent of those voting approved the change, and it was carried in all cantons.
The turnout was 31 per cent.
A similar draft amendment introduced by the government in 1979 had been narrowly defeated.
It was estimated that the change would add 160,000 new voters to the federal electorate.
Several cantons had already reduced the voting age for cantonal elections, and it was expected that the others would now introduce measures to bring their regulations into line with the new situation at federal level.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
By-election gain by Liberal Democrats
The Liberal Democrats (the third largest party in the House of Commons) secured a spectacular gain at a parliamentary by-election in Ribble Valley on March 7, overturning a 1987 general election Conservative majority of 19,528 [see p. 35285]to win by a majority of 4,601.
The swing of 24.7 per cent to the Liberal Democrats was larger even than that at Eastbourne in October 1990 [see p. 37784], or than the swing to Labour at Mid-Staffordshire in March of that year [see pp. 37328-29].
The principal factor working to the disadvantage of the Conservatives in the by-election was the unpopularity of the community charge (poll tax) which had come into effect in England and Wales in April 1990 [see p. 37329 and below].
1991-92 budget
Norman Lamont, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, presented in the House of Commons on March 19 the budget for the financial year beginning April 5, 1991, in which the surprise announcement was made that a considerable portion of the burden of the community charge was to be transferred from individual charge-payers to central government, which would recoup most of the cost through an increase in value added tax.
The budget — the first since sterling entered the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System [see p. 37782]— was introduced against a background of increasing fears of recession.
While the rate of inflation had fallen from 10.9 per cent in September-October 1990 to below 9 per cent in February 1991, unemployment in the United Kingdom (including Northern Ireland) had risen (seasonally adjusted) from around 5.7 per cent in the first half of 1990 to 6.0 per cent by October and to 7.0 per cent by February 1991; in the last quarter of 1990 the index of industrial production was about 3@1/2 per cent down on the figure a year earlier and gross domestic product at constant 1985 factor prices about 1@1/2 per cent lower.
On the other hand, the UK's provisional trade deficit in 1990 was put at £17,000 million as against £24,000 million in 1989 and the current-account deficit at £12,800 million compared with £19,900 million (with deficits for 1991 forecast at £12,000 million and £6,000 million respectively).
Moreover, in the month before the budget interest rates had been falling, with reductions of the clearing banks' base rate in two stages to 13 per cent[for previous reduction from 15 to 14 per cent in October 1990 see p. 37892]and a cut in mortgage lending rates.
Among other measures in the budget, excise duties on tobacco products, petrol and diesel fuel were increased by more than the level of inflation; the rate of corporation tax was cut from 35 to 34 per cent for 1990-91 and further to 32 per cent for 1991-92; and increases were made in child benefit.
Lamont's most dramatic announcement, however, related to the poll tax (in which respect a community charge reduction scheme had already been announced in January, designed to benefit charge-payers by over £1,000 million in 1991-92).
Lamont now proposed a "substantial switch" from local to central taxation, amounting to about £4,250 million in 1991-92 and reducing the net yield of local taxation to around £7,000 million.
The new money would be used to reduce charge-payers' bills in terms of the average "headline charge" by £140 a year and would not be available to increase local authority spending.
(The average amount which people would actually have to pay after allowing for relief and benefits would fall to under £175 in Great Britain as a whole.)
In order to meet most of the cost of this new central government spending, the standard rate of value added tax would go up from 15 to 17.5 per cent effective April 1 (the first increase since June 1979) so as to produce anticipated additional revenue of nearly £4,000 million in 1991-92.
Review of local government structure and finance
On March 21 Michael Heseltine, the Environment Secretary, announced interim results of the outcome of the review of local government structure, functions and finance with which he had been entrusted upon his appointment to the Major government in November 1990 [see pp. 37839-40].
As regards structure, a local government commission would evaluate the most appropriate form of local government for individual areas, with the likelihood that there would be unitary authorities at either district or county level (as there already were, since 1986, at borough or metropolitan district level in London and the six major English conurbations).
Furthermore, a consultation paper would be issued on the internal workings of local authorities with the aim of improving the decision-making process.
On finance, Heseltine conceded that the public had "not been persuaded that the [community]charge is fair" , and he stated that it would be replaced by a new local tax under which there would be a single bill for each household comprising two essential elements: the number of adults living there and the value of the property.
Broadly parallel announcements were made the same day in respect of Wales and Scotland.
It was intended that a consultative document should be published in April.
If legislation were introduced early in the next session of parliament (beginning in November 1991), the first of the new authorities could be in place by April 1994, and local authorities would be consulted on the basis that the new tax could be in place in 1993-94.
Also on March 21 it was announced that it was intended that from April 1993 all further education colleges offering full-time education and all sixth-form colleges should be taken out of local authority control, as the new sector of post-16 education funded directly by central government.
Electricity privatization
The United Kingdom's largest privatization to date, the sale of the electricity supply industry in England and Wales, was completed on March 12 when stock exchange dealings began following flotation of the generating companies, National Power and PowerGen.
Enabling legislation for the electricity privatization had been introduced in November 1988 [see p. 36504]and enacted in July 1989 [see p. 36820], and the 12 regional electricity companies had been sold in December 1990.
The privatization of the 12 regional electricity companies had been carried out by means of a share offer, raising gross proceeds of £5,200 million, which opened on Nov, 21, 1990 and closed on Dec. 5; stock exchange dealings in shares in these companies had followed on Dec. 11.
The gross proceeds of the March 1991 National Power and PowerGen share offer amounted to £2,200 million.
The government was retaining 40 per cent of the shares in both companies, at least until March 31, 1993, when they would be sold either to trade buyers or by means of a further flotation.
NORTHERN IRELAND
Release of Birmingham Six
Six Irishmen, serving life terms in prison for the murder of 21 people killed in bomb attacks on two public houses in Birmingham in November 1974 [see p. 26870], were freed by the United Kingdom Court of Appeal on March 14.
The six were Patrick Hill (45), Richard McIlkenny (57), Johnny Walker (55), William Power (44), Gerard Hunter (42) and Hugh Callaghan (60).
Convicted in August 1975, their previous appeal had been rejected in January 1988 [see p. 36237].
However, Lord Justice Lloyd, presiding over the latest appeal hearing at the Central Criminal Court in London, said that in the light of fresh evidence, which had become available since the previous hearing, their appeals would be allowed.
The imminent release of the "Birmingham Six" was widely seen as a foregone conclusion after Sir Allan Green, the Director of Public Prosecutions, said at a preliminary hearing of the appeal on Feb. 7 that the Crown no longer sought to uphold the convictions on the basis of the scientific evidence.
During the nine-day appeal, which began on March 4, the court heard that the two main strands of the case against the six had collapsed.
Scientific evidence that two of them had handled explosives had been discredited after it was shown that the constituents of soap could give the same positive results in the main test used to detect traces of explosive in 1974.
Police officers investigating the case were shown to have tampered with confession evidence and altered interview notes, a newly developed electrostatic document analysis test having indicated that interview notes were not contemporaneous.
Less than an hour after the six were freed Kenneth Baker, the Home Secretary, announced the establishment of a Royal Commission on the criminal justice system.
The Birmingham Six case was the latest in a series where convictions had been overturned in cases arising from the Irish Republican Army's 1974 public house bombings in England, the "Guildford Four" having been freed in October 1989 [see p. 36983]and the "Maguire seven" in June 1990 [see p. 37536].
The Commission, to be presided over by Lord Runciman of Doxford, a sociologist and chairman of an engineering conglomerate, was to complete its work within two years.
It would consider in particular whether changes were needed in the conduct of police investigations; the role of the prosecutor in supervising the gathering of evidence; the role of experts in criminal proceedings, and the relationship between forensic science services and the police; the access of defendants to legal and expert advice; the powers of the courts in directing proceedings; the role of the Court of Appeal in considering new evidence on appeal; and arrangements for investigating allegations of miscarriages of justice when appeal rights had been exhausted.
More than 100 MPs from all parties formally called on the Queen on March 18 to dismiss Lord Lane, the Lord Chief Justice, over his handling of the Birmingham Six appeal hearing in 1987.
In its formal reading of the judgment on March 27, the Court of Appeal vindicated the three appeal judges, led by Lord Lane, who in 1987 had dismissed the mens' appeals, saying that the scientific issues were not the same.
The Court named four police officers — Detective Superintendent George Reade, who headed the investigation, Detective Sergeant Colin Morris, Detective Constable Terence Woodwiss, and Detective Constable Rex Langford — as having lied at the original trial.
Agreement between political parties on talks in Northern Ireland
Peter Brooke, the UK Northern Ireland Secretary, announced on March 26 that all-party talks on the future of Northern Ireland would start at the end of April.
Brooke would chair the talks which, he said, would be allowed to continue for about three months, and any agreed outcome would be put to a referendum in both Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic.
The nationalist Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP), the Ulster Unionists, the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) and the Alliance Party, i.e. all the province's constitutional parties, would participate, for the first time since the setting up of the Constitutional Convention in 1975 [see pp. 27161-63].
There would be three phases of talks: first, there would be discussions between the constitutional parties in Northern Ireland, focusing on devolution and power sharing; then meetings between the Northern Ireland parties and the Irish government in Dublin; and finally, talks between the governments in London and Dublin.
It was indicated that discussions would initially be held at Stormont Castle, near Belfast.
The 1985 Anglo-Irish Agreement [see pp. 34070-73]would be suspended to allow the talks to go ahead.
The announcement followed almost 15 months of negotiations between Brooke, the political parties and the Irish government.
Brooke had faced two particular stumbling blocks, the status of the Ulster Unionists within the talks and the timing of the involvement of the Irish government.
In his statement, Brooke said that Unionist participation would be formally associated with his presence, and the Unionist parties would regard themselves as part of the United Kingdom team.
His judgement regarding the timing of the Irish government's involvement would, he said, be governed by the fact that all three sets of discussions would get under way within weeks of each other.
Craigavon killings
Two young women and a man were shot dead in a mobile grocery shop in a predominantly Catholic estate on the outskirts of Craigavon in County Armagh on March 28.
A statement by the Protestant Action Force — a cover name often used by the banned Protestant paramilitary Ulster Volunteer Force — said that the attack was in retaliation for the attempted murder by the Provisional IRA of Margaret Cooke, the widow of a policeman, in Londonderry the week before.
The Craigavon killings drew particularly wide condemnation because of the age of the two female victims, 19-year-old Eileen Duffy, who worked in the shop, and her 16-year-old friend Katrina Rennie.
The third victim, Brian Frizzell (29), was shot dead after trying to help a third young girl, who was being dragged along the pavement by her hair by a gunman.
Imprisonment of Eksund crew in France for arms smuggling
A court in Paris on March 6 sentenced the five crew members of the Eksund, a Panamanian-registered ship seized by French customs in October 1987 off Brittany carrying 150 tonnes of weapons [see p. 36238], to prison sentences of between five and seven years and fines totalling £3,540,000 for arms trafficking.
The Eksund's cargo had included surface-to-air missiles, mortar shells, rocket launchers and semtex high explosive.
During the trial the court heard that the vessel had been travelling from Libya to the Republic of Ireland with the last of five arms shipments for the IRA, the previous four having got through undetected.
Gabriel Cleary, James Doherty and James Coll, all from the Republic of Ireland and all IRA members, received five-year sentences, and Henry Cairns, who had co-operated with the French authorities, also received five years but with two years suspended.
(Having been awaiting trial for 3@1/2 years, Cairns was thus no longer detained.)
The ship's captain, Adrian Hopkins, who was on trial in Dublin, was sentenced in absentia to seven years.
All five were debarred from entering France for five years.
EUROPE
IRELAND
Fianna Fáil conference
Prime Minister Charles Haughey committed his Fianna Fáil party to a series of changes in social policy, at the annual party conference on the weekend of March 9-10, promising reforms on contraception, divorce, telephone tapping, and official secrets.
Haughey told the conference that Fianna Fáil's aim over the next decade was to create a new, enlightened, open, Irish society.
He drew back, however, from an earlier announcement that there would be an easing of the law to allow 16-year-olds to buy condoms, saying that this idea (for which he had been fiercely criticized in the week before the conference by Roman Catholic bishops) was only a proposal to be examined.
Haughey's espousal of liberal reforms was seen as a response to the shock result of the November 1990 presidential election [see p. 37868], in which the victory of Mary Robinson, a woman supported by the Labour Party and the Workers' Party, was seen as reflecting a major shift in voters' attitudes and a challenge to the traditional political dominance of Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael.
EUROPE
FINLAND
Opposition gains in general election
The opposition Centre Party (KESK or K-C) became the largest party in the 200-member Eduskunta as a result of a general election on March 17; it overtook the Social Democratic Party (SSDP) and the right-wing National Coalition Party (Kokoomus or KOK), the senior partners in the 1987-91 coalition government.
[For 1987 election results see p. 35091.]
The Centre Party, led by Esko Aho, increased its share of the vote by nearly half to 24.8 per cent and its seat total by nearly one-third to 55.
Kokoomus, led by the outgoing Prime Minister, Harri Holkeri (who did not stand for re-election), lost 3.8 per cent and 13 of its 53 seats.
The SSDP, led by the Foreign Minister, Pertti Paasio, lost 2 per cent and eight of its 56 seats.
Among the smaller parties, the Swedish People's Party (SFP), the junior partner in the outgoing coalition, gained a small number of votes but lost one seat.
The Greens Vihret made significant gains, increasing their seats from four to 10.
The main parties to the left of the SDP, running under the banner of the Left-Wing Alliance formed in April 1990 [see p. 37506], saw their combined vote fall by 3.1 per cent but retained 19 of their 20 seats.
The results represented one of the most dramatic swings in Finnish electoral history.
The turnout was 72 per cent, the lowest since 1945.
Two other features of the election were the large number of new members elected (around two-thirds) and the further rise in the number of women members (up from 63 to 77).
Observers suggested that the election reflected widespread disillusionment with traditional party politics.
The Centre Party campaigned mainly on economic issues, criticizing the government for having caused the current recession, the worst since 1945, with voters affected in particular by unprecedentedly high levels of interest rates and of unemployment (7 per cent in 1990).
The Centre Party was also committed to ending what it saw as the system of political patronage and was more sceptical than the other main parties about the possibility of Finland joining the European Communities.
Founded in 1906 as the Agrarian League (ML) and renamed in 1965, it was traditionally strongest among farmers and in the centre and north of the country, but owed its 1991 success largely to a breakthrough in the southern cities.
The party had been the largest in parliament for most years until 1966, and had been in government (usually with the Social Democrats) almost constantly until 1987.
Because of the complexity of the balance of forces represented in the new parliament, the formation of a government was expected to take a number of weeks.
The outgoing administration was asked to stay on meanwhile in a caretaker capacity.
Percentage of Seats votes 1991198719911987 KESK24.817.65540 SSDP22.124.14856 Kokoomus19.323.14053 Left-Wing Alliance (VL) *10.113.41920 Green Alliance6.84.0104 Swedish People's Party (SFP) **5.55.31213 Finnish Rural Party (SMP) 4.86.379 Finnish Christian Union (SKL) 3.12.685 Liberal People's Party (LKP) 1.21.010 Others2.32.600
Finnish election results
*1987 figures are combined totals for Finnish People's Democratic League (SKDL) and Democratic Alternative (DEVA).
**Including one representative for the autonomous Aaland Islands.
REFERENCES.
Reference article pp. 37505-56.
EUROPE
DENMARK
Greenland elections — New Prime Minister
Elections were held on March 5 in Greenland, an internally self-governing part of Denmark, to the 27-member legislature, the Landsting.
The elections had been called prematurely on Dec. 10, 1990, by Prime Minister Jonathan Motzfeldt, leader of the left-wing Forward (Siumut), after opposition members claimed to have evidence that Cabinet ministers had misused public funds on entertaining party members [see p. 37925].
This issue figured strongly in the election campaign, and appeared to benefit the Centre Party, which won seats for the first time.
Other campaign issues were the territory's economic problems and the proposal to seek readmission to the European Communities (from which Greenland had withdrawn in 1985 — see pp. 33001-02; 33592).
Siumut lost votes but retained the 11 seats it held in the outgoing Landsting.
Its coalition partner, the far-left Inuit Brotherhood (Inuit Ataqatigiit — IA), obtained five seats, a gain of one.
The main opposition party, the right-wing Community party (Atassut), lost three seats, leaving it with eight, as some of its support went over to the Centre Party, which entered the legislature for the first time with two seats.
The Polar Party (Issittrup-partii) retained its one seat.
[For previous elections in May 1987 see p. 35338.]
After the vote Motzfeldt, Prime Minister since Greenland became self-governing in 1979, announced his intention to renew the outgoing coalition.
However, his personal position had been weakened by the allegations of financial mismanagement under his government, and he was successfully challenged for the Siumut parliamentary leadership by Lars Emil Johansen, the Siumut chair.
Johansen then proceeded to form another coalition with Inuit Ataqatigiit, and a six-member Cabinet was sworn in on April 5.
EUROPE
NETHERLANDS
Elections — Austerity proposals
Both governing parties, the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA) and the Labour Party (PvdA), suffered losses in nationwide provincial elections on March 6.
The reverses were particularly sharp for the PvdA, whose share of the vote fell from 33.0 per cent in the previous provincial elections in March 1987 [see p. 35387]and 31.9 per cent in the general election of September 1989 [see p. 36900]to 20.4 per cent.
Support for the CDA fell from 33.0 per cent and 35.3 per cent in the two earlier elections to 32.6 per cent.
Major gains were made by the centre-left opposition party Democrats 66 (D'66), which more than doubled its vote from 6.7 per cent in 1987 and 7.9 per cent in 1989 to 15.6 per cent.
The main opposition party, the right-wing People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD), made minor gains, from 15.5 per cent in 1987 and 14.5 per cent in 1989 to 15.7 per cent.
The vote for the 12 provincial legislatures was widely regarded as of national importance, and was seen in particular as a preliminary negative verdict by voters on a major austerity plan proposed by the government the previous month.
In reaction to a larger-than-expected budget deficit the government had proposed cuts in public spending totalling 12,800 million guilders (about US$7,400 million) and increases in revenue totalling 4,700 million guilders aimed at balancing the budget by 1994.
The package included rises in rents on government-controlled housing, higher public transport fares, and as yet unspecified cuts in disability benefits and other social services.
Despite the election results, the CDA leader and Prime Minister, Ruud Lubbers, and the PvdA leader and Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister, Wim Kok, both reiterated their commitment to the coalition and its agreed programme.
The outcome of the vote would be reflected in the composition of the upper house of parliament, the Eerste Kamer, whose 75 members were elected by the provincial legislatures.
EUROPE
FRANCE
Expenditure cuts
Cuts in the budget were officially announced on March 16 in response to the cost of France's contribution to the Gulf war and to the slowdown in the economy which was reducing tax revenues.
The cuts in current expenditure amounted to F10,200 million and savings of F5,470 million in investment programmes (an effective reduction of about F3,300 million).
They were concentrated on the Ministry of Equipment, Housing, Transport and the Sea which was ordered to lose F3,000 million from its 1991 budget (including F1,000 million from the roads budget) and F2,000 million from projects planned for 1992; and on the Ministry of Labour, Employment and Vocational Training, which was ordered to instigate cuts amounting to F2,500 million.
(US$1.00=F5.3795 as at March 11, 1991.)
The direct cost of the Gulf war to France was estimated at between F8,000 million and F9,000 million, which would be partially covered by contributions from Kuwait (US$1,000 million), Germany (DM300 million), Belgium and Japan.
These included indirect costs such as losses incurred by the state export credit guarantee agency Coface.
While the war was still in progress costs had been estimated lower, at between F5,000 million and F7,000 million.
Announcing the cuts to the National Assembly on Feb. 5, Prime Minister Michel Rocard had said that wage costs and the cost of servicing the public debt and the defence budget would not be included in economies.
The 1991 budget, approved in December, had envisaged a deficit of F80,700 million.
Lowering of bank rate
The economic growth rate was provisionally assessed by the National Statistical Institute (INSEE) at the beginning of 1991 at an annual rate of 1.5 per cent, compared with a figure of 2.8 per cent for 1990.
In an effort to stimulate the economy the Banque de France on March 18 lowered its intervention rate by 0.25 of a percentage point to 9 per cent(the first reduction since October) "in line with the softening of rates on the money market and favourable elements regarding inflation" .
This followed a bank rate cut by Spain on March 15 of 1 percentage point, to 13.5 per cent, easing pressure on the franc and the pound sterling, the weakest currencies in the European Monetary System (EMS).
New urban measures
At a Cabinet meeting on March 13 the new Minister of State for Towns, Michel Delebarre, announced measures to deal with problems of deprivation and racial ghettos in urban areas.
President François Mitterrand had warned in December following the most recent city riots [see p. 37869]that modern socialism had to come to grips with the management of urban society, and the worst affected local authorities had complained that they lacked resources and bore a heavy burden compared with more affluent areas.
Under the legislation on "solidarity between communities" , F900 million of the current figure of F72,000 million in annual central government subsidies to local authorities would be redistributed from affluent towns to 400 poor ones, this amount rising to F1,500 million in 1993.
An additional "solidarity tax" was to be raised in Paris and the surrounding Ile de France region where the social imbalance was greatest, and Paris itself would be hit the hardest financially.
Local housing programmes drawn up by an intercommunal co-operation body and covering at least five years were to be established in the 13 cities with more than 350,000 inhabitants.
Local authorities would be obliged to allocate 15 per cent of council housing to people from depressed areas, and in areas where council housing made up less than 20 per cent of housing, the local authority would be obliged to make a 15 per cent contribution to its construction.
Planning policies were to be changed to encourage a mix of different kinds of housing, and this would be backed up by better policing, job creation programmes and incentives for shopkeepers to move to depressed areas.
A bill to oblige developers to include a proportion of low-income housing in any application to build office blocks or housing complexes was also to go before the National Assembly in April.
The bill provoked outrage from the opposition, principally because the majority of the 35 urban communities benefiting most under the legislation were governed by left-wing councils, whereas only one of the 30 scheduled to make the largest contribution to redistribution (a group includng Paris, Lyon, Bordeaux, Cannes, Nancy and Versailles) had a Socialist council.
The bill passed its first reading in the National Assembly on March 22.
Unrest in Sartrouville
Clashes took place over three nights in the Paris suburb of Sartrouville, which had a large immigrant population, after an 18-year-old North African, Djemel Chitou, was shot dead on March 26 by a supermarket security guard, himself a North African.
The guard was charged with murder.
In the clashes five police were injured, nine youths were arrested and shops and vehicles were damaged and burned.
ITALY
Resignation of Andreotti
Giulio Andreotti resigned as Prime Minister on March 29, but continued as caretaker Prime Minister while members of the five-party ruling coalition negotiated over its future.
The influential role played by President Francesco Cossiga in events leading to Andreotti's resignation drew criticism from some political quarters.
On March 14 Andreotti's 20-month-old coalition came under attack from Bettino Craxi, secretary of the Socialist Unity Party (PSU-formerly the Italian Socialist Party).
With elections due in June 1992 at the latest, Craxi suggested that the socialists might not continue in the coalition until that time unless a new government was formed, and unless there was a clear timetable on such issues as the single European market and the fight against organized crime.
The death of the 71-year-old Labour Minister, Carlo Donat-Cattin, on March 17 increased the pressure for government changes.
Between March 23 and Andreotti's resignation on March 29 Cossiga (like Andreotti a Christian Democrat) won approval from the socialists when he came out in favour of fresh elections and a revision of the role of president in the Italian Constitution.
The PSU advocated the creation of a stronger, directly elected presidency, and also anticipated that a general election would lead to an improvement in the party's position in parliament.
Other member parties in the coalition, however, were reported to prefer the formation of a new government without elections, anticipating that in elections they stood to lose votes to regional autonomy parties.
The Christian Democrats and other parties were also divided over Cossiga's leading role in this political crisis.
Controversy further surrounded Cossiga over his possible involvement, as Deputy Defence Minister in the 1960s, in the organization of a secret anti-communist defence force known as "Gladio" [see p. 37875].
On March 16 Cossiga was questioned by a parliamentary commission investigating the alleged involvement of Gladio commanders in projects to discredit left-wing politicians.
Controversy over Mafia releases
On March 1 a Cabinet decree opened the way for a number of recently released Mafia leaders to be rearrested.
Although the decision on Feb. 18 to release the men had caused an outcry, the subsequent overruling of the decision was criticized by lawyers.
Rulings in February by the supreme appeal court in Rome, presided over by magistrate Corrado Carnevale, meant that a number of Mafia leaders convicted of murder, drug-trafficking and other offences became eligible for release.
It was anticipated that most of some 41 Mafia leaders imprisoned in December 1987 at the conclusion of a major trial in Palermo [see p. 35990]would benefit from these rulings.
The freeing on Feb. 26 of Michele Greco ( "The Pope" ), head of the Corleone Mafia clan, brought to around 30 the numbers released since Feb. 18 and intensified protests in political and judicial circles.
On March 1 an emergency session of the Palermo Court of Appeal was followed by the passing of a Cabinet decree to close the legal loophole which had permitted the releases.
By March 4 all of those recently freed, including Greco, had been rearrested.
Their lawyers criticized the Cabinet decree as arbitrary, and on March 4 Palermo lawyers staged a one-day strike in protest.
Indictment of De Benedetti
Carlo De Benedetti, chairman of the Olivetti group and deputy chairman of Banco Ambrosiano from November 1981 to January 1982, was indicted by the Milan Appeals Court on March 12 to stand trial for charges in connection with the bankruptcy of the Banco Ambrosiano in November 1981.
No date was set for the trial.
Public prosecutor Pierluigi Dell'Osso had appealed against an earlier ruling absolving De Benedetti, and had wanted him to stand trial for extortion.
The Milan Appeals Court said that he should face charges — but for fraudulent bankruptcy.
NXR> REFERENCES.
Reference article pp. 37507-10; February 1991 reconstitution of Communist Party p. 38021.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Cabinet reshuffle
A Cabinet reshuffle announced on March 11 was the most extensive since the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) first took office in 1982.
It was interpreted as marking a shift to the right, favouring "manager-bureaucrats" at the expense of supporters of former Deputy Prime Minister Alfonso Guerra (who had resigned in January — see p. 37968).
The reshuffle enhanced the influence of Carlos Solchaga, who continued as Economy and Finance Minister.
Three key posts were now occupied by men identified as followers of Solchaga: José Borrell Fontelles, a new appointee, headed a new Ministry of Public Works and Transport (also called the "infrastructure" ministry); Pedro Solbes Mira, also new to the government, became Agriculture minister; José Claudio Aranzadi Martínez retained the Industry portfolio and in addition took over the Commerce and Tourism portfolios.
Narcís Serra left the Defence Ministry to succeed Guerra as Deputy Prime Minister.
Foreign Minister Francisco Ordóñez retained his post, and the Interior and Education ministries also remained under the same ministers who, like Ordóñez, were regarded as relatively independent of the PSOE.
The appointment of Julián García Valverde, a favourite of the PSOE, as Health Minister, was meanwhile interpreted as a conciliatory move.
Pact of Progress
Opening a state-of-the-nation debate in the Congress of Deputies on March 21, Prime Minister Felipe Gonzáles proposed a Pact of Progress — to include political parties, unions and industry — which would prepare Spain for the single European market from Jan. 1, 1993.
It would also facilitate the devolution of power to the regions.
Opposition parties gave a lukewarm reception to the proposals, which resembled ideas previously put forward in December 1989 and April 1990.
ETA leader arrested
The second-in-command of the Basque separatist group Euskadi ta Askatasuna (ETA) was arrested in Biarritz, France, on March 18.
Two days later in Paris he was charged with criminal association and arms offences.
Jésus Arkautz Arana (also known as Josu Mondragón) had been under surveillance for some weeks by the French police, who were hoping they might learn the whereabouts of ETA leader Francisco Múgika Garmendia.
On the day of the arrest Spanish Interior Minister José Luis Corcuera, who was visiting Paris, had been informed of the operation.
The March 12 resignation of a council member of the United People (Herri Batasuna — the political wing of ETA) suggested a split within the movement over tactics.
Iñaki Esnaola, who had publicly referred to differences over ETA tactics, also resigned as a deputy in the regional legislative assembly.
EUROPE
GREECE
Opening of Papandreou trial
The trial of former Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou, 72, opened in Athens on March 11.
Papandreou, accused of breach of public trust and of accepting bribes as part of a US$200,000,000 bank embezzlement in 1988, refused to appear and dismissed the trial as an attempt to discredit his party, the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok).
The main prosecution witness, former Bank of Crete chairman George Koskotas, was in prison in the United States and fighting extradition to Greece where he himself would face charges.
He had claimed in 1989 that Papandreou had diverted public funds into the Bank of Crete and accepted bribes in the form of interest generated [see pp. 36562; 37514].
The absence of this crucial witness seemed likely to weaken the case against Papandreou.
Former Justice Minister and Deputy Prime Minister Agamemnon Koutsogiorgas faced related charges, as did former Finance Minister Dimitris Tsovolas and former Public Order Minister Giorgos Petsos.
A fourth accused, former Economy Minister Panayotis Roumeliotis, claimed immunity from prosecution as a member of the European Parliament.
New Left Alliance leader
Maria Damanaki was elected president of the Coalition of the Left and Progress (Synaspismos) on March 18.
A reformist politburo member of the (orthodox) Communist Party of Greece (KKE-Exterior), she replaced Harilaos Florakis, also of the KKE-Exterior, who had led the Left Alliance since its formation in 1989.
Damanaki, 39, began her political career as a student involved in the November 1973 polytechnic uprising.
Her election by the Left Alliance's executive committee was aimed at reversing the decline in electoral support for the 10-party alliance evidenced in the general election of April 1990 [see p. 37388].
Her candidacy also enjoyed the approval of communist party leaders, who hoped to placate members unhappy with the recent election of the conservative Aleka Papariga as KKE general secretary [see p. 38021].
Death of US soldier in bomb attack
The leftist November 17 group was reported to have claimed responsibility for bomb attacks in Athens on March 12.
Five explosions on buses in the early hours were carried out in support of a strike by public transport workers.
A further bomb explosion that evening killed a United States air force sergeant, and in a statement the November 17 group linked this attack with US policy in the Gulf.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Delors proposals for common European defence policy
Jacques Delors, the President of the Commission of the European Communities (EC), proposed on March 7 that the EC go beyond establishing a joint foreign and security policy and commit itself to a common European defence policy.
Speaking at the Institute of Strategic Studies in London, he suggested that the 12 EC member countries should make a mutual defence pledge (as in the Brussels Treaty of the Western European Union — WEU — comprising all EC members except Denmark, Greece and Ireland) and develop a common policy on weapons research and production.
It was now time, he said, to "for common defence issues to be dealt with by the European Council and by the Council of Ministers" .
Delors sought to allay United States government unease that such developments might disrupt NATO by declaring that "the USA has nothing to gain from a politically impotent and economically subordinate Community" .
However, in an interview in the Independent of March 9 the US ambassador to NATO said that "the alliance is not going to underwrite a security policy that is made somewhere else" .
At a meeting on March 26 EC Foreign Ministers discussed a Dutch proposal for "the European role in security and defence" to preserve "a continued north American political and military commitment to the security of Europe" .
It also suggested that WEU membership be opened to non-EC NATO members and that links be set up with east European countries unable to join NATO.
The Netherlands and UK Ministers both opposed Franco-German proposals for the WEU's eventual incorporation into the EC [see p. 38022].
Major's Bonn speech
During a visit to Bonn on March 11 UK Prime Minister John Major described his vision of the UK "at the very heart of Europe" .
The speech further strengthened German-UK ties [see also p. 38022]and contrasted with former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's October 1988 "Bruges speech" on limits to integration in Europe [see p. 36491].
Economic and monetary union
In discussions on economic and monetary union (EMU — proceeding in parallel with those on political union) EC Finance Ministers reached broad agreement on March 18 on the appropriate level of political control over the proposed European central bank (Eurofed).
The agreement was based on a Luxembourg proposal, which suggested that EC governments should set general guidelines on exchange rate policy, but only after consulting the Eurofed with the aim of "trying to reach a consensus [with the bank]compatible with the objective of price stability" .
The proposal sought to balance German preference for a politically independent Eurofed, committed in its statutes to an anti-inflation policy, with French and other countries' preference for greater government control.
Following a visit to Paris on March 22 German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher and his French counterpart Roland Dumas appeared also to reach agreement on the timing of the different phases of EMU.
Whereas the German draft treaty on monetary union presented in February would postpone the Eurofed's creation until 1997 [see p. 38022], the joint Genscher-Dumas statement proposed that the bank be established at the start of phase two, which members had agreed in October 1990 should start in January 1994 [see p. 37783].
The statement agreed that in phase three the new "independent" central bank would be "solely responsible for the conduct of monetary policy and for the defence of the stability of the currency" .
German Bundesbank president Karl Otto Pöhl, addressing the economic and monetary affairs committee of the European Parliament on March 19, warned against introducing a single European currency without greater economic convergence.
He said that the deutschmark had been introduced into the former East Germany in mid-1990 [see p. 37660] "with practically no preparation or possibility of adjustment, and, I would add, at the wrong exchange rate" ; the result had been "a disaster" and rendered eastern Germany "completely uncompetitive" .
Aid to eastern and central Europe
Aid to Bulgaria and Romania amounting to ECU100,000,000 (US$134,000,000) was approved on March 5 at a meeting between Foreign Ministers of the European Communities (EC) and the European Parliament.
It had been held up because of the freezing of assistance to the Soviet Union (also released on the same day — see p. 38105).
A report to a Brussels meeting of the Group of 24 (G-24) leading industrialized countries on Jan. 30 had found that G-24 assistance to Eastern and Central Europe amounted to US$38,000 million.
This included $8,000 million in grants, $12,000 million in loans or credits and $11,000 million in capital for the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development [see pp. 37465-66].
Poland had received 40 per cent of the total and Hungary 27 per cent.
The Jan. 30 meeting also voted to extend assistance to Romania (excluded when demonstrations were crushed in June 1990 — see pp. 37544-45).
On March 6 Frans Andriessen, the EC Commissioner responsible for external relations and trade policy and relations with other European countries, began a series of visits to Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria and Romania.
In early February 1991 Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland had all begun negotiations on association agreements with the EC, which was offering a 10-year transition period to mutual free trade in two stages with asymmetrically large EC tariff cuts over the first five years in all sectors except agriculture, steel and textiles — the very areas where the three countries most desired access.
Havel's visit to EC and NATO headquarters
On March 21-22 Czechoslovak President Vaclav Havel visited Brussels to press his case for closer Czechoslovak relations with the EC and NATO, the first such visit by a central or east European head of state.
In a speech to the European Parliament on March 21 he declared: "It is in the West's own interest to seek the integration of eastern and central Europe into the family of European democracy because otherwise it risks creating a zone of hopelessness, instability and chaos, which would threaten western Europe every bit as much as the Warsaw Pact tank divisions of old." 
Speaking to the NATO Council the following day Havel recognized that "our country cannot become a regular member of NATO for the time being" but called on NATO not to exclude permanently its democratic neighbours.
He apologised to NATO for "all the lies which my predecessors…were for years telling about you" .
NATO officials were more circumspect in their statements, with NATO Secretary-General Manfred Wörner saying that "we are not indifferent" to Eastern Europe's security.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Talks with Iraqi Kurdish leaders
President Turgut Özal revealed unexpectedly to journalists on March 11 that talks had been held with Iraqi Kurdish leaders in Istanbul on March 8.
Senior Foreign Ministry officials had met with Jalal Talabani, leader of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), and Mohsen Dezayi, who represented Masoud Barzani, leader of the Kurdish Democratic Party (DPK).
The Kurdish leaders reportedly asked for an arms supply route to be opened through Turkey to assist the Kurdish insurrection in northern Iraq.
Turkish officials agreed in principle, however, to send food and medicine only.
Officials let it be understood that Turkey would not object to Kurdish autonomy in a federal Iraq, but Özal, interviewed on March 29, said that the Kurdish leaders "were clearly told they should definitely not consider a separate state" .
Unrest among Turkish Kurds — Relaxation of cultural restrictions
A wave of unrest in Kurdish towns and villages of south-east Turkey had resulted in seven deaths by March 19.
In Sirnak on Feb. 28 Turkish soldiers were involved in a confrontation with villagers supporting the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK); clashes in other villages followed on March 3, 7 and 15, with soldiers firing on demonstrators and making arrests.
Most foreign journalists had been expelled from the area by March 5.
Continuing with his initiative to undercut support for the PKK by relaxing cultural restrictions, Özal allowed the Kurdish New Year to be openly celebrated on March 21.
Visit by Özal to Soviet Union
On an official visit to the Soviet Union on March 11-16 President Özal broached the subject of a Black Sea economic co-operation zone, which he said might be extended to include those Soviet republics in which Turkic languages were spoken.
After a meeting with Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin he visited Kazkhstan, Azerbaijan and the Ukraine.
Further allocations of US aid
Final legislative approval was given in the USA on March 22 to a further US$200,000,000 of aid to Turkey (additional to the grant announced in February — see p. 38022).
The following day Özal met with US President Bush at Camp David, and he was thought to have briefed the US administration about the Turkish government's recent talks with Iraqi Kurdish leaders in Istanbul [see above].
Killing of trade unionist and US businessman
A Turkish trade union official, Mehmet Mustafa Inci, was shot dead outside his Istanbul home on March 27.
The left-wing extremist group Dev Sol claimed responsibility for the killing on March 22 in Istanbul of a US businessman.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Gulf ceasefire terms
The UN Security Council on March 2 passed Resolution 686 on a ceasefire in the Gulf war.
A de facto cessation of hostilities had been observed by the US-led coalition force and Iraq from Feb. 28 [see p. 37986].
Resolution 686 was the first passed by the UN Security Council on the Gulf crisis since that of Nov. 29, 1990 [Resolution 678 — see p. 37870], which had provided the authority for the military action of the US-led coalition forces launched on Jan. 16 [see p. 37934].
As of the end of March the Security Council had yet to agree on a further resolution to establish definitive ceasefire conditions.
Protracted discussions between the five permanent members of the Security Council continued from March 20 onwards, greatly complicated by the continuing fighting between Iraqi government and rebel forces [see pp. 38081-82 for southern rebellion; the Kurdish situation will be covered in a forthcoming News Digest].
Sanctions remained in force, although on March 22 the Security Council's sanctions committee did announce that humanitarian aid would be approved for Iraq under the terms of the original sanctions resolution (661 of Aug. 6, 1990 — see p. 37639]in view of the circumstances of the threat of famine and epidemic.
The terms laid out in Resolution 686 were accepted by Iraq on March 3, as announced on Baghdad radio and conveyed in a letter to the UN from Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz.
This followed a two-hour meeting earlier that day at Safwan between Iraqi and coalition military leaders.
The talks at Safwan, an Iraqi air force base near the Kuwaiti border south of Basra which was surrounded by US troops, involved seven Iraqi generals led by Lt.-Gen.
Sultan Hashim Ahmad, operations chief at the Ministry of Defence.
The coalition delegation was headed by Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf.
Discussion covered procedures for avoiding accidental clashes, disclosing the location of mines, and exchanging information about those missing in action.
Iraqi forces were debarred from using military aircraft, although it subsequently emerged that this had only been made explicit with regard to fixed-wing aircraft rather than helicopters.
The release of prisoners of war by Iraq was officially described as completed when a total of 45 prisoners-of-war had been handed over to the International Committee of the Red Cross (10 on March 4, comprising six US personnel, three British and one Italian, and 35 on March 5, comprising 15 US, nine British, nine Saudis, an Italian and a Kuwaiti, who were flown from Baghdad to Riyadh on March 6).
As of March 6 there were 28 US, eight British and one Saudi personnel still missing and unaccounted for.
As regards Iraqi prisoners-of-war held by coalition forces, US White House press secretary Marlin Fitzwater on March 4 estimated their numbers at 60-70,000, the first of whom (294 in all) were flown back to Baghdad on March 6.
On March 7 the Iraqis released the first 1,000 of the Kuwaitis taken prisoner at the end of the Iraqi occupation, the total number of those abducted being given as some 7,000.
On March 8 the Iraqis also released 48 detained Western journalists.
UN Security Council Resolution
Resolution 686.
March 2.
Passed 11-1 with Cuba voting against and China, India and Yemen abstaining.
Demanded Iraqi acceptance of all 12 previous relevant resolutions [see p. 37870], the repeal of all laws annexing Iraq, the acceptance of liability under international law for damage done to Kuwait, and the release of all civilian detainees.
Called on Iraq to cease hostile actions, to send military commanders to discuss the cessation of hostilities, to arrange immediate access to and release of all prisoners of war, and to assist in identifying all mines, booby traps and other explosives.
Gulf diplomatic activity in aftermath of war
Meeting of Egyptian, Syrian and GCC Foreign Ministers — Plan to establish Arab Gulf security force
On March 5-6 eight Arab members of the anti-Iraq coalition, meeting in Damascus, agreed to establish an Arab peace force as part of an ambitious regional security plan.
The meeting was attended by the Foreign Ministers of Egypt, Syria and the six Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) countries (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates).
The only Arab member of the anti-Iraq coalition not in attendance was Morocco.
The participants signed the "Damascus declaration" on March 6 which called, among other things, for the formation of an Arab peacekeeping force to maintain security in the Gulf.
The declaration indicated that the force would consist mainly of Syrian and Egyptian forces and would "guarantee the security and peace of Arab countries in the Gulf region" .
According to some reports, the plan envisaged a 150,000-strong force (100,000 of whom would be Egyptian) to act as a permanent buffer between the GCC countries and Iraq.
In return, the GCC countries would pay Egypt and Syria some US$15,000 million.
Israeli officials indicated that they did not oppose the concept of the peacekeeping force.
An Israeli diplomat quoted in the Independent of March 6 said that if progress was made on wider peace negotiations "it could become a case of eight plus one rather than eight against one" .
Iran, which had long contended that Gulf security should only involve the littoral states, greeted the declaration with great suspicion.
A report on Tehran radio on March 6 said that the new security pact would "hurt the interests of all the countries in the region" [see also p. 38119].
Address to Congress by President Bush
United States President Bush stressed in a major televised speech to a joint session of Congress on March 6 that he regarded the drive for a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict as one of his administration's top priorities in the post-Gulf War period.
The regional realignment during the Gulf war, he contended, had meant Arab states and Israel standing together against a common aggressor, Iraq.
This, he said, had brought the prospect of peace in the Middle East closer than ever before.
 "A comprehensive peace must be grounded in UN Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338 [see pp. 25029; 26197]and the principle of" territory for peace".
This principle must be elaborated to provide for Israel's security and recognition, and at the same time for legitimate Palestinian political rights."
Response to Bush's speech — Israel's reaffirmation of May 1989 "peace plan" 
The Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) officially welcomed the "positive elements" in Bush's speech.
In Israel, however, responses were mixed.
Israel's Foreign Minister, David Levi, simply stated that there was "nothing new" in the speech, whereas the hardline Housing Minister Ariel Sharon, angered by Bush's reference to a "land for peace" formula, called for an immediate convening of the ruling Likud central committee to work out a response.
Sharon and two of his hardline Cabinet colleagues had failed on March 3 to force alterations to the government's "peace strategy" .
At a meeting of the Cabinet, Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir had won majority backing to retain the abortive May 1989 election plan [see pp. 36599; 36670]as the foundation of his government's strategy.
Call by Mitterrand for Palestinian state — Meeting between Mitterrand and Bush
In his first televised address since the end of the Gulf War, French President Mitterrand on March 3 issued his clearest call to date for an independent Palestinian state.
Mitterrand had previously proposed a homeland or state-like structure for the Palestinian people.
During his speech Mitterrand said that "Palestinians, as a people, must have their own identity, homeland and state" .
Israel, on the other hand, "must really enjoy safe and recognized borders and the means of ensuring its security" .
He also called for a meeting of the UN Security Council at the level of heads of state or government to discuss the Middle East, a proposal which was welcomed by the PLO.
Mitterrand and Bush discussed the Arab-Israeli conflict during a one-day meeting on the island of Martinique on March 14.
At the end of the talks differences remained over the timing of a Middle East conference, the role of the PLO, and the desirability of a Palestinian state.
Baker tour of Middle East
US Secretary of State James Baker visited Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Israel and Syria on March 7-14.
In Saudi Arabia Baker met with foreign ministers from the six GCC countries and Egypt and Syria, who issued a joint statement expressing their appreciation for Bush's March 6 speech and its "positive treatment" to the Palestinian question.
In Egypt President Mubarak urged the introduction of confidence measures in preparation for an international conference.
Significantly, Mubarak acknowledged that the PLO (which had opposed Egypt's strong pro-US stance during the Gulf War) remained the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.
Baker's two-day visit to Israel on March 11-12 was his first since his appointment as US Secretary of State in January 1990.
His arrival coincided with a spate of violence, including the shooting dead of six Arab infiltrators from Jordan [see p. 38119].
He met both Shamir and Levy, reportedly stressing that he had found evidence of "new thinking" in Cairo and Riyadh.
According to some reports Shamir refused Baker's request to issue a statement, saying that Israel would not rule out the idea of discussing land for peace at a later date.
However, there was a general agreement between the two sides on the need to follow the so-called "twin-track approach" "to a Middle East settlement, aimed at Israel opening talks with Arab countries on the one hand and with Palestinians on the other.
Baker met with a 10-member Palestinian delegation on March 12, the first such meeting since the US suspended its dialogue with the PLO in June 1990 [see pp. 37547-48].
The PLO had earlier announced that it had approved talks with Baker.
The delegation, which was led by Faisal al-Husseini and also included Elias Freij and Maher al-Masri, presented Baker with an 11-point statement emphasising other things that the PLO was the "sole, legitimate leadership" of the Palestinians.
The statement also proposed that the peace process "must be advanced with the momentum generated by the will of the international community and not made subject to Israeli concurrence and rejection" .
The meeting was denounced by the Islamic fundamentalist Palestinian group Hamas.
In Syria on March 13 Baker had talks with President Assad.
Syrian-US relations had improved dramatically in recent months as a result of Syria's decision to commit troops to support the US-led anti-Iraqi coalition.
On March 12 the official daily newspaper Tishrin praised US Middle East policies in a front-page editorial.
Leaving Damascus on March 14 Baker said that he sensed a "very serious intent" on the part of the Syrian government to "pursue an active peace process" .
The Golan Heights question
Speculation over possible Syrian-Israeli negotiations on the Golan Heights [see p. 38025]continued in March and served to heighten tension within the divided Israeli leadership.
Israel had captured the Golan Heights from Syria in 1967 and had formally annexed the territory in 1981.
On March 17 Israeli Health Minister Ehud Olmert told a meeting of US Jews in Washington that Israel was ready to negotiate on all issues "including all territorial demands of the Syrians" .
Olmert's statement was greeted with anger by Israeli right-wingers.
Sharon responded by announcing plans to increase the Israeli settler population of the Golan from 11,000 to 20,000.
Appearing before the Knesset foreign affairs and defence committee on March 18 Shamir said that the Golan Heights were not a subject for territorial negotiation.
New PLO peace initiative
The PLO chair Yassir Arafat unveiled a new peace initiative in an interview with the Toronto Star of Canada published on March 25.
According to a number of reports the plan's main objective was to restore the credibility of the PLO in the West in the aftermath of the Gulf war.
In an interview with Arab journalists on March 8 US President Bush had said that the PLO had "lost credibility" after siding with Iraq; Bush had dismissed the chances of a quick resumption of US-Palestinian talks.
The centrepiece of the Arafat initiative was the creation of a UN-policed buffer zone between Israel and an independent Palestinian state.
Other elements included a willingness to drop the concept of a "land corridor" between the West Bank and Gaza Strip; the demilitarization of a new Palestinian state for six months; the inclusion of East Jerusalem as a part of Palestine; and the holding of a referendum on confederation between Jordan and independent Palestine.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ARAB LEAGUE
Cairo council meeting
All 21 members of the Arab League sent representatives to a meeting of its council in Cairo on March 30, confounding expectations that Iraq or others might boycott the session.
In the event, the meeting decreed an adjournment after only 90 minutes; observers noted that there seemed to be a general desire to paper over the rifts caused by the Gulf war.
The League's five Maghreb members were the first to announce that they would be sending representation at ambassadorial level only (instead of foreign ministers).
According to the Algerian press this showed their reservations about the League's functioning and political position.
It was then announced from Cairo that all countries would be represented at the meeting at the same level.
Iraq sent as its delegate Saad Qassem Hammoudi, head of the Arab desk at the Iraq Foreign Ministry, and Egypt's Esmat Abdel Meguid was the only Foreign Minister present.
Hammoudi protested about the presence of United States and other foreign troops in southern Iraq, but most speakers made only indirect reference to recent events in the Gulf or to the issue of Palestinian representation.
According to the Independent of April 1, the scant mention of Iraq illustrated "the deference accorded to a state on the verge of collapse — a state that leading Arab governments want to remain intact" .
Assad's meeting with Mubarak
President Assad of Syria arrived in Cairo on March 31 for talks with President Mubarak of Egypt and senior Egyptian officials.
After two days of talks Mubarak called on April 2 for an international peace conference for the region, in which all five permanent UN Security Council members would be included.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
Post-war situation
Return of Crown Prince and Amir to Kuwait — Increased pressure for political reform — Resignation of government
Shaikh Saad al Abdullah as Salim as Sabah, the Crown Prince, Prime Minister and military governor of Kuwait, returned to Kuwait City from exile in Saudi Arabia on March 4, the day after Iraqi and allied commanders signed a formal interim ceasefire agreement.
The Amir of Kuwait, Shaikh Jabir al Ahmed al Jabir as Sabah, returned on March 14.
Both had fled to Saudi Arabia soon after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2, 1990.
Within days of the allied liberation of Kuwait in late February [see pp. 37982-90]it was evident that some Kuwaitis who had lived through the Iraqi occupation were disillusioned with the ruling Sabah family and were determined to demand political reforms.
Leaflets were distributed throughout Kuwait City attacking the government's failure to organize food supplies and to plan for a swift restoration of water and electricity supplies.
Underground groups which had operated inside Kuwait against the Iraqi forces issued demands for political reform which mirrored calls made by exiled opposition leaders.
An opposition Democratic Forum Movement soon emerged, demanding the recall of the National Assembly in accordance with the partially suspended 1962 Constitution, the lifting of martial law and the formation of a new, representative government.
Criticism of the government also came from unexpected quarters.
On March 5 Abdel Aziz Sultan, chair of the Gulf Bank, claimed on United States television that some members of the Sabah family had established assassination squads to kill opposition supporters.
Shaikh Saad submitted his government's resignation on March 20, officially in order to allow the Amir to take whatever action he deemed appropriate in preparation for Kuwait's reconstruction.
The Amir accepted the government's resignation, but called on ministers to remain in office until a new Cabinet was formed.
The Sabahs then entered into "consultation" with various groups and individuals with the aim of forming a new Cabinet.
Those approached included leading members of the previously under-represented Shia community, members of the Moslem Brotherhood and leading businessmen and professionals.
The "consultations" failed, prompting all the main political groups in Kuwait to form a joint delegation which informed Shaikh Saad on March 30 that it was not prepared to join a new government before a timetable for political reform had been established.
The delegation was supported by a petition signed by 96 prominent Kuwaitis, who demanded a commitment to parliamentary democracy, an independent press and judiciary and freedom of speech and association.
During interviews with journalists during March Prince Saad invariably answered questions concerning Kuwait's future political system with a reference to the October 1990 "popular congress" in Saudi Arabia, at which the Amir had made a vague commitment to opposition leaders to restore the 1962 Constitution [see p. 37759].
However, Prince Saad also stressed that reconstruction and security would take precedence over democratization.
On March 5 a night-time curfew was imposed and on March 19 the country's sole post-liberation newspaper, February 26, was suspended after publishing articles critical of the government.
Treatment of Palestinian population in Kuwait
The support of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) for Iraq throughout the Gulf conflict had a serious impact on relations between Palestinians and Kuwaitis.
Of the estimated 170,000 Palestinians remaining in Kuwait after the Iraqi defeat, a number were killed by Kuwaiti soldiers and civilian vigilantes after being accused of collaborating with the occupying forces.
As more details were revealed of the atrocities committed by the occupying Iraqi forces, there were further reprisal attacks.
Some reports indicated that Palestinians in Kuwait had generally opposed the Iraqi invasion and that there had been considerable co-operation between Palestinians and Kuwaitis.
Palestinian activists affiliated with PLO chair Yassir Arafat's Fatah faction had reportedly adopted a strongly anti-Iraqi line, a move which had prompted the Iraqi leadership to deploy guerrillas from the Arab Liberation Front (ALF) and the Palestine Liberation Front (PLF) in Kuwait in an attempt to control the Palestinian community.
The Kuwaiti government consistently denied that Palestinians had been singled out for arrest and punishment.
At a press conference on March 7 Prince Saad said that Kuwait would continue to provide assistance to Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied territories, regardless of the stance of the PLO during the Gulf conflict.
He denied that any Palestinians had been killed and tortured, but admitted that a small number had been detained because they had "committed crimes" against Kuwaitis during the occupation.
The human rights organization Amnesty International released a report on March 18 which claimed that Palestinians were being arbitrarily arrested and tortured by Kuwaiti soldiers and civilians.
A report by Middle East Watch issued on March 21 claimed that Palestinians were among some 30-40 people executed in Kuwait since liberation.
On the same day Baasam Abu Sharif, senior adviser to Arafat, claimed that 210 Palestinians had died in Kuwait under torture, and by shooting and hanging, and that hundreds of Palestinians were being held in police stations and were being tortured "in indescribable ways" .
He called on United States President Bush to intervene on their behalf.
Re-assessment of damage to infrastructure — Visit by UN mission
Preliminary assessments suggested that Kuwait had suffered catastrophic damage to its infrastructure during the Gulf conflict.
However, subsequent assessments suggested that the damage was much less severe than had been originally feared.
Nevertheless, the destruction wrought by the Iraqi forces on Kuwait's oilfields and refineries had been devastating and would take years to rectify.
A report in the Middle East Economic Digest of March 29 claimed that the country's roads and bridges had suffered little damage and that water supply and sewage disposal systems were in good order.
Damage to the power sector was also limited, although emergency repair work was necessary.
Generally, buildings had suffered surface damage, and their structures remained solid.
The initial emergency repair work was co-ordinated by the US Army Corp of Engineers (USACE), which dealt with large numbers of international companies tendering for reconstruction work.
USACE had been appointed to conduct damage assessments and manage emergency repair work to the infrastructure following an agreement reached in January 1991 between the Kuwaiti government and the US Defence Department.
A UN team visited Kuwait in March and reported that although a deliberate attempt had been made to "extinguish Kuwait" , the country had made good progress in dealing with immediate humanitarian needs [see p. 38082 for mission to Iraq].
In early March Saudi Arabian companies had started trucking food into Kuwait and had launched a major refuse clearing operation.
Damage to oilfields
Approximately 800 of Kuwait's 950 oil wells were damaged in some way by the Iraqi forces, as were the country's three oil refineries.
By late March only seven of a reported 571 oil well fires had been capped and it was estimated that it might take a further three years to extinguish all the fires.
Large numbers of Kuwaitis were reported to be leaving the country during March because of the high level of pollution caused by the fires.
In many areas of the country black clouds had completely blocked out the sun, and noxious gases were making normal life impossible.
Reports from hospitals in Kuwait showed that lung and chest complaints had increased dramatically.
Issuing of new bank notes — Re-opening of commercial banks
On March 23 new bank notes went into circulation as 56 of Kuwait's 180 commercial banks re-opened.
The new Kuwaiti dinar was set at a rate of US$1.00=KD0.2857, the rate applicable before the Aug. 2 Iraqi invasion.
Commercial banks were given authority to issue unlimited letters of credit to fund imports, but individual Kuwaitis were limited to withdrawals of KD4,000 per person per month until June.
Visit by UK Prime Minister
John Major, the United Kingdom Prime Minister, visited British troops in Kuwait on March 6.
Major was the first head of government to visit the country since its liberation.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Diplomatic activity — World Bank loan — Regional exchanges
Iran improved its formal relations with several Arab states in March.
On March 12 it was announced that Egypt and Iran had each decided to set up an "interests office" in the other's capital "as a first step towards the restoration of full diplomatic relations between the two countries" , according to Arab Republic of Egypt radio.
Following a 10-year break in relations, the Iranian embassy in Amman, Jordan, was re-opened on March 20.
Diplomatic relations between Iran and Saudi Arabia were renewed on March 26, three years after their breach following the July 1987 Haj clashes in Mecca involving Iranian pilgrims and Saudi Arabian security forces [see pp. 35676-77].
The March 20 joint Iran-Saudi communiqué announcing the restoration of full ties followed a meeting three days earlier in Muscat, the Omani capital, of Foreign Ministers Ali Akbar Vellayati of Iran and Prince Saud al-Faisal of Saudi Arabia.
Meanwhile, several governments which had participated in the US-led coalition against Iraq now sought to assure Iran that there was no plan to exclude it from post-war regional security arrangements.
An Iranian delegation led by Vellayati visited Damascus on March 7-8 and was reportedly assured by Syrian President Assad that Iran would have a significant role in a post-war Gulf security order.
Iran had expressed concerns about the involvement of non-Gulf countries — Egypt and Syria — in the so-called "six plus two" regional co-operation pact with the six Saudi-led Gulf Co-operation Council countries.
Turkish President Turgut Özal, speaking on March 10 during a thee-day visit to Turkey by Iranian First Vice-President Hasan Habibi, was quoted as saying that any attempt to safeguard regional Gulf security would be "meaningless" without Iranian participation.
Indicating United States recognition of Iran's regional importance, US President Bush told Arab journalists in Washington on March 9 that as a "big country" Iran "should not be forever treated as enemies by all of the countries in the region" .
Reported US efforts to seek direct talks and a limited rapprochement with Iran were highlighted by Bush's comment that his country wanted "better relations" and "no animosity" .
Furthermore, a December 1990 decision by the US administration to allow US oil companies to purchase Iranian oil was officially announced in detail on March 14.
Purchase could be made if they were licensed by the US Treasury's Office of Foreign Treasury Control.
World Bank loan
The World Bank extended to Iran its first loan since 1978 (prior to the Iranian revolution) on March 16, a loan made possible by the US decision to remain neutral on the matter.
The 15-year variable interest US$250,000,000 loan was tied to the estimated US$5,000 million earthquake recovery programme in north-western Iran, devastated in June 1990 [see pp. 37521-22].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
Gulf war aftermath — Halting of US aid
Call for regional reconciliation by King Hussein
King Hussein called for regional reconciliation in a televised address to the country on March 1.
The tone of the speech was in marked contrast to his fierce attack on the United States on Feb. 6 [see p. 38024].
Officially neutral during the war, Jordan had nevertheless been heavily criticized by the West and by some Arab states for its pro-Iraqi stance.
The King's speech was therefore widely regarded as an attempt to halt Jordan's drift into regional isolation.
While expressing sympathy for the Iraqi people, the King stressed that the people of Jordan shared the happiness of their "Kuwaiti brothers" .
He urged the world to "address the question of Palestine by the same criteria that it had applied over the question of Kuwait" .
Cancellation of US aid
The US Congress approved a bill on March 22 cutting off the US aid programme to Jordan, which had been placed under review in early February following King Hussein's pro-Iraqi and anti-US speech [see above; p. 38024].
The amount of aid affected included US$56,000,000 which had not yet been disbursed from the 1990 programme and US$57,200,000 in allocations for fiscal 1991.
However, in a concession to a veto threat delivered by US President George Bush, Congress allowed Bush the authority to restore the aid programme if he could certify "that the government of Jordan has taken steps to advance the peace process in the Middle East, or that furnishing assistance to Jordan would be beneficial to the peace process in the Middle East" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Security matters — Foreign aid — Internal political and economic affairs
Sentencing of Popper for Rishon Le Zion massacre — Sentencing of Palestinians for Tel Aviv stabbing
Ami Popper, 22, was on March 17 sentenced to a hitherto unheard of seven life terms in prison for shooting dead seven Palestinian labourers at Rishon Le Zion in May 1990 [see p. 37443].
Popper was given an additional 20-year sentence, to run concurrently, for 11 other attempted murders.
The killings had set off widespread rioting in the occupied territories and in Jordan.
On March 5 two Palestinian teenagers were each sentenced to 30 years in prison for stabbing a Jewish student to death on a bus in Tel Aviv district on Dec. 2, 1990 [see p. 37928].
Killing of "infiltrators" from Jordan — Stabbing of Israelis in West Jerusalem
Israeli forces shot dead six Arab infiltrators along the Israeli-Jordanian border on March 11, and two more on March 22.
Three Israeli soldiers were wounded in the March 11 incident, which took place only hours before the United States Secretary of State James Baker arrived on a visit.
According to police sources, the fatal stabbings of four Israeli women in West Jerusalem on March 10 was described as a "message for Baker" by the attacker, Mohammed Mustafa Abu Galla, a 26-year-old Palestinian from Jabaliya refugee camp in the Gaza Strip.
Galla was shot and arrested shortly after the stabbings.
An Israeli settler in the West Bank was shot dead by unidentified gunmen near Ramallah on March 26.
Cabinet disagreement over response to killings
On March 24 Rafael Eitan, the Tsomet Agriculture Minister, led Cabinet hawks in demanding the use of the death sentence for random stabbings and other "terrorist crimes" .
The Prime Minister, Itzhak Shamir, on March 27 called on his senior ministers to draw up a plan to curb the escalating violence.
Shamir made his call in the light of Cabinet disagreements over a Police Ministry proposal to prevent all unmarried Palestinian men under the age of 30 from entering Israel.
New Kach leader
Rabbi Avraham Toledano was elected as chair of the ultra-Zionist Kach ( "Thus" ) movement on March 24.
Toledano replaced Rabbi Meir Kahane, who had been assassinated in New York in early November 1990 [see p. 37872].
Air Force corruption scandal
Brig. -Gen.
Rami Dotan was sentenced to 13 years in prison on March 27 for using his position as the Israeli Air Force's chief procurement officer to embezzle at least US$6,000,000.
The charges arose out of deals involving arms and technology purchases by the IAF from US defence contractors and raised a number of questions over Israel's handling of the annual US military grant worth US$1,800 million.
Emergency US aid package — EC aid package
The US House of Representatives approved on March 10 a US$4,100 million emergency spending bill containing US$650 million in aid for Israel to help it meet expenses caused by the Gulf war.
In February Israel had formally requested US$1,000 million from the USA to offset defence costs incurred as a result of the war [see p. 38023].
On March 1 the European Communities (EC) approved a ECU250,000,000 (about US$330,000,000) package of aid to Israel and the occupied territories, to help alleviate the economic impact of the Gulf war.
Israel would receive ECU150,000,000 in the form of balance-of-payments loans, and the Palestinians of the West Bank and Gaza Strip would receive the remainder in the form of grants to be disbursed through banks and agri-export and commercial organizations.
Devaluation of shekel
On March 10 the median rate of the Israeli shekel was devalued by 5.66 per cent, setting a new rate at IS2.5522 per unit of a dollar-denominated basket of foreign currencies, down from IS2.4077 per unit [see p. 37729 for previous devaluation, in September 1990].
Approval of 1991 budget
The Knesset approved the government's 1991 budget on March 21 after a chaotic 15-hour debate.
The debate was interspersed with angry exchanges as the small religious parties demanded increased state funding for their seminaries and social institutions.
At one point during the debate the National Religious Party (Mafdal), a member of the Likud-led coalition, threatened to vote against the budget unless it received additional "special allocations" .
The budget provided for expenditure of IS66,500 million for the nine-month period from April 1 to Dec. 31, 1991 (beginning in 1992, the budget would run according to the calendar year).
Foreign and domestic debt servicing accounted for IS21,000 million, spending on immigration IS12,300 million and defence IS10,600 million.
The projected deficit of IS9,000 million, to be made up through bond issues and foreign loans, represented a significant breach of the maximum level recommended by the Bank of Israel of 5.5 per cent of gross national product, and fears had been expressed that this could increase inflation.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Israeli attacks
Israeli forces carried out two attacks in Lebanon during March.
On March 15, Israeli aircraft attacked a Palestine Popular Struggle Front (PSF) base in the village of Qoub Elias in the Bekaa valley on the Beirut-Damascus road, allegedly used as base to carry out attacks against Israel.
The Agence France-Presse news agency (AFP) reported that seven Palestinian guerrillas were slightly injured in the raid, in which 12 missiles were fired at buildings occupied by the PSF.
On March 21, Israeli commandos infiltrated southern Lebanon north of the "security zone" (created by Israel in 1985), killing two people in the village of Louwaizeh who were alleged to be pro-Iranian Hezbollah guerrillas.
Clashes between Palestinians and SLA
On March 6, five Palestinians were killed in clashes with the Israeli-sponsored South Lebanese Army (SLA).
The Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP), in a statement issued in Beirut, said that the five had been intercepted after a DFLP attack on March 5 on an Israeli position in the western sector of the security zone.
Army clash with SLA — Plan to dissolve militias
On March 19 the Lebanese army had its first clash with SLA militiamen since the former's February 1991 deployment in southern Lebanon [see p. 38025].
The Phalangist Radio Free Lebanon reported that the clashes started when an SLA patrol intercepted a Lebanese army unit removing mines on the outskirts of Mlikh township.
The army's deployment in the south was part of the government's attempts to reassert control over the country under the terms of the Arab League-sponsored Taif peace accords [see pp. 36986; 37928].
In another step, a ministerial committee announced on March 19 a plan to dissolve Lebanon's 10 militias, which had agreed in principle to give up their arms.
The plan was drafted by Michel al-Murr, Defence Minister and Deputy Prime Minister; Faris Buwayz, Foreign Minister; Muhsin Dallul, Agriculture Minister; and Sami al-Khatib, Interior Minister.
It stated that the militias should dissolve by April 20, 1991.
It was later announced by the government that the Defence Ministry would designate locations where all private armies should hand over their weapons.
The Lebanese government also announced that it would draft a nationwide security plan within two months of the dissolution.
Murr escaped an assassination attempt on his way to the March 20 Cabinet meeting where the plan to disband the militias was to be approved.
A car bomb exploded as his motorcade was passing through the Antelias area of East Beirut; eight people were killed and 25 wounded.
Re-opening of port facilities in Beirut
In March the Lebanese authorities took control of the port of Beirut and smaller ports in greater Beirut.
Beirut port, where the Lebanese army had taken over control from the militias the previous month, opened on March 15 after a 14-month closure.
The government appointed a ministerial committee to run the port, headed by Mohammed Yussuf Beydun, Minister of Water Resources and Electricity.
Murr said on March 11 that "to complete the imposition of the state's authority on the Greater Beirut area, army units…entered the ports of Dubayyah, Golden Beach, Jamil-al-Jumayyil, Beirut Port's Fifth Basin, Awza'i and Khaldah" .
Resignation of Samir Geaga
Samir Geaga, head of the (Christian) Lebanese Forces militia, resigned formally on March 20 his nominal post of Minister of State in the government of national unity, which he had boycotted since its formation in December on the grounds that it was too pro-Syrian.
Militia sources reported that one of the main reasons for Geaga's resignation was concern for his security.
He was replaced by a close aide, Roger Dib, secretary-general of the Phalangist Party.
Two of his associates who had also boycotted the government, George Sa'adah, Minister of Posts and Telecommunications, and Michel Sassin, the Labour Minister, later agreed to take up their Cabinet posts.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Release of Palestinian prisoners from Syria — Arrest of PLF guerrilla in Greece — Intifada developments
Release of pro-Arafat Palestinian prisoners from Syria
On March 12 Syria released from prison 302 Palestinians, the majority of whom were loyal to Yassir Arafat, chair of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
As many as 5,000 Palestinians had been held in Syrian prisons since 1983, when relations between Arafat and Syrian President Hafez al-Assad had deteriorated into open hostility [see pp. 32457-59; 32649-51].
Some reports claimed that the Syrian government had released the prisoners in order to facilitate a rapprochement with the mainstream PLO factions.
PLO officials publicly characterized the release as a gesture of potential reconciliation.
However, a report in the Washington Post of March 14 claimed that the move marked the start of an ambitious new phase in Syria's longstanding campaign to take control of the PLO.
According to this report, the move was aimed at discrediting Arafat, who was already under serious pressure because of his backing of Iraq during the Gulf war, by stressing that the release had been arranged by Khaled Fayoum, a pro-Syrian opponent of Arafat.
Arrest of Achille Lauro hijacker in Greece — Italian application for extradition
Abdullrahim Khaled, a Palestinian guerrilla, and three Greek men were arrested for arms possession in central Athens on March 5.
In November 1985 Khaled, a member of the Palestine Liberation Front (PLF), had been sentenced in absentia to life imprisonment by an Italian court for his role in the hijacking a month earlier of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro [see pp. 34077-78].
On March 18 the public prosecutor in Genoa formally asked the Greek government to extradite Khaled.
Greek officials indicated that Khaled would be tried in Greece for arms possession before the extradition process was begun.
Resumption of intifada
The Palestinian intifada resumed in early March as the Israeli authorities relaxed the strict curfews imposed on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip during the Gulf war.
A general strike was observed in the West Bank and Gaza Strip on March 6, and on the same day Israeli troops shot dead an 18-year-old Palestinian during rioting near the West Bank village of Ramallah.
At least 42 Palestinians were wounded in a clash with Israeli troops at the Gaza camp of Rafah on March 9.
Fresh unrest erupted in the Gaza Strip after troops shot dead a 15-year-old Palestinian boy on March 27, and later that day shots were fired at an Israeli military vehicle near Hebron.
On March 28 a 12-year-old Palestinian boy was killed by troops near Rafah.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ARAB MAGHREB UNION
Summit
The third summit of the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU)— the first since the Gulf crisis began in August 1990 — was held in Ras Lanuf, Libya, on March 10.
The five member countries (Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco and Mauritania) were represented by their heads of state, or in the case of Morocco by Foreign Affairs Minister Abdel Latif Filali).
The AMU states had had difficulty maintaining a united policy towards the Gulf war.
Morocco, the only AMU country to send forces in support of the United States-led coalition in the Gulf, stressed that its 1,300-strong force in Saudi Arabia had a "defensive" role in guarding the Assafaniya oil refinery [see also p. 37989 for opposition in North Africa to the Gulf war].
King Hassan of Morocco had pressed for the summit — already twice postponed — to be deferred until late April when recent developments might be analyzed with "total objectivity" .
When the summit began as planned on March 10, King Hassan protested in an open letter to the Libyan leader, Col. Moamer al Kadhafi.
Opening the summit, Kadhafi referred to the role of the UN in defending "international legality" , but said that "the Security Council has plundered the sovereignty of the General Assembly" .
The AMU condemned Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, he said.
However, regarding the actions of coalition forces, "we want to believe it was not a crusade, it was not colonialism…subsequent actions will prove all this to us" .
A communiqué issued as the summit closed on March 11 confined itself to expressing "deep pain over the tragic developments" in the Gulf, and calling for UN sanctions against Iraq to be lifted and for post-war reconstruction to begin.
It condemned "the hostile campaign being waged in some quarters to harm the credibility and legitimacy of the PLO's representation of the Palestinian people" .
The document also noted agreements reached on the setting up of a Maghreb Bank of Investment and Foreign Trade, on co-operation in legal, judicial, maritime and other fields and on trade and tariffs.
The summit had also heard reports on AMU consultations with EC states on Jan. 13 and March 8, 1991, in addition to a report on the meeting with western Mediterranean states on Oct. 10, 1990 [see p. 37797].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
General strike
A two-day general strike, Algeria's first since independence, was called by the General Union of Algerian Workers (UGTA) on March 12-13 in protest against price rises of 50 to 200 per cent on various goods and services in the previous weeks.
The strike strengthened the arguments of those in the ruling National Liberation Front (FLN) who opposed the economic reforms of Prime Minister Mouloud Hamrouche.
The UGTA, with 800,000 members and affiliated to the FLN, on March 5 declared that current conditions jeopardized the agreement signed in October 1990 [see p. 37795]: price rises resulted from "the misuse of the law on liberalizing prices, the oppressive monetary policy" and black marketeering.
The strike was widely observed in the public sector, and (according to the official radio) to a lesser extent in the private sector.
On March 13 the UGTA said that negotiations with the government would begin on March 16.
The Islamist Union, affiliated to the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), boycotted the strike, describing it as a dispute between ruling party factions which might provide the FLN with an excuse for postponing a multiparty general election.
Murder of Reuters journalist
The Reuters correspondent in Algeria, Philip Shehadi, was found stabbed to death in his Algiers home on March 1.
A United States citizen of Lebanese origin, he had worked in the Middle East since 1984, but there was no apparent political motive for his killing.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
Release of family of Gen. Oufkir
As King Hassan celebrated the 30th anniversary of his accession to the throne on March 3, officials disclosed that the eight members of the family of the late Gen. Mohammed Oufkir had been released on Feb. 27 after over 18 years in detention.
Gen. Oufkir was a former Defence Minister who reportedly committed suicide shortly after leading an attempt in August 1972 to assassinate King Hassan by shooting down the royal jet [see pp. 25485-86].
His widow, Fatima Oufkir, 56, his six children (now aged between 21 and 37) and his cousin had been imprisoned in southern Morocco in December 1972, and were moved to Marrakesh in 1987.
They had never faced charges and their detention had become increasingly the focus of international criticism [see p. 37874].
According to human rights activists in Morocco and a report in El País of March 8 the family in fact remained under house arrest in Rabat.
Amnesty
An amnesty to benefit 2,268 prisoners by annulling all or part of their sentences was announced on March 1 as part of the anniversary celebrations.
The writer Abraham Serfaty, reportedly Africa's longest serving political prisoner, was not among those released.
A report by the human rights organization Amnesty International published on March 27 said that 650 political prisoners were held in Moroccan prisons and that many of them had been tortured.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
Suspension of Nahda activities
The fundamentalist Nahda movement (Mouvement de la Renaissance) announced the suspension of its activities following the implication of some of its followers in an attack on the headquarters of the ruling Democratic Constitutional Rally in Tunis on Feb. 17 [see p. 38026].
By distancing themselves from the use of violence, the Islamist leaders hoped to move towards eventual legalization of the party.
On March 8 the Tunisian media gave prominence to a statement signed the previous day by Nahda secretary-general Abdelfatah Mourou and two other members of the organization's executive committee, reiterating a commitment to "peaceful methods" .
The statement said that younger Nahda members appeared to have been involved in the February incident "with the agreement of some of the movement's leadership" , and that Nahda's membership and activities would therefore be "frozen…pending the decisions which we may take in the near future" .
Some students and others arrested within hours of the February incident had admitted on television seeking to overthrow the government and, in most cases, membership of Nahda.
Mourou, 42, and his co-signatories apparently intended to disassociate themselves from the pro-Iraqi position of exiled Nahda president Rashid Ghannouchi.
Killing of Netherlands diplomat
A first secretary at the Netherlands embassy in Tunis, Robert-Jan Ackerman, was killed outside his home on Feb. 27 by shots fired from a waiting car.
He had been temporary chargé d'affaires at the Netherlands embassy in Baghdad from September to October 1990, but the Tunisian Foreign Ministry on March 1 said that initial investigations suggested no political motives.
INTERNATIONAL
ORGANIZATION OF PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES
Decision not to re-impose production quotas
Members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) assembled in Geneva on March 11-12 for their first meeting since the ceasefire in the Gulf war.
Iraq and Kuwait, whose output was still embargoed following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, were not represented.
The 11 countries attending the meeting agreed on a Saudi Arabian proposal for a voluntary 5 per cent production cut by all member states, which it was hoped would reduce their collective output by just over 1,000,000 barrels per day, to 22,300,000 bpd.
They did not, however, reimpose mandatory production quotas, which had been suspended in August 1990 following the invasion of Kuwait [see pp. 37641; 37930].
The 5 per cent cut was regarded as insufficient by Iran, Algeria and Nigeria, all of which wanted to reduce OPEC's production still further to 21,000,000 bpd in an effort to bring prices back towards their reference price (i.e. target) of US$21 per barrel.
Saudi Arabia, by far the largest producer in OPEC, resisted pressure to accept a proportionally larger share of any cuts which were to be made in overall OPEC production.
Saudi Oil Minister Hisham Nazer asserted that his country was actually intending to increase its production capacity by up to 30 per cent in the coming years, from the current 8,400,000 bpd to around 12,000,000 bpd (compared with its agreed quota of 5,400,000 bpd before the outbreak of the Gulf war).
He added that Saudi Arabia would not reduce its output in the coming quarter, even if world oil prices were to fall.
Sadek Boussena, the Algerian Mines and Industry Minister, said at the meeting that he was unlikely to seek a further term as OPEC president.
He had expressed fears that Saudi oil policy was being effectively directed by US interests since the Gulf war, which had demonstrated Saudi Arabia's dependence on a US military shield.
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY
Ending of oil stockpile sales
The International Energy Agency (IEA), set up in 1974 by the Council of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) to co-ordinate energy policies among its participating countries, announced on March 6 that it was to withdraw its plan to release oil from its stockpiles, a measure introduced in January to boost the volume of oil available in the world market during the Gulf war [see p. 37943], since the ceasefire agreement ending Gulf hostilities would assist in the prospective restoration of normal suppliers from most oil producing nations.
IEA chairman Geoffrey Chipperfield said on March 6 that 17 countries had released oil from stockpiles, and that both world supplies and world oil prices had remained stable throughout the crisis.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Disagreement over conventional forces
Talks in Moscow on March 15 between the United States Secretary of State James Baker and Soviet President Gorbachev failed to resolve problems over alleged Soviet violation of the terms of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) signed in November 1990 [see pp. 37838-39].
Baker said on television on March 17 that until these differences were "straightened out" it would be "difficult to conclude START [the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty negotiations]" .
In particular the USA and other CFE treaty signatories objected to the Soviet transfer of tanks and other forces east of the Ural Mountains (i.e. outside the scope of the treaty).
On March 21 the 22 delegations to the Vienna CFE talks (the 16 NATO and six Warsaw Pact member states) adjourned their first five-week negotiating session in 1991 without resolving the problem.
Removal of last US cruise missiles from Europe
Under the 1987 treaty on Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces [see p. 35602]the last of the US ground-launched nuclear-armed cruise missiles stationed in Europe under the 1979 NATO "twin-track" decision [see pp. 30159-60]were flown out of the US base at Comiso, Sicily, on March 26.
The last Pershing 2 missiles had left Germany on March 13 and the last cruise missiles in the United Kingdom had left the USAF base at Greenham Common on March 5.
The materiel covered by the treaty was due to be neutralized by May 31, 1991.
Plastic explosives convention
On March 1 Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, the Soviet Union, the UK, the USA and 34 other countries signed a Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of Detection, which sought to forestall terrorist attacks by requiring signatory states to oblige manufacturers to add one of four chemical detection agents to such explosives.
The convention concluded a conference on air law, held at the Montreal headquarters of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) commencing Feb. 12.
INTERNATIONAL
OECD
Conference on migration
Representatives from 25 countries attended a conference on immigration policy in Rome on March 13-15.
Held at the instigation of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the problems the conference sought to discuss were highlighted by the recent influx into southern Italy of thousands of Albanians [see pp. 38105-06].
All the delegates predicted an increase in migratory pressures.
The president of the OECD's development committee declared that "unless policies are changed soon, it is clear that a new wave of migration is imminent" .
The meeting denounced the contradictions of rich countries' policies which "took with one hand — by protectionism — what they gave with the other — development aid" , while an OECD divisional head noted that "the question of migration relates directly to the need for a different co-operation and development policy and for trade liberalization" .
The Economist of March 16 reported that Asia was the main source of the world's migrants, refugees and foreign workers, the most dramatic increase occurring among those who found work, either legally or illegally, in Japan, Taiwan and the Gulf (until the conflict there).
In the mid-1970s some 20,000 people a year had applied for asylum in Europe — in 1990 around 600,000 did so.
INTERNATIONAL
REFUGEES
Conference on Vietnamese boat people
An informal conference on the future of the thousands of Vietnamese boat people temporarily housed in camps in south-east Asian countries, held at the headquarters of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Geneva, requested the UNHCR to convene a full meeting on the issue at an early date.
The talks, proposed by the United Kingdom, Australia and Canada, were also attended by representatives from France, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Netherlands, Philippines, Thailand, the United States and the European Communities.
The participants reaffirmed on March 26 their commitment to the Comprehensive Plan of Action, agreed in June 1989 [see pp. 36733-34], which introduced screening procedures to differentiate between recognized refugees fleeing political persecution (who would be settled in various countries), and economic migrants (who would be returned to Vietnam, in principle on a voluntary basis).
By the end of 1990 the total number of Vietnamese boat people in neighbouring countries had reached 110,000, of whom 52,000 were in Hong Kong, 20,300 in Indonesia, 14,900 in Malaysia and 14,100 in Thailand.
New arrivals totalled 32,450 in 1990, compared with 73,400 the previous year.
Some 31,400 refugees were resettled in 1990, primarily in the United States, Australia and Canada; some 8,200 were repatriated to Vietnam.
Earlier in March the UK government had indicated that it might resume the forced repatriation of boat people from Hong Kong, which it had begun in December 1989 but suspended soon afterwards [see pp. 37121-2].
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
US-Canadian clean air agreement
An agreement to improve air quality in Canada and the United States was signed by Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, and US President George Bush during a visit by the latter to Ottawa, the Canadian capital, on March 13.
It followed repeated requests by successive Canadian governments for US action to reduce the emissions of pollutants which travelled across the frontier to fall as acid rain in south-eastern Canada.
The accord committed the USA to cutting sulphur dioxide (SO@2) emissions to below 1980 levels by 2000.
Canada was to reduce annual SO@2 emissions from its seven eastern provinces to 3,200,000 tonnes by the same time.
Both countries would also limit nitrogen oxide emissions through stricter controls on motor vehicles.
The agreement included a clause setting up a joint committee to oversee air quality.
Record settlement payment for Exxon Valdez oil spill
The US Exxon Corporation on March 13 agreed to pay a record sum in settlement of claims over the Exxon Valdez oil spillage off the coast of Alaska in March 1989 [see pp. 36541; 36606].
Agreed out of court after lengthy judicial hearings, the settlement included (i) a US$100,000,000 criminal fine (the highest levied against a polluter), set after Exxon pleaded guilty to charges of criminal misdemeanour; and (ii) $900,000,000 in civil damages, to be administered by a board of Alaska state and US federal officials, to be used for cleanup operations along the Alaska shoreline over the next decade.
Exxon also agreed to make a further payment of up to $100,000,000 if further damage from the oil slick was discovered in the five years after this period (2002-2006).
In return for the settlement, Exxon was released from all past and future civil or criminal claims by the state or federal governments.
AVIATION
Company difficulties — Transatlantic route competition
With a succession of international airlines reporting poor profits in March, Günter Eser, the director-general of the International Air Transport Association, estimated on March 15 that IATA members had lost more than $2,000 million during 1990 because of falling bookings associated with the Gulf crisis, and because of soaring aviation fuel costs.
The expected growth in world air travel in 1991 was only 3 per cent in 1991, he said, compared with the "more usual" 6 to 7 per cent.
The Australian airline Qantas reported on March 17 that it was facing "possibly the worst short-term financial position in its 70-year history" , because of losses expected to reach US$270,000,000 in the current financial year, and on March 21 Scandinavian Airlines System reported a $127,000,000 loss for 1990.
The Spanish airline Iberia reported on March 22 that it had lost $276,000,000 during the year, and on the same day the Belgian government started a $563,000,000 rescue programme for the troubled national carrier Sabena.
Hong Kong's Cathay Pacific Airways, on the other hand, declared profits of $384,000,000 on March 25.
Aircraft belonging to Air Europe, the British scheduled airline which carried over 3,500,000 passengers in 1990, were grounded on March 8 following the collapse of its parent company, International Leisure Group, which had lost £5,000,000 between November 1990 and the end of January 1991.
Air France, which had agreed in mid-1990 to merge with its main French international rival UTA and the domestic airline Air Inter, faced a new challenge on March 3, when the French government announced that it would redistribute 16 of the airline's routes to its competitors, in an effort to reduce the airline's 97 per cent share of the domestic aviation market.
The US airline Pan American, which had filed in January for protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the US insolvency code [see p. 37953], saw its prospects improve with an acceptance by the United Kingdom government (confirmed on March 11) that it could in effect sell its rights to routes into London's Heathrow airport to United Airlines for $290,000,000; United began its Heathrow services on April 5.
Airline access to Heathrow had hitherto been restricted by a rule introduced in 1977, declaring that only those airlines which already served it could continue to do so.
The UK government secured a package of US concessions worth some £200,000,000 a year in return for relaxing this rule.
TransWorld Airlines, which was also in severe difficulties [ibid.], received permission from the US Transportation Department on March 14 to sell three of its six London routes to American Airlines.
American had offered a total of $445,000,000 for all six Heathrow routes, and the partial blockage of the intended sale would exacerbate TWA's severe cashflow problems.