

MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
THE KURDISH CRISIS
A brutal military campaign launched by Iraqi government troops in late March rapidly crushed the Kurdish guerrilla insurgency, which had been threatening to overrun wide areas of northern Iraq in the aftermath of the Iraqi defeat in the Gulf war.
An estimated 50,000 people were reported killed [see p. 38081], and the ensuing terror in Kurdish-inhabited areas precipitated a major refugee crisis as hundreds of thousands sought refuge in neighbouring Turkey and Iran.
International diplomatic efforts during April were directed first towards an emergency relief operation, then towards finding a framework within which adequate protection could be provided to Kurds within Iraq itself.
By the end of the month the French, United Kingdom and United States governments had committed troops to maintain "safe havens" within Iraq, despite the latter's condemnation, and UN relief agencies confirmed on April 29 that Kurdish refugees who had fled Iraq were returning home at the rate of 20,000 a day.
Intensification of Iraqi military campaign
Evidence of a successful Iraqi military offensive against Kurdish rebels emerged in late March shortly after the suppression of a mainly Shia uprising in the south [see pp. 38081-82].
Reports on March 26, quoting Kurdish sources, said that Kurdish pesh merga guerrillas had been in control of the oil centre of Kirkuk for seven days during which they had sustained intensive shelling and air attacks by Iraqi government forces.
(On March 25 the US State Department confirmed that Kirkuk was under Kurdish control.)
The pesh merga also claimed to have captured 80,000 government troops.
By early April there were reports that Kurdish rebels, under heavy fire from government forces, had retreated into the mountains of northern Iraq.
The Iraqi News Agency (INA) claimed on March 31 and April 1 that government troops had recaptured Kirkuk, as well as Arbil, Dahok and Zakho, the last major towns in the north held by Kurdish rebels.
Reports of decisive military gains by Iraqi government forces were confirmed on April 1 by the leader of the Democratic Party of Kurdistan (DPK), Masoud Barzani, who claimed that around 3,000,000 Kurds had fled into the mountains as part of a "tactical withdrawal" to escape the government's programme of "genocide and torture against our people" .
Barzani issued an urgent appeal to France, Saudi Arabia, the UK and the USA to seek immediate intervention by the United Nations.
On April 2, the US State Department confirmed that "the [Iraqi]government seems to be levelling substantial portions of the Turkoman town of Tuz Khurmatu, 40 miles south of Kirkuk" .
The suppression of the Kurdish uprising came amidst reports that the Iraqi army had made use of tanks, artillery, heavy weapons and aircraft.
Reports in the Independent of April 2 said that the Iraqi government had used fixed-wing jets in defiance of US ceasefire terms [see p. 38081]and had employed chemical bombs and phosphorous shells to kill "hundreds of thousands" of Kurds.
The Financial Times of April 2 also quoted a DPK spokesman as alleging that "we are facing a worse genocide than Halabja" , a reference to the use in 1988 of poison gas by the Iraqi army in the town of Halabja which killed an estimated 5,000-6,000 people [see pp. 36168-69].
The use of chemical weapons, including napalm, against fleeing civilians in Iraqi Kurdistan was confirmed on April 3 by the Iranian Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Vellayati, who added that "more than two million Kurds are leaving under constant bombardment" .
Iraqi claim to have crushed resistance — Amnesty offer
On April 4 the Iraqi Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) held a meeting chaired by President Saddam Hussein which concluded that "Iraq has totally crushed all the acts of sedition and sabotage in all the cities of Iraq" .
Baghdad radio had announced on April 3 the recapture of Sulaimaniya on the Iranian border, and the Vice-Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council and deputy secretary-general of the Baath Socialist Party regional command, Izzat Ibrahim, visited that city on April 4, reporting the "return of security and stability to northern towns and areas" .
The RCC also announced an amnesty to all Kurds "except those" who committed murder, rape and looting during acts of riots and treason".
On April 5 the DPK rejected this amnesty offer, amidst reports that the Iraqi government had begun to round up "tens of thousands" of Kurds living in Baghdad, in reprisal for the Kurdish uprising in the north.
On April 9 the DPK claimed that at least 150 civilians had been killed by mines while fleeing towards the Turkish and Iranian borders.
Reports also emerged of reprisals against Kurds alleged to have had contacts with foreign nationals.
On April 5 the Guardian quoted the Iraqi Interior Minister, Ali Hasan al-Majid, as saying that the government had "material proof" of contacts between Kurdish leaders and "a neighbouring country" , believed to be Iran.
On April 13 Saddam Hussein, while on a visit to the Kurdish town of Arbil, repeated his offer of amnesty.
However, he stressed in an obvious reference to Kurdish guerrillas and their supporters that "we do not give guarantees to those people" .
On April 18 the RCC extended its offer of an amnesty for Kurds.
Resistance by Kurdish guerrillas
By mid-April there were reports that the Iraqi military campaign in the north had met with fierce resistance from Kurdish guerrillas.
On April 2 the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) claimed that Kurdish rebels had recaptured Kirkuk "after fierce battles" .
These reports were disputed by US intelligence officers who said that "the [Iraqi]government appears to be in control" .
On April 9 the DPK said that Kurdish guerrillas had checked the advance of government troops north of Sulaimaniya.
On April 12 there were reports of heavy fighting between Kurdish and government troops equipped with helicopter gunships, tanks and long-range artillery, around the towns of Salahuddin, Kore, Zakho and Arbil.
According to The Times of April 12, the DPK claimed that 50 people had been killed during an attack by government troops on a refugee centre near Halabja on the Iranian border.
The report also mentioned numerous casualties among government forces during heavy fighting around Kirkuk.
Heavy fighting was reported around the cities of Shaqlawa and Sulaimaniya on April 13 in which 150 government troops were said to have been killed.
DPK sources claimed that aerial and artillery bombardment had been employed against Kurdish refugees.
The Iranian news agency (IRNA), quoting DPK sources, said that Kurdish guerrillas had captured the town of Dukan in northern Iraq.
The Independent of April 18 reported renewed clashes between Kurdish guerrillas and government troops near Sulaimaniya.
Iraqi acceptance of Kurdish autonomy
The leader of the PUK, Jalal Talabani, announced on April 24 that President Saddam Hussein had agreed "in principle" to grant a measure of autonomy to the Kurds based on the implementation of the government's 1970 autonomy agreement [see p. 23916].
Talabani appealed to Kurds to return to their homes and stressed that "we want to stay in Iraqi Kurdistan, not leave it" .
Talabani's statement was confirmed by the Iraqi Prime Minister Sa'adoun Hammadi who said on April 25 that his government and representatives of four Kurdish groups had reached an agreement on "paving the way for negotiations on the future status of Kurds within the Republic of Iraq" .
The government's latest autonomy offer, which was expected to be endorsed by Barzani — the DPK leader — before the next round of negotiations, was made to a delegation of Kurdish leaders including Talabani, Nechirvan Barzani (a nephew of Masoud Barzani and a leading DPK member), Sami Abdul-Rahman of the Kurdistan People's Democratic Party (KPDP) and Rasoul Marmand of the Socialist Party of Kurdistan (SPK), during six days of secret talks.
On April 19 a DPK spokesman had confirmed that an unofficial ceasefire between government and Kurdish forces would remain in force while Kurdish leaders discussed "the political developments of the Kurdish issue" .
Masoud Barzani was quoted on April 23 as saying that his party would seek the establishment of a protection zone administered by France, the UK and the USA as part of any peace agreement with the Iraqi government.
On April 27 Talabani was quoted as saying that key differences, centring on "each side's concepts of autonomy" , still remained to be resolved.
Reticence over possible international response
There was a marked absence during early April of any co-ordinated international response to appeals by Kurdish leaders for international intervention on their behalf.
On April 2 a statement issued on behalf of the UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, noted merely that he was "gravely concerned about reports of heavy fighting and bloodshed in both northern and southern Iraq" .
There was no immediate US response to Kurdish appeals for assistance.
On April 1 the State Department reaffirmed the Bush administration's policy of non-intervention in the civil war [see p. 38081].
On April 3 the US State Department spokeswoman, Margaret Tutwiler, said after talks between Kurdish leaders and a high-level US delegation that the administration would "urgently consider" humanitarian aid to the Kurds once the UN ceasefire resolution had been agreed.
She stressed, however, that "I have no reason to believe that the President's policy [of non-intervention]is going to change" and she denied that President Bush had previously made any policy speech calling on the Iraqi people to overthrow the Iraqi government.
Tutwiler's statement came amidst reports of growing bitterness among Kurdish leaders who claimed that the US administration had failed to support them after having initially encouraged their movement.
On April 5 Bush reiterated his government's policy of non-intervention and added that "it was not an objective of the coalition or the US to overthrow Saddam Hussein" .
Meanwhile, an attempt by France on April 2 to persuade the UN Security Council to adopt a resolution to provide protection for the Kurds, ended in failure after opposition from China, the Soviet Union and the USA, which maintained that it would set a precedent for Security Council involvement in internal controversies.
On April 3, the UK Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, said during an interview with the BBC that "I don't think we can get into the business of using force…in order to impose a particular political answer on Iraq" .
Adoption of UN resolution
Continued diplomatic lobbying by France resulted on April 5 in the adoption by the UN Security Council of Resolution 688 condemning the "repression of the Iraqi civilian population in many parts of Iraq, including most recently in Kurdish populated areas, the consequences of which threaten international peace and security" .
The resolution, which also called on Iraq to "allow immediate access by international humanitarian organizations to those in need of assistance" , made no provision for any action to force the Iraqi government to halt its campaign of repression against the Kurdish and Shia minorities.
On April 6 Baghdad radio described Resolution 688 as "another unjust resolution" and a "blatant intervention in Iraq's internal affairs" .
On April 8, Iraq's permanent representative at the UN, Abdul Amir al-Anbari, lodged a formal protest with the Secretary-General against the resolution.
Other reactions
The UN resolution coincided with growing international condemnation of the Iraqi government's treatment of the Kurdish population.
A statement by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on April 5 accused the Iraqi government of "massive human rights violations" and demanded that "every pressure…be brought to bear to bring Iraqi authorities to stop the repression without delay" .
On April 5 Germany's Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, described Iraq's actions against its Kurdish minority as "genocide" and on April 13 called for President Saddam Hussein to be tried for "crimes against humanity" .
Reports on April 6 said that Australia's Prime Minister Bob Hawke had also called for international action to help the Kurds.
US and EC endorsement of Kurdish "safe havens" 
Iraq announced on April 25 that it was withdrawing all but 50 of its security personnel from the allied "safe haven" for Kurdish refugees centred around Zakho.
The announcement followed an ultimatum issued by France, the UK and the USA threatening the use of force.
It had been reported on April 22 that between 700 and 900 armed Iraqi police had moved into the area in defiance of a ban by allied forces engaged in setting up Kurdish refugee camps.
Earlier, on April 19, allied commanders led by Lt.-Gen.
John Shalikashvili (USA) had met Iraqi army officers on the Turko-Iraqi border to discuss allied plans for the establishment of "safe havens" for an estimated 300,000 Kurdish refugees.
The allied forces first moved into northern Iraq on April 17, following an announcement by Bush on April 16 reversing his administration's policy of non-intervention and committing US troops to set up encampments in northern Iraq to ensure the safety of Kurdish refugees and co-ordinate relief supplies.
More than 17,000 troops from France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, the UK and the USA were expected to take part in the operation.
In his statement, Bush stressed that "we intend to turn over the administration of, and security for these sites as soon as possible to the UN" and warned the Iraqi government not to respond militarily.
His statement was denounced on April 17 by the Iraqi Foreign Minister, Ahmad Husayn Khudayyir as "a continuation of a policy of intervention in Iraq's internal affairs" .
The US change of policy followed international pressure for the creation of "safe havens" to protect the Kurds from further attacks by the Iraqi government.
On April 6 Austria had called for the creation of a UN buffer zone to protect Kurds in northern Iraq.
On April 7 President Turgut Özal of Turkey suggested the creation of a UN safe zone for Kurdish refugees inside Iraq's northern border with Turkey.
On April 8, European leaders attending an EC summit meeting in Luxembourg endorsed a plan put forward by UK Prime Minister John Major for the creation of a UN "enclave" in northern Iraq to protect Kurds from further attacks by the Iraqi government.
A White House spokesman said on April 9 that the US had "no position" on the question of Kurdish "safe havens" , and a State Department spokesman said that he was unable to give the proposal "specific endorsement" .
On April 11, however, Bush denied reports of a rift between the USA and its European allies over the issue of Kurdish "enclaves" .
The USA on April 10 issued an injunction against Iraq to cease all military activity north of the 36th parallel, encompassing an area bordered by a line just south of Mosul (but excluding the oil producing area around Kirkuk), and reaching up to the border with Turkey.
A White House spokesman indicated that the US had also warned Iraq that any military interference in international relief effort for the Kurds would be met with force.
In an interview with the Independent published on April 13, the Iraqi Information Minister, Hamid Yusuf Hammadi, rejected the US's claim to determine Iraq's Kurdish policy.
Meanwhile, al-Anbari, Iraq's permanent representative at the UN, dismissed the "safe haven" plan as "a wild idea" .
On April 9 INA quoted Iraqi Prime Minister Hammadi as saying that the idea of a safe zone was "another circle of plots against Iraq and its sovereignty" .
Barzani, however, welcomed the EC "enclave" proposal, saying that it was "a big humanitarian and political step forward" .
He urged all states "to back it and implement it as soon as possible" .
On April 21 Vellayati said that Iran was unlikely to accept Kurdish "safe havens" near its borders.
Reports on April 30 confirmed that allied forces had expanded their military presence 30 km east of Zakho towards the Turkish border.
UN response to "safe havens" proposal
The UN response to proposals for Kurdish "safe havens" within Iraqi territory backed by military forces, was distinctly cautious.
A UK-sponsored proposal for a UN police force, endorsed by EC Foreign Ministers on April 28, was met with scepticism by UN officials, some of whom feared that UN procedures were being by-passed.
Earlier, on April 17, Pérez de Cuéllar had said in Paris that any plan to deploy foreign troops in northern Iraq required Iraqi permission and that a UN-backed police force would need "the agreement of the Security Council" .
The head of a UN humanitarian mission to northern Iraq, Eric Suy, also expressed doubts about the viability of a UN "enclave" on Iraqi territory.
These reservations gained ground following Iraq's formal endorsement on April 18 of an agreement granting UN officials access to carry out relief work in Kurdish refugee camps.
On April 21 Iran asked the UN to assume responsibility for relief centres in the north, adding that allied camps were no longer necessary or justified.
International relief efforts
There was confusion about the number of Iraqi Kurdish refugees fleeing towards Turkey and Iran.
On April 4 the UN Disaster Relief Organization (UNDRO) said that international help was urgently needed to aid 200,000 Kurdish refugees in Iran and Turkey.
However, the Turkish office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) had estimated two days earlier that 200,000 Kurdish refugees were "approaching or close to" the Turkish border alone.
According to IRNA, another 1,000,000 Iraqi Kurds were making their way to the Iranian border.
The Washington Post of April 13 reported that death rates among refugees were unclear, but that relief officials estimated that up to 1,000 were dying daily in camps along the Turkish and Iranian borders.
UNDRO and the UNHCR appealed in early April for a further US$137,630,000 and $42,456,000 respectively, to aid refugees fleeing Iraq.
On April 4 the UK pledged £21,000,000 (about $37,000,000) towards UN and other international relief efforts to help Kurdish refugees.
This coincided with an EC offer equivalent to $6,191,500 to international aid agencies caring for refugees inside and outside Iraq.
On April 5 US President Bush authorized the release of up to $10,000,000 from the US's emergency fund for refugees.
On April 9 Pérez de Cuéllar, responding to a Security Council resolution authorizing humanitarian assistance for displaced Iraqis [see above], appointed Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan to head the UN Inter-Agency Humanitarian Programme for Iraq, Kuwait and the Turkish and Iranian border areas.
He also appointed Suy to lead a UN mission to estimate the needs of refugees in northern Iraq.
On April 7 allied forces began dropping supplies of food and medicine to Kurdish refugees at camps in Cukurca and Isikveren along the Turkish border.
On April 8 a summit meeting of EC leaders approved £105,000,000 to aid Kurdish refugees.
On April 9 the UN appealed for $400,000,000, of which $238,500,000 was to be allocated to the UNHCR to cover the most urgent needs of an estimated 1,500,000 refugees in Iran and Turkey over three months.
On April 11 Prince Sadruddin appealed for $423,000 to cover new financial requirements for an emergency programme for refugees in Turkey and Iraq.
On April 11 Japan donated $10,000,000 towards the UNDRO appeal for Kurdish refugees.
On April 16, US officials confirmed that a limited number of US troops had helped distribute relief supplies to Kurdish refugees in northern Iraq as part of "Operation Provide Relief" .
On April 17 Germany announced that it was increasing its aid for Kurdish refugees to DM440,000,000 ($262,600,000).
On April 23 the foreign affairs committee of the US House of Representatives authorized $475,000,000 as emergency assistance for Iraqi refugees.
On April 25 the UNHCR said that it had received only $43,000,000 of the $238,500,000 it had requested as aid for Kurdish refugees.
On April 29, the co-ordinator of the UN programme for returning Kurdish refugees said that the $100,000,000 set aside for the operation was totally inadequate.
Offers of assistance came also from Czechoslovakia, Greece, Israel, South Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Romania and the Soviet Union.
Turkish response
On April 4 President Özal announced that Turkey had admitted 100,000 Kurdish refugees, reversing its previous decision to close its borders (which it had taken on the grounds that it had neither the infra-structure nor the resources to cope with the flood of Kurdish refugees).
On April 2 Özal had issued an urgent appeal to the UN Security Council to discuss an emergency aid package for an estimated 250,000 Kurdish refugees along the Iraqi-Turkish border; 10,000 refugees were reported already to have crossed into Turkey.
On April 8 the governor of the south-eastern region, Hayri Kozacioglu, estimated that the total number of refugees had risen to 400,000.
On April 9, relief agencies undertook the first stage of an operation to assist Kurdish refugees inside Turkey, amidst allegations by Turkish officials that the Turkish Red Crescent had borne the brunt of the relief effort.
The Finance Minister, Adnan Kahveci said on April 12 that Turkey had spent $45,000,000 so far on relief and expected to spend another $50,000,000 to provide food for refugees.
$120,000,000 had been paid to draft officials to help with the relief operation.
International outrage at deteriorating conditions in Turkish refugee camps in the mountainous border region around Isikveren led the government to announce on April 14 that it was moving 200,000 refugees to prepared sites near Silopi, about 50 km inside Turkey.
Iranian response
The Middle East Economic Digest of April 26 reported that there were more than 1,000,000 Iraqi refugees in Iran, of whom 50,000 were Shias from southern Iraq, and the remainder Kurds.
The report added that President Rafsanjani had estimated that it would cost Iran at least $500,000,000 a month to care for the refugees.
In early April, thousands of Kurdish refugees, many dying from starvation, were reported to have massed along the Iraq-Iran border near Nowsud.
On April 3 Vellayati said that Iran would keep its borders open.
Rafsanjani issued an urgent appeal for international assistance, and accused the USA and its allies of "indifference" towards Kurdish and Shia refugees.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman was quoted on April 5 as having criticized the USA for having "suddenly adopted a different attitude" after initially encouraging rebel factions to overthrow the Saddam Hussein government.
On April 7 Iran temporarily closed its borders with Iraq, claiming that all resources for refugees had been exhausted.
Government ministers accused international aid agencies, particularly the UN, of channelling aid through Turkey while remaining indifferent to Iran's needs.
On April 11 and again on April 14 Iran appealed for UN assistance for 900,000 Iraqi refugees.
Meanwhile, Health Ministry officials said on April 13 that foreign aid had "been very insignificant so far" .
There were reports that 1,000 people a day were dying on the Iranian border alone.
On April 27 a US C141 transport plane carrying relief supplies for Kurdish refugees arrived on the Iran-Iraq border.
The Iranian government had given permission for it to land, the first time that landing rights had been given to US government aircraft in Iran since the revolution of 1979.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Pact between Gorbachev and nine republics
President Mikhail Gorbachev signed on April 23 with the Presidents of nine of the 15 union republics, including Boris Yeltsin of the Russian Federation, a pact aimed at achieving stable relations between the central and republican governments.
This unexpected development was greeted by observers as Gorbachev's biggest tactical success for many months, and they noted Yeltsin's new willingness to co-operate with Gorbachev and the concessions made by both men.
The pact gave broad support to central government proposals to rescue the economy, including a clampdown on political strikes, albeit stipulating that their implementation should be left largely to the republics.
As announced in Pravda, the newspaper of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), on April 24, it insisted that stabilizing the country and extricating it from its present crisis was inconceivable without a "cardinal increase in the role of the republics" .
The pact also involved ordering modifications in policy notably in the matter of price rises.
The joint declaration by Gorbachev, Yeltsin, and the Presidents of Azerbaijan, Byelorussia, Kazakhstan, Kirghizia, Tadjikistan, Turkmenia, the Ukraine and Uzbekistan, was the product of a day of talks at Novoye Ogarevo, a government dacha on the outskirts of Moscow.
It set out a timetable for major political changes, starting with the signing of the new Union Treaty, which was expected to be ready within three months.
No later than six months after signature of the Treaty a new Union constitution would be promulgated, followed by fresh elections to the Congress of People's Deputies.
The declaration made clear that the Union Treaty need only be signed by the nine republics which were party to the Novoye Ogarevo meeting.
The only specified penalty for the six republics which had not participated and were not expected to sign the Treaty (Armenia, Estonia, Georgia, Latvia, Lithuania and Moldavia), was that they would thereby be excluded from a new "common economic space" .
Government anti-crisis programme
The nine republics gave qualified support in their pact for the anti-crisis programme which Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov had presented to the USSR Supreme Soviet on April 22.
The programme, intended to stabilize the economy by the end of the year, was described by The Times of April 23 as "a mixture of deregulation and authoritarian measures" .
Its most controversial element was a proposed ban on political strikes and on political rallies in working hours, with Pavlov suggesting that the introduction of a "special regime" in key industries might entail using force to break strikes.
Other notable elements of the programme were the planned privatization of one-third of small businesses in the trade and consumer services sector by the end of 1991, and complete price liberalization by October.
The programme was approved by the USSR Supreme Soviet on April 23 by 323 votes to 13.
Implementation through specific legislation and presidential and Cabinet decrees was expected to begin in May.
Price rises
In supporting the anti-crisis programme, the pact between the 10 Presidents nevertheless instructed the government to revise downwards some of the drastic retail price rises which it had introduced on April 2.
The pact also ordered the abolition of the unpopular 5 per cent sales tax, introduced in January [see p. 37970].
A cornerstone of market economic reform, the long-awaited price rises had been unveiled by Pavlov in the USSR Supreme Soviet on Feb. 18, and enacted formally by a presidential decree of March 19 following endorsement by the Federation Council.
They resulted from the introduction of a new pricing system which was designed to allow cuts in price subsidies of around 60 per cent in 1991.
Around 35 per cent of goods were to be sold at unregulated prices, or at prices agreed between supplier and retailer, while prices for a range of other goods (including food staples such as milk, eggs and sugar), and public transport fares, were to rise to a new fixed level.
The price rises were also needed urgently to close the gap with wholesale prices for raw materials, which had been increased on Jan. 1, and with the state purchase prices for agricultural produce, which had gone up in 1990.
State enterprises had been hoarding goods rather than sell them at unprofitable retail prices, thereby exacerbating shortages in the shops [see p. 37902].
Prices went up on April 2 by an average 60 per cent.
The cost of bread, rice, flour and meat went up by 300 per cent, as did the prices of children's clothing; the cost of milk, eggs, cheese, sugar and tea, and adult clothing, went up by 200 per cent ; fares on public transport went up by between 70 and 140 per cent .
The cost of a range of goods and services remained unchanged, however, this list including medical supplies, petrol and electricity, and also coffee and vodka (the controversial decision not to raise the vodka price was justified in terms of preventing an upsurge in illegal distillation, as had happened when the price had been raised during the anti-alcohol campaign started in 1985 — see p. 35844).
The Presidents' pact also ordered the introduction of full wage indexation to offset the effect of the price rises, rather than the existing system of compensation payments.
The government had begun to introduce from March 20 monthly compensation payments on top of wages, pensions, student grants and child benefit, albeit conceding that these would cover only around 85 per cent of the cost of the price rises.
Wage-earners received a minimum Rbs60 per month, pensioners Rbs65 per month, and children Rbs40, Rbs80 or Rbs110 per month, depending on age bracket.
The cost of the compensation was being met out of the money saved by cutting price subsidies.
Additionally, two presidential decrees on March 23 had been designed to cushion the blow of the price rises.
The first had cut the profit tax for Soviet enterprises from 45 per cent to 35 per cent, stipulating that enterprises should seek to raise wages to an average Rbs480 a month for production workers (the average wage was currently Rbs270 a month).
The second decree had ordered payment to each person with a savings account or state savings bonds of a one-off bonus calculated at 40 per cent of the value of the account or bond holdings.
Miners' strike — Strikes and political protests in Byelorussia
As part of the joint declaration Gorbachev and the nine republican Presidents issued a joint appeal on April 24 for miners to end their eight-week-old strike.
The appeal called for restoration of order and discipline throughout the country, and condemned all calls for political strikes and civil disobedience.
Nevertheless, commentators assessed that the decision to revise the price rises had been taken in response to the strikes and street protests which they had provoked, notably in the normally conservative and politically tranquil Byelorussia.
The miners' strike action had begun with patchily supported one-day strikes in the Donbass, Vorkuta and Karaganda coalfields on March 1, and in the Kuzbass coalfield on March 4.
The Donbass miners were demanding a 100-150 per cent pay rise, but the Kuzbass strike was exclusively political, the miners demanding Gorbachev's resignation, dissolution of the USSR Congress of People's Deputies, and the transfer of power to the Federation Council.
After the one-day strikes a small number of pits in the Donbass and Kuzbass had remained on indefinite strike, but in the course of March the action had snowballed, especially after the breakdown on March 9 of talks between strike committee leaders and government representatives in Moscow and Kiev.
On March 18 the strikers in the Donbass had adopted the political demands of their Kuzbass counterparts.
On April 2 Pavlov and Coal Industry Minister Mikhail Shchadov met coal industry representatives, including leaders of the Independent Union of Miners (IUM), in an effort to negotiate an end to the strike which by then involved some 200,000 miners and had stopped production at some 150 mines, almost one-third of the total.
Agreement was reached on April 3 to increase wages by 25 per cent in each of the next four quarters, in exchange for productivity increases, but on the following day IUM representatives announced that since the strikers' political demands were not being met the strike would not be suspended.
The wage agreement produced some drift back to work in the following days, but the strike held steady in the Kuzbass, Donbass and Vorkuta.
Indeed, by April 15 the number of mines affected by the strike nationwide had actually risen to 163, and at the end of April the strike was still holding in most of those mines.
[A mission to the Kuzbass by Yeltsin, beginning at the end of April, to persuade miners to return to work will be covered in the May News Digest.]
In Byelorussia on April 3 strikes broke out spontaneously in a number of factories in the capital, Minsk, in support of higher wages to offset the price rises.
On the following day at least 10,000 people, including striking workers, rallied in front of the Byelorussian government building, and speakers announced not only the wage demands but demands for the resignation of Gorbachev, of Byelorussian President Nikolai Dementei, and of the central and republican governments, as well as for an emergency session of the Byelorussian Supreme Soviet to disband Communist Party cells in factories.
Byelorussian Premier Vyacheslav Kebich addressed the crowd and declared his government's willingness to negotiate, but his words were drowned out by jeers and whistling.
The rally dispersed peacefully after around six hours having elected a strike committee, which threatened to call a general strike if their demands were not met.
On April 10 the strike committee brought up to 100,000 people on to the streets of Minsk.
Workers walked off the morning shift in 66 enterprises, including the giant Minsk tractor works, which Gorbachev had visited barely six weeks before [see p. 38079].
The protest continued on the following day, but on April 12 the strike committee agreed to suspend strikes for 10 days pending negotiations with the republican leadership.
During these discussions the strikers focused their political demands on the issue of party cells, but the authorities refused to convene an emergency Supreme Soviet session.
Consequently strike action was resumed on April 23, and up to 50,000 people again rallied in Minsk city centre.
On April 24 it was reported that the strike was spreading to other parts of Byelorussia.
However, late on April 25 the Minsk strike committee voted to suspend strike action until May 21, the date when a regular Byelorussian Supreme Soviet session was due to open.
On April 26 an estimated 50,000,000 workers in the Russian Federation responded to a call by the Federation of Independent Russian Trade Unions by joining a one-hour warning strike or holding meetings at their workplaces in protest against falling living standards.
Recent developments in "war of laws" 
Before the signing of the Presidents' joint declaration, there had been fresh demonstrations during April of the effects of the so-called "war of laws" between the centre and republics.
On April 6 USSR Internal Affairs Minister Boris Pugo overruled the appointment, confirmed only hours earlier by Russian Federation Internal Affairs Minister Viktor Barannikov, of Lt.-Gen.
Vyacheslav Komissarov as Moscow's police chief, responsible to Moscow city soviet.
This was the second attempt to install the liberal Komissarov in the post: in January Moscow city soviet had nominated him to replace the hardliner Pyotr Bogdanov, but the USSR Interior Ministry had rejected the nomination on the grounds that it had not been consulted, and had ordered Bogdanov to remain in the post.
Since the end of March control of Moscow's police had been with a new directorate headed by USSR First Deputy Interior Minster Ivan Shilov and responsible directly to the USSR Interior Ministry [see p. 38080].
The Ministry reaffirmed Shilov's authority in a statement on April 6.
The response of the Moscow city soviet presidium to Pugo's decree raised the prospect of rival police forces in the capital.
It adopted on April 8 a resolution on establishing a Moscow municipal militia.
This decision brought to an end a hunger strike which several city councillors had been observing since the police force had been taken out of the city's control.
The USSR Supreme Soviet on April 4 issued an urgent appeal to the parliaments of the republics to stop withholding contributions to the union budget.
Only around Rbs18,500 million out of a required Rbs54,000 million had been contributed by the republics in the first quarter of the year [for passage in January of 1991 union budget see p. 37970].
Viktor Kirichenko, the chair of the Supreme Soviet's budget commission, announced that virtually every republic was withholding some or all of its contributions, and that the government had resorted to raising credit and running up a Rbs35,000 million deficit to cover expenditure.
Kirichenko warned that continued default by the republics would result in salaries to state employees and social security being curtailed.
He also warned of dire consequences such as hyper-inflation if the country failed to maintain a unified budget and a co-ordinated fiscal policy.
Gorbachev on April 12 issued a decree giving republican and regional authorities one week to annul all bans on the export outside their areas of raw materials and manufactures.
He also ordered a stop to the unauthorized utilization by those authorities of produce already allocated for fulfilment of state orders.
He warned that material shortages resulting from such export bans were bringing many enterprises to a standstill.
Yeltsin victory at Russian Congress
An extraordinary session of the Russian Federation Congress of People's Deputies, called in February on the initiative of Yeltsin's conservative opponents with the intention of holding a vote of no confidence in him, ended on April 5 as a triumph for Yeltsin.
He not only saw off no-confidence motions, but won the Congress round to supporting direct elections for an executive presidency.
The Congress opened on March 28, but adjourned after emergency votes concerning the confrontation currently taking place close to the Kremlin between security forces and pro-Yeltsin demonstrators [see p. 38080].
When the main Congress business began on March 29 Yeltsin's hardline communist opponents twice defeated motions to place on the agenda the creation of an executive presidency for the Russian Federation.
It was agreed, however, to "discuss" the results of the March 17 Russian Federation referendum, in which 70 per cent of all voters had supported the idea of a direct election for Russian President, a post which Yeltsin would be clear favourite to win.
Further attempts to put on the agenda votes on creating a directly elected presidency and scheduling elections were defeated on April 1 and 2, the Congress voting to delay discussion of the issues until its next regular session.
An agenda proposal by Yeltsin's opponents that he should give a "report back" explaining his conduct was defeated in favour of Yeltsin's giving the customary keynote report in his capacity as Chair of the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet.
Yeltsin gave his report on March 29.
In a wide ranging and at times overtly anti-communist speech, described by the Guardian of March 30 as "more measured and specific than any he has given for a long time" , Yeltsin pilloried central government policy, labelling perestroika the "last phase of the stagnation period" .
He declared that the economic and political crisis had nothing to do with the "war of laws" with the republics [see above; pp. 37862-63], commenting: "Republican governments refuse to work in blind obedience, but the central government has failed to see this, and by inertia it has pursued its policy of diktat." 
Presenting a detailed manifesto for the country's economic and political survival, he appealed for the creation of a "coalition government of popular trust and national concord" to run the Soviet Union, and for removal of communist influence over the judiciary, the security services, the civil service and state bodies.
An attempt to move a vote of no confidence in Yeltsin was made by Boris Isayev, one of the Deputy Chairs of the Supreme Soviet, in the closing speech of the debate on Yeltsin's report on April 1.
The proposal was defeated on April 2 by 767 votes to 121.
A second attempt on April 3, in the guise of a proposal for a vote of censure for Yeltsin's "unconstitutional" call in March for a declaration of war on the Soviet leadership [see p. 38079], was defeated by 485 votes to 121.
The Congress approved on the morning of April 4 an amended version of Yeltsin's March 29 report.
Yeltsin immediately turned this to his advantage.
He effectively won the argument for the creation of an elective presidency, by arguing that the republic's leadership needed new powers to implement his report's proposals for overcoming the socio-economic crisis.
Yeltsin's proposals specifically envisaged that he, as Chair of the Supreme Soviet, should be given powers to issue "binding orders" , as should the Prime Minister.
His own new powers, however, should last only until direct elections for a President were held.
He proposed June 12 as the polling date, with a regular Congress session convened on May 21 to make the necessary constitutional change to create an executive presidency.
Although his critics rounded on him furiously with accusations that he had unmasked his political ambition, a vote on April 4 gave preliminary approval to Yeltsin's proposals by 588 votes to 292.
Having been formalized by a drafting commission, the proposals were resubmitted to the Congress for final approval on April 5, when 608 votes were cast in favour and 228 against, with 100 abstentions.
CPSU plenum: Gorbachev's defeat of critics
At a plenum of the CPSU central committee, held in closed session on April 24-25, Gorbachev defeated an attempt to force his removal from the post of party general secretary, and then called the bluff of his critics inside the party by offering his resignation, only to have it refused.
Participants in the plenum described it as the stormiest in Gorbachev's six years as party leader.
Ahead of the plenum there had been unprecedented calls from party branches for Gorbachev to step down.
At the start of the plenum hardline critics proposed putting on the agenda discussion of separating the post of general secretary from that of state President.
However, Gorbachev arrived at the plenum with his political standing newly boosted by the surprise announcement of the pact with Yeltsin and the other republican leaders [see above], and this appeared to play a decisive role in the motion's defeat.
Gorbachev went on to give an emphatic answer in his keynote address to calls heard from both ends of the political spectrum for his resignation not just from the party leadership, but also from the presidency.
He warned that to destroy the "legitimate state structures" would inevitably create "an explosive power vacuum" .
He predicted civil war between parties currently gathered in an "illusory coalition" against his administration, which would lead to "genuine dictatorship, and not the imaginary one which certain people perceive in the current constitutional regime" .
Gorbachev's resignation offer came in the middle of the second day's debate.
He went to the podium, reportedly pushing aside deputy general secretary Volodymyr Ivashko who tried to restrain him, after hearing fierce criticism, including a speech by Russian Federation Communist Party (CP) leader Ivan Polozkov accusing him of "abandoning the party" and criticizing the lack of harsh measures to restore order.
Gorbachev then announced his resignation offer because "70 per cent of the speakers are criticizing me, not from a personal point of view but on behalf of the people" .
Ivashko adjourned the meeting, and the politburo went into emergency session, emerging to announce its unanimous backing for Gorbachev.
When the plenum resumed, the central committee took a vote on whether to discuss Gorbachev's resignation offer, the results being 13 in favour, 382 against, and 14 abstentions.
CPSU appointments
The plenum on April 25 formally elected to the politburo Grigory Yeremey and Dzhumgalbek Amanbayev, respectively the new Moldavian and Kirghiz CP first secretaries [see p. 38014; p. 38159].
It also elected to the politburo Mikhail Surkov, who was currently secretary of the CPSU committee in the Red Army.
Oleg Baklanov left the secretariat.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Deterioration in government-ANC relations
As factional killings and a general atmosphere of increasing violence spread through the black townships [see below], the African National Congress (ANC) issued an ultimatum on April 5 demanding specified government actions by May 9 to restore peace.
The ultimatum was immediately rejected by President F. W. de Klerk.
In a open letter to de Klerk and his Cabinet, the ANC deputy president Nelson Mandela threatened to break off talks on a post-apartheid constitution unless the government agreed to (i) legislation during the current parliamentary session to ban the carrying of weapons in public;(ii) the dismissal of Adriaan Vlok, the Law and Order Minister, and of Gen. Magnus Malan, the Defence Minister;(iii) the removal of military and police officers responsible for covert operations;(iv) the public dismantling of all special counterinsurgency units;(v) the suspension of police officers implicated in the killing of black demonstrators;(vi) the closure of single-sex migrant workers' hostels; and (vii) an independent commission of inquiry to examine all allegations of misconduct by the security forces.
The ANC's letter described it as inconceivable that the authorities lacked the capacity to stop the factional fighting, in which 1,200 people had died in the past seven months.
The letter implied that the government connived at "acts of organized terror in the hope that they will succeed in destroying or seriously crippling the ANC" .
There was public and media speculation that the real purpose of the ANC's letter was to rally its supporters in the townships, and to fend off criticism that it attached more importance to pressing on with constitutional negotiations with the government than to defending its own people.
Both Vlok and Malan stated in the ensuing five days that they were prepared to resign if requested to do so by de Klerk.
On April 8 the South African Communist Party (SACP) announced its support for the ultimatum.
The following day Mandela was reported as having softened the ANC's line, telling diplomats at a meeting in Cape Town that the deadline might be shifted if the government showed a commitment to addressing the issue of township killings.
On April 18, before leaving on official visits to European capitals, de Klerk announced that he was calling an all-party "peace summit" of political, community, church and business leaders on May 24 and 25 to seek an end to township violence.
The ANC leadership rejected this as a "propaganda ploy" , although by the end of the month the ANC was reported to be under intense diplomatic pressure to attend the "peace summit" .
In an earlier ultimatum, issued on Aug. 6, 1990, the ANC had threatened to halt the constitutional talks unless the government had freed all political prisoners by April 30, as provided for in the "Pretoria Minute" accord by which the ANC had agreed to suspend armed action [see p. 37642].
As this deadline expired, Mandela told a mass rally in Johannesburg city hall that the government had failed to meet its obligations, and promised "mass action" to secure the release of remaining political detainees.
Also on April 30, de Klerk told Parliament that he had ordered the release of 933 political prisoners since 1990, and that those still in prison would be freed within days.
He blamed the ANC for failing to provide until April 25 a list of names of other political prisoners.
ANC's new constitutional proposals
On April 12 the ANC published a 32-page document laying down its principles for a post-apartheid constitution.
The proposals envisaged that an independent judiciary and a bill of rights would provide guarantees of equality for all South Africans.
Apparently ruling out any form of legislative veto for minority groups (a point on which the government side had long insisted), the document was nevertheless seen as containing a notable concession in its acceptance of a bicameral parliamentary system.
A lower house would be elected according to a system of proportional representation combining regional and national lists.
An upper house provided for representation on a regional basis, which ANC officials were quoted as saying could be combined with a system of representation according to political party.
A government draft constitution was expected to be published "within weeks" .
Sanctions decisions — De Klerk's international diplomacy
The Commonwealth Secretary-General, Chief Emeka Anyaoku, was quoted on April 6 as saying that the South African government's promises would have to be turned into concrete action before economic sanctions against South Africa could be lifted.
A summit meeting of leaders of the "frontline" states (Angola, Botswana, Mozambique, Namibia, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe) scheduled for April 13-14 in Gaborone, Botswana, which was to have discussed the issues of sanctions, was postponed indefinitely on April 11.
No reason was given.
A meeting of Foreign Ministers of the European Communities (EC) on April 15 agreed (despite the threat of blocking action in the Danish parliament) to lift most of the remaining EC sanctions [see also p. 37910 for December 1990 lifting of ban on new investment].
The EC measures, which were criticized by the ANC, appeared to clear the way for a resumption of exports of iron, steel and krugerrands.
EC bans on the export and import of arms, on military co-operation, and on sporting activities, remained in force.
A United States State Department official was quoted as saying on April 16 that US sanctions would remain in force pending South Africa's compliance with the remaining two of five conditions set by the US Congress.
Three of the conditions — the repeal of the state of emergency regulations, legalization of banned opposition parties, and negotiations with representative political groups — had been met.
There remained the release of all political prisoners and the end of the Group Areas Act and the Population Registration Act, due to be repealed during the current parliamentary session [see pp. 36991; 38086].
De Klerk arrived in Europe the following week on a diplomatic mission to attract overseas foreign investment and political support.
On the first day of a two-day visit to the United Kingdom, de Klerk saw the UK Prime Minster, John Major, on April 22 and appealed for help in winning investment.
Major was reported to have told him that his efforts to end race policies should be rewarded by the scrapping of sanctions.
Throughout his tour, which also took in visits to Denmark and Ireland before returning to London on April 26 for further talks with business leaders en route for Johannesburg, de Klerk stressed that foreign investment was needed to underpin his political reforms.
He emphasized in meetings with British business people and bankers that South Africa needed a steady growth rate of 6 per cent to keep pace with population growth.
He confirmed that Major had been invited to South Africa and that the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd would be visiting shortly.
On April 24, as de Klerk left for Denmark, Mandela arrived in London.
In his first meeting with Major, Mandela unsuccessfully urged the retention of sanctions, and expressed opposition to the planned visit by Hurd.
Major appealed to him to withdraw the threat to break off talks with the South African government [see above], but at a press conference Mandela reiterated that such negotiations would cease on May 9 unless de Klerk acted to halt township violence.
Mandela had on April 22 urged editors and publishers at the annual assembly of the International Press Institute in Tokyo to back the retention of sanctions; he also blamed "factions of the government security apparatus" for township violence.
Deteriorating relations between ANC and Inkatha
Throughout April, violence and killings erupted repeatedly in several of the townships.
Up to 60 people were reported killed on the weekend of April 27-28 when ANC supporters clashed with supporters of Chief Gatsha Buthelezi's predominantly Zulu Inkatha Freedom Party in Soweto and Alexandra, on the outskirts of Johannesburg.
The continuing fighting between the two groups was seen as having wrecked a five-point plan to end the violence, agreed at a meeting between Buthelezi and Mandela on March 30 [see p. 38087].
On April 8 it was reported that ANC peace talks with Inkatha, scheduled for the previous weekend, had been called off as a result of the ANC's May 9 ultimatum to de Klerk.
Buthelezi was said to be angry that the ANC had alleged connivance between the security forces and Inkatha in killing ANC supporters.
Buthelezi accused the ANC of bringing the country to the brink of civil war and of aiming to wreck the negotiation process, setting the stage for an attempt to seize power.
The ANC was reported on April 13 to be forming self-defence units in the townships.
A spokesman for the South African police was quoted the same day as saying that the establishment of "private armies" was "a recipe for civil war" .
On April 17 it was reported that the ANC's armed wing Umkhonto we Sizwe was advising on community defence tactics.
ANC officials called for police help during the weekend of April 13-14 when some 500 armed Inkatha supporters attacked a workers' hostel near the Mandelas' home in Soweto.
Four men were killed and some 40 wounded in clashes there on April 14.
De Klerk warned Parliament on April 29 that the continuing slaughter could lead to civil war.
The same day he called on Mandela and Buthelezi to hold new talks with him on ways of restoring peace.
There was no immediate reaction from either leader to de Klerk's appeal.
Relations between them had deteriorated sharply in previous days, with the ANC alleging a plot to wipe out its leadership, and Buthelezi stating that he had been warned of an ANC plot to kidnap and kill his two children.
ANC reconciliation with PAC
By contrast to its growing enmity with Inkatha, the ANC appeared to be moving towards a new accommodation with the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), originally formed in 1958 as a breakaway from the ANC.
Mandela led an ANC delegation to talks with the PAC leadership, in Harare, the Zimbabwean capital, on April 15-16, with the aim of forming an anti-apartheid "patriotic front" .
Later, Mandela and the PAC's president, Clarence Makwetu, hailed the meeting as an "outstanding success" .
They called on other organizations to join their "patriotic front" , whose formation would be announced at a conference in Cape Town in August.
The ANC also received encouragement from the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) which announced on April 29 that it would consider staging a general strike if the government failed to take effective steps to halt the violence.
A COSATU statement also gave full support to the ANC's May 9 ultimatum, and called on its members to arm themselves and to form self-defence units "in a disciplined and organized way" .
AFRICA
LESOTHO
Military coup
Maj.-Gen.
Justin Lekhanya, who seized power in 1986 from the then Prime Minister Chief Leabua Jonathan, was himself led into the studio of Radio Lesotho by troops on April 30 and made to broadcast his own resignation as Chairman of the six-member ruling Military Council.
About 15 minutes earlier, the radio had announced that Lekhanya and another member of the Military Council, Col. Michael Mkhahle Tsotetsi, were under arrest.
Diplomats reported seeing troops surrounding Lekhanya's home and armoured vehicles in the streets of Maseru, the capital.
Early reports said that he had been replaced by Col. Elias Tutsoane Ramaema, another Military Council member.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
Further delays in peace process
A sixth round of peace talks in Rome between the government and the South African-backed rebel Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo), previously set for April 8, was postponed until April 15, then until April 26, and finally until May 2, each time at the rebel group's request.
Announcing the further deferment in a speech on April 24, President Joaquim Chissano expressed scepticism about the seriousness of the MNR's intentions.
The Rome talks had produced a ceasefire agreement on Dec. 1, which broke down in mid-January [see pp. 37909; 37951; 37993].
The latest delays added to continuing speculation that the MNR was intent on strengthening its own power base before coming to the negotiating table.
Constitutional changes to allow for a multiparty system, one of the MNR's main demands, had been introduced in 1990 but were apparently disregarded by the rebel movement.
Outstanding agenda items at the reconvened Rome talks were to be the integration of the two forces, a date for general elections, and the withdrawal of the estimated 7,000 Zimbabwean troops guarding the Beira and Limpopo transport corridors to landlocked central Africa.
In March the MNR had threatened to intensify its attacks on these corridors, repeating its allegations that Zimbabwean troops were still stationed in other areas, while the international Joint Verification Commission (JVC) continued to assert that there was no evidence to support the allegation [see p. 37993 for February allegation and JVC response].
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
Preparations for October election campaign
The main opposition party, the Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD), launched its campaign for the October 1991 presidential and legislative elections at a rally in Lusaka on April 7.
Frederick Chiluba, who addressed several thousand MMD supporters in pouring rain, was chairman-general of the Zambia Congress of Trade Unions and had been elected as MMD president at its first national convention on Feb. 27-March 2, nearly three months after the enactment of multiparty legislation [see p. 37909].
Radio Zambia reported on March 20 that defectors from the MMD had formed a new party, the National Party for Democracy (NPD).
Closure of university
Paramilitary police ejected the 3,500 students from Lusaka University on April 18 after the government ordered them to be sent home and the university closed, for "political reasons" .
Ministerial changes
Finance Minister Gibson Chigaga died of a suspected heart attack after collapsing as he prepared to address a press conference at Lusaka airport on his return from Paris and London on March 25.
Chigaga had just successfully negotiated a US$650 million economic restructuring package.
On April 19, it was reported that President Kenneth Kaunda had dismissed Dodson Siatalimi, the third Defence Minister to be dropped since the failed coup of July 1990 [see also pp. 37523; 37909].
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Expectations of peace
Hopes grew throughout April that a workable peace settlement might emerge from the continuing talks in Portugal between the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-Workers' Party (MPLA-PT) government and the US-backed rebel National Union for Total Independence of Angola (UNITA).
The optimism of some reports was tempered by accounts of continued heavy fighting in Angola itself, where the two sides had fought for control since the end of Portuguese rule in 1975.
The MPLA delegation, headed by Territorial Administration Minister Lopo Fortunato Ferreira do Nascimento, had arrived on April 3 for the opening of the sixth round of the talks (brokered by Portugal, the USA and the Soviet Union, and held at Bicesse, near Estoril) stating that they were ready to stay as long as was necessary.
Angolan President José Eduardo dos Santos said in Spain on April 5 at the start of a European tour that a peace agreement might be signed on April 30.
The key outstanding issues were said to be the establishment of a single army, modalities of a ceasefire, and elections.
Angolan radio announced on April 18 that agreement had been reached on unification of the two military forces, and Portuguese media reported on April 19 that it had been agreed to hold free elections 18 months after a ceasefire was signed.
On April 20, however, Angolan radio warned that the government delegation might be withdrawn if UNITA continued "to intensify its military actions" .
The arrival of US Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman J. Cohen and a Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Vladimir Kasimirov, on April 23 was taken as a sign that an overall agreement was close.
Opening an extraordinary MPLA-PT congress in Luanda on April 24, dos Santos said that agreement had been reached on a ceasefire to begin the following month and that elections would take place in September 1992.
The National People's Assembly had legalized political parties on March 26.
The UNITA leader, Jonas Savimbi, announced in London on April 29 that the two sides would initial the peace agreement the following day, and that it would be signed formally on May 30.
It was expected that Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, the UN Secretary-General, US Secretary of State James Baker, and Soviet Foreign Minister Aleksandr Bessmertnykh, would all attend the formal signing.
Throughout the talks, fighting had continued, centred on the town of Luena in the eastern province of Moxico, with both sides making claims and counter-claims.
The government said that large numbers of civilians had been killed in UNITA assaults on the town.
On April 29, Reuter reported that UNITA had ordered its forces to drive government troops out of the area, while denying that it was launching a general offensive.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
President's agreement to national conference — Party and government changes
In the face of mounting political tensions, it was reported on April 9 that President Mobutu Sese Seko had withdrawn his objections to the holding of a national conference.
Two days later, Mobutu was quoted as saying that the conference would convene on April 29 to draw up a new constitution which, if approved by a referendum, would lead to multiparty politics.
It was understood that the conference would also draw up a timetable for elections.
However, on April 27, it was announced that the government had postponed the conference for organizational reasons, and that a new date would be set.
Throughout April there were reports of confrontations between demonstrators and security forces.
At Mbuji-Mayi, in Kasai Oriental region, it was reported on April 23 that nine people had been killed during violent demonstrations.
One person died and several were wounded in fighting at an opposition party's rally in Lubumbashi, Shaba region, on April 14.
The national radio, Voix du Zaïre, reported that in Kinshasa on April 10 a peaceful student demonstration calling for a national conference had been dispersed by troops using tear gas.
On April 21 Mobutu accepted the leadership of the ruling Popular Movement of the Revolution (MPR) from which he had resigned a year before [see p. 37336].
The party's chairman, N'singa Udjuu Ongwakebi Untube, had resigned on April 5, while Voix du Zaïre radio had announced on April 16 the resignation of Nenda Kabita, "one of the most influential members" of the MPR.
Three Cabinet appointees were reported on April 1 to have rejected posts which they had been given in a transitional government appointed on March 30.
They were Placide Lengelo Muangundu (Social Affairs), Gustave Malumba Mbangula (Deputy Prime Minister in charge of Economy and Industry), and Weregemere Na Manta (Secretary of State for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises).
AFRICA
RWANDA
Ceasefire violations
Observer teams met on April 2 in Goma, Zaïre, under the aegis of the Organization of African Unity, as laid down in the ceasefire agreement signed between the government and rebels of the Rwanda Patriotic Front (FPR) in N'Sele, Zaïre, in mid-March [see p. 38088]and formalised on March 29.
A report in Le Monde of March 31-April 1 said that French Foreign Legion troops, flown in to assist the Rwandan forces when the rebel invasion began the previous October [see pp. 37765-66], were being withdrawn following the ceasefire.
By April 9, however, Radio Rwanda was reporting that the FPR had "once again violated the ceasefire" .
In the ensuing days there were repeated government claims of successes against rebel forces along the Uganda border.
On April 15 the government called on the Ugandan authorities to "shoulder their responsibilities" in helping restore peace.
On April 21 President Juvénal Habyarimana, addressing the National Development Council, said that a multiparty system would be introduced on June 2.
The following day he flew to Paris to begin an official visit to France, seeing President Mitterrand on April 23.
AFRICA
MALI
Formation of new government
Following the overthrow of President Moussa Traoré on March 26, military officers gave priority to the restoration of order in Bamako, the capital, and to consultation with an umbrella organization of civilian pro-democracy groups, the Co-ordinating Committee of Democratic Associations and Organizations (CCAOD).
By the end of March it had been announced that the coup organizers had disbanded their Council of National Reconciliation (CRN) and that a 25-member Transition Committee for the Salvation of the People (CTSP) had been established, with 10 military and 15 civilian members.
The CTSP would be chaired by Lt.-Col. Amadou Toumani Touré, leader of the March 26 coup.
A joint CRN-CCAOD communiqué broadcast on March 30 said that free elections at municipal, legislative and presidential level would be held before Jan. 1, 1992, and that the army would return to barracks on Jan. 20.
A constitutional conference was to be convened within three months.
In an interview on Radio France Internationale on March 31, Touré affirmed the commitment of the CTSP to democracy and the rule of law.
He said that Traoré and his wife had been arrested "at his palace at Koulouba" , that the former President was "very well" , but that it was too early to speak about a trial.
On April 2 the appointment was announced of a new Prime Minister, Soumana Sacko.
Sacko, a UN Development Programme (UNDP) official serving in the Central African Republic, had been Finance Minister for six months before resigning in August 1987 in protest at the unwillingness of Traoré's government to support him in a drive against corruption [see pp. 36085-86].
Sacko arrived in Bamako on April 4 and announced the composition of his government the following day.
The 22 appointments consisted chiefly of "unknown" technocrats; five military officers and two women were brought into the Cabinet, as were several former political prisoners.
The key Ministries of Foreign Affairs, and of Defence and Internal Security, went to military men, respectively Maj. Soulemane Sidibe and Lt.-Col. Tiecoura Doumbia.
Bassary Touré was appointed Minister of Economy and Finance, and Bakary Mariko Minister of Planning and International Co-operation.
On April 8, a reshuffle of the CTSP was announced.
France and the Netherlands suspended aid pending the arrival in Bamako of a World Bank mission at the end of April.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Installation of interim government
Against a background of cross-border clashes and fears that the civil war might draw neighbouring states into a wider conflict, the Liberian national conference continued to meet in Monrovia, under the aegis of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
On April 19 the remaining conference participants, principally the rebel Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia led by Prince Yormie Johnson, and the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL) led by Gen. Hezekiah Bowen, re-elected Amos Sawyer as interim President.
The predominant rebel group, the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) headed by Charles Taylor, had walked out of the conference on March 27.
The NPFL had earlier agreed that its representative would form part of a triumvirate of vice-presidents under an independent interim president, but this arrangement appeared to be stillborn.
On April 22 Taylor reportedly told visiting US congressmen that the NPFL would not accept any decisions by Sawyer.
The conference nonetheless appeared to have agreed that the interim government would serve until January 1992, and that a general election would be held on Oct. 15, 1991.
After successive allegations by Sierra Leone in late March and early April that Taylor's forces had raided Sierra Leonean villages, killing numbers of civilians, Sierra Leonean forces were reported by mid-April to be operating inside Liberian territory held by the NPFL, while NPFL troops with heavy weapons were said to be advancing into Sierra Leone, both sides claiming successes.
On April 23, a Sierra Leone military spokesman was quoted as saying that the border was now quiet [see also p. 38136].
AFRICA
SENEGAL
New government
President Abdou Diouf announced on April 7 that he was appointing the president (Speaker) of the National Assembly, Habib Thiam, as Prime Minister, a post which had been in abeyance since 1983, shortly after Thiam's removal from it [see p. 32180].
Thiam, 58, a former banker, named a 27-member power-sharing government the following day, bringing in opposition figures including the controversial Abdoulayé Wade, leader of the Democratic Party of Senegal (PDS) who had come second to Diouf in the presidential elections in both 1983 and 1988.
Wade was appointed Minister of State, a post whose responsibilities were not immediately defined.
It was noted, however, that his name was at the head of the official announcement of the Cabinet list, immediately after that of the Prime Minister, as read on Radiodiffusion-Television du Senegal.
Other PDS figures in the new government were Ousmane Ngom, Labour and Professional Training Minister; Jean-Paul Diaz, Minister of African Economic Integration; and Aminatat Tall, Minister-Delegate to the National Education Ministry.
The secretary-general of the Marxist-oriented Independence and Workers' Party, Asmath Dansokho, became Minister of Housing and Town Planning.
Other significant changes included the appointment of the former National Education Minister, Djibo Laity Ka, to the Foreign Affairs portfolio.
The former Interior Minister, Famara Ibrahima Sagna, became Minister of Economy, Finance and Planning.
Deaths of Gulf contingent members
It was reported on March 21 that a transport plane, in which members of Senegal's contingent in the anti-Iraq coalition were returning from a visit to Mecca, crashed in Saudi Arabia killing 92 people.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
Pressure for political change — Amnesty — New Prime Minister
Several months of public disorder incidents, accompanied by calls for political reforms, appeared to be coming to a head during April, with rioting and repression reported in Douala, Yaoundé, Bamenda, Ngaoundéré, Maroua, Bafoussam, Kumba, and other main centres.
Police fought with students at Yaoundé University on April 2, as they demanded the end of President Paul Biya's rule and a national conference to prepare for political reform.
The following day the capital witnessed serious street fighting between police and thousands of youths.
The disturbances spread to other areas of the country in the ensuing days.
Human rights activists in Cameroon were quoted on April 25 as saying that up to 48 people had been killed in demonstrations and that 58 detained students might also have died.
Government sources had said that only two students were in detention.
Large demonstrations in 1990 had forced the government to accept the principle of multiparty democracy, and 11 political parties were subsequently legalized; the government insisted, however, that it would remain in office during elections, promised by the end of 1991.
Opposition parties had threatened to boycott elections unless Biya's ruling Cameroon People's Democratic Movement (RDPC) stood down first.
The National Co-ordination Committee of Opposition Groups called for a day of civil disobedience on April 15 and for a general strike — "Operation dead cities" — on April 18 and 19, which appeared to be widely observed.
On April 22, Radio Cameroon reported that the National Assembly had passed an amnesty bill providing for the return of political exiles and complying with an opposition demand for the freeing of political prisoners, believed to number several hundreds.
The Assembly also reintroduced the post of Prime Minister, abolished in 1984 [see p. 32778], and on April 25 Biya named Sadou Hayatou, hitherto Secretary-General at the Presidency and a former Finance Minister, to the post.
AFRICA
CONGO
Deliberations of national conference
The national conference convened to settle the country's political future [see p. 37908], which was originally to have run from Feb. 25 to March 12, was extended until the end of April.
The 1,100 delegates were drawn from the ruling Congolese Party of Labour (PCT) of President Denis Sassou-Nguesso, and from approximately 100 opposition groups.
The conference had been accepted reluctantly by the government following a succession of crippling strikes in 1990, and its early meetings were marred by disputes over representation.
On March 11 it voted to proclaim itself a sovereign body whose decisions would be binding and not subject to government authority.
This ruling appeared to have been accepted, however reluctantly, by Sassou-Nguesso, and during April the conference began to take on the character of a national assembly.
On April 18, it was reported that the conference had voted to draft a "fundamental law" , suspending the 1979 constitution, and calling for multiparty democracy within 15 months.
AFRICA
MAURITANIA
Announcement of reforms
President Moaouia Ould Sidi Mohamed Taya, in a speech on April 15 marking the end of the Moslem holy month of Ramadan, responded to pressure on his government from a number of sources with an unexpected announcement on future democratization.
A referendum on the constitution, to be held by the end of the year, would be followed by multiparty elections to a reinstated National Assembly and Senate.
Taya also announced an amnesty (further to those of March — see p. 38085-86) to benefit up to 70 political detainees.
On April 4 the Mauritanian Workers' Union (UTM) had demanded the introduction of a multiparty system, citing recent events in Mali [see pp. 38083; 38134].
A report published in London on the same day by the human rights organization Amnesty International claimed that over 200 people arrested in late 1990 had died or been executed in military or police custody.
French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas had discussed the issues of human rights and democratic reforms with Taya during his April 5 visit to Nouakchott, the Mauritanian capital.
The French press noted that the Mauritanian government's pro-Iraqi alignment during the Gulf war had lost it the financial support of certain Gulf states, leaving it more dependent on French aid.
On April 13, in an open letter to the government, 50 Mauritanian intellectuals urged democratic reforms and demanded a commission to investigate the many deaths in custody, which were mainly of black Mauritanians.
On April 20 two leading opposition groups — the African Liberation Forces of Mauritania (FLAM) and the United Front for Armed Resistance (FURAM)— said in a joint statement that without Taya's resignation and a general amnesty there could be no genuine democracy.
AFRICA
TOGO
Government concessions to demonstrators
The rioting which had shaken the capital, Lomé, during March [see p. 38085], continued into April as students and citizens pressed demands for political reform.
Crowds fought with armed troops in successive incidents in Lomé and elsewhere; teargas was used and several demonstrators were shot dead.
Two school pupils were shot dead in Lomé on April 5.
A tribal chief and another civilian were shot dead in demonstrations at Kévé, 50 km north-west of the capital on April 8.
That day, President Gnassingbe Eyadema met representatives of the opposition grouping, the Front of Associations for Renewal (FAR), and deplored the violence.
Petrol price increases were cancelled on April 9, following a strike by taxi drivers, but by this time new outbreaks of rioting, looting and arson had spread throughout Lomé's working class districts.
A dusk-to-dawn curfew was imposed, and the university and all schools throughout the country were closed indefinitely.
On April 10, thousands of students and others fought riot police, and shouted for Eyadema's resignation.
Finally, on April 10 it was given out that the government had agreed to the opposition's main demands for the rapid legalization of political parties and for an amnesty for political activists.
Over the next two days, 27 bodies were fished out of the lagoon, and a further seven were found elsewhere in Lomé.
Human rights activists on April 12 challenged the official assertion that the victims had been killed by "criminals" .
In a radio speech on April 15, Eyadema predicted a new constitution within the year and multiparty elections.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Religious riots
Several weeks of demonstrations in the northern state of Katsina by a group loyal to the local Shi'ite Moslem leader, Mallam Yakubu Yahaya, came to a head in April.
The sect had objected to an article published in a local magazine in December 1990, which they considered blasphemous.
On April 4, the state governor, Lt.-Col. John Madaki, a Christian, was reported to have threatened to execute Mallam Yahaya in public if the demonstrations continued, and on April 17 some 2,000 protesters called for the death of Madaki.
Radio Nigeria reported on April 21 that 124 religious fundamentalists had been arrested in connection with arson attacks.
The following day it further reported that Mallam Yahaya had surrendered to police.
The Katsina police commissioner was later quoted as saying that there had been no deaths, contrary to media reports.
On April 28 a report from Bauchi state, citing authoritative sources, said that the bodies of 246 people killed in violence the previous week had been buried — 184 in Moslem, 62 in Christian cemeteries.
Reports on April 25 had claimed that up to 130 people, mainly Christians, had been killed in riots in Bauchi and other mainly Moslem northern states in places where Shi'ites were demanding the imposition of Moslem law.
The reports further stated that 12 churches had been destroyed.
A curfew was imposed in Bauchi, and President Ibrahim Babangida warned that his military government would deal harshly with those responsible for the violence.
The Nigerian federal authorities were said to be concerned that the rioting could lead to polarization of the country's Christian and Moslem areas, threatening plans to install an elected civilian government in 1992.
AFRICA
SIERRA LEONE
Repercussions of Liberian civil war
Reports persisted from March 23 onwards of incursions from a border area of Liberia held by rebel forces loyal to the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) led by Charles Taylor.
Villagers were said to have been killed.
On March 31, Sierra Leonean commanders were reported as saying that 2,150 men of the 3,000-strong national army had occupied part of Lofa County in Liberia.
President Joseph Momoh was quoted on April 6 as stating that the army had done no more than pursue rebels across the frontier.
Momoh claimed that Burkinabe regular troops had been in action alongside the rebels.
On the same day it was reported that 40 Liberian rebels and one Sierra Leonean soldier had been killed in fighting in southern Sierra Leone.
Taylor's group denied involvement, claiming that the attackers were Sierra Leonean dissidents.
On April 7 it was reported that a helicopter had bombed a village in Sierra Leone.
By April 12, Sierra Leone had asked the United States for military assistance.
Heavy fighting was reported, and 150 people were said to have been killed [see also p. 38134].
Two days later, Momoh announced that allied Nigerian and Guinean troops were also engaged against the invaders.
President's volte-face on democracy
Momoh, who had hitherto firmly rejected the demand that legislative elections in May should be held on a multiparty democratic basis, suddenly announced on March 28 that he welcomed the proposal that Sierra Leone should become a multiparty democracy.
Students at Fourah Bay College and other establishments had demonstrated and gone on strike during March to demand a multiparty system.
Particularly bold demands were said to have come from students close to the Liberian border.
Meeting student leaders as recently as March 22, Momoh had rejected the demands as "absurd" .
AFRICA
KENYA
Government's rebuffs to foreign criticism
In a speech on April 6 President Daniel arap Moi spoke of foreign criticism which amounted to "abuse and insult to the dignity of the nation" .
A United States State Department travel advisory warning to US citizens on April 21, alerting them to alleged security risks in Kenya, drew an angry response from local media and from an official of the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU) the following day.
Shariff Nassir, KANU's Mombasa branch chairman, said that Kenya was a haven on the African continent, and that the USA had "formed the habit of creating trouble around the world" .
In the National Assembly on March 26 the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation, Wilson Ndolo Ayah, had criticized "the sheer bad manners" of some diplomats, and on March 29 KANU secretary-general John Joseph Kamotho had warned Kenyans against "collaborating with foreign embassies" .
MPs had demanded that the job descriptions of the 45 diplomats at the US embassy be produced, and that the movements of the US ambassador be restricted.
Kenyan ministers had recently criticized the British Broadcasting Corporation for allegedly attempting to destabilize Africa, and warned Kenyan journalists to "reduce their obsession with politics" .
AFRICA
SUDAN
Appointments — Reports of coup attempt
Maj.-Gen.
Faisal Ali Abu Salih was replaced as Interior Minister by Deputy Prime Minister Brig. -Gen.
Zubir Mohammed Saleh on April 15.
The head of the political committee of the regime's Revolutionary Command Council (RCC), Brig. -Gen.
Uthman Ahmad Hasan, also lost his post.
The two men dismissed were regarded as being close to Moslem fundamentalist circles.
On April 20 the Egyptian liberal opposition newspaper Al Wafd said that Abu Salih had been placed under house arrest for opposing the execution on April 16 of 20 army officers involved in a coup attempt.
The report was denied by Sudanese government representatives.
Sharia law developments
On April 3 it was announced that a fund would be set up to complement the introduction with effect from March 22 of a new penal code based on sharia (Islamic) law [see p. 37995].
Resources of over US$352,000,000 would be used for purposes including religious schooling and combating corruption.
The Middle East Economic Digest of April 5 noted that the government of head of state and Prime Minister Lt.-Gen.
Omar Hassan al-Bashir was "keen to distance the new version of sharia law from that of Nemery" , who as President had introduced Islamic law to Sudan in 1983.
Although remaining on the statute books, Nemery's version had not been applied since 1985.
Request for aircraft for relief operations
Minister of Finance Abdul Rahman Mahmoud Hamdi, in London on April 18 for talks with United Kingdom Overseas Development Minister Lynda Chalker, appealed for aircraft for use in the Sudanese relief effort; the UK authorities said that they regarded an airlift as unnecessary but that they would release British equipment and spare parts for the repair of the Sudanese railway system.
At an April 18 press conference in London, Hamdi declined to describe the crisis as a "famine" — a point of contention with donor countries — but he did go further than previous official statements in referring to the need for emergency aid and saying that the UN World Food Programme had a free mandate to organize the operation.
A report in the Guardian of April 25 said that no aid sent to the north of Sudan was now reaching the southern provinces, where the only government presence was in garrison towns such as Juba, 125 km north of the border with Uganda.
The rebel Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA) had captured the town of Rokon, 80 km west of Juba, on March 31.
Release of Sadiq al-Mahdi
Former Prime Minister and leader of the Umma party Sadiq al-Mahdi was among the detainees released under an amnesty announced by Bashir as he opened a "National Conference on the Political System" in Khartoum held on April 29-May 2.
Mahdi, 56, had been imprisoned and then under house arrest since his civilian government was overthrown in June 1989.
Sudanese Communist Party secretary-general Mohammed Ibrahim Nugud also benefited from the amnesty, as did all political detainees and exiled politicians — subject to a proviso that those accused of corruption should be tried by the courts.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Temporary ceasefire in south
A temporary ceasefire between the currently ruling United Somali Congress (USC) and groups operating in the south was announced after talks in the southern port of Kismayu on April 2-4.
On April 8 a representative of the Somali Patriotic Movement (SPM) said in Nairobi that ceasefire negotiations were to continue regardless of an incident that day when USC members clashed with forces of the SPM and of the Somali Salvation Democratic Front (SSDF) at Afgoye, 30 km west of Mogadishu, the capital.
On April 25 a USC delegation including Interior Minister Ahmad Shaykh Hasan arrived in Kismayu.
Kenya Television on April 29 quoted aid workers to the effect that forces loyal to the USC were now firmly in control of the town.
Allegations by USC officials on April 2 and 3 that the Kenyan government was supplying arms to supporters of former President Mohammed Siyad Barre in southern Somalia were rejected by Kenyan Foreign Minister Wilson Ndolo Ayah.
In an April 3 statement he said that Kenya had merely allowed relief agencies to organize airlifts from Kenyan territory.
On April 17 the former Italian ambassador to Somalia Mario De Sica denied rumours that Italy was supporting groups loyal to Siyad Barre.
On April 22 De Sica met with interim President Ali Mahdi Mohammed in Mogadishu to discuss ways of ending the armed conflict.
Rival government in north
According to Le Monde of April 4 the Somali National Movement (SNM) had set up an 11-member "government" in the north.
Radio Mogadishu reported that SNM representative Uthman Jama Ali, who arrived in Mogadishu on April 20 bearing a written message for the USC, denied reports that the SNM favoured secession.
Foreign visits by interim Prime Minister
Between March 18 and April 23 the USC regime's interim Prime Minister Umar Arteh Ghalib visited four Gulf states and Egypt, Syria, Tunisia and Libya, seeking aid and support in resolving the armed conflict.
In Oman on April 3 he appealed for intervention by the Arab League and the Organization of African Unity.
Opponents of the USC claimed that he was seeking international recognition for his government.
Emergency aid
The European Communities on March 22 announced an emergency aid grant worth US$12,000,000 to Somalia, and the German government on March 27 said that food aid worth DM2,120,000 (about US$1,270,000) would be shipped to Somalia before the end of April.
On April 24 an Italian ship carrying food supplies was hijacked at Kismayu by about 800 refugees.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Pressures for political solution
President Mengistu Haile Mariam, in the course of a three-hour broadcast speech on April 19, offered to resign "if that will preserve the unity of the country" .
During the same speech, however, he denounced "tribal secessionists,…mercenaries and traitors" , and he also accused Sudan, Libya and Iraq of aiding the rebel forces, whose military successes during April intensified the pressure on the Mengistu regime.
On April 10 a group of around 240 Ethiopian academics had submitted a petition to the government demanding its resignation and the creation of a "provisional caretaker government" , to be followed by multiparty elections under international supervision.
Nekemte, the capital of the western province Welega, fell on April 2 to the forces of the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front/Movement (EPRDF, or EPRDM, a Tigrean-led alliance — see p. 38089 and also p. 38053 where it is given incorrectly as the EPDRF).
On April 19 the EPRDF took the hydroelectric power station at Finchaa (also in Welega province), and by April 24 it had taken the town of Ambo, 100 km west of Addis Ababa, although this area was retaken by government forces four days later.
On the Red Sea coast, meanwhile, the separatist Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) drew nearer to Assab, taking Beylul, 50 km from the port, on April 6.
Shengo resolution on "peace forum" leading to transitional government — Appointment of Prime Minister
On April 22 the National Shengo (parliament), summoned by Mengistu to find ways of "resolving the problem politically and peacefully" , approved a resolution to set up a "peace forum with all opposition parties and unity forces" , which would install a transitional government.
It also approved, however, the mobilization of all men over 18, under the supervision of a new national campaign centre (created by a Council of State decree on April 27).
A "Coalition of Ethiopian Democratic Forces" (CEDF — founded in the United States on April 15-17 by long-established opponents of the regime including the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party and the Ethiopian Democratic Union) announced on April 24 its support for the Shengo's initiative.
The initiative also had support from the United States and the Soviet Union.
On the weekend of April 27-28 Rudy Boschwitz, an envoy of US President Bush, and three other officials met with Mengistu and his government.
On April 28 a US official left for Khartoum to meet leaders of the EPLF and EPRDF leaders; both these organizations, however, had meanwhile rejected the Shengo initiative.
On April 26 it was announced that Tesfaye Dinka, Deputy Prime Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs and a US-trained economist, had been made Prime Minister (a post vacant since November 1989), with a brief to form a new Cabinet composed of individuals "who can stand up for Ethiopian unity" .
No announcement was made regarding responsibility for the Foreign Affairs portfolio.
AFRICA
BENIN
President Nicéphore Soglo, who was flown to hospital in Paris on March 28 after defeating Mathieu Kérékou in the presidential elections [see p. 38084], flew home on April 3 to be sworn in and to appoint a provisional government, before returning to Paris for further treatment on April 13.
AFRICA
MALAWI
516 people were dead or missing, and 40-50,000 still homeless in early April following flooding and mudslides in mid-March which affected the south-east.
AFRICA
RÉUNION
Tension continued during April following anti-government riots in February, which had left at least 10 people dead, and a mid-March visit by the French Prime Minister, Michel Rocard, who was jeered at by crowds.
AFRICA
UGANDA
Omara Atubo, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and Regional Co-operation, was arrested together with two National Assembly members and accused of collaborating with northern rebels, as announced on April 17.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Adoption of budget bills by Congress
On April 17, only two days behind schedule, the House of Representatives passed a $1,460,000 million budget for the fiscal year 1992 (beginning Oct. 1, 1991).
The measure, which embodied no new taxes and incorporated a federal deficit of $362,000 million, was approved by 261 votes to 163.
Earlier in the day the House had rejected the budget drawn up by President George Bush by 335 votes to 89, with 74 Republicans joining the Democratic majority in opposition to the proposal.
Amongst the most controversial aspects of the Bush budget was the proposed $46,600 million reductions in Medicare funding and other entitlement programmes cuts over the next five years.
In contrast to previous years the House's rejection of the presidential budget and its adoption of an alternative was marked by a minimum of partisan rancour.
This was largely because the 1990 budget agreement — reached after a protracted and bitter struggle — had already dictated overall ceilings for defence, foreign aid and discretionary domestic spending, and had prohibited any tax cuts or the expansion of major benefit programmes unless specific revenue could be found to fund them.
The Democrat-controlled House budget committee, therefore, had little opportunity to redraft the budget in a radical fashion, although overall its budget proposal did redirect some $13,0000 million of the spending embodied in the Bush plan.
Those areas where the budget adopted by the House increased spending included education, nutritional assistance, job training and medical care for veterans.
The funding for the increases came from cuts in space and scientific programmes, and from holding many general government functions at or below the level of the previous year.
The committee's chairman, Leon E. Panetta, a Californian Democrat, rejected charges that the $13,000 million in readjustments constituted "just tinkering with the edges" of the Bush proposal.
On April 25 the Senate approved by voice vote a $1,450,000 million budget bill broadly similar to that passed by the House.
It differed from the budget proposed by the President in that it included an additional $4,400 million for domestic spending on education, health and social service programmes at the expense of space and scientific programmes.
An attempt by liberal Democrat Bill Bradley to waive the rules of the previous year's budget agreement in order to transfer 2 per cent of the defence budget to additional domestic spending was defeated by 73 votes to 22.
Bush education strategy
On April 18 President George Bush announced an "America 2000 strategy" of "bold, complex and long-range reforms" designed to initiate a "true renaissance in American education" .
The reforms were described as "intended to make good" his 1988 presidential campaign promise "to be the education president" .
They were drawn up by Lamar Alexander, who on March 18 had taken up the post of Education Secretary following the December 1990 resignation of Lauro Cavazos [see p. 37911].
The strategy included plans (i) to develop a new, voluntary nationwide examination system of "American Achievement Tests" in the core subjects of English, mathematics, science, history and geography;(ii) to promote parental choice as to which schools children should attend;(iii) to establish a business-financed, non-profit-making organization to develop non-traditional types of school, which would receive limited federal funding; and (iv) to boost vocational training by encouraging business and labour to devise (voluntary) skill standards and "skill certificates" .
The programme established six goals:(i) adequate pre-schooling;(ii) a high school graduation rate of at least 90 per cent;(iii) student competence in the five core subjects;(iv) world pre-eminence for US students in mathematics and science;(v) 100 per cent adult literacy (23,000,000-27,000,000 US adults were currently estimated to be "functionally illiterate" ); and (vi) absence of drugs and violence from every school.
Bush was careful in his proposals to avoid trespassing on traditional local and state responsibilities for education, assigning, for instance, a panel of administration officials and governors to develop the national tests.
Only 6 per cent of education spending came from the federal budget and it was estimated that the cost of Bush's proposals would at federal level absorb $820 million of the federal budget of $27,100 million for the fiscal year beginning on Oct. 1.
In the run-up to the November 1992 presidential elections, education was seen as a key issue.
Democratic party leaders were already piloting their own education bill through Congress, and Richard Gephardt, Democratic leader of the House of Representatives, gave Bush's proposals a lukewarm response, describing them as "tinkering at the margins" .
Senate rejection of Appeal Court judge nomination
The Senate judiciary committee voted on April 11 by eight (Democrats) to six (Republicans) to reject the nomination of a new Appeal Court judge for the 11th Circuit, covering Florida, Georgia and Alabama.
A motion to allow the nomination to go to a vote of the full Senate was defeated by a tied vote of seven to seven.
A coalition of nearly 50 civil rights, Hispanic, black and women's organizations had opposed the nomination of Judge Kenneth L. Ryskamp of Miami, on the grounds of his alleged hostility to minorities.
He was thought to have hampered his own cause through the manner of his testimony, especially his attempted defence of his membership of a country club with a notorious reputation for discrimination against blacks and Jews.
He was the sixth judge to be rejected by the judiciary committee during the past decade.
Deaths of Heinz and Tower
A Republican senator, John Heinz, was one of seven people killed in a plane crash on April 4.
Heinz's Piper Aerostar aircraft collided with a helicopter which had been dispatched to check that the landing gear of the aircraft had been correctly deployed.
Debris from the two aircraft killed two children in a school playground in a suburb of Philadelphia.
Heinz, 52, an heir to the H. J. Heinz food fortune, had been elected senator for Pennsylvania in 1976, following five years in the House of Representatives.
Former senator John Tower, 65, his daughter Marian, 34, and a space shuttle astronaut, Manley Carter, were among 23 people killed when a commuter plane crashed into a wood at Brunswick, Georgia, on April 5.
An old friend of President George Bush, Tower was a senator for Texas for 24 years and chaired the Armed Services Committee from 1981 to 1985, but suffered humiliation in 1989 when the Senate rejected his nomination as Defence Secretary [see pp. 36515-16].
Abortion
Passing of anti-abortion law in Utah
Governor Norman Bangerter of Utah signed legislation on April 20 which prohibited all abortions except in cases of rape, incest, gross foetal abnormality or risk to the mother's health.
The law, the most draconian to have been passed by any mainland state, could not take immediate effect because it conflicted with the 1973 Roe v. Wade Supreme Court decision — the foundation of legalized abortion in the USA.
Many opponents of abortion hoped that the Utah legislation would act as the catalyst for the Court to overturn the Roe v. Wade ruling and to allow individual states to regulate the availability of abortion.
As originally passed in January, the Utah law had been ambiguously worded, allowing the possibility of capital murder charges against both doctors and pregnant women who participated in abortions.
The legislation was re-drafted, however, to stipulate that to perform, procure, or supply the means for, an illegal abortion was a third degree felony and thus punishable by up to five years in prison and a fine of $5,000.
Veto of North Dakota anti-abortion bill
Earlier, on April 1, Governor George A. Sinner of North Dakota vetoed an anti-abortion bill similar to — though somewhat more restrictive than — that passed in Utah, which provided penalties of a $1,000 fine and a year in prison.
In his veto message Sinner warned against the abuse of governmental power, stating that government "must not play God" .
The North Dakota House of Representatives attempted unsuccessfully to override Sinner's veto on April 2, falling eight votes short of the required two-thirds majority.
An associated bill, which stipulated a mandatory 24-hour waiting period for women seeking abortions, was signed by Sinner on April 1.
Under the terms of the legislation an abortion clinic was also required to inform a patient about the possible alternatives to abortion.
Re-election of Chicago mayor
The Democratic incumbent, Richard M. Daley, was re-elected Mayor of Chicago on April 1, with unofficial returns suggesting that he had received 73 per cent of the vote.
R. Eugene Pincham, a black former state appellate judge, received 22 per cent as the candidate of the Harold Washington Party, a grouping founded in the aftermath of the 1987 death of, and named after, Chicago's popular black mayor.
Republican candidate George Gottlieb and James A. Warren of the Socialist Workers' Party polled 4 per cent and less than 1 per cent, respectively.
Daley, the son of Richard J. Daley, one of Chicago's most famous mayors, had been elected in 1989.
Chicago's solid Democratic tradition — the Republican Party last won the mayor's office in 1927 — meant that Daley's re-election was virtually certain after he had secured the Democratic nomination by winning 63.5 per cent of the vote in the primary on Feb. 26, 1990.
National rail strike
Ten rail unions representing some 250,000 workers went on strike on April 17 after failing to resolve a three-year dispute with management over wages, health care and working conditions.
However, within 24 hours Congress approved and Bush signed legislation ordering an end to the strike, with the result that most railworkers were back at work on the morning of April 18.
US legislation provided for the establishment of a presidential emergency board if unions and management failed to resolve their differences in negotiations conducted through the National Mediation Board.
The emergency board's recommendations in the dispute had been presented in mid-January 1991 after eight months of hearings.
It recommended reducing the size of train crews, increasing wages by an average of 3-4 per cent per year over the next three years, and the payment by workers of a proportion of their health care costs.
The majority of the unions involved, however, rejected these recommendations and a "cooling-off period" expired without resolving the issue.
About one-third of freight was moved by rail in the USA, and Bush justified the legislation stopping the strike by the need to avoid a "serious disruption" of the economy just as it was "trying to turn around and get out of this recession" .
The law imposed most of the emergency board's wage and benefits package but established a new emergency board which would look again at differences over work rules and would present binding recommendations after 65 days of deliberations.
Controversy resulting from police brutality case
The ramifications arising from an assault by a group of white police officers on black motorist Rodney King in Los Angeles on March 3 [see p. 38091]grew throughout April as the case developed into a national symbol of general police conduct and institutionalized racism.
It also sparked an intense struggle between the popular black mayor of Los Angeles, Tom Bradley, and the city's widely respected white police chief, Daryl Gates.
On March 15 a 23-member grand jury indicted four officers involved in the beating; they were due to come for trial on May 13.
With action pending against the perpetrators of the attack, the focus of case switched to the future of Gates, a 42-year veteran of the department and chief of the Los Angeles force for 13 years.
Although Gates claimed that the incident was an aberration, records showed that there were 1,294 investigations of police brutality in California between 1984 and 1989, making it second in the country only to Texas.
An alliance of black groups, the liberal press, Californian celebrities and local politicians exerted increasing public pressure for the resignation of Gates.
Polls showed, however, that Gates retained significant levels of support within Los Angeles, particularly within the white community.
Although Gates announced a 10-point plan to restore public confidence in the force, and established a citizens' panel to investigate the King case, he rejected all demands for his resignation or retirement.
On April 2 Bradley, who on the previous day had established his own committee of inquiry into the case, finally demanded the resignation of Gates, but was immediately rebuffed by the police chief.
The Los Angeles Police Commission on April 4 put Gates on inactive duty pending the full investigation of the King case.
Gates challenged the move in the courts and, on the following day, the Los Angeles city council (which lacked the authority to overturn the Police Commission decision, but was responsible for the settlement of lawsuits) ordered the city attorney to settle the suit in favour of Gates.
This in turn was subject to protests — on April 7 the Rev. Jesse Jackson led a 2,000-strong march — and an unsuccessful legal challenge.
On April 8 a Superior Court judge ruled that Gates could return to full duties pending a judiciary hearing.
The hearing opened on April 25, but was immediately adjourned until May 1.
Rape case involving Kennedy family
During April Senator Edward Kennedy, one of the Democratic party's most senior and controversial liberals, became involved in the furore resulting from a case of alleged rape involving his nephew, William Kennedy Smith, a medical student.
A 29-year-old woman accused Smith of raping her on March 30 at the Kennedy family's oceanside mansion in Palm Beach, Florida.
She was one of two women invited back to the house after meeting Smith, Edward Kennedy and Kennedy's son, Patrick, in a local bar.
Smith denied committing any crime and dismissed the woman's accusation as a "damnable lie" .
It was reported on April 9 that he had submitted hair and blood samples for police forensic tests, but had refused to be questioned.
Although by the end of April the authorities had yet to decide whether to file charges arising from the incident, both the Kennedy family and the alleged victim had employed formidable legal teams to represent their interests.
The incident first attracted national attention because it involved the Kennedy family, a subject which tended to elicit fiercely polarized views.
Amid a dearth of reliable information, allegations of a cover-up, and lurid details concerning the alleged events at the house on the night in question, critics cited the episode as further evidence of Edward Kennedy's lax standards of personal morality, and of the questionable judgment of the 59-year-old Massachusetts senator.
As the case developed, however, it spawned a more fundamental debate concerning legal strategies and the treatment of complainants, particularly in cases of sexual assault.
This debate was fuelled when the alleged victim in the Smith case was named on a national NBC news broadcast on April 16.
NBC's decision, which contravened the code of anonymity usually maintained in regard to victims in cases of sexual assault, was justified on the grounds that her identity was already widely known in the Palm Beach area.
Thereafter, she was identified by many newspapers, including the prestigious New York Times, leading to bitter criticism by civil rights organizations and womens' groups.
First declared candidacy for 1992 presidential elections
Former Massachusetts senator Paul Tsongas, 50, who abandoned politics in 1984 after being diagnosed as suffering from cancer, became the first person to declare his candidacy for the Democratic Party's nomination for the 1992 presidential elections.
In making his declaration in Lowell, Massachusetts, on April 30, Tsongas attacked the Washington political culture of "avoidance" and "mediocrity" and promised to restore the economic vitality of the USA.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Cabinet reshuffle — New British Columbia Premier
Cabinet reshuffle
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney on April 21 undertook the largest reshuffle of his Cabinet since taking office in 1984.
The move was seen as an attempt to bolster the falling level of public support for his administration by addressing the two crucial issues of national unity and the economy.
Joe Clark (hitherto Secretary of State for External Affairs, and Prime Minister in 1979-80), was persuaded to take on a key role in the ongoing constitutional debate concerning Canada's future federal structure and the position of Quebec.
Michael Wilson (hitherto Finance Minister) took on a new "super-ministry" with a brief to increase Canada's competitiveness in the world market; his successor at Finance, Donald Mazankowski (hitherto Agriculture Minister) promised to retain his policy of strict limits on federal spending.
The elevation of Clark and Mazankowski — both of whom were from Alberta — was seen as an attempt by Mulroney to reassure the country's western provinces that their interests would not be sacrificed to the demands of Quebec.
(Formed in 1988 [see p. 37414], the Reform Party, a right-wing, populist, protest grouping, had spread from its base in Alberta and had grown rapidly in all of the country's western provinces.)
Brian MulroneyPrime Minister
New Canadian Cabinet
*Joseph (Joe) ClarkMinister Responsible for Constitutional Affairs; President of Privy Council
*John CrosbieFisheries and Oceans
*Donald MazankowskiDeputy Prime Minister; Minister Finance Elmer MacKayPublic Works Jake EppEnergy, Mines and Resources
*Robert De CotretSecretary of State
*Perrin BeattyCommunications
*Michael WilsonIndustry, Science and Technology; International Trade Harvie AndréMinister of State; Leader of the government in the House of Commons Otto JelinekNational Revenue Thomas SiddonIndian Affairs and Northern Development Charles MayerWestern Economic Diversification; Minister of State for Grains and Oilseeds;
*William McKnightAgriculture
*Benoît BouchardHealth and Welfare
*Marcel MasseDefence
*Barbara McDougallExternal Affairs Gerald MerrithewVeterans' Affairs Monique VézinaMinister of State for Employment and Immigration; Senior Citizens Frank OberleForestry
*Lowell MurrayGovernment Leader in Senate Paul DickSupply and Services
*Pierre CadieuxMinister of State for Fitness, Youth and Amateur Sport
**Jean CharestEnvironment Tom HockinMinister of State for Small Businesses and Tourism
*Monique LandryExternal Relations; Minister of State for Indian Affairs and Northern Development
*Bernard ValcourtEmployment and Immigration Gerry WeinerMinister of State for Multiculturalism and Citizenship*Douglas LewisSolicitor General
*Pierre BlaisConsumer and Corporate Affairs; Minister of State for Agriculture John McDermidMinister of State for Privatization and Regulatory Affairs
*Shirley MartinMinister of State for Transport Mary CollinsAssociate Minister of National Defence; Minster responsible for Status of Women William WineguardMinister of State for Science and Technology Kim CampbellJustice and Attorney General
*Jean CorbeilTransport
*Gilles LoisellePresident of Treasury Board; Minister of State for Finance
*Marcel DanisLabour
**+Pauline BrowesMinister of State for Environment
*Altered portfolio.
**New appointment.
New British Columbia Premier
Rita Johnston, hitherto Deputy Premier, was sworn in on April 2 as Premier of British Columbia, the first woman provincial premier in Canadian history.
Her predecessor, William Vander Zalm, had resigned after being criticized by the provincial conflict-of-interest commissioner for his role in the sale of his family-owned amusement park, Fantasy Gardens, to a Taiwanese investor.
Vander Zalm, a Dutch immigrant who made his fortune from a garden nursery business in Vancouver and who had held the premiership since 1986 [see p. 37940], was one of the country's most colourful politicians.
Until recently he had resided in a castle in Fantasy Gardens complete with ornamental moat and imitation Dutch village.
He held strong fundamentalist Protestant views on religious matters, but appeared indifferent to social welfare issues, and his administration had become increasingly divided and unpopular, as reflected by a series of recent Cabinet resignations and by-election defeats.
His departure was thought to improve the ruling Social Credit Party's prospects (from which he also resigned as leader), with an election due in 1991, of withstanding the challenge of Canada's increasingly successful social democratic New Democratic Party (NDP — for its September 1990 provincial election victory in Ontario see p. 37705).
A Social Credit Party convention to choose a new leader was expected to be held in June.
AMERICAS
CENTRAL AMERICA
Powell tour
The chairman of the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Colin Powell, visited the US government's principal allies in the region — Honduras, El Salvador, and Panama — on April 8-9 to meet government and military leaders.
US diplomats insisted that there was "no political message" behind the visit, the prime aim of which was to assess the work of locally deployed US forces and to support military reforms currently being carried out in the three countries.
Powell's statements to the press on April 8 in the Honduran capital Tegucigalpa, however, caused some controversy.
He claimed that "if it is necessary to defend liberty" then US military intervention in the region could not be ruled out.
This was interpreted by some sections of the media as a sign that the US government was disposed to use force in El Salvador in the event of the breakdown of the current peace process.
A spokesman for the US embassy in San Salvador claimed that Powell's statement "was a general comment linked to the search for a new and peaceful international democratic world order" .
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Free trade talks
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari visited seven United States states and Canadian cities on April 7-12, in a tour aimed at allaying doubts over the inclusion of Mexico in a North American free trade bloc.
On April 7, before beginning the tour, he met with US President Bush for an hour at an air force base outside Houston, Texas, and Bush promised to "work tirelessly" for an extension of the period in which "fast-track" Congressional authorization could apply to a free trade agreement.
(The Canadian, Mexican and US governments had announced on Feb. 5 that Canada was to join the negotiations on a free trade zone.)
The "fast-track" procedure allowed any agreement reached by US negotiators to be subsequently voted on as a package [see p. 37849].
However, there was substantial US Congressional opposition to a free trade pact with Mexico; the US unions and the citrus and textile industries were drawing attention to the job losses which such an agreement could entail for the USA, while environmental groups lobbied to warn of the implications of Mexico's less stringent controls on industry.
In meetings with politicians, lobbyists, union leaders and journalists in Ottawa, Montreal and Toronto in Canada, and in Boston, Chicago, Austin and San Antonio in the USA, Salinas emphasized that a free trade treaty would reduce labour migration from Mexico, and he also pledged firmer enforcement of environmental regulations.
Agreement with EC
A commercial accord signed by Mexican Foreign Relations Minister Fernando Solana Morales and representatives of the European Communities (EC) at the meeting between Group of Rio and EC Foreign Ministers in Luxembourg on April 26 [see p. 38145]was the most important such agreement so far concluded between the EC and any Latin American country.
The 45 articles of the accord provided a framework for dealing with questions of product standardization, and other matters relating to customs regulations.
The EC brought Mexico within the scope of its generalized system of preferences (GSP) for access to the EC market, and promised co-operation in industrial, cultural and scientific fields.
Observers identified a weak point of the agreement in its section on agriculture, which was made conditional on such agreements as might result from the "Uruguay Round" of negotiations in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
The EC sought co-operation against drug traffickers, and Mexico was reported to have inserted at the last minute a formula to safeguard its national jurisdiction in this area.
The agreement was signed on behalf of the EC by Luxembourg Foreign Minister Jacques Poos and the EC Commissioner with responsibility for relations with Latin America Abel Matutes.
El País of April 26 noted that EC officials regarded the current negotiations for the incorporation of Mexico into a trade bloc with the USA [see above]as increasing Mexico's importance as a trading partner.
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Peace talks
Negotiations between the Guatemalan government and guerrilla organizations grouped under the umbrella of the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity (URNG) took place in Mexico City on April 24-25.
The government delegation included five senior military officers.
The talks were presided over by the president of the National Reconciliation Commission, Mgr Rodolfo Quezada Toruño.
Although government and rebels had met briefly in 1987, it was the first time that army officers had agreed to talk with URNG representatives.
President Jorge Serrano, announcing the peace initiative on April 8, presented it in the context of the process launched by the Arias peace plan (also known as Esquipulas II — see pp. 35441-42; 37269) in 1987, and the agreement concluded in Oslo in March 1990 [see p. 37372].
He said that a definitive peace would require serious negotiations on "dismantling rebel fronts and mechanisms" , an end to anti-insurgency operations, the strengthening of Guatemala's social welfare structure and measures to combat "extreme poverty" , a more effective legal system, increased democratic decision-making and "the valorization of Mayan cultures" .
It was hoped that the negotiations would produce a preliminary drafting of a conclusive peace agreement.
AMERICAS
PANAMA
Split in ruling coalition
President Guillermo Endara on April 8 ousted the Christian Democrats (PDC) from his governing coalition, dismissing the five PDC members of his Cabinet whom he accused of "disloyalty and arrogance" .
Other PDC officials, including the chief of the National Police and the mayor of Panama City, were also dismissed.
The move followed recriminations since late March within the four-party Democratic Civic Opposition Alliance (ADOC), sparked by allegations that a coup was being prepared against Endara, while the Christian Democrats for their part claimed that the government secret service was tapping their phones.
On April 5, members of Endara's Arnulfist Party met with him reportedly "to request certain changes in Cabinet posts" then held by PDC politicians.
The split with the PDC left Endara's government without an assured majority in the Legislative Assembly, where the PDC constituted the strongest bloc with 28 seats (against only seven controlled by the Arnulfistas, and 16 and four controlled respectively by their remaining ADOC partners, the Nationalist Liberal Republican Movement (Molirena) and the Authentic Liberal Party).
The PDC's leader, Ricardo Arias Calderón, remained as one of the two Vice-Presidents, although his position as Interior Minister and Justice Minister was taken by Juan Chevalier Bravo, hitherto Commerce and Industry Minister and a close associate of Endara.
Chevalier was replaced at Commerce and Industry by Roberto Alfaro.
The other new appointments were Guillermo Rolla Pimentel — Health; Alfredo Arias — Public Works; Marcos Alarcón — Education; and Guillermo Elías Quijano — Housing.
The Cabinet changes aroused concern in the US Congress, where they were described as a "constitutional coup" by the House of Representatives government operations committee chairman John Conyers.
They came within a week of the leaking of a US Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) document, compiled by an agent in Panama investigating a cocaine-smuggling operation, which named more than 20 companies registered by President Endara's law firm.
Agreement with USA on money laundering
The USA and Panama on April 11 concluded an accord providing for co-operation in investigating money laundering.
The Mutual Legal Assistance Agreement was reported to contain a formalization of existing channels through which US investigators had access to Panamanian banking records.
US negotiators had been seeking such an agreement since shortly after Endara's government was installed following the overthrow of the Noriega regime by US military intervention in December 1989.
The US Congress had since early 1990 withheld $84,000,000 of aid for Panama pending the signing of an agreement.
The agreement was subject to legislative approval in both countries.
US officials said that it would facilitate the investigation of tax invasion, embezzlement and insider trading operations, in addition to transactions connected with drug trafficking.
The agreement in the form originally proposed had encountered strong opposition from Panama's 110 offshore banks, and had been subsequently amended.
AMERICAS
CUBA
30th anniversary of Bay of Pigs invasion
President Fidel Castro delivered a speech broadcast by radio and television on April 20 to commemorate the 30th anniversary of the abortive United States-sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion [see pp. 18151-55].
Cuba's resistance to the subsequent 30-year US blockade, he stressed, had "saved the honour of Latin America" and "saved the honour of socialism which will be defended to the end" .
Cuba stood alone in the face of "threats of world imperialism and reaction" , spearheaded by the USA but would not be receiving further supplies of needed arms.
A total of 85 per cent of Cuba's foreign trade "had crumbled in a matter of months" , Castro said, following the collapse of the east European communist regimes and as a result of political changes in the Soviet Union.
Cubans must be ready to defend themselves against external military threat, he warned, and would face further economic deterioration, at a rate dependent on the nature of a continued economic relationship with the Soviet Union "based on specific premises" .
He insisted that there would be no market economy, while admitting that realism and not dogmatism was needed "under the special conditions of the special period" and that international co-operation might be useful, citing successful joint ventures with Western business in the development of the tourism sector.
Postponement of party congress
The fourth congress of the ruling Communist Party (PCC), scheduled to take place in August in Santiago de Cuba, was postponed until the autumn, ostensibly because it conflicted with the simultaneous hosting of the Pan-American Games.
AMERICAS
ST VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
Cabinet reshuffle
Prime Minister James Mitchell announced minor Cabinet changes at the beginning of April.
The Culture portfolio was transferred from Attorney General and Justice Minister Parnel Campbell, who had suffered a minor heart attack but was expected to be back in post within a month, to the Minister of Education, Youth, Sports and Women's Affairs, John Horne.
The Minister of State for Trade and Tourism Jonathan Peters was moved to the Prime Minister's Office in order to assist with foreign affairs, and was replaced by the Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister's Office Stuart Nanton.
AMERICAS
GUYANA
Election reform agreement
Prospects for a free and fair general election, scheduled for late 1991, improved when opposition parties agreed in late April to respect electoral procedures, in return for a government promise to consider the reform of the election commission [for December 1985 election see p. 34162].
The government had provoked opposition protests by twice extending the current parliamentary session by two months, in early February and again in early April, ostensibly because it would take at least six months to complete the registration exercise for a new electoral roll.
The Working People's Alliance had responded by resigning its seat in the National Assembly on Feb. 3, and the conservative United Force and the main opposition People's Progressive Party similarly declared on April 2 that their members would resign their seats.
The subsequent agreement resulted from the visit on April 3-5 of the Prime Minister of Belize, George Price, in his capacity as an observer for the Council for Freely Elected Heads of Government, set up by former US President Jimmy Carter.
Price was thought to have influenced the decision on April 21 by Guyana's President Desmond Hoyte to appoint Rudolph Collins, a former ambassador to Venezuela, to chair the electoral commission, in place of Sir Harold Bollers, who had been strongly criticized for failing to assert the commission's independence from the ruling People's National Congress.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
Earthquakes
Central America
An earthquake measuring 7.5 on the open Richter scale hit the Caribbean border region of Costa Rica and Panama on April 22.
At least 80 people were reported to have been killed, over 800 were injured and thousands of homes were destroyed.
The earthquake, causing the most deaths in Central America since the 1986 tremor which killed 1,500 people in El Salvador [see pp. 35421-42], had its epicentre in the Valley of the Star, 120 km east of the Costa Rican capital San José.
The most serious damage was concentrated in the Costa Rican cantons of Matina and Talamanca, the port of Limón, and the Panamanian frontier provinces of Bocas del Toro and Chiriquí; states of emergency were declared in all of these areas.
The number of dead and injured was expected to rise as rescue teams reached more outlying regions cut off due to the widespread destruction of roads and bridges.
This was especially true of the area of the epicentre, where thousands of indigenous Indians lived.
Argentina, Mexico and Venezuela offered immediate food aid and the Costa Rican government asked for urgent international aid.
Banana production, the major activity of the region, which provided 35 per cent of world exports, was expected to be disrupted for between two and six weeks.
Peru
Three earthquakes struck Peru on April 5-6, the severest of them (measuring 6.9 on the Richter scale) killing 35 people and injured 750 others in the northern jungle province of San Martín.
There was extensive damage in the regional capital, Moyobamba, 644 km north of Lima, where an earthquake had killed over 100 people the previous year [see p. 37474]; 20 people died in the village of Nueva Cajamarca alone.
A second quake in San Martin measured 5.8, and another measuring 5.5 was recorded in the southern coastal region of Ica, 257 km south of Lima; two people were reported injured in these lesser tremors.
Health Ministers meeting on cholera epidemic
The Health Ministers of Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, Peru, Venezuela and Spain met in the Bolivian city of Sucre on April 20-23 to discuss possible joint action to stem the cholera epidemic which first broke out in Peru in late January [see p. 38002], and had since spread into neighbouring Brazil, Colombia, Chile and Ecuador (but not as yet into Bolivia or Venezuela).
Argentina, Uruguay and the countries of central America were reportedly taking emergency steps to prevent the entry of cholera through public education campaigns and increased border surveillance of suspected carriers.
In his address to the meeting, Carlyle Guerra de Macedo, the director of the Pan American Health Organization (a specialized organization of the Organization of American States, which served as the Regional Office for the Americas of the World Health Organization (WHO)), warned that 42,000 people could die from cholera unless firm measures were taken to deal with malnutrition and the lack of basic sanitary and medical facilities in the countries concerned.
He stated that neither Latin American countries nor the UN had sufficient resources to tackle the epidemic and called for urgent international aid.
According to the latest WHO figures, more than 1,200 people had already died in the cholera epidemic and a further 160,000 at least were infected with the disease.
The majority of these were in Peru where 1,130 had so far died and 150,929 people were infected.
Ecuador had 97 dead and 3,861 infected; Colombia had two dead and 134 infected, and Chile had one person reported dead and 15 people infected.
Brazil had only five cases of infection but the real fear was that cholera was about to spread from the Peruvian into the Brazilian Amazonian river system.
At least 60,000 people, many of them indigenous Indians, would then be placed at risk from contaminated drinking water.
The WHO also estimated that the epidemic had currently cost Peru US$1,000 million in lost exports, especially in fish products, and reduced revenues from tourism.
AMERICAS
PERU
Guerrilla attacks
The Maoist Sendero Luminoso guerrilla group sabotaged the national electricity grid on April 6.
Electricity supplies to the capital, Lima, and to the cities of Trujillo, 500 km to the north-west, and Ica, 250 km to the south-east, were cut off.
Guerrillas then launched bomb, grenade and bazooka attacks on the embassies of the United States, Canada, Israel, Colombia and Japan, and on banks, public buildings, petrol stations, buses and a zinc factory.
No-one was reported killed or hurt but the damage was estimated in millions of dollars.
Minor clashes were reported to have taken place between police and students at Lima's San Marcos University.
To combat Sendero Luminoso activities in their strongholds in the southern departments of the country, state of emergency regulations were extended on April 18 to cover eight more provinces.
Under the emergency regulations, currently affecting more than two-thirds of the country and 50 per cent of the population, all constitutional guarantees contained in Articles 7, 9 and 10 of the Constitution were suspended and the army was placed in full control of internal order.
Newly affected provinces were Azangaro, Lampa, Melga, San Antonio de Putina and Huancane in the department of Puno, and Caraveli, La Union and Cayoma in the department of Arequipa.
New currency
The general manager of the National Mint, Javier de la Rocha, announced on April 9 that a new currency, the new sol, would replace the inti in September.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
Controversy over use of US anti-narcotics personnel
In the early hours of April 4, an extraordinary session of the Congress approved the use of United States military personnel in training army units for operations against coca traffickers.
The first contingent of US advisers and equipment arrived later that day.
Half of the total of 112 US advisers had arrived in Bolivia by April 24, together with communications and transport equipment donated by the US government.
The Bolivian authorities stressed that the US personnel had a strictly advisory capacity; training of specialized units of the Bolivian army was to consist of two 10-week courses, each concluding with field exercises.
Opposition parties in the Congress had adopted filibustering methods to delay approval for the US instructors' arrival, arguing that it was unconstitutional.
Both inside and outside the Congress there were fears that a "militarization" of the anti-narcotics campaign would lead to acts of repression against peasant growers and to corruption among the military.
Peasant organizations in coca-producing areas threatened to block motorways to prevent the movement of the military and the US advisors.
A 24-hour strike was called by the Bolivian Workers' Central (COB) for April 9, in protest against the anti-coca campaign and against new legislation for the mining sector, approved at the same session of the Congress, which it regarded as preparing the way for privatization.
President Jaime Paz Zamora, however, in a message to the Congress, said that the "wider participation" of the military was an extension of the work of specialist air force and army units in 1983 and 1988.
The promotion of substitute crops, whose importance had been recognized in the February 1990 Cartagena Declaration [see pp. 37243-44]and other international accords, would be assisted by the US economic aid programme, worth US$150,000,000 for the 1991 fiscal year (a 70 per cent increase).
 "Repression" would be directed against traffickers, not producers, he said.
Chemical defoliants would not be used against crops, nor would producers be arrested or property confiscated.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Assassination of Jaime Guzmán
Senator Jaime Guzmán Errázuriz, founder and leader of the right-wing Independent Democratic Union (UDI), was shot at point-blank range by two gunmen as he left the Catholic University in Santiago, where he had been giving a law lecture, on April 1.
He died while undergoing surgery later that day.
The killing, attributed to leftist groups, put fresh pressure on the coalition government of President Patricio Aylwin to adopt a firmer policy on the suppression of armed groups.
Guzmán, 44, had been legal adviser to Gen. Augusto Pinochet after the 1973 military coup.
One of the main architects of the 1980 Constitution, his ideas were said to represent a fusion of economic neo-liberalism with authoritarianism.
In the December 1989 elections the UDI, the party closest to Pinochet, had emerged as the weaker of the two right-wing opposition parties, winning 11 seats in the House of Deputies and five in the Senate.
Guzmán had voted against a measure for the pardon of political prisoners imprisoned under the 1973-1990 regime (given final congressional approval on March 23), and had strongly rejected the report on human rights abuses released by President Aylwin on March 4 [see pp. 37958; 38095].
Two groups of the extreme left — the Manuel Rodríguez Patriotic Front (FPMR) and the Mapu Latero — were reported to have claimed responsibility for the murder.
Guzmán also had enemies on the extreme right, and there was some speculation as to their involvement.
Police erected roadblocks, interviewed around 500 people, and were reported to have killed two FPMR members on April 9 in a shoot-out in Rancagua, 80 km south of Santiago.
On April 19 it was announced that a new Public Security Coordinating Office was to be set up, headed by a civilian, to "assist the security forces and propose public security measures" with the help of the military police (Carabiñeros) and the investigative police.
The army was reported to be pressing for a role in the new body, despite public sensitivity over any apparent resurrection of the National Intelligence Directorate (DINA) of the post-1973 regime.
Aylwin's European tour
From April 7 to 25 Aylwin and Finance Minister Alejandro Foxley visited west European capitals, seeking to reassure potential investors about Chile's future political stability, and to reduce barriers to the import of Chilean goods to the European market.
During Aylwin's visit to Spain (April 7-10) King Juan Carlos praised his "courage" over human rights abuses.
On the first day of a six-day visit to London (April 10-15) he met with Prime Minister John Major and leading bankers and businessmen; his tour afterwards included visits to the Netherlands, Italy, the European Parliament in Strasbourg, the Vatican and four German cities.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Debt agreement — Other economic developments
A preliminary agreement on interest arrears was signed in New York on April 8 by the Brazilian government and the advisory committee of creditor banks, to which Brazil owed some US$8,000 million in interest due by end-1990 on some US$60,000 million of medium and long-term debt.
The Brazilian media hailed the agreement — the product of almost six months of negotiations — as reintroducing Brazil into the international financial community.
The United States and other industrialized countries responded by withdrawing their objections to a US$350,000,000 credit to Brazil from the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB).
The agreement, subject to ratification by the Federal Senate, provided for payment of arrears of US$2,000 million in 1991, of which 45 per cent was payable immediately and the rest in equal monthly instalments by December 1991.
The balance of the interest arrears would be settled through the issuing of 10-year bonds, with a three-year grace period and increasing amortization.
The bonds might be used in the privatization programme and other debt conversion programmes yet to be created.
On April 4 two large state-owned companies — PETROBRAS, the oil monopoly, and Companhia Vale de Rio Doce, a transportation company — were authorized by the Brazilian central bank to resume repayments to foreign banks.
They were the first state concerns to be given this go-ahead since July 1989, although private companies had from January 1991 been allowed to make direct payments of foreign commercial debt.
Brazil's Economy Minister Zélia Cardoso de Mello, speaking during the annual IDB meeting in Nagoya, Japan on April 7-9 [see p. 38144], had sharply criticized the linking of the interest agreement with the approval of Brazil's IDB loan, intended for sanitation projects.
In March the USA and France had led opposition to the granting of any new credits to Brazil in view of the slow progress of its negotiations with private banks.
On April 9, however, within hours of the interest agreement being signed in New York, IDB president Enrique Iglesias announced that the new loan would be approved at an IDB board meeting later that month.
Ending of price freeze
On April 16 the price freeze imposed as part of the February 1991 anti-inflation plan [see p. 38002]was lifted.
In a return to the system of price controls which had been abandoned in 1990, sector-wide increases would be decided by union, business and government representatives.
The restrictions on withdrawals from bank accounts introduced in President Fernando Collor de Mello's first anti-inflation plan of March 1990, was declared illegal by a federal court in Sao Paulo on April 5.
The government had the right of appeal to the Supreme Court.
Metal workers' strike — Ending of car import quotas
An indefinite "strategic" strike by 40,000 members of the Metal Workers' Union of Sao Paulo began on April 15, closing all but one of Brazil's main car manufacturers.
The union was demanding wage increases of 216 per cent, while the industrialists' association had offered 90 per cent .
On April 4 it was announced that all remaining quota limits on the import of foreign cars were to be ended.
The domestic car manufacturing industry, heavily protected since the 1950s, had already begun to face some competition from imports when quotas were partially lifted in July 1990 [see also p. 38002 for reduction in tariffs on imports].
Resumption of coffee exports
On April 8 Brazil re-opened coffee exports for registration, after announcing on March 21 that it was suspending sales on international coffee markets until it had determined its position with regard to a new International Coffee Agreement.
The authorities denied that there had been any insider trading by dealers anticipating price rises resulting from the March 21 suspension of trading.
In the first week of April all export registrations made on March 21 were cancelled, to eliminate any illicit gains.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Anti-narcotics measures — New Justice Ministry
President Carlos Menem on April 17 outlined steps to combat the dual problem of drug trafficking and corruption.
These included the dismissal of the Peronist governor of the north-western Catamarca province, Ramón Saadi; co-operation with the United States authorities in carrying out an aerial survey to detect drug trafficking activity; and the creation of a Justice Ministry.
Referring to Saadi's dismissal, Menem said that it had been decided to "extend federal government intervention to the executive and legislative branches of Catamarca province" .
El País of April 19 said that Menem had thus "opened a new front for political struggle within Peronism" ; the Saadi family which for decades had wielded considerable power in Catamarca, had provided crucial support to Menem in his ascent to presidential office.
Saadi was widely believed to be involved in drug trafficking and corruption, and local public opinion had become increasingly incensed over the alleged involvement of members of the governor's family in the death in September 1990 of a local teenager.
Saadi, 42, reacted angrily to the news of his dismissal, calling a press conference in Buenos Aires on April 18 in which he accused Menem and other leading Peronist politicians of betrayal, suggesting that coca detection operations should include an examination of their nostrils ( "rinoscopia" ).
An aerial photographic survey of Argentina was to be carried out "in co-operation with the US government" to detect clandestine landing strips, coca plantations and other evidence of trade in narcotics.
Menem also announced that a newly created Justice Ministry under Leon Carlos Arslanian would introduce fresh legislation in order to "fight corruption effectively" .
The creation of the Ministry was approved by the Senate on April 18, and Arslanian, who had experience as a judge in trials of military junta members, was sworn in on April 23.
AMERICAS
FALKLAND ISLANDS
Major land sale
Over a quarter of the territory of the Falkland Islands was sold in early April to the Falkland Islands Executive Council by the Falkland Islands Company, a subsidiary since mid-1989 of the debt-ridden mining and fuel distribution group Anglo United.
Total proceeds of £5,750,000 were raised by the sale, involving four East Falkland farms totalling 3,230 sq km, as well as farm buildings, 200,000 sheep, and mortgages on a farm on West Falkland.
AMERICAS
IDB
Annual meeting in Nagoya
The annual meeting of the 44 countries holding shares in the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) took place in Nagoya, Japan, on April 7-9.
This was the first time the meeting had been held in Asia, and representatives of the 25 American countries participating — including Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori, who was of Japanese parentage — reportedly regarded the meeting as an important forum for encouraging Japanese trade and investment links with the region.
The IDB president, Enrique Iglesias of Uruguay, had said on April 4 that although Japanese investment had been rising in Chile, Mexico, Brazil and Venezuela, "we see potential for much more" .
In the course of the meeting Japanese Deputy Finance Minister Makoto Utsumi underlined the demand for capital in eastern Europe and in the post-war Gulf.
Nevertheless, according the Le Monde of April 9, "Tokyo seems determined to take on a more important role in Latin America" .
Chairing the talks, Japanese Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto declared that flows of fresh credits were essential for renewed growth, and that debt reduction alone would not solve the difficulties of indebted countries.
On April 7 Hashimoto announced that the Japanese government wished in the future to increase its quota of capital in the IDB.
At present it stood at 1.1 per cent of the bank's capital, compared to 34.7 per cent from the United States.
On the question of voting rights, Hashimoto described as "regrettable" the fact that Germany, France, the United Kingdom and Japan together controlled only 8 per cent of the shareholder vote, compared to the 34.6 per cent controlled by the United States and Canada together.
Funding for "Enterprise for the Americas" initiative
On the first day of the meeting Hashimoto also announced that Japan would support the "Enterprise for the Americas" initiative launched by US President Bush in June 1990 [see p. 37526].
The amount of the Japanese contribution to the planned fund to promote free-market investment was not specified, but the Japanese press suggested that it might be below the US$1,000,000 which the US government was seeking from Japan.
Most European countries remained noncommittal on the subject of their participation in the fund.
A proposal supported by Chile and Brazil for the bank to make loans directly to private-sector companies, as it had done frequently in its early years, was discussed.
Such a measure would benefit countries such as Chile, which had privatized much of its state sector, but was opposed by other shareholders, including Mexico and the United Kingdom.
IDB annual report
According to the IDB annual report published on April 7, there was a O.8 per cent fall in gross domestic product in Latin America and the Caribbean in 1990, compared with growth of 0.9 per cent in 1989.
Recession in Argentina, Brazil and Peru had been most significant in producing this fall.
Export growth of 4 per cent in Latin America compared unfavourably with 8 per cent in Asian developing countries.
The region's debt grew by US$3,500 million in 1990, with interest arrears accounting for 6 per cent of the total by the end of the year.
The report said that continuing economic reform, despite its short-term costs, might allow annual growth of about 5 per cent by the end of the 1990s.
AMERICAS
GROUP OF RIO
Meetings in Bogotá and Luxembourg
The 11 Foreign Ministers of the Group of Rio member countries met in Bogotá on April 3-4 to prepare an agenda for the meeting with EC Foreign Ministers in Luxembourg on April 26.
The Bogotá meeting discussed the possibility of securing flows of fresh investment for Group of Rio countries through the European Investment Bank, as well as possible applications of EC financial instruments in tackling Latin American foreign debt.
The Foreign Ministers of Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela signed accords on energy, transport and communications and announced that they planned to create a free-trade zone between their countries by mid-1994.
Meeting with EC countries in Luxembourg
A meeting at ministerial level between the European Communities (EC) and the Group of Rio countries in Luxembourg on April 26 took place in the framework of an accord on inter-regional co-operation signed in Rome on Dec. 20, 1990 [see p. 37915].
Apart from the Foreign Ministers of the 11 Group of Rio countries, the meeting was attended by those of Costa Rica and Jamaica, representing, respectively, central America and the Caribbean.
Foreign Ministers of five EC countries — Spain, Portugal, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Italy — were present.
A declaration signed at the conclusion of the meeting emphasized co-operation in various fields, including narcotics and control of the cholera epidemic in Latin America [see p. 38142], but contained no concrete measures for increased credit flows through the European Development Bank.
The Spanish press reported that due to United Kingdom resistance to increased lending to Latin America it was agreed that a "case by case" approach would be adopted.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Former interim President Ertha Pascal-Trouillot was detained briefly in early April, and subsequently debarred from leaving Port-au-Prince, pending investigation of her suspected "complicity" in organizing the attempted coup of Jan. 6 [see p. 37955].
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Armando Durán was on April 30 appointed Foreign Minister, replacing Reinaldo Figueredo Planchart, who resigned to campaign for the leadership of the ruling Acción Democrática (AD); Durán, was replaced as Secretary-General of the Presidency by Beatrice Rangel.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
NPC session — Approval of five-year plan
The fourth session of the seventh National People's Congress (NPC — the Chinese unicameral legislature) was held in Beijing on March 25-April 9 [see p. 38096-97 for opening of fourth session; see p. 37373 for third session held in March-April 1990].
State Council appointments
A number of appointments to the State Council were approved by the NPC on April 8.
Zhu Rongji, 62, mayor of Shanghai, was appointed as a Vice-Premier.
Zhu, a high-profile reformist and an alternate member of the central committee of the ruling Communist Party of China (CCP), was reportedly promoted at the behest of China's "elder statesman" leader Deng Xiaoping.
He was replaced as mayor of Shanghai by his deputy Huang Ju.
Some analysts claimed that Zhu's promotion was the first gain for moderates since the army crackdown on the 1989 pro-democracy movement.
Zou Jiahua, 64, Minister in charge of the State Planning Commission, was appointed to the concurrent post of Vice-Premier; he relinquished his post of State Councillor.
Zou, a Soviet-trained technocrat and a full member of the CCP central committee, was regarded as a conservative.
Qian Qichen, the Foreign Affairs Minister, was promoted to the concurrent post of State Councillor.
Approval of five-year plan and 10-year programme
On April 9 the NPC formally approved an outline of the 10-year programme and the eighth five-year plan for national economic and social development.
It was the first time that the government had simultaneously formulated a 10-year programme and a five-year plan [see p. 37917 for adoption of plan and programme guidelines at seventh CCP plenum held in December 1990; see p. 38097 for report on seventh five-year plan].
10-year programme (1991-2000).
The main targets were as follows:(i) to increase gross national product (GNP) at an average annual growth rate of about 6 per cent;(ii) to increase the total output value of industry and agriculture at an average annual rate of 6.1 per cent ;(iii) to increase total agricultural output at an average annual rate of 3.5 per cent , with grain output reaching 500,000,000 tonnes and cotton 5,250,000 tonnes by 2000;(iv) to increase total industrial output at an average annual rate of 6.8 per cent , with the output of raw coal reaching 1,400 million tonnes, electricity 1,100 million kWh, steel 80,000,000 tonnes, chemical fertilizer 120,000,000 tonnes and rail freight 1,900 million tonnes;(v) to ensure that 40 per cent of major products in the machine-building and light industry sector reached or approached relatively advanced international standards;(vi) to raise the proportion of the tertiary sector in the GNP from the current 25 per cent to around 33 per cent ; and (vii) to control the average annual population growth rate at below 12.5 per thousand.
Eighth five-year plan (1991-95).
The plan gave priority to "economic structural readjustment" to improve the balance between agriculture and industry and to remove the "irrationalities" in the organizational structures of enterprises.
Structural reforms would be carried out in the planning, investment, finance, taxation, banking, price, supply, commerce, foreign trade and wage systems.
While calling for the consolidation and development of the state sector, the plan called for the "appropriate development" of the individual and private sectors, both of which played a "valuable supplementary role" .
TargetTotalAnnual (millionincreaseincrease yuan) over 1990 Gross National Product2,325,00033.6%6% Agricultural output878,00018.9%3.5% Industrial output3,270,00037.1%6.5% Tertiary industry53.9%9% Grain445 Coal1,230 Crude oil145 Rail freight1,650 Steel72 Chemical fertilizer100 Cement230 Ethylene2.3 Electricity810,000 million kWh Natural gas20,000 million m3 
Planned economic growth rate under eighth five-year plan (based on 1990 prices)
1995 target figures under eighth five-year plan
(in million tonnes unless otherwise stated)
CPPCC session — Appointment of reformist Vice-Chair
The 13-day fourth session of the seventh National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC — the government's largely ceremonial opinion gathering forum) closed in Beijing on April 4.
At the closing session Ye Xuanping, the governor of Guangdong province, was elected as the new Vice-Chair of the CPPCC.
The Financial Times of April 9 suggested that Ye, a reformist who had been building Guangdong into a "free-wheeling relatively autonomous province" , had been appointed to the new central post in order to deprive him of his regional power base.
Price rises — First quarter figures — Devaluation
The government announced on April 24 that it was raising the price of state rationed food grain and oil for urban residents from May 1.
The increases were necessary, it was announced, because the burden of government subsidies had quadrupled over the past 10 years.
Evidence that the Chinese economy was entering a period of growth emerged on April 7 with the publication of economic figures for the first quarter of 1991.
Industrial production and retail sales had both surged, at a rate of 13.7 per cent and 13 per cent respectively.
A senior official in the State Statistical Bureau warned that demand had to be controlled to avoid runaway inflation.
The government confirmed on April 22 that it was pursuing a policy of devaluing the yuan in small, frequent steps, in an effort to boost exports and curb imports.
According to some reports the policy was the first step towards making the currency convertible.
Between April 9 and 20 the yuan was devalued a cumulative 1.38 per cent to a new level of US$1.00=5.2819 yuan [see p. 37859 for previous devaluation in November 1990].
Asia Watch report on export of prison goods — Carter speech
The New York-based human rights organization Asia Watch issued a report on April 19 which claimed that the Chinese authorities had systematically used prison labour — including political prisoners — to produce cheap goods targeted for export to the United States, Japan and Germany.
Some reports claimed that the allegations (described as "totally groundless" by the Chinese Foreign Ministry) were certain to increase US congressional pressure on President Bush not to renew China's most favoured nation trading status.
Former US President Jimmy Carter called on the Chinese government to release all its political prisoners during a speech delivered on April 14 at Beijing Foreign Affairs College.
Carter, who was visiting China in a private capacity, also raised the subject of human rights during talks with Li Peng and Jiang Zemin.
Government statement on "counter-revolutionary trials" — Reported arrests of students and pro-democracy activists — Executions in Wuhan
In his annual report to the NPC delivered on April 3 Ren Jianxin, President of the Supreme People's Court, said that the courts had "basically completed" all trials connected with the 1989 "counter-revolutionary rebellion" .
Despite Ren's report, the Reuters news agency reported on April 10 that Chen Yanbin, a student activist, had been imprisoned for 15 years for his involvement in the pro-democracy movement.
The Times of April 18 reported that two more student activists, Wang Zhixin and Li Minqi, were soon to stand trial for "counter-revolutionary crimes" .
The Hong Kong newspaper Ming Pao reported on April 25 that Yang Zhou, the founder of Shanghai's first human rights organization, the "China Human Rights Issue Research Society" , had been detained on April 18.
According to the report Gu Bin, a participant in the 1986 student movement, had also been arrested in Shanghai in early April.
The Agence France-Presse news agency reported on April 28 that 15 people had been executed and another 125 sentenced to prison terms after a "huge" public trial in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei province.
Death of Qin Benli
Qin Benli, editor of the World Economic Herald, died in Shanghai on April 15, aged 73.
Qin had founded this weekly journal in 1980 and it had played a major role in the campaign for economic and political reform in China until being closed down in April 1989 following the outbreak of student demonstrations [see p. 36587].
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Ending of Period of Communist Rebellion — Reform developments — Relations with China
President Lee Teng-hui announced on April 30 that he had signed a document declaring the end of the "Period of Mobilization for the Suppression of the Communist Rebellion" at midnight on April 30-May 1.
The document effectively brought to an end over four decades of "civil war" between the Kuomintang government of the Republic of China (Taiwan) and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) -ruled People's Republic of China.
At a press conference held on April 30 Lee acknowledged officially for the first time the existence of a CCP-led government in Beijing.
 "We must face the fact" he said "that the mainland area is now controlled by the Chinese communist regime." 
However, he went on to say that the acceptance of the existence of Communist China did not mean that Taiwan had abandoned its "one-China policy" and that the country was prepared to wait for a positive response to its proposals for unification on the basis of liberal democratic policies.
There was no immediate official response to the document from the Chinese government.
Along with the ending of the "Period of Rebellion" President Lee also formally announced the termination of the "Temporary Provisions" (effective during the "rebellion" ) and promulgated a number of major amendments to the country's Constitution [see p. 37917 for President Lee's December 1990 announcement of his intention to rescind the Temporary Provisions and also for Kuomintang approval of a constitutional reform package].
The Provisions, adopted in 1948 just before the Kuomintang government fled from the mainland to Taiwan, had rendered the Constitution largely irrelevant.
They not only provided the president with enormous powers, but also served to freeze in office the ageing mainland-elected members of the various deliberative assemblies.
Abolition of the Provisions and reform of the Constitution were, therefore, a crucial part of the process of political liberalization which had started with the ending of martial law in July 1987 [see p. 35378].
The constitutional amendments reformed the country's obsolete political system, reapportioning the seats in the three elected branches of government and stipulating that most of the delegates would be elected from Taiwanese (as opposed to mainland Chinese) constituencies.
All "senior parliamentarians" (i.e. those elected to mainland seats in the 1940s) would be forced to retire before the election of a new 327-member National Assembly in late 1991.
Elections to a new 161-member Legislative Yuan and 52-member Control Yuan would be held before the end of 1993.
The National Assembly and the Legislative Yuan would have a small number of presidentially appointed "overseas Chinese" representatives.
National Assembly session — Opposition demonstration in Taipei
The termination of the Temporary Provisions and the constitutional reforms had been approved on April 22 at a special session of the National Assembly, the sole branch of government with the power to amend the Constitution.
The session, which lasted from April 8 to 24, was heated and often violent.
Fighting erupted in the chamber on the first day when the eight delegates from the opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) raised a banner protesting against "constitutional blackmail" by the Assembly's elderly members.
The DPP members demanded that the National Assembly should not be used to amend the Constitution and claimed that the Kuomintang planned to protect its control of the political system by including undemocratic revisions, including the retention of emergency presidential powers.
On April 12 two Assembly members were injured in a fracas which broke out after a DPP member had physically attacked the Speaker, Liang Su-yung.
The DPP boycotted the Assembly session on April 15, a decision described by President Lee in a public speech the next day as "very regrettable" .
The DPP organized a 15-hour protest march through Taipei (the capital) on April 17-18.
The march was attended by as many as 20,000 people and passed off peacefully.
It was eventually called off by DPP leaders after the Kuomintang agreed to consider revising part of its constitutional amendment package.
According to some reports the government agreed to allow three agencies (including the powerful National Security Council) to be removed from presidential control in 1994.
Visit to China by Taiwanese delegation — Ending of "loudspeaker war" by China
The ending of the "Period of Communist Rebellion" removed a major obstacle to the development of closer ties between Taiwan and China.
On April 28 the first formal Taiwanese delegation to visit the Chinese mainland arrived in Beijing.
The 14-member delegation from the Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) met with officials from the Chinese State Council's Taiwan Affairs Office for a round of talks on April 29.
Prior to the visit the Cabinet-level Mainland Affairs Council (MAC) had authorized the SEF to handle "cross-strait disputes" over illegal immigrants, smuggling, acts of piracy and travel and trade issues.
On April 24 (the final day of the Taiwanese National Assembly session) China announced that it had stopped its "loudspeaker war" with Taiwan.
Loudspeakers from the south-eastern province of Fujian had previously directed propaganda messages to Taiwanese troops stationed on Quemoy and other islands close to the mainland.
The Taiwanese Defence Ministry said on April 24 that it would continue its loudspeaker broadcasts to the mainland, which it claimed were aimed at "keeping our mainland compatriots informed of free world developments" .
Resignation of Communications Minister
Premier Gen. Hau Pei-tsun accepted the resignation of Communications Minister Clement Chang on April 24.
Three days earlier Chang had been summoned to appear in court in connection with an insider stock trading scandal.
Chang had offered his resignation in early March after his wife and daughter had been implicated in the scandal [see p. 38089].
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Visit by UK Foreign Secretary to Hong Kong and China — Discussions over airport scheme
Douglas Hurd, the United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary, visited Hong Kong and China on April 2-9 for discussions aimed at settling the ongoing conflict between China and the Hong Kong government over the latter's plan to build a new airport and port complex [see p. 37961].
Hurd's visit to China was the first by so senior a UK minister since the crushing of the Chinese pro-democracy movement in June 1989.
China, whilst approving the airport plan in principle, had been insistent that it should be able to set its own terms for the size and financing of the project.
Such demands had provoked controversy over who controlled Hong Kong's internal affairs in the period leading up to its 1997 reversion to China.
On April 4-5 Hurd met with a series of senior Chinese leaders including Premier Li Peng, Foreign Affairs Minister Qian Qichen, Communist Party general secretary Jiang Zemin and Director of the State Council's Hong Kong Office Lu Ping.
During the discussions Hurd reportedly adopted a tough line over the airport issue, warning that the plans would be shelved unless the Chinese authorities abandoned its opposition to the project.
However, on his return to Hong Kong on April 8 he indicated to reporters that he had been unsuccessful in his attempt to win Chinese approval for the project.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Merger of opposition parties
At a national convention on April 9, a new opposition New Democratic Union (NDU) was formally launched under the leadership of Kim Dae Jung.
Formed by the merger of Kim's Party for Peace and Democracy (PPD) and the small dissident Party for New Democratic Alliance, the new party's platform was similar to that of the PPD; it included a commitment to a market economy, to independent diplomacy and to the restoration of morality within the political sphere.
Although the merger did not dramatically increase the main opposition party's size, it expanded its geographical area of support beyond the PPD's traditional south-western stronghold around Kwangju.
As such it helped to improve the prospects of Kim's anticipated campaign for the presidency in late 1992 or early 1993.
Kim's attempt to achieve "a grand coalition" of opposition forces followed President Roh Tae Woo's success in creating the ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP) through a merger in February 1990 of his governing party and two key opposition groups [see p. 37247].
In recent months the DLP had shown increasing signs of feuding amongst its three factions over internal hegemony and the candidacy for the presidential elections.
Visit by Soviet President
Soviet President Gorbachev made an official stop-over visit to the South Korean island of Cheju on April 19-20, whilst returning to Moscow from his four-day visit to Japan [see p. 38148].
The visit was the first by a Soviet leader to the divided Korean peninsula, and was indicative of the recently improved relations between South Korea and the Soviet Union, including the establishment of full diplomatic relations in 1990 [see p. 37714].
During the course of talks with Roh Tae Woo, Gorbachev suggested a "Korean-Soviet friendship and co-operation treaty" .
It was agreed to discuss the proposal further through talks between the foreign ministers of the two countries.
Gorbachev was also reported to have expressed his support for South Korea's bid to join the UN, describing North Korea's suggestion of a shared Korean seat as "unrealistic" .
The two leaders reaffirmed their desire to see an improvement in relations between North and South Korea, including an early resumption of the suspended inter-Korean Premiers' talks.
They also agreed that it was imperative that the North Korean government open its nuclear facilities to inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Local elections — Resignation of LDP secretary-general
In nationwide local elections held on April 7 and April 21, the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) increased its total number of seats, but suffered a humiliating defeat in the gubernatorial elections in Tokyo, and the party's secretary-general, Ichiro Ozawa, resigned his post on April 8.
LDP victories in prefectural and municipal elections
In the elections in 44 of the country's 47 prefectures for prefectural and municipal assemblies the LDP won 1,543 seats, 161 more than in 1987, and increased its share of the vote from 44.7 per cent to 46.6 per cent.
All of the other main political parties lost seats.
The Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ)— the country's main opposition grouping — won only 345 local assembly seats, a net loss of 98, in its worst showing since 1955.
The losses led to calls for the resignation of the national leadership.
Seats won in 19911987 Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) 1,5431,382 Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ) 345443 Komeito159186 Japanese Communist Party (JCP) 98118 Democratic Socialist Party (DSP) 82104 Others3740 Independents429397 
Distribution of local assembly seats
Gubernatorial elections in Tokyo and elsewhere
In the contest for the governorship of Tokyo the LDP switched its support from the 80-year-old incumbent governor Shunichi Suzuki, to Hisanori Isomura, the candidate supported by the national leadership of the opposition Komeito (Clean Government Party) and Democratic Socialist Party (DSP).
The move was inspired by Ozawa as part of a deal to gain support in the Diet (legislature) for Japan's US$9,000 million contribution to the allied war effort against Iraq [see p. 30811].
Fighting a campaign which asserted local democracy over central authority, however, Suzuki won a fourth consecutive four-year term, polling 2,292,846 votes (49.9 per cent of those cast) compared with 1,437,233 votes (31.3 per cent) for Isomura.
Shigeo Hatada, the candidate supported by the Japan Communist Party (JCP), came third with 421,775 votes (9.2 per cent), finishing ahead of Mitsunori Ohara, the preferred candidate of the SDPJ, who received 290,435 votes (6.3 per cent ).
The remaining candidates polled a total vote of 148,463 (3.3 per cent).
In the 12 gubernatorial contests outside Tokyo, LDP-supported candidates were victorious in Akita, Fukui, Ibaraki, Iwate, Kanagawa, Oita, Osaka, Saga, Shimane and Tottori.
Only in two instances — Hokkaido and Fukuoka, where the party failed to wrest control from left-wing incumbents — did candidates opposed by the LDP emerge as winners.
Incumbents were re-elected in all gubernatorial contests except Iwate, Saga and Osaka.
In the latter case the victorious candidate was supported by all parties except the JCP, whilst in the other two the winner was the preferred choice of the LDP, DSP and Komeito.
Resignation of Ozawa
Despite the overall success of the LDP, Ozawa — whom many commentators had singled out as a likely future Prime Minister — resigned on April 8, ostensibly as an act of atonement for the defeat of Isomura.
Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu reportedly attempted to persuade Ozawa, his main ally and patron, not to give up the secretary-general's post (which he had held since August 1989 when Kaifu became Prime Minister — see p. 36850).
The loss of Ozawa was seen by many as a serious blow to Kaifu's position, not least because it removed the chief architect of the process of co-operation between the LDP, Komeito and the DSP which Ozawa had been constructing in the Diet.
Within hours of Ozawa's departure, Kaifu announced that he would be succeeded by Keizo Obuchi, a former Chief Cabinet Secretary and (like Ozawa) a member of the LDP's powerful Takeshita faction.
Mayoral and city assembly elections
The second phase of Japan's local elections (for mayors and legislators at city, ward, town and village level) was held on April 21 and resulted in further LDP victories.
Candidates supported by the LDP (either singly or in alliance with some or all of the opposition parties) triumphed in 116 of the 128 mayoral contests.
Among the successful opposition candidates was Hitoshi Motoshima, who was narrowly elected to a fourth term as mayor of Nagasaki.
Motoshima had become a symbol of the right of free expression after he survived an assassination attempt by a right-wing nationalist in January 1990.
The attack was motivated by Motoshima's observation that the late Emperor Showa (in life known as Hirohito) bore some responsibility for the Pacific war, a comment which also cost him the support of the LDP [see p. 37186].
Harue Kitamura was elected mayor of Ashiya, in the southern prefecture of Hyogo, thereby becoming the first Japanese woman to hold such a post.
Running as an independent, Kitamura defeated the LDP incumbent after fighting a campaign centred upon increasing the local education budget.
Bush-Kaifu talks
Kaifu held a round of talks with the US President, George Bush, in California on April 4.
The meeting was widely seen as an opportunity for both sides to stress the importance of the US-Japanese partnership, which had been under strain following the Gulf war.
Japan's image as a "cash only" contributor to the war effort had increased US public hostility towards Japan, already high as a result of trade tensions.
Following the talks, Bush defended Japan's role in the Gulf war and said that he hoped that most Americans understood the constitutional constraints on Japanese military operations.
Bush also said that he had raised the rice issue with Kaifu, who had offered to settle the question of Japan's closed rice markets within the ongoing "Uruguay Round" of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) global trade negotiations.
Inaugural meeting of Import Board
A multinational Import Board, established as part of the follow-up to the so-called "Structural Impediments Initiative" (SII — see p. 37319-20) agreement of June 1990, held its inaugural meeting in Japan on April 8.
Under the terms of the SII agreement the USA and Japan had agreed to take measures to reduce the massive US trade deficit with Japan (US$41,000 million in 1990 — almost half the total US trade deficit).
The Import Board consisted of 18 business executives (eight Japanese, four from the Asian-Pacific region, three from the USA and three Europeans) and 10 high-level Japanese government officials.
It would meet twice a year, but working staff groups would have regular consultations.
At the April 8 meeting the US participants made a number of specific proposals for reducing the trade deficit including tax changes, incentives for foreign investment, and reductions in cross-shareholdings by related companies.
Gorbachev visit — Prospect for progress in Northern Territories dispute
Soviet President Gorbachev made a historic four-day visit to Japan on April 16-19, during which he held several sessions of talks with Kaifu.
Although the two leaders signed 15 low-level agreements covering issues such as environmental protection, nuclear energy and cultural links, no significant progress appeared to have been made towards resolving the outstanding dispute arising from the Soviet Union's occupation of the four islands north of Hokkaido.
The Northern Territories (known in the Soviet Union as the Kuriles) consisted of the four islands of Shikotan, Etorofu, Kunashiri and the Habomai group, seized by Soviet forces in the final days of the Pacific War in 1945.
The Soviet government's refusal to comply with demands for the return of the islands resulted in Japan's unwillingness to sign a peace treaty with its former enemy.
Notwithstanding a 1956 offer — later withdrawn — to return the two smaller islands (Shikotan and Habomai), and a 1973 Soviet suggestion that there could be a discussion of the sovereignty of the larger two, the issue served to freeze Soviet-Japanese relations and prevented joint economic ventures or Japanese aid.
The military importance of the islands in safeguarding the Soviet fleet's access to the Pacific, together with the potentially rich fishing rights, the past Soviet stance on the issue, and the precedent which it could set for those wishing to revise the Soviet Union's post-1945 boundaries, were all cited as reasons for the Soviet government's reluctance to surrender the territory.
The situation was also complicated by the fact that, since 1945, much of the islands' native population had been replaced by Soviet citizens who were opposed to any concessions towards Japanese claims of sovereignty.
A referendum on the issue on March 17 showed that 81.3 per cent of voters on Etorofu and 70.2 per cent on the other islands were opposed to the islands being returned to Japan.
Prior to Gorbachev's visit there had been intense diplomatic activity between the two countries.
This culminated in late March with a visit to Moscow by Ozawa as LDP secretary-general, during which it was strongly rumoured that Japan had offered a US$26,000 million cash, loans and aid package in exchange for the return of the islands.
It was understood, however, that the Soviet government had refused the offer prior to Gorbachev's visit.
Thus, despite several unscheduled sessions of talks between the two leaders, the only concessions offered by Gorbachev during the course of his visit were to acknowledge the nature of the dispute, to promise a reduction in the level of Soviet forces stationed in the territories — currently one 10,000-strong army division and 40 MiG-23 aircraft — and to allow visa-free travel between Japan and the disputed islands.
In a speech to the Japanese Diet on April 17 Gorbachev made a wide-ranging appeal for an end of the bilateral relationships in the Pacific which were a legacy of the Cold War.
Instead he called for a new security order based either on "trilateral Soviet-Japanese-US consultations and concrete agreements" , or a five-power conference involving China, India, Japan, the Soviet Union and the USA.
He also promised unilateral Soviet military reductions in the region, and called for other Pacific powers to follow suit.
Both leaders expressed themselves pleased with the symbolic importance of the visit, and a joint communiqué, signed late on April 18, expressed a desire to "promote mutual relations" in trade and other spheres.
They also agreed to hold further talks in Moscow in the summer of 1991.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Appointment of new Chief of Staff
The Deputy Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), Maj.-Gen.
Alexander Aguirre, resigned on April 8 in protest over President Corazon Aquino's choice of a new Chief of Staff to succeed Gen. Rodolfo Biazon who retired from the army on April 14.
By choosing Maj.-Gen.
Lisandro Abadia, Aquino passed over a number of more senior figures, including Aguirre — the country's third-ranking officer — and his immediate superior, Maj.-Gen.
Guillermo Flores, the current Vice-Chief of Staff and hitherto favourite to succeed Biazon.
Aquino's choice of Abadia, announced on April 6, together with her appointment of Brig. -Gen.
Arturo Enrile — who was expected to succeed Abadia when he retired in May 1992 — as army commander, represented the ascendency of the Philippine Military Academy's class of 1962.
A veteran of the Vietnam war, Abadia was a self-professed "field soldier" , and the architect of the army's current "seize-hold-consolidate-develop" strategy which, since 1988, had been used with some effect against the guerrilla insurgents of the New People's Army (NPA).
Although Abadia was respected by the lower ranks, his appointment was understood to have caused widespread resentment amongst senior officers who interpreted it as a breach of the seniority rule, hitherto strictly adhered to.
Aguirre, previously thought of as one of the President's most loyal officers, described it as "unfair and unjust" and stated that a leader who was incapable of "making a just and proper decision over a simple matter such as appointments cannot be expected to make correct decisions about the complex affairs of state" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Launching of pro-democracy groups
Formation of Democracy Forum
A Democracy Forum was launched on April 3 by leading members of Indonesia's religious, cultural and intellectual communities with the aim of promoting political dialogue.
The 45-member group was headed by Abdurrahman Wahid, leader of the Nahdatul Ulama, the country's largest Moslem grouping.
A government-endorsed Moslem organization, the Association of Moslem Intellectuals, had been formed in December 1990 [see p. 37919].
The Far Eastern Economic Review of April 25 reported that some government officials and members of the armed forces had welcomed the creation of the Forum, provided that it complied with strict government guidelines on political behaviour.
However, the report also stated that the group had been asked to change its name.
Formation of League for Restoration of Democracy
The formation of a more radical organization was reported by the Agence France-Presse news agency on April 8.
The League for the Restoration of Democracy, led by Johannes Princen, had been launched "with the goal of persuading voters to boycott the 1992 [general]election" .
Princen was also president of the banned Independent Setiakawan ( "Solidarity" ) Trade Union.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Relations with USA
The United States indicated to Vietnam on April 9 that it was prepared to normalize relations in return for Vietnamese co-operation in negotiating a settlement of the Cambodian conflict and in accounting for US servicemen listed as missing in action (MIA) during the Vietnam war.
Commenting on the proposal at a April 20 press conference, Vietnamese Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach said that he had "not yet accepted and not yet rejected" the US conditions.
The offer was made during a meeting in New York between Richard Solomon, US Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and the Pacific, and Trinh Xuan Lang, Vietnam's permanent representative at the UN.
A report in the Washington Post of April 10 said that the plan presented by Solomon outlined four distinct phases:(i) at the time of the signing of an international agreement on Cambodia the USA and Vietnam would enter into normalization discussions; the USA would also officially approve visits by US business and veterans' groups to Vietnam;(ii) with the establishment of a US transitional presence in Cambodia, the US would partially lift its trade embargo against Vietnam and Cambodia; the second phase would also require increased accounting for US MIAs;(iii) the third phase would begin after the UN process in Cambodia had lasted at least six months and would include the establishment of US and Vietnamese diplomatic offices in Hanoi and Washington respectively, a full lifting of the US trade embargo against Vietnam and an easing of US opposition to international bank lending to Vietnam; the third phase would also involve further substantial progress in accounting for US MIAs;(iv) the final phase would follow UN-supervised elections in Cambodia and would include full normalization of US diplomatic and economic relations with Vietnam and Cambodia as well as support for international bank lending.
Visit to Hanoi by US delegation — Agreement to establish MIA office in Hanoi — US offer of humanitarian aid
A US delegation led by Gen. John Vessey, special envoy of President Bush, visited Hanoi on April 19-20 for talks with Vietnamese officials, including Nguyen Co Thach.
During the talks it was agreed that the USA would establish a "temporary office" in Hanoi to investigate outstanding MIA cases.
The US side stressed that the office's sole purpose would be to investigate the fate of the remaining 2,278 MIAs and would not be an "embassy in disguise" .
The Guardian of April 27 reported that the US had offered US$1,000,000 to be channelled through humanitarian groups to provide artificial limbs for Vietnamese war victims.
Party affairs — Economy
Preparation for seventh CPV congress — Attack on CPV by leading intellectual — Expulsion of Bui Tin
Intense preparations for the seventh congress of the ruling Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) continued amid reports that an acrimonious debate was taking place within the party over economic and political policy.
There was some indication that the congress, originally thought to have been scheduled for May, had been postponed until June.
A report on Voice of Vietnam radio on March 4 said that some local party congresses had "proceeded in a cursory and unsatisfactory fashion" , while elsewhere "some issues generated contrasting views and suggestions" .
The Agence France-Presse news agency had reported on March 3 that Nguyen Khac Vien, a leading intellectual and historian, had submitted an extremely critical petition to a CPV meeting in January, describing the current CPV leadership as "totally impotent" and accusing them of "plunging the country into disorder and preventing all development" .
The petition, which was subsequently circulated in Paris, warned that unless a "set of broad-based rules for democracy" were implemented, then Vietnam would "never be able to stand alone and compete with its neighbouring countries" .
Voice of Vietnam radio announced on March 12 that Bui Tin had been expelled from the CPV and dismissed from his post as deputy editor-in-chief of the party daily Nhan Dan.
Bui Tin, who had lived in Paris since September 1990, had issued a controversial "citizen's petition" in December criticizing the CPV leadership and demanding greater reforms.
He went on to repeat his demands during a number of interviews on the British Broadcasting Corporation's Vietnamese-language service.
Foreign investment forum
Vietnam's first foreign investment forum was held in Ho Chi Minh City on March 11-15.
The forum, sponsored by the Vietnamese government and the UN Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), was attended by over 600 delegates from 31 countries.
Over 180 local industrial projects worth a total of US$6,800 million were presented at the forum.
According to Vietnamese officials, 217 foreign investment projects worth a total of US$1,400 million had been approved since the passage in late 1987 of liberal foreign investment legislation [see pp. 35900-01].
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Relations with USA
Suspension of US aid to non-communist rebels — Visit to Phnom Penh by US delegation
It emerged in April that the United States had in January 1991 suspended aid to the two non-communist factions of the rebel National Government of Cambodia (NGC)— the Sihanoukists and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF).
Details of the suspension surfaced a matter of days after the USA had outlined a four-stage plan for the normalization of US-Vietnamese relations, under which any improvement in relations was fully conditional on Vietnam's acceptance of the stalled UN peace plan for Cambodia [see p. 37654].
News of the suspension of a US$20,000,000 humanitarian and "non-lethal military aid" package came after months of intense debate between the US State Department and Congress over allegations of military co-operation between the non-communists and the third NGC faction, the communist Khmers Rouges.
The suspension followed reports of "tactical military co-operation" between the three factions [see p. 37777 for Senate approval of aid package in October 1990].
Details of the suspension emerged on April 11-12 during a testimony given by Richard Solomon, US Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and the Pacific, to House and Senate committees [see p. 38100 for Solomon's March 1991 visit to China, Japan, Indonesia and Thailand].
Solomon, reflecting State Department displeasure at the move, said that a full-scale cut-off of US aid would be a "disaster" .
A US congressional delegation led by Senator Robert Kerrey visited Phnom Penh on April 2-4 for talks with, amongst others, Hun Sen, the Premier of the State of Cambodia (SOC), and Chea Sim, the powerful National Assembly chair.
During his visit Kerrey made it known that he was campaigning for the lifting of the US economic embargo against the SOC and for increased investment and aid by US non-governmental organizations.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
IMF structural adjustment facility
In a press release dated April 8, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced that it had approved a loan equivalent to 8,790,000 special drawing rights (SDR1=US$1.35476 as at April 8, 1991).
The loan was in support of the second annual programme of a structural adjustment facility (SAF) arrangement, which was approved in September 1989 for a total of SDR20,510,000.
The government had drawn SDR5,860,000 to support the first annual SAF programme.
The press release stated that most of the elements of a market-based economic system were in place in Laos.
The government aimed to reduce further its direct role in productive activity and to continue the liberalization of the foreign trade system.
The government's economic programme for 1991 was designed to achieve real economic growth of about 5 per cent, to hold inflation down to 14 per cent and to limit the deterioration in the current-account balance.
Fifth LPRP congress
The ruling Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP) held its fifth congress in Vientiane, the capital, on March 27-29 [for fourth congress held in November 1986 see p. 35006].
The 367 congress delegates represented over 60,000 party members.
The congress was also attended by the secretary general of the ruling Communist Party of Vietnam (Nguyen Van Linh), by the general secretary of the Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party (Heng Samrin) and by a delegation from the Communist Party of China.
Kaysone's political report
The political report to the congress, delivered on March 27 by Kaysone Phomvihane in his capacity as LPRP general secretary, said that the policy of restructuring applied over the past five years had "injected new life and a sense of flexibility" into the private and state-operated economic sectors.
Nevertheless, shortcomings in the economic field were still "quite numerous" , and included a poor transport and communications network, low-quality education, public health and social welfare systems, a growing trade imbalance and an increasing budget deficit.
Kaysone called on the party to continue "comprehensively implementing the cause of restructuring" , presenting a list of economic tasks which included quickening the pace at which privately owned farms replaced agricultural co-operatives, and reforming the country's financial and banking system.
Election to leadership bodies
On March 29 the congress announced that Kaysone had been unanimously elected as "president of the party" in recognition of "his great virtues and tireless devotion" .
The nine-member secretariat, which had previously conducted party affairs on a day-to-day basis, was abolished, a move which some commentators assessed as increasing Kaysone's personal control of the party.
A new political bureau was elected [see p. 35006 for composition of previous bureau], which included three new members, all strong supporters of Kaysone's economic reform policies.
A central committee advisory board was created to accommodate three "old guard" revolutionaries who were not re-elected to the political bureau, namely Souphanouvong, Phoumi Vongvichit and Sisomphone Lovansay.
A fourth person dropped from the political bureau was Gen. Sisavat Keobounphanh, the Chief of General Staff and mayor of Vientiane.
According to some reports Sisavat's departure related to charges of corruption and nepotism.
[For death of politburo member Saly Vongkhamsao on Jan. 23, 1991, see p. 37963.]
New political bureau
Full members.
Kaysone Phomvihane, Nouhak Phoumsavan, Gen. Khamtay Siphandon, Gen. Phoune Sipaseuth, Maychantane Sengmany, Lt.-Gen.
Saman Vignaket, Oudom Khatti-gna**, Brig. -Gen.
Choummali Saignakong**, Somlak Chanthamat*, Khamphoui Keoboualapha*, Thongsing Thammavong*.
*New member.
**Promoted from alternate membership.
The new central committee had 55 full members and four alternate members (the previous committee had 51 full and nine alternate members).
Kaysone's wife, Thongvinh Phomvihane, was removed from the central committee, but his son, Saysomphone Phomvihane, was elected as a new member.
It was officially stated that 47 per cent of the members of the new central committee were aged under 49, that four of them were women and that 41 per cent had received education to university level.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Internal political developments — Abolition of enterprise unions
Election of NLA president — Formation of constitution drafting commission
Ukrit Mongkolnavin, the former president of the dissolved House of Representatives, was elected president of the National Legislative Assembly (NLA) on April 1.
The NLA had been appointed in mid-March by the military junta (the National Peace-Keeping Assembly) which had seized power (as the National Peace-Keeping Council-NPKC) in a Feb. 23 coup [see pp. 38003-04; 38099].
A 20-member Constitution Drafting Commission (CDC) held its first meeting on April 8 [see p. 38099 for approval of interim constitution in early March].
The CDC was composed of one military officer, two former MPs and seven academics, the remainder being civil servants, lawyers and members of the NLA.
At its first meeting the CDC elected Michai Ruchuphan as its chair and Arun Phanuphong as its vice-chair.
Government policy statement — Announcement on lifting of martial law
Anand Panyarachun, appointed Prime Minister by the military in early March [see p. 38099], delivered a government policy statement to the NLA on April 4.
His government would (i) support the NLA in drafting a fresh constitution and in organizing "honest and fair" elections;(ii) reform the bureaucratic administrative system by, among other measures, fighting corruption and decentralizing power;(iii) modernize the armed forces and develop the national defence industry;(iv) support good relations with ASEAN and neighbouring countries;(v) speed up the relief of economic hardships suffered by the people and farmers and improve economic efficiency; and (vi) step up crime suppression and prevention.
Anand announced on April 23 that martial law and a ban on political gatherings, both imposed in the immediate aftermath of the Feb. 23 coup, would be lifted in May.
Anand made the announcement after student leaders had presented him with a petition calling for the lifting of martial law.
However, a military spokesman warned on April 24 that martial law could easily be re-imposed if any unrest occurred.
Abolition of state enterprise unions — Appointment of officers to state enterprise boards
On April 19 King Bhumibol Adulyadej signed into law two acts which automatically dissolved all 61 of the country's state enterprise unions [see p. 38099].
The legislation had been approved at a single sitting of the NLA on April 15.
Under the new legislation, leaders of state enterprise unions were forced to seek approval from the Interior Ministry to register their organizations as "associations" .
If approved, such "associations" would have no right to collective bargaining or to initiate industrial action.
The Cabinet approved the appointment of several high-ranking military and police officers to the boards of a number of state enterprises on April 23.
The officers replaced directors appointed by the ousted government of Maj.-Gen Chatichai Choonhaven.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Further moves against NLD opposition — Ethnic insurgency
Statement by junta ruling out transfer of power — Removal of Suu Kyi as NLD leader
During April the ruling military junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), moved to frustrate further the efforts of the opposition National League for Democracy (NLD) to form a democratic government.
The NLD had won an overwhelming election victory in May 1990 [see pp. 37457-58], following which the junta had refused to hand over power and had instead initiated a strategy of undermining the party.
On April 22 Gen. Than Shwe, Deputy C.-in-C. of the armed forces, confirmed that the military had no plans to transfer power to the dormant People's Assembly.
Gen. Than Shwe said that "at present we cannot find any organization that can govern the country in a peaceful and stable manner" .
On April 23 the SLORC announced that, with effect from March 26, the central committee of the NLD had been "invalidated" .
This meant in effect that Aung San Suu Kyi, the country's main opposition leader who had been under house arrest since July 1989, was removed as the party's secretary general.
Gen. (retd) Tin U was also removed as party chair.
Under the new "restructured" central committee, Suu Kyi was replaced by U Lwin and Tin U by Aung Shwe.
Operations against Karen rebels — Thai operations against Khun Sa — Ceasefire with Pa-o rebels
By early April large numbers of civilian refugees had crossed into Thailand to avoid fighting in the eastern town of Phaw Hta.
Heavy fighting had broken out in late March when guerrillas of the Karen National Union (KNU), supported by student dissidents, attempted to wrest control of the town from government forces.
For the first time government forces used fighter-bombers to attack rebel positions.
Also in late March fighting had erupted to the north of the Karen heartlands as government-backed Wa guerrillas battled with the private army of "warlord" Khun Sa for control of narcotics routes into Thailand.
After the fighting had spilled over into Thailand, Thai forces responded with helicopter and fighter-bomber attacks against Khun Sa's soldiers.
It was reported on April 11 that the government had signed a ceasefire agreement with the Pa-o National Organization, a small group which had operated in the hill country of southern Shan state.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Economy
Foreign exchange crisis — Introduction of import curbs — Emergency Japanese aid package
At a press conference in Delhi on April 14, Finance Minister Yaswant Sinha assured India's international creditors that the government would not default on its debt repayments.
He also ruled out debt rescheduling.
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI), the central bank, had placed severe credit restrictions on imports on March 20 in an attempt to curb the outflow of hard currency following a sharp deterioration in foreign exchange reserves.
Foreign currency reserves had plunged to some US$2,300 million in early March, barely enough to cover three weeks' imports.
The foreign exchange crisis, the country's second in three months, stemmed from the delay in negotiations with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) over a US$2,000 million standby credit [see p. 38006].
On a visit to Japan on April 10-13, Sinha secured $350,000,000 in emergency assistance to help replenish foreign exchange reserves.
Japan also agreed to contribute $150,000,000 to a longer-term energy loan as part of a co-financing package with the Asian Development Bank.
In return for the loans, India removed five Japanese companies from a government blacklist.
The companies had been placed on the blacklist after being accused of offering "kickbacks" to win an oil pipeline contract.
State developments
The Election Commissioner announced on April 24 that national and state-level elections would be held in Punjab on June 22, a month after polling in the general election elsewhere in the country [see p. 38101 for calling of elections].
The announcement was opposed by Congress (I) and many other parties.
However, a report in The Times of April 25 stated that the three main Panthic committees, whose member organizations led the separatist struggle in the state, had decided to put up candidates in the elections.
Leading separatists had met with Prime Minister Chandra Shekhar in Delhi on April 17 and 19; on April 20 it was announced that a large number of Sikh youths imprisoned for minor offences would be released.
The Election Commissioner also announced on April 24 that national and state-level elections would take place in Assam on June 6 and 8.
On April 17 Shekhar had suspended the army's five-month military operation in the state after the separatist United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) had provided assurances that it would not disrupt the elections [see p. 38102 for ULFA ceasefire announcement in early March].
The state of Jammu and Kashmir was excluded from the May national elections by a presidential order signed on April 18.
In Kashmir the militant Moslem Crusade Force (MCF) had kidnapped two Swedish engineers on March 31.
Olle Loman and Johan Jansson were the first foreigners to be seized during the rebellion in Kashmir.
The MCF demanded that the UN and the human rights organization Amnesty International send teams to the Kashmir Valley to investigate alleged atrocities carried out by the Indian security forces.
The Indian government had previously refused to allow international human rights organizations access.
Haryana was placed under president's rule on April 6 following the disqualification of three Janata Dal (S) members under anti-defection legislation and the subsequent refusal of controversial Chief Minister Om Prakash Chauthala to prove his majority on the Assembly floor.
National and state-level elections were due to be held in Haryana in late May.
The Kerala State Assembly was dissolved on April 5 ahead of simultaneous state-level and national elections in May.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Cyclone — Internal politics and security
Cyclone
The coastal regions of Bangladesh were struck by a powerful cyclone on April 29-30.
The cyclone, the worst in the country's 20-year history, killed large numbers of people, left hundreds of thousands homeless and destroyed vast areas of farmland [for full report on the cyclone and its effects see May News Digest].
Opening of National Assembly
Acting President Shehabuddin Ahmed opened the newly elected Jatiya Sangsad (National Assembly) on April 5 [see p. 38102 for formation of government by Bangladesh Nationalist Party — BNP — in mid-March].
One of the first acts of the new Jatiya Sangsad was to elect Abdur Rahman Biswas of the BNP as Speaker.
Arrest of former Prime Minister — Transfer of Ershad to Dhaka jail
Mizanur Rahman Chowdhury, Prime Minister in 1986-88 and acting chair of the Jatiya Party, was arrested on April 21 after demanding the release from prison of the deposed President, Lt.-Gen. (retd) Hussain Mohammad Ershad.
On April 18 Ershad had been moved to Dhaka central prison from the Gulsham villa where he had been detained since his arrest in December 1990.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Intensification of violence
Intensified conflict between government forces and the guerrillas of the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) in late March [see p. 38103]and April made the month to April 21 the bloodiest yet, according to official figures.
Over 950 LTTE guerrillas were recorded as killed, two-thirds of them around Mannar, on Mannar Island in the north-west, where the government now claimed to have established firm control.
Security personnel losses were given as 166 killed.
In early April a figure had been given of 1,108 security personnel deaths since June 1990, when the breakdown of a year-long ceasefire [see pp. 37529-30]had dashed hopes of a political solution to the Tamil separatist issue.
On April 25-29, government forces conducted an offensive on Karaitivu and Kayts islands, just west of the Jaffna peninsula, claiming success in ending the rebel siege of Karainagar naval base (attacked by LTTE forces on April 1) and killing 126 guerrillas for 31 soldiers lost.
In the ethnically mixed Tamil, Moslem and Sinhalese Buddhist areas of eastern Sri Lanka, where inter-group violence since 1990 had effectively led to the creation of a series of mutually hostile ghettoes defended by informal militias, the government blamed the LTTE for three major attacks during April, involving the killing of 11 fishermen off Trincomalee on April 3, of 17 men, women and children in a village further south on April 14, and of 22 more on April 20 at Neadalla near Monaragala.
The army also reported having overrun an LTTE camp at Toppigala near Batticaloa on April 9, killing 77 guerrillas and losing seven soldiers.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Introduction of Sharia bill — Acquittal of former minister — Resignation of Azad Kashmir government — Indo-Pakistan
talks
Prime Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif announced legislation on April 10 aimed at creating an "Islamic welfare state" .
The move, widely regarded as an attempt to appease the government's right-wing critics unhappy with the slow pace of Islamic reform and with recent Gulf war policy [see pp. 38007; 38102], was expected to be resisted by women's groups and minorities.
Addressing a rarely convened joint session of the Federal Legislature, made possible by the ending of a two-month opposition boycott in protest against the alleged intimidation of Pakistan People's Party (PPP) members in Sind, Sharif said that the proposed legislation would consist of two bills, one to amend the Constitution and the other to make the Koran and Sunna (the practices of the prophet Mohammad) supreme law.
While justifying the need for Islamic reform, Sharif nevertheless stressed that he was not "a fundamentalist" impervious to "the requirements of modern times" .
Responding to the Prime Minister's speech, PPP leader Benazir Bhutto said that "his proposals contain some good points, which if implemented could lead to social reforms and improvement" .
Bhutto added that her party would be willing to co-operate with Sharif "if he brings non-fundamentalist bills" .
The leader of the Jama'at-i-Islami, Senator Qazi Hussain Ahmad, said that "this is a good package, but we will see what steps the Prime Minister actually takes towards implementation" .
Elaborating the content of the Islamic Law bills in the National Assembly on April 11, the Minister of State for Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Chaudhary Amir Hussain, said that they would enforce measures to control corruption in the public services and bring education in line with Islamic values.
He also said that a commission would be established to "oversee the elimination of riba (interest) from every sphere of economic activity" and to recommend "suitable alternatives" within three years.
On April 13 the main religious parties rejected the proposed Islamic Law bills, saying that they sought to perpetuate an interest-based economy.
The Independent of April 27 quoted the Minister of State as saying that the Islamic Law bills would seek to prevent a woman becoming Prime Minister.
Acquittal of former Law Minister
On April 28 the Supreme Court overturned the conviction of Syed Iftikhar Hussein Gilani, a member of the PPP and a Law and Justice Minister in the Bhutto government [see p. 37203].
The decision came after a special tribunal in Peshawar had found Gilani guilty on April 24 of the misappropriation of public funds, and had disqualified him for seven years from a seat in the National Assembly.
Meanwhile, Ghulam Abbas Chandio, an adviser to the former PPP chief minister of Sind, was arrested on April 25 on charges of being "closely associated" with the hijacking of a Singapore Airlines Airbus in March [see p. 38103].
His arrest was expected to threaten the accord reached on April 9 between Sharif and the PPP which undertook to investigate allegations of the continued harassment of PPP members in Sind in return for an end to the opposition's boycott of parliament [see also above].
On April 8, unknown gunmen shot dead Abdur Rahman Sheikh, the governor of the Karachi prison where Bhutto's husband Asif Ali Zardari was being held on charges of conspiracy to murder.
Resignation of Azad Kashmir government
On April 13 the Prime Minister of Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK), Mumtaz Hussain Rathore, announced in Muzaffarabad that elections to a new State Assembly would be held on June 29.
Rathore's government, dominated by the Azad Kashmir People's Party, had resigned on March 31, complaining of "repeated attempts by the opposition Moslem Conference to topple the government through unconstitutional means" .
Reports suggested that Rathore had found it increasingly difficult to co-operate with the AJK President, Sardar Abdul Qayyum Khan of the Moslem Conference, a party closely allied to the Islamic Democratic Alliance (IDA) -dominated government of Pakistan [see p. 37653].
Indo-Pakistan talks
A fourth round of Indo-Pakistan talks at foreign secretary level took place in New Delhi on April 4-6, concerned with confidence-building measures.
On April 6, the two sides signed agreements on the prevention of airspace violation by military aircraft and on advance notification of military exercises and troop movements [see also p. 37965].
A joint statement said that they had "agreed in principle to resume dialogue on Siachen" , the disputed glacier area in the north.
Earlier, on March 26, boundary officials from the two countries had agreed on an early demarcation of the Sir Creek area in the Great Rann of Kutch.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman confirmed on March 27 that the responsibilities of the Foreign Minister, Sahibzada Yaqub Khan, who resigned officially on March 20 [see also p. 38007], would be assumed by Akram Zaki, secretary-general at the Foreign Office.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Fall of Khost
The Afghan government in early April acknowledged that its garrison at Khost had fallen to mujaheddin guerrillas on March 31.
Khost, situated south of Kabul near the border with Pakistan in Paktia province, had been under virtual siege for the duration of the Afghan civil war.
Of little strategic value, the capture of Khost was nevertheless a major symbolic victory for the rebel forces, and their most significant military success since the Soviet withdrawal in February 1989.
The rebel forces had launched their latest offensive in mid-March with a sustained artillery barrage and ground attack.
The Kabul regime responded by reinforcing the garrison's 3,000-4,000 regular troops and by launching a high-altitude bombing campaign; Kabul-based Scud-missiles were also fired at rebel positions.
An assortment of mujaheddin guerrillas were involved in the offensive, including supporters of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar's fundamentalist Hezb-e Islami and Jalaluddin Haqqani's rival Hezb-e Islami (Yunis Khan faction).
The rebels also reportedly received logistical support from the United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and its Pakistani counterpart, the Inter Services Intelligence (ISI).
The Afghan government claimed that artillery and infantry units of the Pakistan army had actually entered the battle at a decisive stage in late March.
The eventual surrender of the garrison was reportedly arranged by Lt.-Gen.
Shahnawaz Tanay, former Defence Minister and failed coup leader [see p. 37314], who persuaded soldiers that they would not suffer reprisals.
Following its capture a 23-member shura (council) of mujaheddin members took control of the town.
Meeting of Pakistan Afghan Bureau
In Pakistan, the government's Afghan Bureau met on April 3 to discuss the country's policy in the wake of the capture of Khost.
According to a report in the Middle East International of May 3 the Bureau, whose members included the Prime Minister, President, Chief of Army Staff and intelligence heads, decided that Pakistan would open a dialogue with the Soviet Union aimed at seeking a modus vivendi.
Pakistan had recently been under some pressure from the USA to formulate a fresh political initiative on Afghanistan.
Scud attack on Asadabad
Mujaheddin rebels claimed that up to 400 people were killed on April 20 in the north-eastern city of Asadabad as a result of a Scud missile attack by government forces.
The city, the capital of Kunar province, was under mujaheddin control.
However, a report on (government-controlled) Radio Afghanistan on April 22 claimed that the deaths were the result of a rebel missile attack on the city.
Dismissal of Keshtmand
On April 8 the National Assembly unanimously approved the dismissal of Sultan Ali Keshtmand as First Vice-President.
At the same time it formally approved the confirmation as a Vice-President of Abdol Wahed Sorabi, as announced by President Najibullah in January.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
Welfare cuts — Proposed new labour law
Cutbacks in social security payments were implemented on April 1, significantly reducing welfare state provisions in a sphere where New Zealand had been one of the earliest pioneers.
The Nationalist Party government of Prime Minister Jim Bolger, elected in October 1990 after six years of Labour rule [see p. 37781], aimed to reduce the budget deficit and to tackle what Finance Minister Ruth Richardson characterized as a burden sapping the country's energy.
Unemployment and sickness benefits were reduced (with particular severity for those under 25), as were benefits for single mothers; some families would no longer be eligible for child benefit, and pensions would not be uprated in line with inflation.
Allied to the welfare cutbacks was a radical change in labour law, the controversial Employment Contracts Bill, due to be introduced in May.
Ostensibly designed to open new job opportunities for those moving from welfare into work, this legislation would abolish compulsory union membership, remove exclusive union bargaining rights, and abolish the national tripartite annual wage negotiations.
Protests on April 2 attracted 100,000 participants, the largest demonstrations since those in 1981 against the South African rugby tour; in Auckland, effigies of Bolger and Richardson were burned.
Schools were closed as 50,000 teachers joined strike action, part of a week of protests called by the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions.
Visit of French Prime Minister — Apology over Rainbow Warrior
French Prime Minister Michel Rocard signed in Wellington on April 29 an agreement setting up a bilateral "friendship fund" ; accepting blame, he said that France had recognized its past wrongdoing in the Rainbow Warrior affair.
His two-day visit was the first by a French Prime Minister and also the first by any European Prime Minister since Harold Macmillan in January 1957 [see p. 16042].
In 1986 France had undertaken to punish two secret agents who came to Auckland in July 1985 and sank the Rainbow Warrior, a ship used by Greenpeace environmental activists in protests to highlight French nuclear testing in the Pacific [see pp. 33852-55; 34565-68].
A UN panel, finding in May 1990 that France had violated the 1986 agreement, proposed French payments into a "friendship fund" [see p. 37459].
The affair had dominated relations between the two countries, and Rocard now hoped for a fresh start, although Bolger noted that they would have to "agree to differ" over French nuclear policy.
On agriculture the New Zealand side expressed concerns over protectionist barriers affecting its major exports, and over the current impasse in the GATT talks [see also p. 38027].
ASIA — PACIFIC
WESTERN SAMOA
HRPP victory in general election
The Human Rights Protection Party (HRPP), led by Prime Minister Tofilau Eti Alesana, was returned to power on April 5 in the first general election under the country's recently introduced universal adult suffrage.
Interim official results gave the HRPP 26 of the 47 seats in the Fono (the unicameral legislature), with 18 going to the opposition Samoan National Development Party (SNDP — the name adopted by the coalition of independents and the Christian Democratic party following their defeat in the February 1988 general election — see p. 36098); three seats were won by independents.
By April 24 Tofilau Eti claimed that 30 members of the Fono had pledged support for his administration, while 16 were aligned with the SNDP and one remained an independent.
The government had held a one-seat majority in the Fono as elected in 1988 [see p. 36098].
Opposition leader Tupua Tamasese Efi — who, as Tupuola Tamasese Efi, had served as Prime Minister in 1976-82 — lost his seat, thereby allowing Va'ai Kolone, Prime Minister in 1986-1988, to resume leadership of the opposition.
One Cabinet Minister in the previous government, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker all also failed to secure re-election.
Universal adult suffrage had been adopted following a referendum in October 1990 [see pp. 37884-85].
Hitherto, since independence from New Zealand in 1962, 45 legislators had been elected by the 20,000 Matai — the traditional male heads of extended family groups — and the remaining two by voters of European blood who were not members of any Matai family.
The right to stand for election still remained restricted to Matai.
The turnout was estimated at 78 per cent of the 57,000 registered electors.
The new Fono was due to assemble on May 7.
In an interview on April 6, Tofilau Eti said that the introduction of compulsory education would be the new government's first priority.
ASIA — PACIFIC
ADB
The 51-country Asian Development Bank's annual meeting in Vancouver, Canada, on April 24-26 failed to agree terms for a controversial replenishment of its soft loan window, the Asian Development Fund [see p. 35206 for last replenishment in 1986].
MONGOLIA: the country's disgraced hardline former communist leader Marshal Yumjaagiyn Tsedenbal died in exile in Moscow on April 18, aged 74 [see pp. 33159; 37318; 37610].
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Extraordinary Luxembourg summit
On the evening of April 8, the heads of state and government of the 12 member countries of the European Communities (EC) held an extraordinary meeting of the European Council in Luxembourg to discuss the situation in the Middle East.
The summit was originally intended to improve EC foreign policy co-ordination after member countries had failed to present a united front during the Gulf crisis [see pp. 37927; 37934].
In the event the meeting provided the forum for EC leaders to give their backing to a plan presented by United Kingdom Prime Minister John Major for the creation of a "safe haven" for Kurds in northern Iraq [for full details see pp. 38127-28].
Major's proposals were first put forward at the summit (although the United States government had reportedly been told shortly beforehand), prompting the Independent of April 10 to wonder whether "the early bungling over the Gulf crisis could be quietly forgotten" .
The meeting approved emergency aid for Kurdish refugees totalling 150 million European currency units (US$200 million).
Two-thirds of this was to come from EC funds and the remainder from member countries.
(On April 3 the Commission had already announced the provision of ECU5,000,000 in emergency aid to Kurdish refugees within Iraq, and EC humanitarian aid to Iraq had been agreed on March 25 — see p. 38083.
On Feb. 28, within 24 hours of the suspension of allied military operations, the Commission had announced a donation of ECU500,000 for water purification equipment in Iraq.)
At the April 8 meeting it was also agreed that France, the UK and Belgium (currently a non-permanent UN Security Council member) would press for the UN to establish a register of all arms sales.
The Independent of April 8 noted that this Luxembourg meeting of the European Council would be the fourth special meeting in 18 months [see pp. 37028; 37363-64; 37782-83]and detected "a subtle but important change in the character of the Community, away from supranational roots where the European Commission holds sway, towards a more intergovernmental future under the guiding hand of the European Council" .
WEU meeting
Also on April 8 Foreign Ministers from the nine-member Western European Union (WEU) held a parallel extraordinary meeting in Luxembourg to co-ordinate military and logistical support in distributing Kurdish aid.
The meeting was attended by the ambassador from Turkey (not a WEU member), and, for the first time, by an EC Commissioner, Frans Andriessen (responsible for external relations).
Non-member countries Denmark and Greece sent observers but neutral Ireland did not.
Some press reports described the holding of the WEU parallel meeting as establishing a precedent for greater EC influence over the WEU [see also pp. 38022; 38115].
Discussion of draft treaty document
In mid-April the Luxembourg government, which held the EC Council presidency for the first half of 1991, presented a 95-page draft treaty document focusing on political union.
At a meeting on April 15-16 Luxembourg Foreign Minister Jacques Poos declared that there had been a "large majority" in favour of the draft in the key areas of (i) common foreign and security policy and (ii) increased powers for the European Parliament (EP).
EC Commission President Jacques Delors, however, speaking on April 17, warned that the proposals presented "a real danger that the Commission will be turned into a mere secretariat serving the Council" .
The Luxembourg draft outlined the aims of the "European Union" and then identified three areas of competence.
The first covered standard EC activities including the existing 1957 Treaty of Rome, amended to include economic and monetary union and the EC's separate Euratom and coal and steel treaties [see pp. 15951-56; 15927-30; 11905-10].
The second part would define areas of joint EC-national competence on common foreign and security policy.
Initially areas of "common action" would include arms co-operation and control, and UN peacekeeping operations.
France and the UK, as the only EC countries holding permanent membership of the UN Security Council, would be required to vote in line with the views of their EC partners.
Unanimity would generally be the rule, although "the means of applying a common action would be adopted by majority vote" .
On the sensitive issue of the WEU [see also above]the draft stated only that decisions with defence implications "can be entirely or partially implemented in the framework of the WEU to the degree they also come within the competence of this body" .
Review of this arrangement would take place in 1996.
The third area would codify existing intergovernmental co-operation on drugs, crime, political asylum and immigration policy — hitherto conducted informally in the so-called Trevi group [see pp. 37208; 37535].
These decisions would thus come within the competence of the Council of Ministers, to be reached by consensus.
In addition the draft proposed that the size of the Commission be reduced to one member per country (France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the UK currently having two Commissioners).
It incorporated a Spanish proposal whereby EC citizens would be allowed to reside anywhere in the EC (currently they only had the right to work throughout the EC) and to vote in local and EC elections.
As regards the powers of the EP, the draft did not propose giving the EP the right to initiate legislation (currently the preserve of the Commission) but suggested a new category of "framework laws" over which the EP would have powers of "co-decision" with the Council.
On April 10 a joint Italo-German proposal had suggested giving the EP equal powers with those of the Council.
These would include genuine participation in the selection of Commission members and the right to initiate legislation.
Progress on economic and monetary union
During April discussion among EC economic and finance ministers on economic and monetary union (EMU) centred on the conditions and date for a transition to the second stage of EMU [see p. 37625 for start of stage one in July 1990].
At a meeting in Luxembourg on April 8 Germany, supported by Denmark and the Netherlands, argued that stage two should be embarked upon in January 1994 (as agreed in October 1990 — see p. 37783) only if sufficient convergence were achieved between EC economies in particular in the alignment of inflation rates and budget deficits.
Eight other member country governments favoured a more or less automatic start to stage two in January 1994, while the UK had not been party to the October 1990 decision and had presented its own "hard ecu" proposals [see p. 37969].
Ministers were also unable to agree on a date for the establishment of the European central bank (Eurofed).
At a regular monthly meeting on April 9 at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel, EC central bank governors approved a final draft version of the statutes for the proposed Eurofed which would be presented to the EC presidency for discussion.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
Inauguration
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), first conceived by President Mitterrand of France in late 1989 to assist the economic reconstruction of central and eastern Europe [see p. 37028], was formally inaugurated in London on April 15-17.
The Bank had 39 member countries plus the Commission of the European Communities (EC) and the European Investment Bank (EIB).
[Details are given on pp. 37465-66 of the founding charter signed in May 1990; the 40 signatory countries as listed there include both East and West Germany, subsequently unified.]
Its initial capital was 10,000 million European currency units (US$12,400 million).
Jacques Attali, the (French) president of the EBRD, estimated that eastern Europe would need ECU2,000,000 million over the next 20 years, although "the most important point" was that "the money will come from the reorganization of their own economies and their own savings" .
Some 30 heads of state and government and 39 ministers of finance attended the ceremonies, which Attali described as "an informal summit about the reconstruction of Europe" .
Finance ministers from the Group of Seven industrialized countries also met on April 14 in preparation for their meeting on April 28.
In speeches on April 15, United Kingdom Prime Minister John Major maintained that the UK's participation in the EBRD "underlines our commitment to be at the very heart of Europe" [see also p. 38115]and that the UK government's privatization programme had helped financial companies in London to "build up a wealth of experience from which to draw" , while Mitterrand declared: "A new order has been put in place.
From a continent divided by the war will succeed a united Europe.
This is the first institution of the new Europe."
On April 16 Nicholas Brady, the United States Treasury Secretary, maintained that "we do not view the activity of the board [representing shareholders]as an advisory one, but, instead, as a critical element of the bank's operations" .
Viktor Gerashchenko, chairman of USSR Gosbank (the Soviet central bank), called upon the EBRD to lift its restrictions on Soviet borrowing, which stipulated that the total volume of Soviet credits could not exceed its paid-in capital in the first three years.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Assassination of Treuhand chief executive
Detlev Rohwedder, 58, executive head of the Treuhand agency entrusted with the privatization of former East German state enterprises, was shot dead at his home in Düsseldorf on April 1; his wife was injured in the attack, made from a garden 60 metres away.
The Red Army Faction (RAF) claimed responsibility, and a note from the Commando Ulrich Wessel (named after an RAF member killed in 1975 — see p. 27262) was left at the scene.
The authorities discounted the possibility that the former East German state security police ( "Stasi" ) had been behind the attack, despite confirmation on March 26 by the federal prosecutor that the Stasi had sheltered and trained RAF members since 1978.
The RAF had killed the banker Alfred Herrhausen in November 1989 [see p. 37049]; carried out an unsuccessful car bomb attack on July 27, 1990, against Hans Neusel, state secretary at the West German Interior Ministry; and fired shots at the US embassy in Bonn in January 1991 [see p. 37990].
[For 1990 attacks on politicians by mentally disturbed assailants see pp. 37388; 37762.]
Rohwedder was succeeded on April 13 by Birgit Breuel, 53, a Christian Democrat (CDU) politician who had been both Economics and Finance Minister in Lower Saxony before joining Treuhand.
Since the autumn of 1990 she had served on the board where she co-ordinated the work of Treuhand's 15 regional offices.
Criticism of Treuhand policy
The Guardian of April 3 reported that over the preceding months Treuhand had become the "focus of growing public anger" and was viewed as the "embodiment of eastern Germany's economic misery" .
By early April it had sold 1,000 companies out of a total of over 8,000.
Over 330 other enterprises, employing over 80,000 people, had been closed because they were deemed incapable of surviving in the free market.
On Feb. 8 Treuhand had announced that Interflug, the former East German state airline, would be closed with the loss of 2,900 jobs.
Interflug had registered dramatic losses in January because of the Gulf war [for other airline crises see pp. 37953; 38213].
The west German state airline Lufthansa had reportedly presented various purchase plans but had faced opposition from the Federal Cartel Office.
Associated Press reported on March 26 that Pentacon, the Dresden company producing Praktica cameras, was to be merged with the west German company Beroflex, which made Rollei cameras, with the loss of 4,000 out of 5,000 jobs.
At Robotron, once the showpiece of East German high technology, the workforce had by the beginning of April been cut from 68,000 to 15,000.
The Financial Times of March 22 reported that Treuhand would "no longer be able to close large plants without agreement with the relevant east German local authorities" .
On March 27 Treuhand announced an indefinite extension of the end-March deadline for repayment of loans totalling DM19,000 million (about US$11,375 million) made by private banks to Treuhand-controlled companies.
On April 9 the Cabinet approved tax-free incentives to encourage civil servants to move from the west to the east, and announced pension increases of 15 per cent from July 1 for eastern pensioners (whose pensions would still be half those of western pensioners).
The following day the Financial Times reported that Leuna and Buna, eastern Germany's two largest chemical concerns, were each to receive DM250 million (US$150 million) in credits guaranteed by Treuhand to assist their restructuring.
Protests at economic crisis
The economic crisis and escalating unemployment prompted a rising tide of protest in eastern cities in March, the biggest turnouts being in Leipzig (echoing the city's celebrated Monday demonstrations in 1989 against the Honecker regime).
The March 25 Leipzig demonstration, organized by the IG Metall trade union, drew over 60,000, and protesters called for the resignation of Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
On April 8 some 15,000-30,000 attended the Leipzig demonstration, when a minute's silence was observed for Rohwedder; the number of protestors dwindled in subsequent weeks, although a rally organized by IG Metall on April 17 at the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin attracted some 30,000 people.
Kohl, in eastern Germany for the first time since the December 1990 general election, was jeered and pelted with eggs by several hundred protesters on April 7 in Erfurt (where enthusiastic crowds of over 100,000 had greeted him on his last visit in February 1990 — see p. 37260).
On April 12 Kohl and Social Democrat (SPD) leader Hans-Jochen Vogel agreed to establish two joint working parties on stemming unemployment in eastern Germany and on legal and administrative obstacles to investment there.
However, there were immediate differences as to the powers the working parties should have.
CDU defeat in Rhineland-Palatinate
In Land (state) elections on April 21 in Kohl's home state, the Rhineland-Palatinate, the CDU lost power for the first time since 1949.
The result reflected growing disillusionment with the CDU since unification [see p. 38109 for tax increases announced in March].
For the first time since the process of unification began it placed a question mark over the future of Kohl, who had made 14 campaign appearances and admitted that the result represented a "bitter defeat" .
The outcome meant that the SPD was now in government (either alone or as the dominant partner) in 10 out of the 16 Länder.
The ruling federal coalition lost its majority in the Bundesrat (upper house of federal parliament) which it had regained in October 1990 [see pp. 37762-63].
Seats Percentage of vote 1991198719911987 SPD474044.838.8 CDU404838.745.1 FDP*776.97.3 Greens756.45.9 Other**003.12.9
Rhineland-Palatinate election
*Free Democratic Party.
**Comprised in 1991 the Republicans with 2.0 per cent; the Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP) with 0.9 per cent and the German Alliance with 0.2 per cent .
Turnout: 73.9 per cent.
Formation of "red-green" coalition in Hesse
On April 5 Hans Eichel was sworn in as Minister President at the head of a SPD-Green coalition in Hesse [for January 1991 Land election see p. 37966].
Constitutional Court rulings
The Federal Constitutional Court ruled on April 23 that landowners and industrialists whose property was expropriated during the Soviet occupation of eastern Germany in 1945-49 did not have a right to its return, and that this was not counter to clauses in the federal Constitution on the right to property and equal treatment before the law.
The Soviet Union had made the "two-plus-four" treaty on the external aspects of German unification conditional on the recognition of the irreversibility of these expropriations [see pp. 37536; 37834], which affected one-third of the territory in eastern Germany.
The Court advised the German government to pay compensation to former owners.
It was hoped that the decision would hasten the restructuring process in eastern Germany.
The Court ruled on April 24 that the government was entitled to dismiss up to 600,000 former East German civil servants who at the time of unification had been given temporary contracts rather than being made redundant.
EUROPE
FRANCE
Opposition electoral accord — Corsican autonomy legislation — Other internal developments
Opposition accord
The Gaullist Rally for the Republic (RPR) and the centrist Union for French Democracy (UDF) announced on April 10 that they had reached an electoral accord providing for a system of "primaries" for the presidential elections scheduled for 1995 and for "common candidates" in regional and legislative elections scheduled for 1992 and 1993 respectively.
The two parties had in June 1990 formed the Union for France (UPF — see p. 37684) but had been unable at a meeting on Nov. 8 to resolve differences over the organization of the presidential primaries.
Corsican autonomy legislation
On April 12 the National Assembly (lower house of parliament) approved a bill on Corsica's status, replacing special provisions in decentralization legislation promulgated in 1982 [see pp. 32327-28].
The new law described the "Corsican people" as "part of the French people" ; established a regional executive council with its own powers, and provided for the drawing up of a new electoral register.
The National Assembly had given the bill its first reading in November 1990 [see p. 37968].
The Senate (upper house) rejected the key elements of the bill when giving it a first reading on March 22, 1991, and conciliation between the two houses failed to resolve the issue four days later.
The government then adopted the "guillotine" procedure to push the legislation through.
In the April 12 National Assembly vote 276 deputies voted in favour, 262 against (primarily the RPR and UDF); 38 (mostly Communist) deputies abstained.
However, Senate President Alain Poher, RPR and UDF deputies and others immediately appealed to the Constitutional Council over the law.
On May 9 the Council ruled the term "Corsican people" unconstitutional on the grounds that the Constitution recognized only the "French people comprising all French citizens without distinction as to their origin, race or religion" .
The other essential elements of the law were, however, validated.
Privatization policy
On April 5 the government published a decree permitting private companies to take minority stakes in state-controlled companies, subject to agreement on a co-operation accord.
Officials stressed that this did not signal an abandonment of President François Mitterrand's 1988 presidential campaign policy of favouring "neither privatization nor nationalization" [see also pp. 35978-79], but it indicated the difficulties of state companies in raising capital and the pressure on the national budget [see p. 38113].
On April 3 the French government had announced that it was committing F4,000 million in new capital over two years to the loss-making computer concern Groupe Bull — which was 93 per cent state-owned — and making a F2,700 million contribution to its research budget over four years.
The state-owned electronics concern Thomson was to receive F1,800 million in new capital in 1991 and Air France was to receive F2,000 million.
The government also allocated F2,400 million (over half its 1991 research budget) for research into high definition television, joint European semi-conductor research and other electronics projects.
(US$1.00=F5.7122 as at April 8, 1991.)
New armed forces chief
On April 3 Adml.
Jacques Lanxade, 56, was named Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces in place of Gen. Maurice Schmitt, who had reached retirement age in early 1991 but had stayed on because of the Gulf crisis.
[For Schmitt's appointment in October 1987 see p. 35523.]
[For Socialist Party congress and events leading to Prime Minister Michel Rocard's resignation in May see May News Digest.]
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
All-party talks
All-party talks began on April 30 on the future of Northern Ireland, the first such meetings since the 1975 Constitutional Convention [see pp. 27161-63].
The talks, arranged on the initiative of the United Kingdom government's Northern Ireland Secretary Peter Brooke, began with bilateral "agenda-setting" meetings between Brooke and the leaders of Northern Ireland's "constitutional" parties; the nationalist Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) and the centrist Alliance Party on April 30, and the Ulster Unionists and the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) later that week.
Plenary sessions involving all four parties were planned for the following week.
This first "strand" of the talks took place at the Stormont parliament building outside Belfast; a venue had yet to be agreed for subsequent "strands" involving the Irish (Dublin) government [see pp. 38111-12].
The Anglo-Irish Conference (bilateral UK-Irish meetings under the 1985 Anglo-Irish Agreement) met in London on April 26 and was then suspended for the duration of the all-party talks; its next session was scheduled for July 16.
On April 17 the Combined Loyalist Military Command, representing Ulster loyalist paramilitary groups, had declared a temporary ceasefire from midnight on April 29, but warned that "defensive and, where fitting, retaliatory action" would be taken if the Irish Republican Army (IRA) disrupted negotiations.
Within hours of the announcement, however, a Catholic taxi driver was shot dead, the third such killing in 1991.
For its part the IRA announced on April 22 that it would suspend attacks on Protestant "death squads" , although attacks on UK government and security forces would continue.
Verdict on Roermond killings
Gerard Harte, 27, was convicted and sentenced by a Dutch court on April 2 to 18 years in prison for the Roermond murders of May 1990, when the IRA had admitted responsibility for shooting two Australian tourists mistaken for UK service personnel [see p. 37537].
Three others arrested shortly after the killings (Donna Maguire, 24, Paul Hughes, 27, and Sean Hick, 30) were acquitted on the grounds of insufficient evidence, but remained in custody, since the German authorities were seeking their extradition in connection with attacks on UK service personnel in Germany.
EUROPE
ITALY
Formation of new government
On April 5 Giulio Andreotti was asked to form a new government, the 50th of post-war Italy and the seventh to be led by Andreotti, 72, as Prime Minister.
The five parties of the previous coalition government, dissolved on March 29 [see p. 38114], appeared to have found common ground for continuing their coalition, in power since the 1987 elections.
On April 15, however, Andreotti was left heading a four-party administration after an announcement by the Republican Party (PRI) that it was withdrawing its support.
On April 6-11 the Christian Democrats (CD), the Socialists (PSI), the PRI, the Democratic Socialists (PSDI) and the Liberals (PLI) negotiated over the policies and composition of a new government.
In the new Cabinet announced on April 12 there were no changes to major ministries, but five politicians from the left of the CD who had left the government in July 1990 [see p. 37624]were restored to Cabinet posts.
An Immigration Ministry was created under the Socialist Margherita Boniver.
Withdrawal of PRI
The replacement of the PRI Minister of Posts and Telecommunications, Oscar Mammí, by a Social Democrat, Carlo Vizzini, prompted the three PRI ministers of the new Cabinet to boycott the swearing-in ceremony on April 13.
On the evening of April 15 the PRI announced that it would not be supporting the new government in parliament.
The field of telecommunications had become politically sensitive since restrictions on simultaneous newspaper and television channel ownership by media groups became law in August 1990 [see pp. 37510; 37624].
Observers linked the removal of this ministry from PRI control to the influence of PSI secretary-general Bettino Craxi and his close association with media proprietor Silvio Berlusconi, who stood to lose from a strict interpretation of the new law.
The PRI also disputed the splitting in two of the Ministry for Regional Affairs and Institutional Reforms, formerly headed by the pro-PRI Antonio Maccanico.
PRI political secretary Giorgio La Malfa claimed that he had been misled over the Cabinet posts by Andreotti "who I thought was a man of quality" .
New Italian Cabinet
*Giulio Andreotti (DC) Prime Minister; State Participation; Culture; Regions
*Claudio Martelli (PSI) Deputy Prime Minister; Justice
*Gianni De Michelis (PSI) Foreign Affairs
*Vincenzo Scotti (DC) Interior
*Guido Carli (DC) Treasury
*Paolo Cirino Pomicino (DC) Budget
*Salvatore (Rino) Formica (PSI) Finance
*Virginio Rognoni (DC) Defence
***Riccardo Misasi (DC) Education
*Giovanni Prandini (DC) Public Works Giovanni Goria (DC) Agriculture
*Carlo Bernini (DC) Transport
**Carlo Vizzini (PSDI) Posts and Telecommunications Guido Bodrato (DC) Industry Franco Marini (DC) Labour
**Vito Lattanzio (DC) Foreign Trade
**Ferdinando Facchiano (PSDI) Merchant Marine
*Francesco De Lorenzo (PLI) Health
*Carlo Tognoli (PSI) Tourism
*Giorgio Ruffolo (PSI) Environment Without portfolio
***Calogero Mannino (DC) Mezzogiorno Nicola Capria (PSI) Civil Protection
*Antonio Ruberti (PSI) Research
*Egidio Sterpa (PLI) Relations with Parliament
***Mino Martinazzoli (DC) Institutional Reforms
*Pierluigi Romita (pro-PSI/PSDI) Co-ordination of EC Policy
*Carmelo Conte (PSI) Urban Affairs
*Rosa Russo Jervolino (DC) Social Affairs
*Remo Gaspari (DC) Public Administration Margherita Boniver (PSI) Immigration
*Held same post(s) in outgoing government.
**Altered portfolio.
***Resigned in July 1990 [see p. 37624].
Vote of confidence
On April 19 the new government won a parliamentary vote of confidence by 339 votes to 207.
President Francesco Cossiga made it clear, however, that he was unhappy with Andreotti's postponement of discussion of constitutional reform until after the general election due in 1992.
Cossiga emphasized in a television interview that compromise had been necessary to avoid an early general election.
Coalition partners had agreed on a minimum programme with familiar priorities: the fight against organized crime; reduction of the public deficit; preparation for European economic union; and the reform of public services.
Andreotti promised on April 17 that draft legislation allowing certain public-sector enterprises to offer shares would be presented to parliament within 30 days.
Agreement on control of Mondadori publishing house
The two business magnates Carlo De Benedetti and Silvio Berlusconi reached agreement on April 29 on a division of the Arnoldo Mondadori SpA publishing business, after a much-publicized 17-month contest for ownership.
Under the agreement Mondadori was to be split into roughly equal halves, each worth around US$800 million.
Berlusconi, who also owned three television stations as part of his Fininvest Group, would keep the Mondadori name and several periodicals including the news magazine Panorama.
De Benedetti's holding company CIR (Compagnie Industriali Riunite) would gain control of the profitable national daily La Repubblica, L'Espresso magazine and a chain of local newspapers.
[For August 1990 passage of media law designed to prevent undue concentration of media holdings see pp. 37510; 37624.]
Ferry disaster — Tanker explosion
At least 140 people died when a ferry boat, the Moby Prince, collided with an oil tanker in thick fog off Livorno on the night of April 10.
Burning oil which had leaked from the tanker, the Agip Abruzzo, engulfed the ferry and all except one of the ferry's crew and passengers were burned to death or drowned.
The tanker's crew of 36 survived.
Initial fears that oil from the tanker would cause an environmental hazard proved unfounded.
Merchant Navy Minister Carlo Vizzini said on April 11 that an official inquiry would start immediately and that the accident appeared to have been caused by human error.
An oil slick, created on April 11 when the Cypriot-registered tanker Haven exploded during a routine pumping operation in the Ligurian Sea off Genoa, caused pollution along the Mediterranean coast westwards towards Nice on the French coast.
Gale-force winds helped to break up the 40-km oil slick, reducing the impact of what was initially reported as a massive environmental disaster, although oil continued to seep out of the sunken vessel.
EUROPE
GREECE
Death of Koutsogiorgas — Adjournment of Papandreou trial.
The trial involving former Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou was adjourned from April 11 to April 22 following the death of another defendant, Agamemnon Koutsogiorgas.
Papandreou, 72, continued to refuse to appear in court to answer accusations of betraying public trust and of accepting bribes, as part of a US$200,000,000 embezzlement at the Bank of Crete in 1986-88 [see p. 37514].
Koutsogiorgas, 68, who had a heart attack in court on April 11 and died in hospital on April 18, had been a key figure in governments formed by the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok) under Papandreou from 1981 to 1989.
He resigned from the Justice Ministry in November 1988 and from the Prime Minister's Office in March 1989 after accusations that he received a US$1,300,000 "reward" from the Bank of Crete's then chairman George Koskotas for his effecting the passage of legislation to shield the bank from investigation [see pp. 36527; 36562].
In the trial, which opened in Athens on March 11, it was also claimed that Papandreou had diverted public funds into the Bank of Crete and accepted bribes in the form of interest generated.
Former Finance Minister Dimitris Tsovolas and former Public Order Minister Georgios Petsos faced related charges.
A fourth accused, former National Economy Minister Panayotis Roumeliotis, claimed immunity from prosecution as a member of the European Parliament.
Koskotas, the main prosecution witness, was fighting extradition from the United States to Greece, where he himself faced charges.
His absence weakened the case against Papandreou, who dismissed the trial as an attempt by the ruling conservative New Democracy Party to discredit the socialists.
Koutsogiorgas' death contributed to growing doubts — especially within the Communist-dominated opposition Coalition of the Left and Progress (Synaspismos)— about the wisdom of the judicial proceedings.
Bomb and rocket attacks
Prime Minister Konstantinos Mitsotakis was reported in late April as expressing "concern" over the number of attacks mounted by underground groups over the past six months, and said that his government would intensify the drive against terrorism, which was discouraging foreign tourists.
Apart from the explosion in Patras [see p. 38167], there were a number of incidents in Athens which caused no casualties.
These included a rocket attack on a hotel on March 31 (claimed by the November 17 group) and bombs in Citibank offices on the same day.
On April 3 the People's Revolutionary Struggle (ELA) and the May 1 group jointly claimed responsibility for an explosion outside UN offices and for placing bombs under European diplomats' cars.
EUROPE
FINLAND
Formation of coalition
On April 26 Esko Aho, 36, was sworn in as Prime Minister of a four-party centre-right coalition.
The new government's programme had been presented on April 24.
To tackle the current economic crisis, it envisaged freezing government expenditure and reducing the costs of social security and unemployment benefit.
As regards the current European Communities-European Free Trade Area negotiations [see p. 37906], the programme avoided ruling out the possibility of an eventual application for EC membership.
President Mauno Koivisto had asked Aho to form a government on April 8, his Centre Party (KESK or K-C) having become the largest single party after the March general election [see p. 38112].
His coalition, the first Finnish government in 25 years not to include a left-wing party, embraced the right-wing National Coalition Party (KOK, led by outgoing Prime Minister Harri Holkeri), the Swedish People's Party (SFP), and the Finnish Christian Union (SKL).
Esko Aho (KESK) Prime Minister Paavo Väyrynen (KESK) Foreign Affairs
Finnish Cabinet
*Pertti Salolainen (KOK) Foreign Trade Hannele Pokka (KESK) Justice Mauri Pekkarinen (KESK) Interior
*Elisabeth Rehn (SFP) Defence Iiro Viinanen (KOK) Finance Riitta Uosukainen (KOK) Education Martti Pura (KESK) Agriculture and Forestry Ole Norrback (SFP) Transport and Communications Kauko Juhantalo (KESK) Trade and Industry Eeva Kuuskoski (KESK) Social Affairs and Health
*Ilkka Kanerva (KOK) Labour Tytti Isohookana-Asunmaa (KESK) Culture Sirpa Pietikäinen (KOK) Environment Pirjo Rusanen (KOK) Housing Toimi Kankaanniemi (SKL) Development Co-operation
*Member of outgoing Cabinet.
EUROPE
ICELAND
General election — Formation of centre-right coalition
In a general election on April 20 the largest of the four main parties, the conservative pro-European Communities Independence Party (IP), recovered the votes which had gone to a breakaway liberal Citizens' Party (CP) in the April 1987 elections [see pp. 35138-39], giving it twice the representation of the next-largest party.
The election produced little real change in the relative strength of the other three main parties.
SeatsPercentage of voteVotes 19911987199119871991 IP261838.627.260,826 PP131318.918.929,861 SDP101015.515.224,454 PA9814.413.322,705 WA568.310.113,068 CP071.210.91,927 Other013.14.44,905 Progressive Party — PP; Social Democratic Party — SDP; Progressive Alliance — PA; Women's Alliance — WA.
There were now 15 women in the 63-member Althing (parliament).
Icelandic election results
Formation of centre-right coalition
The outgoing Prime Minister, Steingrímur Hermannsson of the PP, resigned on April 23, and a new IP-SDP centre-right coalition was formed, led by Davíd Oddsson (IP).
The new Cabinet was sworn in on April 30.
The PP thus joined the opposition after nearly 20 years in successive governments.
The SDP leader Jón Baldvin Hannibalsson had declared that his party could not continue to participate in the previous PP-SDP-PA centre-left coalition arrangement without a clear consensus on two key policy issues: Iceland's position in EFTA negotiations with the European Communities (EC), in which he had personally played a leading role as Foreign Minister, and a proposed US$1,000 million project to build a new aluminium smelting plant south of Reykjavik.
Davíd Oddsson (IP) Prime Minister, Minister at the Statistical Bureau of Iceland
Icelandic Cabinet
*Jón Baldvin Hannibalsson (SDP) Foreign Minister Fridrik Sophusson (IP) Finance Thorsteinn Pálsson (IP) Fisheries, Justice and Ecclesiastical Affairs Halldór Blöndal (IP) Communications, Agriculture
*Jón Sigurdsson (SDP) Industry and Commerce
*Jóhanna Sigurdardóttir (SDP) Social Affairs Eidur Gudnason (SDP) Environment Olafur G. Einarsson (IP) Education Sighvatur Björgvinsson (SDP) Health
*Held same or similar post in outgoing Cabinet.
Oddsson, 43, had been elected as IP chair on March 10, 1991, after a brief period as deputy leader.
Popular in Reykjavik, where he made his name as a dynamic and uncompromising mayor, he narrowly defeated the more mild-mannered Thorsteinn Pálsson, the party chair since 1983 and Prime Minister in 1987-88.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Legal reforms
A package of reforms to the criminal code, designed to improve Turkey's human rights record, was approved by the Grand National Assembly early on April 12 and signed into law by President Turgut Özal a few hours later.
Notorious articles (141, 142 and 163) of the penal code dating from the 1930s which effectively outlawed communist or fundamentalist opinion were abolished by the new legislation.
(Their abolition had been under discussion since 1989 — see pp. 36564; 37593.)
The 1983 law banning the use of the Kurdish language in private life and songs was also repealed [see also p. 37969], but it remained illegal to use Kurdish in broadcasting or print.
Prisoners under sentence of death (numbering some 256) were reprieved; together with an estimated 43,000 other prisoners serving lighter sentences, they became eligible for release after minimum periods of imprisonment which varied according to the crimes committed and sentences received.
The definition of terrorist association, however, was phrased more broadly in the new legislation, and prison terms and fines for terrorist-related offences were increased.
Propaganda and demonstrations against the integrity of the state were prohibited.
Continuing unrest among Turkish Kurds — Other shootings and bomb attacks
Unrest continued in Kurdish areas of south-east Turkey.
An official statement on April 3 reported six "separatist terrorists" , including two women, killed by the army in the province of Sirnak when they ignored an order to surrender.
In the town of Diyarbakir around 5,000 protestors demanding self-rule clashed with police on April 9.
On April 15 seven passengers of a village minibus were killed by "terrorists" in the Kahramanmaras area, and three senior local government officials died in an attack by unidentified gunmen in the Solhan district of east-central Turkey on April 29.
There were several bombings and shooting incidents in Ankara and Istanbul in late March and April.
In Ankara a car bomb wounded the Iraqi trade attaché on March 26; the Islamic Jihad organization claimed responsibility.
Two demonstrators were killed and one injured by machine gun fire from inside the Iraqi consulate-general in Istanbul on April 5.
The left-wing Dev Sol group claimed responsibility for the shooting of a policeman in Istanbul on April 5, for the shooting of Gen. Memduh Unluturk at his Istanbul home on April 9, and for nine bombs which damaged banks and business premises, but caused no injuries, in Istanbul and Adana on April 29-30.
Attack on Greek tourists
Eye-witnesses said that a man dressed like a beggar boarded a Greek tourist bus in central Istanbul on April 9, poured an inflammable liquid over the upper deck and set it alight.
Thirty-four passengers were killed in the explosion that followed.
By April 12, after pressure from the Greek government for a thorough investigation, the Turkish authorities identified as the arsonist a 33-year-old Turk (who also died in the explosion).
Election of Semra Özal to party post
Semra Özal, wife of the President, was elected on April 28 as chair of the Istanbul section of the ruling Motherland Party (Anatavan Partisi — ANAP), defeating the Islamist candidate Talat Yilmaz.
An earlier ballot, at a provincial party conference on April 4, had collapsed amid scuffles and evidence of vote-rigging.
Semra Özal's support came principally from secularists who were concerned to counter the growing influence of Islamic rightwingers within the party, especially in Istanbul.
President Özal's brother Korkut Özal, himself a prominent pro-Islamist, had publicly criticized Semra Özal's move into politics, while the President's cousin, Husnu Dogan, had been dismissed from his post as Minister of Defence in February, reportedly after voicing similar criticisms [see p. 38022].
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Georgia independence declaration
An extraordinary session of the Georgian Supreme Soviet on April 9 adopted unanimously a formal declaration of the "restoration of state independence" .
Coming two years to the day after the massacre in Tbilisi of 20 Georgian nationalist demonstrators by Soviet troops [see p. 36593], the declaration followed the overwhelming "yes" vote in Georgia's March 31 independence referendum [see pp. 38078-79].
However, Georgia's President Zviad Gamsakhurdia told the Supreme Soviet that the declaration did not mean immediate secession from the Soviet Union.
On the following day Gamsakhurdia issued statements calling on Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev and the international community to recognize Georgia's independence, and on April 12 the Georgian Supreme Soviet presidium called for negotiations to begin with Soviet authorities.
Executive presidency — Civil disobedience campaign
Gamsakhurdia was elected by the Georgian Supreme Soviet on April 14 to the new post of executive President of Georgia (his previous title had been Chair of the Supreme Soviet).
He was given extensive powers, including the right to appoint the government, to rule by decree as necessary, and to declare war.
Gamsakhurdia's term was to last only until direct presidential elections which the Supreme Soviet scheduled for May 26, but he was widely expected to be returned to office.
One of Gamsakhurdia's first acts as executive President was to decree on April 15 that government bodies should organize a campaign of civil disobedience against Soviet interests in the republic, with the aim of restoring "Georgia's complete de facto independence and its liberation from subordination to imperial structures" .
Already since April 11 railway workers in western Georgia and dockers at the Black Sea ports had been on strike in protest at the presence of Soviet troops in the troubled South Ossetia region.
Assassination attempt on President of Adzharia by Vice-President
In a bizarre incident on April 29, Nodar Imiadze, the Vice-President of the Adzhar autonomous republic (ASSR) in south-west Georgia, attempted to assassinate the acting President, Aslan Abashidze, and was himself shot dead by security guards.
According to a report by the official Tass news agency, Imiadze and two accomplices had stormed into Abashidze's office while the latter was chairing a meeting, spraying it with submachine-gun fire.
Both Abashidze and Georgian Deputy Premier M. Omanadze were wounded.
Guards killed Imiadze on the spot, and his accomplices were arrested.
Earthquake
A severe earthquake, measuring 7.2 on the Richter scale, struck northern Georgia on April 30.
According to preliminary reports, the quake killed more than 100 people in several remote towns and villages and in Kutaisi, Georgia's second largest city.
Several villages were reported to have been completely destroyed by the quake and its aftershocks, and the towns of Sachkhere, Ambrolauri, Oni and Dzhava were badly damaged.
Troops trying to put down the ethnic conflict in South Ossetia (in which Dzhava was one of the principal centres) were transferred to relief operations.
Developments in other republics
Kirghizia: new Communist Party leader
A plenum of the Kirghiz Communist Party central committee on April 6 elected Dzhumgalbek Amanbayev as first secretary (and ex officio a member of the CPSU politburo).
He replaced Absamat Masaliyev, who was leaving the post apparently because of differences with Kirghizia's President Askar Akayev.
Moldavia: Communist Party split
Part of the membership of the Moldavian Communist Party (CP) split away on April 8 to form an "Independent CP of Moldavia (on a Democratic Platform)" .
Its founders announced that the new party would have no relations with the CPSU.
Russian Federation: Ethnic violence in North Caucasus ASSRs — Demonstrations for Tatarstan sovereignty
While Georgia's South Ossetia region continued in a state of virtual civil war, an unconnected ethnic dispute erupted into violence during April in neighbouring North Ossetia, an ASSR across the Caucasus mountains in the Russian Federation.
A state of emergency was declared on April 20 in and around the capital, Vladikavkaz (formerly Ordzhonikidze), by the North Ossetian soviet following armed clashes on April 19-20 in the village of Kurtat between Ossetes and Ingushis.
Reportedly, several people were seriously injured.
The violence apparently stemmed from a campaign, stepped up in March, for the restoration of Ingushi autonomy within the borders of the former Ingush Autonomous Region.
This had existed from 1919 to 1934, when it had been incorporated into the new Chechen-Ingush ASSR.
In 1944 the Ingushis and the Chechens had been among several ethnic groups charged en masse with collaborating with the Nazi German invaders and deported to Central Asia.
Checheno-Ingushetia was abolished, and a large part of the Ingushi lands had been ceded to North Ossetia and repopulated by Ossetes.
In 1957, when the Chechens and Ingushis had been rehabilitated and Checheno-Ingushetia restored, these lands had not been returned to the Ingushis.
Beginning on April 27, Ingushis were also involved in clashes with Cossacks in the Sunzha district of Checheno-Ingushetia.
On April 28 eight people died and more than 20 were injured in a gun battle in the village of Troitskaya.
According to Moscow Radio, the fighting followed the beating up of a Cossack boy by two Ingushi boys.
The town of Almetevsk in the Tatar ASSR (Tataria or Tatarstan) was the scene on April 21 of clashes between police and demonstrators demanding full sovereignty for Tatarstan and greater autonomy within the Russian Federation.
The demonstrators had marched on a key pumping station at the start of the "Friendship Pipeline" which carried oil from Tatarstan's oilfields to eastern Europe, and amid chants of "Tatar oil for Tatarstan" they had attempted to put it out of action.
On April 7 and 14 several thousand pro-sovereignty demonstrators had rallied in the Tatar capital, Kazan.
Suicide of Russian anti-Semite
It was announced on April 29 that Konstantin Smirnov-Ostashvili, the leader of the extreme nationalist Pamyat organization who had been sentenced in October 1990 to two years in a labour camp for anti-Semitism [see p. 37789], had hanged himself in prison.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Final election results — Opening of People's Assembly
The outright victory of the ruling (communist) Albanian Party of Labour (PLA) in the March 31 first round of Albania's first free multiparty elections [see p. 38106]was consolidated in second round voting held on April 7 and 14.
The PLA won enough seats to give it a two-thirds majority in the 250-member People's Assembly, which would enable it to make constitutional changes without the support of other parties.
1st round, 2nd round, March 31April 7&14Total PLA162*7169 DP651075 Republican Party0 — 0 Ecology Party0 — 0 Agrarian Party0 — 0 Omonia**325 National Veterans' Committee1 — 1 Total23119250
Allocation of seats following elections
*Including 19 contested jointly with the Democratic Front, the Youth Union, the trade unions and the Women's Union.
**Wrongly given on p. 38106 as Amonia.
Post-election violence — Strike call
Frustration in urban areas over the first round defeat of the main opposition Democratic Party (DP) erupted into anti-communist rioting on the morning of April 2 in the northern city of Shkodër.
Thousands of people stormed the local PLA headquarters and set it alight, and the windows of the city council building and city library were broken.
Three people were shot dead by police, including local DP leader Arben Broxhi, who was reportedly shot in the back as he tried to calm the rioters; a fourth person died of bullet wounds in hospital on April 4.
A demonstration on April 2 by up to 3,000 people outside the DP headquarters in the capital, Tirana, was dispersed by police firing into the air.
On April 3 the DP leadership appealed for demonstrations to cease, but called a general strike for the following day to commemorate those killed in Shkodër.
On April 4 the DP claimed that the strike had been a success, with strong support in several large enterprises, but observers assessed that even in the cities support for the strike had been patchy.
Opening of People's Assembly — Interim constitution — Re-election of Alia as President
The new People's Assembly convened on April 10, but with the DP staging a boycott.
The only DP deputy present, Neritan Ceka, read out a statement on behalf of the party demanding that the Assembly be suspended until those responsible for the killings in Shkodër had been identified.
The opening session adjourned after barely 30 minutes, reconvening on April 17, when the DP ended its boycott.
Kastriot Islami, the Education Minister, was elected Assembly president (Speaker).
A parliamentary commission was appointed on April 18 to investigate the Shkodër killings.
On April 25 this reported that the security forces were to blame for provoking violence from what had been previously a peaceful crowd by making baton charges.
The draft of a new constitution was presented to the Assembly on April 25.
This renamed the country the Republic of Albania (i.e. dropping the adjectives "Socialist" and "People's" ), and defined it as "democratic and juridical, based on social equality, the defence of freedom and the rights of man, and political pluralism" .
Pending approval of the document in full a law "on the major constitutional provisions" was adopted on April 29 to serve as an interim constitution; the 1976 constitution was declared invalid.
In accordance with the interim constitution, on April 30 the People's Assembly held an election for the new post of President of the Republic.
Despite his humiliating first-round election defeat in a Tirana constituency, the incumbent head of state and PLA leader Ramiz Alia was nominated, his only opponent being Assembly deputy Namik Dokle, also of the PLA.
Out of 245 votes cast, 172 were for Alia, two for Dokle, and 71 (corresponding to the entire opposition) were ruled invalid.
The President was C.-in-C. of the armed forces; he was empowered to appoint the government and in exceptional circumstances to dissolve the People's Assembly or to declare war or a state of emergency.
Privatization decree
The outgoing Council of Ministers on April 4 approved decrees on privatization.
Ministries and local councils were instructed to co-operate with a newly created Committee for the Reorganization of the Economy in deciding before the end of the month which state enterprises should be privatized.
Individuals, partnerships, collectives and co-operatives would all be allowed to own companies.
Another decree approved on the same day authorized the employment of Albanians abroad.
Renewed unrest among would-be emigrants
Unrest among would-be emigrants erupted again on April 26.
Several thousand people from Shkodër and nearby towns converged on the northern port of Shengjin where they attempted to seize vessels to take them to Italy.
Around 300 people managed to board a ship which set sail, but this was intercepted in the harbour by coastguards.
Others attempted to storm a naval base, but were turned back by police.
Many of the would-be emigrants gathered later in the neighbouring town of Lezhë, where they stoned public buildings, and after police intervention a number converged on the railway station and boarded a train for Shkodër.
As the train was pulling into the station at Shkodër some of the rioters set light to the last two carriages; at least two passengers were burned to death.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Controversy over leak of files
Internal Affairs Minister Khristo Danov tendered his resignation on April 22 amid controversy about the confidentiality of police files.
Earlier that day the newspaper Faks had revealed the names of 32 deputies in the Grand National Assembly (GNA) who had been identified by a parliamentary commission as secret police informers under the communist regime ousted in 1989.
There were heated exchanges inside the GNA on April 22, and a number of opposition deputies submitted their resignations and called for the GNA's dissolution.
On April 23 Danov announced a criminal investigation against Faks, which was generally sympathetic to the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP — the former communists); also placed under investigation were the parliamentary review Debati, for publishing on April 17 a list of Bulgarian diplomats who had been secret service agents, and the weekly Reporter 7, for publishing the police file of an alleged secret agent.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Dismissal of Slovak Prime Minister
Vladimir Meciar was dismissed as head of the Slovak government on April 23 by the Presidium of the Slovak National Council (parliament).
Seven of his supporters were also removed from the government, including Foreign Minister Milan Knazko, but the resignations of two others were refused by the Presidium.
Meciar was replaced by First Deputy Premier Jan Carnogursky, the former dissident lawyer and leader of the Christian Democratic Movement (CDM), a junior partner in the ruling coalition.
Opponents of Meciar in Public Against Violence (PAV, the senior partner in the ruling coalition), which he had effectively split in March by forming a separate minority faction [see p. 38106], had allied with the CDM in arranging a parliamentary investigation into Meciar's recent conduct, which found him guilty of incompetence, lying, and abusing his access to former secret police files.
A report approved by the Presidium on April 19 had also assessed that the government could no longer function properly because of arguments over economic policy.
Meciar's government had rejected an economic programme drawn up by Deputy Premier Jozef Kucerak which followed the reform strategy of the federal government, creating fears among Meciar's critics that Slovakia's economy would lag behind that of the Czech Lands.
Crowds of Meciar's supporters, hearing news of his dismissal, began to gather in Bratislava, the Slovak capital, to protest.
On April 24 tens of thousands of people took part in a rally organized by Meciar's Platform for a Democratic Slovakia faction.
Later, around 3,000 people marched on the parliament building, where there were minor scuffles with police.
There were smaller demonstrations on April 25-26, while trade unions threatened strike action.
Inside the parliament on April 24 Kucerak fell victim to a vote of no confidence, although a vote of no confidence in the Presidium was narrowly defeated on April 25.
The Platform for a Democratic Slovakia formally split from PAV at an extraordinary PAV congress in Kosice on April 27.
Founding meetings of Civic Forum parties
The right-wing Civic Democratic Party, one of the two new political parties to have emerged in February from the Civic Forum movement [see p. 38017-18], held its founding congress in Olomouc, Moravia, on April 20-21.
Former Civic Forum chairman and federal Finance Minister Vaclav Klaus was elected overwhelmingly as chairman of the new party.
The rival Civic Movement held its founding meeting in Prague on April 27, electing federal Foreign Minister Jiri Dienstbier as chairman.
New federal minister
President Vaclav Havel on April 19 appointed Emil Ehrenberger as Federal Minister of Communications.
A Slovak without party affiliation, Ehrenberger replaced Theodor Petrik, who had resigned on the previous day.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA-HUNGARY
Disagreement over future of Danube hydroelectric scheme
Talks in Budapest between the Hungarian and Slovak governments concerning the future of the giant Gabcikovo-Nagymarós hydroelectric scheme on the river Danube broke down on April 22.
The Slovak negotiators refused to agree to follow Hungary in abandoning the project.
Hungary's former communist government had bowed to public pressure and pulled out of the project on environmental grounds in 1989, halting the construction of a dam and reservoir at Nagymarós [see pp. 36664; 37048].
However, Czechoslovakia had continued building a power station at Gabcikovo, and was reportedly considering diverting the Danube to bring it into operation.
The Hungarians claimed that the scheme threatened drinking water supplies to several million Hungarians, and also noted that diverting the river would mean redefining the frontier between Czechoslovakia and Hungary, in violation of international treaties.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Approval of Compensation Bill
Long-awaited legislation on compensating former owners for land and property expropriated under the communist regime was finally approved by the National Assembly on April 24.
The Compensation Bill, passed by 189 votes to 108, with 11 abstentions, offered partial compensation to Hungarian citizens, or their direct descendants, whose property had been nationalized after June 8, 1949.
Simple restitution by way of returning expropriated lands and property had been ruled out on practical grounds, and instead claimants would receive compensation in the form of vouchers to be used to buy privatized state property (the scheme was designed to limit the government's cash liability).
Based on current values, up to 1,000,000 forints' worth of land and 200,000 forints' worth of other property (houses, hotels, factories, etc.) would be compensated in full, with compensation above those limits being awarded against real values on a sliding scale; the upper limit for awards per claimant was set at 5,000,000 forints (US$1.00=76.6553 forints as at April 29, 1991).
A right of first refusal was granted to former land and home owners when their expropriated property came on the market.
The Guardian of April 25 commented that the Hungarian government hoped that "the new law will provide the much-needed impetus for Hungary's privatization programme and unlock the door to foreign investors who have so far been put off by the uncertainty over who owns what" .
The bill had been the subject of months of debate both inside and outside the National Assembly.
It had jeopardized the government coalition, because the Independent Smallholders' Party (FKgP) for a long time had been unwilling to make concessions which compromised the commitment in its electoral programme to full restitution [see p. 37790; 37975].
Although the disagreements had been resolved in early March, continuing dissatisfaction in some quarters of the FKgP had been highlighted by the passage on March 18 of a vote of no confidence in FKgP parliamentary group leader Jozsef Torgyan, because of a speech he had made at a rally on March 9 attacking the voucher scheme.
The compensation bill cleared its last hurdle on April 19 when the Constitutional Court rejected an application by the opposition Alliance of Free Democrats (SzDSz) to annul the government's proposals.
By-election
A second round National Assembly by-election held in a Budapest constituency on April 14 was won by the candidate of the Hungarian Socialist Party, the renamed former ruling communist party.
The seat was that being vacated by Gabor Demszky of the SzDSz in connection with his October 1990 election as Budapest's mayor [see p. 37922].
The first round on March 24 had failed to produce a winner because the turnout had fallen well short of the required 50 per cent, but in the second round the required 25 per cent turnout was just exceeded.
Rejection of army commander's resignation
President Arpad Göncz on April 2 refused the request of Lt.-Gen.
Kalman Lörincz to be relieved of his post as Commander of the Hungarian Army.
Lörincz had tendered his resignation on March 29, accusing Defence Minister Lajos Für of seeking to weaken the President's constitutional position as commander-in-chief through proposed legislative amendments which would strengthen Defence Ministry control over the armed forces.
Dismissal of ambassador to USA
Peter Zwack, a Hungarian-born millionaire liqueur manufacturer who had renounced United States citizenship to take up the post of Hungary's ambassador to the USA in September 1990, was dismissed from the post on April 10 amidst public recriminations with the Hungarian government.
He had infuriated the government by calling publicly for the resignation of Foreign Minister Geza Jeszenszky, whom he described as incompetent, and by complaining that he had been forced to lie to US politicians about the sale of Hungarian weapons to Croatia.
His statements on the latter issue threatened to revive the scandal which had followed discovery in February of the sale [see p. 38019].
EUROPE
POLAND
Visits to Belgium, France and UK by Walesa — IMF loan
President Lech Walesa paid a working visit to Brussels on April 2-4 during which he held talks with Belgian Prime Minister Wilfried Martens, with the President of the Commission of the European Communities (EC), Jacques Delors, and with the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Manfred Wörner.
He also addressed members of the European Parliament.
[For visits to Brussels, France and UK by Polish leaders in 1990 see p. 37736.]
At the European Commission Walesa said that "neither today nor tomorrow will there be a more important issue for Poland than her membership of the EC" .
Both he and Delors said that they hoped that negotiations on an EC association agreement with Poland (started in February 1991 — see p. 38115) would be concluded by the end of 1991, although Delors warned against over-hasty accession to full EC membership.
After his talks with Wörner, Walesa said that Poland did not intend to apply for NATO membership and stressed that a place for the Soviet Union needed to be found within Europe's security system.
During a state visit to France on April 9-11 Walesa and French President Mitterrand signed a 10-year treaty of friendship and solidarity, the first of its kind to be signed by the Third Polish Republic with a Western country.
The treaty provided for mutual consultations if European peace were threatened or violated.
It stressed the importance of co-operation in fields such as telecommunications, transport, environmental protection, industry, agriculture and health protection, and gave the strongest international support thus far to Polish efforts to secure EC membership.
On April 7 Mitterrand had announced the cancellation of a further 10 per cent of Poland's US$5,200 million debt to France, Poland's second largest creditor.
[See p. 38107 for March "Paris Club" agreement writing off 50 per cent of Poland's debt to foreign governments, and for US debt write-off.]
During a state visit to the UK on April 23-25 Walesa and UK Prime Minister John Major signed a joint declaration on Polish-UK relations, committing the two countries to work together for "a united, free Europe" .
There was, however, no pledge to forgive more of Poland's debt to the UK than that already agreed in March with the Paris Club.
IMF loan
On April 18 the IMF announced approval of an additional financing programme for Poland providing loans totalling SDR1,828.6 million in support of the government's economic reform programme, launched in early 1990 and already backed by an IMF standby loan [see pp. 37224-25].
The Polish economy had, in the IMF's view, "made important progress" under this programme.
The package comprised an SDR1,224 million extended fund facility (EFF) available over three years, with a further SDR442 million available through the IMF's compensatory and contingency financing facility (CCFF) should Poland's balance of payments position come under pressure.
SDR162,600,000 was available from the CCFF to meet expected increased energy import costs.
A further disbursement of SDR87,600,000 could be made available later if certain conditions were met.
(SDR1=US$1.34667 as at April 19, 1991.)
The Polish government's 1991-93 economic objectives were to stabilize the economy quickly and decisively, to accelerate the transformation to a fully functioning market system, and to eliminate the overhang of external debt.
Economic stabilization was intended to reduce inflation to about 36 per cent in 1991 and to an annual rate in single figures by 1993 (as against around 250 per cent in 1990).
Half the country's state enterprises were to be privatized by end-1993, a large proportion of the remainder was to be converted into wholly state-owned joint stock companies, competition was to be promoted, agriculture modernized, a sound banking system created, and a modern tax and budgetary system implemented.
A document detailing the terms of the Paris Club debt reduction agreement reached in March 1991 [see p. 38107]was signed on April 21.
Reopening of share trading
For the first time since before the Second World War shares (of the five companies privatized in January 1991 — see p. 37975) were traded in Warsaw on April 16.
There would be weekly trading sessions until the stock exchange reopened in June 1991.
Formation of new ex-Solidarity party
Polish television reported on April 20 that the Citizens' Movement for Democratic Action Party (ROAD), established in July 1990 by Solidarity supporters [see pp. 37620-21], had dissolved itself and had re-formed as the Democratic-Social Movement.
Zbigniew Bujak, a former Solidarity activist prominent in ROAD, was elected leader.
The Movement would contest the parliamentary elections due later in the year on a platform designed to appeal to workers, employees and farmers.
It favoured the complete separation of church and state in Poland, and aimed to be the main rival to the Centre Alliance, formed by pro-Walesa elements from Solidarity [see pp. 38107-108].
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Second stage of price liberalization — Other economic developments
The second stage of the government's price liberalization programme took effect on April 1.
As a result of sharp cuts in state subsidies prices of essential goods doubled overnight, and increases in the prices of other goods were expected to outstrip that as they found true market levels.
Already, since the first stage of price liberalization in November 1990, the cost of living had soared by over 50 per cent.
Worried about renewed unrest, the government diluted plans to remove all subsidies in the second stage by setting an average maximum limit of 125 per cent for price increases on a basket of 11 essential foodstuffs including bread, sugar and cooking oil.
The cost of rents, heating and some medical services remained unchanged.
Furthermore, the price rises were partially offset by increases in compensation payments on top of wages and pensions.
Compared with the compensation payments introduced during the first stage of price liberalization, these went up from 750 lei to 2,100 lei per month for workers, and from 400 lei to 1,470 lei for pensioners, while there were also increases in child benefits, maternity benefits and student grants.
Nevertheless, the government admitted that most people would be around 30 per cent worse off in real terms.
Wage and pension indexation was due to be introduced from July 1.
The introduction of the price ceilings and the compensatory wage and pension rises had apparently been decided by the government only on March 19, following the intervention of President Ion Iliescu.
He had attended a Cabinet meeting at which he had conveyed worries about the planned price rises expressed to him by trade union leaders.
The modification of the programme had angered Finance Minister Theodor Stolojan and Trade and Industry Minister of State Anton Vatasescu, and on March 20 they had tendered their resignations, complaining that the programme as it now stood was insufficiently radical.
However, at the request of Prime Minister Petre Roman on March 21 they had withdrawn their resignations, as had Resources and Industry Minister Mihai Zisu (whose offer to resign had officially been on health grounds).
On March 20 Alfa Kartel, Romania's largest independent trade union bloc, organized a protest march and rally in central Bucharest which was attended by some 5,000 people.
There was a further anti-government demonstration on April 12 in Bucharest's Revolution Square organized by the Civic Alliance and other opposition groups.
However, apart from these demonstrations and an outbreak of panic buying in the last days of March, the public response to the second stage of price liberalization was muted, in marked contrast to the street protests which had greeted the first state in November 1990 [see p. 37866].
Introduction of individual income tax
From April 1 an individual income tax system was applied with rates ranging from 6 to 45 per cent.
Previously, using the former communist regime's arrangements, taxes had been deducted from the total wage fund of each enterprise.
Devaluation — IMF loan
Also on April 1 the leu was devalued by 72 per cent, from US$1.00=35 lei to US$1.00=60 lei.
This was described as a step towards internal convertibility by 1992, and to meet conditions set by the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
An IMF loan, as announced by the IMF on April 11, provided for government borrowings up to the equivalent of US$748,000,000 over 12 months.
Foreign investment law
The National Assembly on April 8 passed legislation opening the way to direct foreign investment in Romania.
It allowed full foreign ownership of enterprises, capital protection, and repatriation of profits.
There were to be tax incentives for foreign investors.
The most significant restriction was that only 15 per cent of profits made in Romanian currency could be transferred abroad in hard currency.
Mitterrand visit
President Mitterrand of France on April 18-19 made the first state visit to Romania by a west European head of state since the fall of Ceausescu in December 1989.
Romanian opposition leaders criticized his visit as "inopportune" but he maintained: "I feel there is a definite return to democracy in Romania and nothing I have seen or heard here can contradict this feeling." 
At a dinner in his honour he urged: "You need to institute reforms leading to a state of law and an open market…
Beyond that you need to hasten the process of democracy, banish authoritarianism, one party's domination over others."
He also underlined the importance of "guarantees" for the country's minorities.
During the visit a Franco-Romanian management institute was established and both governments agreed to negotiate a friendship and co-operation treaty.
[For February 1990 visit by Roman to Paris see p. 37743.]
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Proposal for referendum on country's future — Developments in Croatia and Serbia
The Presidents of Yugoslavia's six constituent republics took over from the federal presidency the principal role in negotiating Yugoslavia's future when they began on March 28 a series of weekly summit meetings.
The third summit, at Brdo kod Kranja in Slovenia on April 11, produced an agreement to hold a referendum on the future structure of the country.
Ideas for that structure had crystallized into two models:(i) a community of independent and sovereign states, as advocated by Croatia and Slovenia; and (ii) a united federal state, as advocated by Serbia and Montenegro, in which republics continued to delegate some sovereign rights to a central government.
Macedonia and Bosnia-Hercegovina advocated a compromise solution, but both inclined towards the first option.
It was decided at the Brdo kod Kranja meeting to hold by the end of May a separate referendum in each republic except Slovenia, which had already voted overwhelmingly for independence in a referendum in December 1990 [see p. 37924].
Slovenia's President Milan Kucan told the meeting that in accordance with the results of that referendum Slovenia was already committed to becoming an independent state, a proclamation to that effect being scheduled for June 26.
For his part, Croatia's President Franjo Tudjman announced that his republic would follow suit unless agreement on Yugoslavia's future was reached by the end of June.
The referendum proposal ran into problems, however, at the fifth summit held in Cetinje, Montenegro, on April 29.
The arguments centred on scheduling, with Serbia and Montenegro insisting that referendums should take place in each republic at the same time and with the same questions, Croatia announcing that it had already scheduled its referendum for May 19, Macedonia asking for a postponement of the deadline to mid-June, and Bosnia-Hercegovina suggesting that the referendum should take place in two stages.
There was also argument about whether Slovenia should indeed be exempted from holding a referendum because of its December plebiscite.
absentia
Croatia: Separatist aspirations to join Serbia — Increased army deployment — Opening of Defence Minister's trial in
The executive council of the self-proclaimed "Serbian Autonomous Region of Krajina" , comprising municipalities in Croatia with a majority Serb population, followed up its March 16 decision to secede unilaterally from Croatia by deciding on April 1 to become part of Serbia.
This was not endorsed, however, by the Serbian Assembly, which met in emergency session on April 2.
Tensions were already running very high in Croatia following the deaths on March 31 of two people in a gun battle between Serb separatists and Croatian police in the Plitvice National Park; a third Serb died of his wounds on April 2.
The Serbs had taken over the park, one of Croatia's main tourist attractions, several days earlier, and had proclaimed its incorporation into their "Autonomous Region" .
In response to the violence the Yugoslav National Army (JNA) had deployed tanks and armoured vehicles in the park, and on April 2 Croatian police complied with a JNA order to withdraw from the park in an effort to reduce tensions.
Nevertheless, intercommunal violence continued on April 2 elsewhere in the "Autonomous Region" , with reports of various shooting incidents; at least four bombs exploded in the region's main town, Knin.
Similar incidents were reported sporadically throughout the month.
The JNA deployed more armoured units in Croatia on April 3.
Although ostensibly there for peace-keeping duties, the increased troop presence heightened fears among Croats of a creeping military takeover.
On April 8 Tudjman announced that he had received assurances from the JNA leadership that the JNA would not interfere in the settlement of the political crisis, but on April 11 the Croatian government announced the establishment of a de facto republican army in the form of a Croatian National Guard Corps.
On April 29 the JNA occupied the village of Kijevo, near Knin, where ethnic tensions had been heightened by the Croatian government's new policy of establishing new Croat-manned police stations to reassert Croatia's authority in the districts controlled by the Serb separatist militants.
The JNA ordered the Croatian police to withdraw from Kijevo.
The trial of eight Croats charged with "preparing an armed insurrection on the territory of the Republic of Croatia" , including, in absentia, Croatia's Defence Minister Martin Spegelj, opened at the military court in Zagreb, Croatia's capital, on April 8.
However, an indefinite postponement was ordered by the judge on the first morning of the proceedings because of the danger posed by a violent protest against the trial which was taking place outside the courthouse.
Members of a crowd numbering several thousand people pelted the building with stones, eggs and fruit, breaking every window, as police initially looked on passively.
Only much later did riot police intervene to disperse the protesters.
The trial resumed on April 18.
Several thousand demonstrators rampaged through the centre of the Croatian coastal city of Split on the evening of April 8, smashing the windows of buildings belonging to the JNA, and of Serb-run shops and offices.
On April 10 a JNA club in the town of Sibenik was fire-bombed.
Serbia: Interior Minister's resignation — Criminal proceedings against Draskovic — Strikes
The Serbian Assembly on April 10 accepted the resignation of republican Interior Minister Radmilo Bogdanovic, one month after violent clashes between police and demonstrators in Belgrade (the Serbian and federal capital) in which two people were killed.
A parliamentary commission of inquiry had concluded on the previous day that Bogdanovic had lost control of riot police, who had exceeded their authority.
He had reportedly insisted on resubmitting his resignation, first tendered shortly after the March 9 demonstration, despite a recommendation by the Serbian government that the Assembly should refuse it.
The opposition remained dissatisfied with the commission's findings, and on April 10 it moved no confidence votes against Serbian Prime Minister Dragutin Zelenovic, Justice Minister Predrag Todorovic, and Industry Minister Dusan Matkovic in connection with the March demonstrations.
All three motions were defeated.
A Belgrade municipal court on April 24 decided to pursue criminal proceedings against Vuk Draskovic, the chairman of the opposition Serbian Renaissance Movement, in connection with the March 9 demonstration.
Draskovic, who had been arrested during the demonstration, had appeared before an investigating magistrate on April 22.
He was charged with calling an illegal demonstration, and with being a party to violence.
In Yugoslavia's biggest postwar strike, nearly 700,000 workers in Serbia's textile, leather and metallurgical industries stopped work on April 16 to demand that the Serbian government pay them the guaranteed minimum monthly wage, backdated to January, and that it abolish new taxes introduced at the end of 1990.
The government capitulated within hours, agreeing late on April 16 to pay minimum wages owed from January and February by the end of April, to abolish the contentious taxes, and to adopt a new system of paying social security.
The strike was called off on the following day.
Devaluation
Federal Prime Minister Ante Markovic announced on April 19 a 30 per cent devaluation of the dinar.
It would remain pegged to the deutschmark at a new rate of DM1.00=13 dinars.
He told the Federal Assembly that the devaluation, the second in less than four months, would compensate for an excess in public spending during the past nine months equivalent to US$5,400 million.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
An appeal court on April 15 upheld former Chancellor Fred Sinowatz's 1990 conviction for perjury [see p. 37721], imposed after he denied having suggested in 1985 that information on Kurt Waldheim's Nazi past would be made public.
EUROPE
BELGIUM
The Iraqi embassy in Brussels was occupied for several hours early on April 3 by Kurds protesting at the massacre of their people by Iraqi troops.
EUROPE
NORWAY
The opposition Conservative Party elected Kaci Kullmann Five as party chair and John Bernander as deputy on April 20; Anne Enger Lahnstein had been chosen a few weeks earlier as leader of the agrarian Centre Party.
EUROPE
POLAND-GERMANY
neo-Nazi skinheads attacked Poles entering Germany on April 8, when visa-free entry became permissible under a March 29 reciprocal agreement between Poland and the members of the Schengen group (Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands).
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
The Rt.
Rev. George Carey, 55, hitherto Bishop of Bath and Wells, was enthroned as Archbishop of Canterbury on April 19 in succession to the Rt.
Rev. Robert Runcie, who had held the post since 1980 [see p. 29924].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
UN resolutions on ceasefire and demilitarized zone
On April 3 the UN Security Council adopted its comprehensive Resolution 687 on the terms of a full ceasefire in the Gulf.
The passing of the resolution, based on a United States draft, followed a week of intensive lobbying by the Bush administration.
A separate Resolution 689 on April 9 created a demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait, monitored by an observer mission for which all five permanent Security Council members were prepared to provide military personnel.
Resolution 687 was accepted on April 5 by Iraq's ruling Revolutionary Command Council and on April 6 by the Iraqi National Assembly, after "extensive discussions" , with 160 votes in favour and 31 against.
Iraq's permanent representative at the UN, Abdul Amir al-Anbari, conveyed on April 6 his government's formal acceptance.
An accompanying letter from Foreign Minister Ahmad Husayn Khudayyir described the terms as "unfair and vindictive" , ignoring his country's "right to demand compensation" for destruction to its infrastructure and environment which "conspicuously exceeded" the authority given to the US-led coalition forces under Resolution 678 [for which see p. 37870].
The resolution would maintain a military imbalance which "made Israel the dominant aggressive power in the region" .
On April 11 the UN Security Council, having meanwhile approved Resolution 689 on a demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait, notified the government that a ceasefire in the Gulf was formally in effect.
Resolution 687.
April 3.
Passed 12-1 with Cuba voting against and Ecuador and Yemen abstaining.
A comprehensive resolution containing 34 points.
Required the Iraqi government to submit information concerning chemical and biological weapons stocks by April 17, to accept on-site inspection of the destruction of "weapons of mass destruction" by a UN/IAEA commission, and to destroy all non-conventional weapons and ballistic missiles with a range above 150 km, by July 2.
Demanded an Iraqi renunciation of international terrorism.
Required payment of war reparations from a special UN-administered fund created from a levy of an unspecified percentage of Iraq's oil export earnings.
Lifted the embargo on food exports to Iraq but retained other sanctions, subject to bi-monthly review, with exceptions for specifically humanitarian purposes.
Resolution 689.
April 9.
Passed unanimously.
Approved the establishment of a demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait, extending 10 km into Iraq and 5 km into Kuwait.
Approved immediate deployment of a 1,440-member UN Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM).
UN Security Council Resolutions
On April 18 the Iraqi government informed the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) about holdings of non-conventional weapons stocks.
It revealed 10,000 chemical bombs, as well as 50 Scud missiles, including at least 30 with chemical warheads for long-range missiles.
The Foreign Minister assured the UN that "Iraq does not possess any biological weapons or related items" .
The US State Department claimed on April 19 that the government's disclosures about chemical, nuclear and missile programmes did not satisfy the terms of the UN ceasefire resolution.
On April 21 the IAEA requested further details of stocks of weapons-grade uranium located at two research reactors south of Baghdad.
On April 29 the government informed the IAEA that all weapons-grade uranium was buried under rubble from allied bombings.
Continuing reports of effects of bombing — Offers of assistance
Reports continued about the scale of damage inflicted by allied bombing, and the resulting danger of epidemics.
On April 6 the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) warned that "a public health catastrophe of immense proportions" , resulting from the pollution of drinking water, threatened the whole civilian population in the south.
The mayor of Baghdad warned on April 21 that epidemics caused by sewage-infected water threatened 50,000 people in the city.
On April 28 UN relief agencies were reported to have noted an increase in symptoms commonly associated with cholera, especially around the cities of Basra and Mosul.
On April 4 the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the European Communities (EC) announced that they were providing US$17,000,000 and US$2,000,000 respectively in emergency food aid and medical supplies, including water purification tablets.
On April 17 the Iraqi government asked the UN to relax the ban on Iraqi oil exports so that the country could buy food and meet "humanitarian needs" worth US$942,500,000.
Appointment of Defence Minister
On April 6 President Saddam Hussein appointed Brig. -Gen.
Hussein Kamil, his cousin and son-in-law, as Defence Minister with the rank of general.
Kamil replaced Lt.-Gen.
Saadi Tu'ma Abbas al-Jaburi who was appointed military adviser to the President [for Jaburi's appointment in December 1990 see p. 37927].
Kamil, whose appointment came in the wake of a major government reshuffle [see p. 38083], was replaced as acting Minister for Oil and for Industry and Military Industrialization by Gen. Amir Hammoudi al-Saadi, hitherto a senior under-secretary in the Ministry of Industry and Military Industrialization (MIMI).
Analysts interpreted the move as evidence of the ascendancy of the MIMI over the oil sector.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
Appointment of new Cabinet — Amnesty report — Announcement of war trials — Reconstruction
The Amir of Kuwait, Shaikh Jabir al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah, named a new Cabinet on April 20 headed by the Crown Prince, Shaikh Saad al Abdullah as Salim as Sabah, only four weeks after Shaikh Saad had submitted his government's resignation [see p. 38118].
The new government, which brought in a number of technocrats to take over key economic portfolios, did not, however, include any members of the opposition or resistance movements.
Although the overall representation of the Sabah family was reduced from seven to five, its members retained control of the important Defence, Foreign Affairs and Interior portfolios.
Among the more significant changes, prompted in part by criticism of the government's handling of events leading up to the Iraqi invasion of August 1990 [see pp. 37631-41], was the replacement of the Foreign Affairs Minister and Deputy Prime Minister Shaikh Sabah al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah, who failed to obtain a Cabinet post for the first time in almost three decades.
The former Defence Minister, Shaikh Nawwaf al Ahmad as Sabah, was nominally demoted to Labour and Social Affairs Minister.
Some reports suggested that the exclusion of Shaikh Sabah from the new Cabinet, and his replacement by Shaikh Salem, reflected growing rivalry between the Jabirs and the Salems, the two main branches of the as Sabah family.
Other changes included the replacement of the former Oil Minister, Rashid al Amiri, reportedly for his incompetence in dealing with oil well fires, and the confirmation of Badr al Jasim al Yaqub as Information Minister following the resignation in November 1990 of Shaikh Jabir Mubarak al Ahmad as Sabah [see p. 37872].
On April 21 a statement signed by all major opposition groups said that the "frustrating and disappointing" new Cabinet represented "a challenge to popular opinion" and that the ruling family was thereby "opening many doors, threatening national unity and blowing the winds of unease, doubts and evil" .
There had been reports on April 2 that a meeting to discuss the formation of a more representative government had broken down in disagreement between Crown Prince Saad and representatives of a coalition of merchant groups, Islamic parties and former members of parliament.
On April 22 opposition parties who had assembled to voice their criticism of the new government were prevented from holding a press conference in a state-owned hotel after the Information Ministry allegedly refused permission for the use of hotel premises which had not been previously booked.
New Kuwaiti Cabinet
Shaikh Saad al Abdullah as Salem as Sabah Crown Prince, Prime Minister
**Shaikh Salem as Sabah as Salim as Sabah Deputy Prime Minister, Foreign Affairs
*Shaikh Ahmad Hamoud al Jabir as Sabah Interior
*Shaikh Ali Sabah as Salim as Sabah Defence
**Hamud Abdullah al Raqaba Oil
**Nasir Abdel allah al Rawdan Finance
*Ahmad Mohammad Saleh al Adasani Electricity and Water
**Shaikh Nawaf al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah Labour and Social Affairs
*Ahmad Ali al Jassar Planning
**Badr Jasim al Yaqub Information
Habib Jawhar Hayat Communications
*Abdullah Youssef as Qatami Public Works
*Abdullah Hassan Jaralla Commerce and Industry
Abdel al Wahab Sulayman al Fawzan Public Health
*Suleiman Saadoun Badr Education
*Ali Abdullah as Shamlan Higher Education
*Ghazi Obeid as Sammar Justice and Legal Affairs
*Mohammad Saqr al Moushourgi Waqfs (religious endowments) and Islamic Affairs
Ministers of State
*Ibrahim Majeed as Shaheen Municipal Affairs
*Dhari Abdullah al Othman Cabinet Affairs
*Mohammad Abdel-Mohsin al Asfour Housing Affairs
*New appointment.
**Altered portfolio.
Renewed pressure for political reform
On April 7 the Amir, in his first major speech since returning from exile [see p. 38118], announced that elections to a new parliament (the National Assembly having been dissolved in 1986 — see pp. 34767-68) would be held in 1992 "after things settle down" .
He also promised to "study" the question of women's participation in parliamentary life, and hinted that the status of naturalized "second category" citizens would be reviewed.
On April 1, six main opposition parties, including both secular and Islamic groups, had signed a manifesto demanding a free press, an independent judiciary, legalized political parties and anti-corruption measures.
According to a report in The Times of April 3, the United States administration had also urged political reform, and a White House official confirmed that President Bush had written to the Amir "about the political and economic challenges in Kuwait" .
On April 9 the then Minister of State for Cabinet Affairs Abdul Rahman Abdallah as Awadi said that elections were unlikely to be held before August or September 1992 due to the continued absence of an estimated 400,000 Kuwaitis (including "second category" citizens) who had left the country during the Iraqi occupation and who were not expected to return before the end of 1991.
The minister also said that the government expected to double the size of the electorate by extending the franchise to women over 21 and to naturalized citizens who had previously been denied the vote.
Opposition parties, including the liberal Kuwait Democratic Forum, gave a cautious welcome to the government's proposed schedule for elections, but argued that the endorsement of urgent reconstruction plans required a parliament to be in place sooner rather than later.
Isa Shaheen of the conservative Moslem Brotherhood said that "his Highness sort of met us half-way by pinpointing the issue which we will try to solve by discussion" .
Amnesty report
On April 19 the human rights organization Amnesty International called on the Amir to intervene personally on behalf of hundreds of people detained on suspicion of collaborating with the Iraqis who, it claimed, were still being held in "deplorable conditions" .
In its report, based on the findings of a team which visited the country in March, Amnesty said that "victims have been gunned down in public, and taken away, tortured and killed in secret" .
The vast majority of those abused were Palestinians, although the numbers also included Iraqis, Sudanese and some stateless individuals [see p. 38118].
(Amnesty also returned to an issue covered in its December 1990 report on abuses under the Iraqi occupation — see p. 37927 — saying that there was in fact no reliable evidence to support the claim that babies had died as a result of being removed from incubators by Iraqi troops.)
Reports in the Washington Post of April 2, citing the New York-based human rights group Middle East Watch, also confirmed cases of revenge attacks meted out against Palestinians [see p. 38118]and others suspected of collaborating with the Iraqis.
While confirming that there had been widespread Iraqi brutality, Middle East Watch emphasized that no proof had as yet emerged to support allegations that thousands of Kuwaitis had been executed by the Iraqis.
(It also dismissed as "totally false" the claim that babies had died because of the looting of incubators by Iraqi troops.)
Responding to the Amnesty report in a BBC interview on April 19, the then Minister for Planning, Salman Abdul Razek as Mutawa, denied that human rights violations were continuing unchecked, although he acknowledged that some human rights violations may have occurred immediately after the liberation of the country.
Amnesty International rejected these denials.
On April 24 the UK Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, told the House of Commons that "we take the Amnesty report seriously" , and he promised to raise the question of human rights during a forthcoming visit to Kuwait.
At a press conference on April 22 after talks with the Amir, the US Secretary of State, James Baker, said that he had been assured that human rights abuses had ceased and that the government "would be pleased to invite human rights organizations to interview minorities — Palestinians and others" .
According to the Middle East Economic Digest of May 3, Baker was understood to have warned the Amir that US support might dwindle if human rights violations continued unchecked.
On April 30, the Information Minister reasserted the government's claim that human rights violations against Palestinians and other minorities had stopped.
The government's assurances came amidst reports that US officials, meeting with the Crown Prince in March, had submitted evidence showing that one of his sons and a nephew had been responsible for the organization of anti-Palestinian "death squads" .
On April 27 the Independent reported that the Crown Prince had sent his son on "a long-term sabbatical outside the emirate" .
A report on April 2 said that the International Labour Organization (ILO) had undertaken to break the "conspiracy of silence" surrounding the brutal exploitation of foreign workers in Kuwait.
The Observer of April 14 reported that scores of Sri Lankan and at least 50 Filipino women had been terrorised and raped by armed gangs in Kuwait City.
Announcement of war trials
A spokesman for the Justice and Legal Affairs Ministry, Abdul Aziz as Dakhil, announced on April 8 that the government would start war trials "in a couple of weeks" .
He confirmed that 628 Iraqis, including high-ranking officers, who were being held on charges of torture and murder would face trial "in a normal court under martial law" .
The spokesman added that a number of other unspecified nationals were also being held on charges of collaboration during the Iraqi occupation.
Reports on post-war reconstruction
It was reported on April 12 that the government had estimated that reconstruction plans could cost between US$50,000 million and US$100,000 million.
Reports confirmed by members of a team of UK trade experts led by the UK Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, Peter Lilley, said that the government was planning to raise a series of loans in different countries to help finance reconstruction plans.
Meanwhile, it was reported on April 11 that the World Health Organization (WHO) had launched an appeal for US$4,100,000 to finance a three-month emergency health plan amidst reports that there had been a marked increase in cases of lung and chest diseases resulting from oil fire pollution [p. 38119].
On April 13 the then Oil Minister, Rashid al Amiri, announced that the time needed to extinguish oil fires started by Iraq had recently been estimated to be seven months rather than 24 months [see also p. 38119].
EUROPE
SWEDEN
35 Kurds were arrested after they attempted to storm the Iraqi embassy in Stockholm on April 7; the Iraqi chargé d'affaires was later expelled after the embassy refused to hand over an automatic weapon which police claimed had been fired from the embassy during the incident.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SAUDI ARABIA
Proposals for political reforms — US arms deal
NP9> On April 15 King Fahd announced that a commission chaired by the Interior Minister, Prince Nayef Ibn Abdul Aziz, to study the introduction of a "Consultative Council" , had made "long strides in its final review" .
He said that the commission's findings would be presented to the Council of Ministers as soon as they were completed.
The King's announcement came amidst reports on April 15 that 43 intellectuals and businessmen had published an open letter calling on the King to establish national and municipal councils and to curb the activities of the Islamic religious police, the mutaween.
US arms deal
The Middle East Economic Digest (MEED) of April 12 reported that the United States administration had announced a new arms deal, subject to approval by Congress, worth US$919,000,000 and comprising exclusively spare parts and engineering support.
An earlier arms deal, worth US$21,000, million was reported in September to have been substantially scaled down [see p. 37694].
In late March the US Senate had introduced an amendment barring arms sales to countries which had failed to keep up contributions to US Gulf war costs.
MEED of April 5 reported that only an estimated US$4,536 million to US$6,924 million of the US$13,500 million pledged by the Saudi government [see p. 37988]had so far been paid.
On April 28 the Finance and National Economy Minister, Muhammad Ali Abdul Khail, confirmed in Washington that the government had contributed US$1,000 million towards United Kingdom war costs.
Visit by Foreign Minister to France
The Foreign Minister, Prince Saud al-Faisal, held talks in Paris with his French counterpart Roland Dumas on April 2.
He also met President Mitterrand, agreeing to work for a "just" solution to the Palestinian problem.
Opening of Iranian embassy
Iran opened its embassy in Riyadh on April 1 following the resumption of diplomatic relations in March [see p. 38119].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Baker tours
James Baker, the United States Secretary of State, embarked on an extensive round of diplomacy in the Middle East during April.
Baker's sustained diplomatic efforts, following an earlier visit to the region in March, appeared to lend weight to President Bush's March 6 assertion that he regarded settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict as one his administration's top priorities in the post-Gulf war period.
Baker made three separate trips to the region between April 8 and 26, holding talks in Israel, Syria, Egypt and several other countries [see May News Digest for a chronology of Middle Eastern diplomacy between March and May].
During his visits Baker attempted, unsuccessfully, to arrange a regional Middle East peace conference.
Israel accepted the concept of a limited regional conference (a "ceremonial" opening session followed by direct "twin-track" negotiations between Israel and the Arab states on the one hand, and Israelis and Palestinians on the other), but was deeply apprehensive about the authority of the conference to impose a solution and about Palestinian representation and European, Soviet and UN participation.
The Israeli government was divided, and hardline opponents of the concept, led by Housing Minister Ariel Sharon, made every effort during April to antagonize Baker and the US government [see p. 38168].
The Arab governments and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) rejected the idea of a regional conference and supported instead a UN-supervised international conference on the Middle East, attended by a full PLO delegation.
Such a conference, it was argued, would have the necessary authority to force Israel into conceding a "land for peace" formula.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Internal PLO affairs
Meeting of PLO Central Council
The Central Council of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) convened in Tunis on April 21-23.
In its final statement the Council rejected United States and Israeli proposals for a regional peace conference and reiterated previous demands for a UN-supervised international conference on the Middle East, to be attended by, among others, the PLO and the five permanent members of the UN Security Council.
The Central Council also called for a meeting of the so-called "frontline states" (Egypt, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and the PLO) to co-ordinate a unified negotiating position.
The council called for "an end to the consequences of the Gulf war" , affirmed the "unity and security of Iraqi national soil" and condemned the "intervention to which the fraternal people of Iraq" were being exposed.
During the meeting Yassir Arafat, the PLO chair, stressed that the PLO had had no alternative but to support Iraq during the Gulf war.
Also during the meeting Khalid al-Hassan, one of the chief critics of Arafat's pro-Iraqi policy, reiterated details of his controversial new initiative.
The plan, based on "new regional and international realities" , called for, among other things, the creation of a provisional Palestinian government to hold talks with Jordan about confederation and the formation of a joint negotiating delegation.
According to press reports Hassan's plan received little support [for Arafat initiative see p. 38117].
Palestinian unity initiative from pro-Syrian front — Divisions within DFLP
Radio Monte Carlo reported on April 8 that the Damascus-based "rejectionist" Palestine National Salvation Front (PNSF) had recently outlined a "surprising" new initiative stressing the importance of adherence to the leadership of the PLO and calling for "a review of the past phase in order to agree on a political and organizational action plan" .
The PNSF had previously been staunchly anti-Arafat and the initiative was regarded by some sources as an attempt by Syria to strengthen its influence over the PLO [for March reports of Syrian plans to increase its influence within the PLO see p. 38121].
A statement issued by the politburo of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP) on April 5 stated that the organization's deputy secretary-general, Yassir Abd Rabbuh, had been dismissed after creating a breakaway faction in mid-January.
The move followed an attempt in late 1990 by a group of "young democrats" in the DFLP executive committee to elect Rabbuh as secretary general in place of Nayef Hawatmeh.
Death sentence on Abu Iyad's assassin
Tunisian sources revealed on April 5 that Hamzah Abu Zayd, the Palestinian who assassinated Abu Iyad and two other PLO leaders in mid-January [see pp. 37975-76], had recently been sentenced to death at a Palestinian military tribunal in Yemen.
Intifada and other developments in occupied territories
New measures to combat intifada — Deportation orders against Fatah activists — Release of detainees
The Israeli Cabinet voted on March 31 to introduce new measures to combat the intifada, effectively codifying a series of tough controls on the movement of Palestinians imposed during the Gulf war.
Under the new restrictions, which came into effect immediately, Palestinians were not permitted to enter Israel without a permit issued by the military authorities.
Any Palestinian who had been arrested for "security violations" would be barred.
The authorities would also extend the use of deportation for alleged activists; Israeli radio reported on March 31 that the authorities would henceforth "expel inciters in places from where murderers, stabbers and others set out" .
Deportation orders against four senior Fatah activists in the Gaza Strip had been issued on March 24.
The four were accused by the authorities of directing and taking part in violent acts against Israel.
Radwan Abu Ayyash, head of the Arab Journalists Association, was released from "administrative detention" on April 12.
He had been imprisoned along with two other prominent Palestinians in November 1990 [see p. 37873].
On April 28 Palestinian academic and PLO supporter Sari Nusseibeh was released from prison after three months of "administrative detention" for allegedly carrying out spying activities for Iraq [see p. 37976].
Visit to Egypt by Gaza notables
The Israeli authorities confirmed on March 31 that three Palestinian notables from the Gaza Strip had been allowed to travel to Egypt and Saudi Arabia to raise money for development projects.
According to some reports, the activists also planned to consult with PLO officials about the possibility of participating in municipal elections in the Gaza Strip.
Palestinian involvement in failed bomb attack in Greece
Ahmad Hashika, a 26-year-old Palestinian, was killed in the Greek city of Patras on April 19 when a bomb he was carrying exploded in his hands.
Six bystanders also died in the explosion.
The intended target of the bomb was the United Kingdom consulate in Patras.
By late April the Greek authorities were holding five Palestinian students whom they suspected of involvement in the attempted bomb attack.
Soon after the explosion the PLO headquarters in Tunis sent two officials to assist the Greek authorities with their investigations.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Immigration and settlement — Foreign relations — Security
Decline in Soviet immigrants
On April 11 the chair of the Knesset immigration committee, Michael Kleiner, expressed concern over the fall in the number of Soviet Jewish immigrants arriving in Israel during the first quarter of 1991.
He said that officials had now halved their projections of the number of Soviet Jews set to arrive in 1991, and now expected some 200,000, or only slightly more than in 1990 (185,000).
The Gulf war, when Israel was hit by a series of Iraqi missiles, had caused a serious decline in immigration during January and February.
Numbers increased slightly in March (to around 14,500), but Kleiner was concerned that job shortages had caused up to 1,000,000 Soviet Jews to cancel or postpone emigrating to Israel.
He said that there had been an unprecedented 37 per cent rise in the number of recently arrived Soviet Jews who applied for unemployment benefit in March, as increasing numbers ended their initial period of direct state support.
Airlifting of Albanian Jews — Halting of immigration of Ethiopian Jews
Israeli immigration officials confirmed on April 10 that some 300 Albanian Jews (almost the entire Jewish community in Albania) had been airlifted to Israel in recent weeks.
The Albanian authorities had apparently acquiesced in the secret operation organized by the Jewish Agency and the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee.
[For March 1991 mass exodus of refugees from Albania see p. 38105.]
Officials of the World Jewish Congress revealed on March 13 that the Ethiopian government had halted the departure of Ethiopian Jews to Israel.
The immigration process had previously been proceeding at a hectic pace following a "family reunification" agreement signed by the two countries in January.
Both Israel and Ethiopia claimed that the halt was due to "technical problems" .
However, some press reports alleged that the Ethiopian government was demanding weapons and fuel from Israel in return for the departure of 16,000 Ethiopian Jews currently living in squalid camps around the Israeli embassy in Addis Ababa.
Settlements issue
The controversial issue of Israeli settlements in the occupied territories was the subject of intense internal and international debate during March and April.
The opening of new settlements in the West Bank during April constituted a serious challenge by the hardline right (led by Housing Minister Ariel Sharon) to ongoing United States-mediated peace negotiations and to the position of Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir within Likud, the dominant party in the ruling coalition.
A US State Department report to Congress released on March 20 stated that over 200,000 Israeli settlers were currently living in some 200 settlements in the occupied territories.
The report stated that while the number of new settlements had levelled off in recent years, the Jewish population in the occupied territories was growing by as much as 10 per cent annually.
Of the estimated 185,000 Soviet Jews who emigrated to Israel during 1990, approximately 4 per cent had settled in the territories.
The Israeli government had previously said that less than 1 per cent of Soviet Jews had settled in the territories, but its count had covered only the West Bank and Gaza Strip, excluding East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights.
The Israeli government maintained that it had not encouraged Soviet Jews to settle in the occupied territories.
In February the USA had signed a guarantee for a loan to Israel for the housing of new immigrants, only after receiving assurances from the government that it would not use the funds for settlements in the territories [see pp. 38023-24].
However, Sharon said in an interview with the Jerusalem Post of March 22 that the Housing Ministry planned to build 13,000 new homes in the West Bank over the next two years.
He denied that Soviet immigrants would be directed to the new homes, but said that the settlements were essential to provide Israel with "strategic depth" .
US Secretary of State James Baker criticized Sharon's plans during talks with Shamir in Jerusalem on April 9.
Shamir, who had earlier stated that the settlement issue was not relevant to the peace process, assured Baker that the plan could not be implemented without full Cabinet approval.
Sharon denied saying this on April 10, stating that the plan had already received Cabinet authorization and was in fact an "ongoing activity" .
as if to prove Sharon's point, Israeli settlers began moving on April 16 into a settlement at Revava, the first to be established in the West Bank for two years.
Another settlement was opened at Talmon, south of the West Bank town of Ramallah, on April 23.
Meeting between Israeli and Soviet Prime Ministers
Shamir held talks with his Soviet counterpart, Valentin Pavlov, on April 16 in London, where both were attending the inauguration of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development [see p. 38155].
This was the highest-level Soviet-Israeli meeting since the breaking off of diplomatic relations in 1967.
New Chief of Staff
Lt.-Gen.
Ehud Barak succeeded Lt.-Gen.
Dan Shomron as Chief of Staff of the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) on April 1 [see p. 35352 for appointment of Lt.-Gen.
Shomron in 1987].
According to some reports Barak, who had been Shomron's deputy for four years, had planned and commanded those carrying out the assassination of Abu Jihad, the PLO "number two" , in Tunis in 1988 [see p. 36436].
Continued "infiltrations" from Jordan
Israeli forces shot dead a 21-year-old Jordanian "infiltrator" along the Israeli-Jordanian border on April 15 [see p. 38119 for March incidents].
An IDF soldier sustained critical injuries in the incident.
According to Israeli reports the "infiltrator" had been carrying a "leaflet attesting to his membership of [the Islamic fundamentalist]Hamas" .
Gunmen crossed into Israel from Jordan on April 17 and attacked a kibbutz in the Bet She'an Valley, killing one person and injuring three others.
One of the "infiltrators" was subsequently shot dead by an IDF patrol; according to Israeli reports, the dead gunmen had carried documents identifying him as a member of Hamas and of the Jordanian Popular Army.
An "infiltrator" from Jordan was wounded and captured by the IDF on April 18.
The Voice of Israel radio reported on April 22 that two "terrorists" had been killed by an IDF unit the previous evening after infiltrating northern Galilee.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Dissolution of militias
The Cabinet approved a timetable, putting forward an April 30 deadline, for the disarming of the country's militias at a meeting held on March 28.
The plan had been drafted earlier that month by a four-member ministerial committee [see p. 38120].
Under the plan, the government considered all "armed organizations" and all "Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias" as disbanded as of March 20.
It asked that they turn in their "heavy and medium-calibre weapons and ammunition" no later than April 30.
Some two months after this deadline the government forces would complete their deployment in certain areas outside the perimeter of Greater Beirut, namely the Upper Metn, Chouf, Alayh, Kasrawan, Jubayl and the Batrun and Kurah districts.
Government forces would be deployed in the rest of Lebanon by Sept. 20.
It was subsequently announced that the government planned to increase the size of the country's internal security forces to accommodate some 16,000 "unemployed" militiamen.
Progress of dissolution of militias
Palestinian guerrillas, based for the most part around Sidon, proved to be the main obstacle to a full dissolution of the Lebanese militias.
Palestinian leaders argued that their fighters did not constitute a militia, but were an army engaged in a war with Israel and its proxy South Lebanon Army.
The same argument was propounded by the Iranian-backed Shia Hezbollah group and by a contingent of Iranian Revolutionary Guards stationed in Lebanon.
The main Maronite Christian militia, the Lebanese Forces (LF), contended that they could not disarm while armed Palestinian units remained in southern Lebanon.
However, the LF eventually relented and began the process of disarming on April 30.
Other militias disarmed by the agreed deadline, including the Shia Amal and the (Druse) Progressive Socialist Party.
Increase in number of deputies
At the March 28 meeting the Cabinet also approved a draft resolution to increase, by nomination, the number of parliamentary deputies from 99 to 108 (as agreed under the 1989 Taif charter — see p. 36986).
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
Relations with Soviet Union and Egypt
Farooq ash-Shar", the Syrian Foreign Affairs Minister, visited Moscow on April 3-4, for talks with his Soviet counterpart Aleksandr Bessmertnykh and with President Gorbachev.
The issues discussed included the post-war structure in the Gulf, the Arab-Israeli conflict and Syrian-Soviet co-operation.
A report in the Middle East Economic Digest of April 19, citing a recent edition of a London Arabic language daily Asharq Alawsat, claimed that the Soviet Union would not fulfil promises made in early 1991 to provide Syria with a large consignment of weapons.
Traditionally, the Soviet Union had been one of Syria's major arms suppliers.
The Syrian Defence Minister, Gen. Mustafa Tlass, had visited Moscow in February and had reportedly received a pledge of military aid.
However, Asharq Alawsat quoted Moscow sources as saying that the Soviet Union was no longer in a position to supply large amounts of weapons to developing countries "because of changed international circumstances and the weakness of the Soviet economy" .
Visit by Assad to Egypt
President Hafez al-Assad visited Egypt on March 31-April 1 for talks with his Egyptian counterpart, Hosni Mubarak.
The talks dealt with bilateral relations, the Arab-Israeli conflict and the situation in the Gulf.
In early March Syria, Egypt and the six Gulf Co-operation Council countries had agreed to establish a joint Arab Gulf regional security force [see pp. 38116-17].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Release of Roger Cooper — Visit by EC ministers — Visit to Syria and Lebanon by Rafsanjani
A British businessman, Roger Cooper, 55, was released from prison on April 1 and returned to London on April 2.
He had been accused of spying and held without trial since December 1985 [see pp. 35544; 37423; 37727].
The United Kingdom Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd welcomed Cooper's release as "an important step" [for resumption of UK-Iranian diplomatic relations in September 1990 see p. 37727].
Reports suggested that a visit to Iran by a high-ranking European Community (EC) delegation [see below]might have facilitated Cooper's release.
Two weeks earlier, on March 15, Mehrdad Kowkabi, an Iranian student held in the UK for 15 months, had been deported after a court dropped charges of arson against him, and Iranian officials had been quoted as saying that the government might respond to this "positive step" by releasing Cooper.
The government's decision was criticized by sections of the Iranian press with close links to radical factions.
The daily newspaper Jomhuriye Eslami of April 3 reproached the judiciary for "the unexpected release" of Cooper and "the failure to provide the public with information" .
Visit by EC ministers
Talks between Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati and an EC delegation consisting of the Foreign Ministers of Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands were held on April 3.
At a press conference afterwards, Vellayati said that "an understanding was reached on the expansion of economic ties between Iran and the EC" .
He said that ministers had in addition addressed the internal situation in Iraq; the problems of Afghanistan and Lebanon were also reportedly discussed.
On March 28 the Italian Foreign Minister, Gianni De Michelis, had held talks with Vellayati and President Rafsanjani on Western hostages in Lebanon.
Visit by Rafsanjani to Syria and Lebanon
President Rafsanjani visited Syria on April 27-29, on his first trip abroad since assuming the presidency.
Rafsanjani and Syrian President Assad discussed bilateral relations, the consequences of the Gulf war, Lebanon, and the Arab-Israeli conflict.
They also stressed their commitment to Iraq's territorial integrity.
Rafsanjani interrupted his visit to Syria on April 28 to hold talks in Lebanon with leaders of Hezbollah concerning Western hostages held in Lebanon.
He also met the Druse leader Walid Jumblatt and Ahmed Jabril, the leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine — General Command (PFLP — GC).
Killing of dissident
Abdul Rahman Broumand, a member of the dissident National Iranian Resistance Movement (NIRM), was stabbed and killed in Paris on April 18.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Announcement of June election — New electoral laws
In a television broadcast on April 3 President Chadli Bendjedid set the date of June 27 for Algeria's first multiparty general election.
Prime Minister Mouloud Hamrouche, who was to stand for election for the first time, said that the ruling National Liberation Front (FLN) might consider entering into a coalition with one of the secular opposition parties, either before or after the election.
Controversy surrounded the legal framework for the election and particularly the new constituency boundaries: new electoral laws endorsed by the National Assembly on April 1 and 2 marked the abandonment of the proportional representation system which had given dramatic victories to the fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) in local elections in June 1990 [see pp. 37549-50].
The law endorsed on April 1 specified voting procedures, and provided for two rounds of voting.
The second round, to take place by late July, would decide the issue in those constituencies where the first round failed to give any candidate at least 50 per cent of the vote.
Proxy votes were limited to one per person (although husbands might still vote on behalf of their wives) and electoral campaigning in mosques and school buildings was banned.
The second law, which was passed on April 2, increased the number of constituencies from 290 to 542, each electing one representative.
In spite of last-minute adjustments some of the approximately 40 opposition parties complained that constituency boundaries were weighted in favour either of conservative-minded voters in the thinly populated south or of voters in areas where anti-clerical Berber parties were strong.
The FIS continued to demand that a general election to the National Assembly should be followed within three months by presidential elections.
A grouping of eight opposition parties, including the Movement for Democracy in Algeria (MDA) and the Rally for Culture and Democracy (RCD), met on April 7 and agreed to support a single candidate in each constituency.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
WESTERN SAHARA
Referendum timetable
The practicalities of arranging a ceasefire and a referendum on the future of the Western Sahara were detailed in a report presented to the UN on April 22 by UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar.
A budget for the operation, which was to cost US$200,000,000, was to be approved by the General Assembly in May 1991.
The planned repatriation of tens of thousands of people to take part in the referendum would cost US$34,000,000, to be financed by voluntary contributions from UN members.
Following approval of the budget, the UN timetable envisaged that a ceasefire could be arranged within 16 weeks between Morocco and the guerrillas of the Polisario Front.
This was to be followed within 11 weeks by the withdrawal of two-thirds of the Moroccan troops from the territory.
A UN Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (Minurso) would then have support from 2,900 civilian, police and military personnel in overseeing the registration of voters (based on a census compiled by the Spanish authorities in 1974), the political campaigns, and voting in a referendum, to be held by January 1992.
The UN Security Council on April 29 passed unanimously Resolution 690 concerning the settlement of the Western Sahara dispute, giving its approval to this schedule and to the creation of the Minurso mission under a Swiss diplomat, Johannes Manz.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
BAHRAIN
The 1991 budget deficit estimated at BD118,000,000 (US$313,000,000) was expected to increase by 6 per cent in 1992.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GCC
Finance Ministers approved on April 22 the creation of a fund worth US$10,000 million to finance regional development programmes.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
King Hussein visited France and Germany between March 29 and April 3 on his first visit to Europe since the end of the Gulf war.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
One student was killed and about a dozen injured on April 18 in Casablanca when police ended a demonstration at the Hassan II University to draw attention to demands for improved conditions.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Oil production rose by 26 per cent to a record 850,000,000 barrels a day in 1990; the government also announced an increase in its total contribution to US Gulf war costs, to US$2,870 million.
INTERNATIONAL
INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES
Meeting of G-7 Finance Ministers
Finance ministers and central bank governors from the Group of Seven (G-7) major industrialized countries met in Washington on April 28.
Differences of emphasis on interest rate management
The meeting came amidst renewed United States pressure for reductions in world interest rates [see pp. 37977-78].
A statement issued after the meeting, reported to be "the most acrimonious in recent times" , gave few indications of the rift between the USA and its Western trading partners, especially Germany, noting merely that "the persistence of high real interest rates and the slowing of economic activity" posed a risk to the global economy.
Ministers emphasised "the importance of monetary and fiscal policies which provide the basis of lower real interest rates" , but failed to recommend any immediate measures, agreeing only "to monitor the situation closely and to take actions as needed within the co-ordination process, with a view to achieving a sound recovery and a growing world economy" .
The statement added that ministers "believed that such a medium-term strategy was the best way of reducing potential risks and uncertainties in the current outlook" .
The two-page statement also observed that ministers had noted "signs of a prospective economic recovery and lower inflation in those countries which are in recession" .
It was understood that growing US concern about the failure of its economy to respond to the stimulus of lower interest rates had been impressed upon G-7 Finance Ministers and central bank governors by US President George Bush during talks on April 28, ahead of the opening of the formal session.
According to the German Finance Minister, Theo Waigel, there had been "no reproaching the Germans" during the meeting.
Earlier, during talks with US treasury officials, the president of the German Bundesbank, Karl Otto Pöhl, was reported to have stressed that German interest rates were the lowest in the European Communities (EC), and that hardly any other country in the world had achieved such a positive combination of strong growth and low inflation.
On April 11 Pöhl had denied rumours of an imminent rise in German rates, noting that inflation had actually fallen from 2.7 per cent in February to 2.5 per cent in March, despite strong economic growth and public-sector borrowing.
During pre-meeting talks with US Treasury officials, Waigel was also reported to have underlined "differences [in economic growth]between countries" , adding that Germany had no objection to other countries altering their monetary policies if they had the scope to do so.
The German position was supported by Japan's Finance Minister, Ryutaro Hashimoto, who told US Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady during bilateral talks preceding the formal session that Japan was not yet ready to change its economic policies.
Reports suggested that continuing differences over interest rates stemmed from different economic perceptions.
Germany and Japan stressed "inflation-free growth" , while others, especially the USA, placed the emphasis on the risk of recession [see pp. 37977-78].
The US discount interest rate was on April 30 cut from 6 per cent to 5.5 per cent; the move was not expected to persuade the German Bundesbank to change its position on interest rates.
Reaffirmation of exchange rate co-operation
The final statement also noted that ministers had reaffirmed "their commitment to co-operate closely on exchange markets" .
Reports prior to the meeting had suggested that the dollar's recent sharp advance in currency markets would force central banks to intervene in keeping with a January agreement "to monitor developments in exchange markets" [see p. 37978].
At an informal meeting of G-7 Finance Ministers in London on April 14, some ministers had expressed fears that the failure to stem the dollar's rise would provoke a further rise in German interest rates, and in those of other members of the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM).
On April 29 the French Finance Minister, Pierre Bérégovoy, dismissed speculation about possible intervention in currency markets by saying that the current level of the dollar was "convenient" .
The UK Chancellor of the Exchequer, Norman Lamont, was also quoted as saying that he did not believe that the present position of the dollar had rendered it "uncompetitive." 
Unlike in previous G-7 communiqués, the customary reference to international debt strategy was notably absent.
Bérégovoy said later that France had "categorically refused" to agree to a proposed statement on international debt which would have attempted to "ring-fence" recent US-sponsored Polish and Egyptian debt forgiveness settlements [see pp. 37978; 38107].
Forgiveness of government-to-government debt had previously only been available to the poorest countries, concentrated mainly in Africa, whereas Egypt and Poland were both defined as middle-income debtors.
(On recent occasions France had argued against making a special case for Poland and Egypt, emphasizing the needs of other middle-income countries such as those in Africa — see also p. 37524.)
G-10 communiqué
A communiqué issued on behalf of a steering group of the Ministers and central bank governor of the Group of Ten (G-10) industrial economies (the G-7 contries plus Belgium, the Netherlands, Sweden and Switzerland), which met in Washington on April 29, called on central and east European countries to abandon "gradualism" and adopt the Polish model of economic reform.
The communiqué also urged the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD — see p. 38155) to act in co-operation with the World Bank and other international institutions to promote "the privatization of state enterprises" .
G-24 meeting
Finance Ministers from the Group of 24 (G-24) developing countries who met in Washington on April 28 expressed support for the World Bank's reaffirmation of its commitment to make poverty reduction "a priority objective" in its lending operations.
(IFC).
A final communiqué noted the ministers' concern at the slowdown in growth in the industrialized countries and "the worsening of the already unfavourable external environment facing the developing countries" .
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
Proposed "rapid reaction" force
The Military Committee of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) met at the level of chiefs of staff for the first time in 1991 on April 11-12 at the organization's political headquarters in Brussels, under the chairmanship of Gen. Vigleik Eide (Norway).
In the light of the profound changes in Europe since 1989 and the ending of the Cold War, NATO was undergoing a radical restructuring, a process due to culminate in an autumn summit meeting.
In this context, the Military Committee agreed on unspecified overall force reductions, but its most significant contribution was a plan (subject to approval by Defence Ministers) to create a "rapid reaction" force, which would be a key element in the alliance's capability to respond to any future security threat to the territory of its member states.
NATO already had an Allied Mobile Force, first created in 1960 and consisting of several dozen aircraft and a 5,000-strong mixed-nationality division under German command.
The "rapid reaction" force would provide a capability at a more substantial level, as a "corps-sized formation" (an imprecise indication, taken to mean anything from 30,000 to 100,000 troops) drawn from different European NATO member countries with the United States providing air support.
Probably based in Germany, it would have a significant British element and was likely to come under a British commanding officer.
The proposal for the "rapid reaction" force was not intended to suggest that NATO might undertake "out-of-area" military commitments.
The plan did, however, contribute to fuelling the debate about a possible common European defence policy outside the structure of NATO itself [see pp. 37931; 38022], whether within the existing Western European Union (WEU), or by an extension of the sphere of activity of the European Communities (EC).
If the force consisted of personnel from WEU member countries, it was argued, then it might be deployed under that organization's auspices in pursuit of agreed objectives.
In this connection, it was noted that France had not participated at the Military Committee meeting (having remained outside the NATO joint military structure since 1966), but had decided in March to join a working party created at the July 1990 NATO summit [see p. 37599]to consider the strategic implications of the changed world situation.
NATO staff cuts
It was announced on April 15 that there would be a 10 per cent staff cut in two stages by end-1992 at NATO's military headquarters in Europe (the Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe, or SHAPE, near Mons in Belgium) and at the major command centres in Europe (Brunssum, Netherlands; Kolsaas, Norway; and Naples, Italy).
NATO involvement in Prague conference
NATO and Czechoslovakia co-sponsored on April 25-26 in Prague a conference on "the future of European security" , opened by Czechoslovak President Havel and attended by senior NATO personnel including the organization's Secretary-General, Manfred Wörner.
Designed to explore possible relationships between the NATO alliance and east European countries, the meeting was also warned by Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Uli Kvitsinski that NATO in a post-Cold War world should not aim to build up a "super bloc" which could in turn provoke a "fortress Soviet Union" response.
INTERNATIONAL
ANTARCTICA
Agreement on mining ban
A 50-year ban on mining and mineral extraction in Antarctica was the central part of a draft protocol agreed by the signatory states to Antarctica Treaty at a meeting in Madrid on April 22-30.
The meeting formed the second part of the 11th special session of the Treaty conference.
The first part had been held in Vina del Mar, Chile, at the end of 1990 [see p. 37931].
The protocol, which was subject to ratification by the governments of the states concerned, effectively marked a compromise between those countries which favoured the eventual opening of Antarctica to mineral exploitation (notably the United Kingdom and the United States), and those which supported proposals for the continent to be declared a "world park" (which included Australia and France).
The mining ban would remain in force for 50 years unless reversed by a consensus among the 26 voting members of the Treaty.
At the end of this period, it could only be overturned by a 75 per cent majority of all states attending a Treaty conference, which must include the current 26 voting members.
Environmentalists hailed the decision as going a long way towards meeting the demands of campaigns in favour of preserving Antarctica.
The full text of the protocol was to remain secret until formal signature following ratification, tentatively scheduled to take place in Madrid at the end of June.
However, in addition to the mining ban, it was understood to cover the protection of the marine environment, the disposal of waste from the numerous research stations in the area, and the preservation of fauna and flora.
Agreement on the protocol was facilitated by announcements before and during the conference by the Netherlands, Germany and Japan to the effect that they would support a prohibition of mining.
This in effect left the UK and USA, together with other supporters of eventual exploitation such as Saudi Arabia and South Africa, in an untenable position, with a majority of the Treaty's 26 voting members in favour of a ban.
The Japanese decision, announced on April 23, was particularly unexpected, and was welcomed by environmentalists as a "body blow to the pro-mining camp" .
INTERNATIONAL
NUCLEAR ENERGY
Fifth anniversary of Chernobyl accident
The days leading up to the fifth anniversary of the accident at Chernobyl nuclear power station, in the Soviet Ukraine, were marked by a series of reports on the consequences of the accident (which occurred on April 26, 1986 — see pp. 34460-62).
In a document leaked to the United Kingdom television programme This Week, the deputy head of the Soviet State Committee for Atomic Energy Safety, N. A. Steinburg, itemized 32 design faults in the reactor type which caused the explosion.
The report concluded that the design "blatantly contravenes the requirements of the rules of nuclear safety" .
A further 15 reactors of the same type — RBMK 1000 — were still in operation, despite appeals by Soviet scientists for them to be shut down to avert a similar disaster.
A Ukrainian physicist, Vladimir Chernousenko, claimed in London on April 18 that at least 7,000 people involved in clean-up work following the accident had died of radiation sickness.
His figure, which was based on a tally kept by victim support groups, was criticized by other experts, who argued that a longer period would have to elapse before such a large number of people could develop cancer.
The UK Atomic Energy Authority, in a "worst-case scenario" , suggested that some 10,000 Soviet citizens could be expected to die of radiation-induced cancer as a result of the accident, with a further 30,000 fatalities possible worldwide.
As work continued to seal the reactor (whose current condition was the subject of some alarming reports, despite the original claim that it had been "entombed" successfully in concrete by November 1986 — see p. 34749), the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet passed a series of laws in early April which reduced the permissible radiation level, and, as a result, would lead to the evacuation of a further 73,000 people from the Chernobyl area, bringing the total moved since the accident to 250,000.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
US shuttle flights
The United States space shuttle Atlantis landed in California on April 11 at the end of a six-day mission during which a US$617,000,000 gamma ray observatory (GRO) was released into orbit to make unprecedented observations of the highest energy radiation in the universe.
The observatory, weighing 17 tonnes, was the second of four major telescopes to be put into orbit by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)[for details of Hubble Space Telescope see pp. 37394; 37551].
The first US space walks for five years were made during the shuttle mission, one in an emergency to free an antenna on the GRO which had failed to operate, and the other to test equipment for the construction of the proposed Freedom space station.
The shuttle Discovery was launched on April 29 on an eight-day mission to conduct tests on the "Star Wars" defence system.
This was the eighth military shuttle mission and the 40th shuttle flight overall.
INTERNATIONAL
AIR CRASHES
20 people were killed in two separate air crashes on April 9 and 19 near the French city of Clermont Ferrand, and off the island of Nuku Hiva in French Polynesia.
INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCE ON SECURITY AND CO-OPERATION IN EUROPE
Parliamentarians from the 34 participating countries agreed on April 3 in Madrid to establish a pan-European Assembly; a Centre for the Prevention of Conflict had been inaugurated in Vienna on March 18.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Strategic Arms Reduction Talks resumed in Geneva on April 19 after a month's recess.
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
The Stockholm Initiative on Global Security and Government proposed on April 22 the widening of the powers of the UN.