

AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Fall of Mengistu government — Formation of EPRDF administration
President Mengistu Haile Mariam fled from Ethiopia on May 21, leaving his Vice-President nominally in charge of a collapsing regime.
One week later, the forces of the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) met relatively little opposition as they entered the capital, Addis Ababa.
EPRDF leader Meles Zenawi announced that a transitional government would be formed in consultation with other groups, pending elections.
The separatist Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF), which had co-operated with the EPRDF in a strategic alliance to bring down the Mengistu government, announced on May 29 that it was to set up its own provisional government in Eritrea, although it would recognize and co-operate with the EPRDF administration in Addis Ababa.
United States-mediated talks held in London on May 27-28, attended by representatives of the effectively defunct Ethiopian government, the EPRDF, the EPLF and the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF), had provided a crucial political dimension to EPRDF and EPLF advances on the ground.
Postponement of peace talks — Rebel advances
In early May the Mengistu government had continued to claim that the Shengo (parliament) resolution of April, calling for the establishment of a transitional government, had wide international endorsement as a peace proposal.
On May 8 the government announced that prior to the "joint peace forum" to be held in London, the Ethiopian government would implement the Shengo (parliament) resolution by setting up a peace commission to negotiate with "all opposition and pro-unity forces" .
A new Cabinet headed by Prime Minister Tesfaye Dinka was announced on May 9 and greeted favourably by the foreign press and diplomats.
The EPRDF executive committee meeting on May 10-12, however, dismissed the Cabinet changes as "cosmetic" .
On May 15 the US-mediated peace talks which (since May 9) had been scheduled to be held in London on May 20, were postponed until one week later.
On May 16, as the government denounced the postponement as an attempt by rebel groups to "buy time to intensify the war" , the EPRDF launched a fresh offensive against the Ethiopian army in southern Wollo and northern Shoa regions, north-east of Addis Ababa.
Heavy fighting also continued to the west of the city, where EPRDF forces recaptured the town of Ambo on May 18 [see p. 38137], and around Beylul in Eritrea.
Departure of Mengistu
A State Council statement of May 21 said that Mengistu had "stepped down from power today and fled the country to a foreign country" .
Vice-President Lt.-Gen.
Tesfaye Gebre Kidan (Defence Minister in 1981-86 and appointed Vice-President on April 26) would "work in his place" and the government was taking steps through diplomatic channels to implement proposals for a ceasefire and a transitional government.
Mengistu was reported to have arrived in Harare, the Zimbabwean capital, late on May 21, and on May 23 was granted asylum there.
On May 21-27 fighting in the southern Wollo region centred on rebel attempts to cut the road connecting the capital with the north-eastern port of Assab.
On May 21 the EPRDF took Adis Alem, 55 km west of the capital, while on May 23 they took the key town of Debre Birhan (about 70 km north-east of the capital).
In the north of Eritrea, EPLF forces moved into the regional capital of Asmara on May 24, and took Assab from demoralized government troops on May 25.
Tesfaye Gebre Kidan continued to appeal for a ceasefire and to impress on foreign ambassadors his willingness to negotiate with the rebels.
On May 23, 187 political prisoners were released, while defeated or deserting government troops began to drift back to the capital.
EPRDF forces moving in from the west began to reach the suburbs of Addis Ababa on the weekend of May 25-26.
London talks — EPRDF entry into Addis Ababa
On the morning of May 27, representatives of the government and rebel groups began talks in London, with the US Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, Herman Cohen, as mediator.
In Addis Ababa Tesfaye Gebre Kidan told the Italian ambassador and the US chargé d'affaires that he was no longer in control of the military.
There had been intermittent heavy firing and tank movements around the presidential palace since the previous night, reportedly by dissident officers seeking to prevent Tesfaye Gebre Kidan from ordering a unilateral ceasefire — which he in fact did that evening.
Cohen had meanwhile made a surprise afternoon announcement to the press in London that the US government was "recommending that the forces of the EPRDF enter the city as soon as possible to stabilize the situation" .
At the London talks the Ethiopian government delegation was headed by Tesfaye Dinka.
The chief EPRDF negotiator was Zenawi, its president, who was also general secretary of the Tigre People's Liberation Front (TPLF), which formed the core of the EPRDF.
The EPLF secretary-general Issaias Afewerki and OLF leader Yahannes Lata Wagayo also participated.
The talks ended abruptly on the morning of May 28, as an angry Tesfaye Dinka protested over the US sanctioning of the EPRDF's move into Addis Ababa, and EPRDF forces fought government troops around the presidential palace.
Zenawi told a press conference in London on the afternoon of May 28 that a temporary administration would before July 1 organize a conference to enable all groups to participate in forming a broad-based provisional government.
This government would subsequently organize free elections within nine to 12 months.
As the foreign news media speculated as to the political programme of the EPRDF administration (and recalled in particular some earlier pro-Stalinist utterances of TPLF guerrilla leaders), US State Department officials warned on May 29 that future humanitarian aid to Ethiopia would be conditional on moves towards democratization and respect for human rights.
On May 31 the EPLF vice-chairman Tamirat Laynie told relief officials at a meeting in Addis Ababa that priority would be given to relief operations: the port of Assab had been reopened by agreement with the EPLF and all relief agencies should within a week submit details of their future projects, he said.
Up to seven people were killed when EPRDF forces opened fire on demonstrators in Addis Ababa on May 29.
Crowds of 100 to 400 people were reported to have gathered in various parts of the city, chanting anti-EPRDF, anti-US and pro-Ethiopian unity slogans.
Demonstrations were declared illegal, but continued over the next two days.
On May 30 senior civil servants were instructed by EPRDF representatives to continue to work as normal.
Eritrea
In a cautiously worded announcement on May 29 Afewerki said that the EPLF would be setting up a provisional administration for Eritrea, but that this did not constitute a unilateral declaration of independence.
The EPLF continued to demand a US-supervised referendum on independence from Ethiopia, but was flexible as to the timetable for this, he said.
The EPLF would attend the conference to be held before July 1, but would not participate in any government subsequently formed.
According to the Guardian of May 30, US officials said that there had been "tacit agreement" at the London talks "that Ethiopia would, in effect, have two administrations" .
The OLF announced on May 29 that it would seek a referendum on the future of the Oromo people of southern Ethiopia.
Airlift of Ethiopian Jews to Israel
An airlift of 14,087 Ethiopian Jews — widely known as Falashas (a name they rejected)— was carried out by the Israeli authorities on May 24-25, in anticipation of the fall of the Ethiopian government.
On May 26 Israeli officials announced that the airlift from Addis Ababa to Tel Aviv had been completed in 41 civilian and military flights, in an operation co-ordinated by the Israeli army and the official Jewish Agency.
In a television interview on May 25 Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir said that US assistance in the last stages the operation had been "vital" , since the Ethiopian authorities had demanded a clearly worded appeal from the USA for the airlift.
President Bush was said to have addressed an appeal to Mengistu in April and to Prime Minister Tesfaye Dinka on May 21 concerning the Ethiopian Jews, and press reports focused on the role of US envoy Rudy Boschwitz.
A last-minute payment of US$35,000,000 had been made by the Israeli government to the outgoing regime for its assistance in the operation, according to press reports from Washington and Israel.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Assassination of Rajiv Gandhi
Rajiv Gandhi, the 46-year-old Congress (I) party president and former Prime Minister, was assassinated in southern India on May 21, while campaigning in the general election which had started the previous day.
His murder brought to an end a political dynasty stretching back through his mother Indira Gandhi to Jawaharlal Nehru, Indira's father and India's first Prime Minister.
Details of assassination — Allegations of Tamil Tiger involvement
Gandhi had been about to address an election meeting at Sriperumpudur in Tamil Nadu, 45 km from Madras, when there was a massive explosion.
He died instantly along with some 15 bystanders.
It subsequently emerged that he had been assassinated by a young Tamil woman who triggered explosives strapped to her back while presenting him with a bouquet.
Because of the location of the assassination, blame was immediately placed on the largest Sri Lankan Tamil rebel group, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).
However, some reports speculated that Sikh extremists might have been involved in the murder.
Although the LTTE denied involvement in the assassination, it was widely noted that they had a strong motive, believing that Gandhi had betrayed them in 1987 when he dispatched the Indian army in an unsuccessful effort to bring Sri Lanka's civil strife under control [see p. 35313].
All-India Radio reported on May 25 that over 100 Tamil Tiger activists and 3,600 "anti-social elements" had been rounded up following the assassination.
On May 27 police in Tamil Nadu said that they were holding a Sri Lankan Tamil woman for questioning in connection with the assassination.
Subramanian Swamy, Minister of Law and Justice and of Commerce, said on May 29 that the government was convinced that the LTTE had been involved in the assassination.
The government met in emergency session on May 22 and agreed to set up a commission of inquiry to investigate the assassination.
Justice J. S. Verma was appointed to head the commission on May 27.
National and international response
All major political leaders in India expressed their horror at Gandhi's assassination and the government immediately declared a seven-day period of state mourning.
The polling scheduled to take place on May 23 and 26 for the Lok Sabha (lower house of parliament) and for some state assemblies, was quickly deferred by the chief election commissioner to June 12 and 15 [see below for details].
Messages of condolence began arriving in New Delhi on May 22 from a host of world leaders.
In a radio address broadcast early on May 22 President Ramaswamy Venkataraman urged people to "maintain the utmost calm" and "not to allow passions to overtake them" .
A maximum security alert was sounded in New Delhi, and the army and paramilitary forces were deployed at strategic locations around the city.
Curfews were imposed in a number of sensitive areas.
Despite such precautions, early on May 22 All-India Radio started broadcasting reports of outbreaks of violence in a number of states in which up to 11 people died.
Large areas of India were at a virtual standstill on May 22, with little public transport and few shops open.
However, by May 23 fears of widespread violence had receded and most cities and towns had returned to normal.
Gandhi's funeral
Rajiv Gandhi was cremated on May 24 after a four-hour state funeral procession through the streets of Delhi.
The cremation was attended by numerous foreign leaders including the Prime Ministers of Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Nepal.
Gandhi's ashes were scattered on the waters of the Ganges and Yamuna rivers at Allahabad on May 28 in a ceremony that marked the end of the funeral service.
Obituary
Rajiv was thrust unwillingly into Indian politics after the death in 1980 of Sanjay Gandhi [see pp. 30574-75], his younger brother and the family's political heir-apparent.
Under pressure from his mother, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, Rajiv gave up his career as an airline pilot and entered the Lok Sabha in 1981, winning the Amethi seat formerly held by Sanjay [see p. 31256].
After Indira Gandhi's assassination in 1984, Rajiv was swiftly sworn in as her successor [see p. 33220]and led Congress (I) to a massive victory in a general election held at the end of the year [see pp. 33464-66].
After a promising start Rajiv's administration began to falter in 1987.
Widespread allegations of corruption led to increasing factionalism within his government and party.
In the 1989 general election, Congress (I) lost its majority, although it remained the largest single party in the Lok Sabha [see pp. 37030-31].
Gandhi ably led the opposition to the new minority Janata Dal government, led by his former Finance Minister V. P. Singh.
Within a year Singh's government had collapsed after Rajiv had lent his considerable backing to a rebel Janata Dal faction led by Chandra Shekhar [see p. 37854].
When he withdrew his support from the Shekhar government, that too collapsed, in March 1991, and fresh elections were ordered [see p. 38101].
During the campaign, Rajiv deliberately spurned the tight security which had surrounded him as Prime Minister and consciously adopted a more intimate style of canvassing.
Congress (I) leadership question — Election of Narasimha Rao as party president
Congress (I) was thrown into confusion by Gandhi's death.
He left no natural successor to take on the Nehru mantle.
His wife, Sonia Gandhi, was an Italian-born Christian who had made known her distaste for the political life imposed on her husband; their son Rahul, 21, and daughter Priyanka, 19, were too young even to enter the Lok Sabha.
Despite Sonia Gandhi's obvious reluctance to succeed her husband, the Congress (I) machinery swiftly set about attempting to persuade her to do so.
Within 18 hours of Gandhi's death, a faction of the party's central working committee (CWC) had convened in Delhi and had "unanimously" elected Sonia as the new party president.
Other party leaders who had not been privy to the "election" advised Sonia against accepting the post.
On May 23 she issued a statement announcing that she had declined to accept the party presidency.
Extensive informal consultations then took place among senior party leaders, and on May 29 the CWC unanimously elected as the new party president P. V. Narasimha Rao, 70, a southerner who had served in cabinets under Indira and Rajiv Gandhi.
Rao's appointment was widely regarded as a temporary measure; he was in poor health following recent open-heart surgery and was not standing in the current general election.
First round of elections
The first round of voting in the general election took place on May 20 [see p. 38101 for calling of general election in March following collapse of Shekhar government].
Following Gandhi's assassination on May 21, the subsequent rounds of voting were postponed.
Polling was held in 203 constituencies on May 20, with elections being countermanded in five constituencies due to the death of a candidate.
Voting was also held for all State Assembly seats in Haryana and West Bengal and for a number of State Assembly seats in Uttar Pradesh.
The major parties contesting the elections were Congress (I), the Samajwadi Janata Party (i.e. Chandra Shekhar's faction of the Janata Dal), V. P. Singh's Janata Dal faction, the Bharatiya Janata Party and the Communist Party of India (Marxist).
Serious violence erupted in a number of states during campaigning in April and May.
The worst of the unrest occurred in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal and Punjab where at least 100 people died in election-related violence.
On May 20 the government deployed 630 companies of paramilitary troops — the largest ever for an election — to supplement security arrangements.
The greatest deployment — 14,000 men — was in Bihar where the state borders were also sealed as an extra security measure.
Elections held on May 20 (number of seats contested in parenthesis)
Andhra Pradesh (17); Bihar (35); Madhya Pradesh (28); Rajasthan (14); Uttar Pradesh (42); *West Bengal (42);
*Haryana (10); *Delhi (7); *Himachal Pradesh (4); *Sikkim (1); *Andaman and Nicobar Islands (1); *Chandigarh (1);
*Lakshadweep (1).
Total seats:203.
*Voting completed.
New election timetable
June 6 and 8 Assam
June 12 Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, *Kerala, Manipur, Tripura, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Dadra and Nagar Naveli, Daman and Diu
June 15 *Uttar Pradesh, *Tamil Nadu, Orissa, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
*Pondicherry
June 22 Punjab
No polling scheduled Jammu and Kashmir
*State assembly elections to be held.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Cyclone disaster
Nearly 139,000 people were killed and thousands more threatened by epidemics, according to official reports, after a devastating cyclone which struck Bangladesh on April 29-30 [see p. 38152].
The government estimated that the total cost of the damage could exceed US$3,000 million.
Many of the victims were in the south-eastern districts around Chittagong and Cox's Bazar, and unofficial reports indicated that up to 10,000,000 people had been made homeless.
Fears of a higher death toll were compounded after reports indicated that up to 4,000,000 people risked death from starvation.
Relief efforts during May were severely hampered by fresh gales on May 6-13 and widespread flooding in the north-east, storms in the coastal district of Barisal on May 20, and heavy rains and floods on May 25-26 around Sylhet in the north-east.
Deaths directly attributed to these new disasters totalled some 400, while many hundreds of thousands were left homeless, without food, or without clean drinking water.
On May 1 the Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia appealed for international aid, saying that "the magnitude of devastation wrought by the latest cyclone is so great that Bangladesh cannot face it alone" .
The cyclone in late April had formed in the Bay of Bengal and brought winds of up to 145 mph.
The highest death toll was on the islands of Kutubdia, Maheshkali, Sandwip and Chakori in the south-east.
Experts believed that the death toll could have been much higher but for the recently installed early warning system which had allowed time for many people to move to safety or to use the 300 concrete cyclone shelters built under the Cyclone Preparedness Programme, run mainly by the Bangladesh Red Crescent.
The Red Crescent's cyclone project director, Emdad Hossain, stressed, however, that up to 5,000 shelters, each at a cost of US$68,000, were required to protect the entire population at risk.
The total annual operating budget of the Cyclone Preparedness Programme was under US$136,000.
Relief and health workers warned that the large number of unburied corpses and animal carcasses posed significant health risks and increased the chances of thousands of additional deaths from water-borne diseases.
On May 11 a UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) official said that up to 1,700,000 people were in danger of being infected by diarrhoeal diseases.
The Guardian of May 13 reported that the country's health directorate had confirmed that 951 people had died from diarrhoea in the previous two weeks, mostly in cyclone-affected areas.
Estimating cholera-related deaths was made more difficult because the spread of the disease was not given official recognition, reportedly because of fears that it would adversely affect the country's lucrative shrimp trade.
Preliminary estimates of damage
Immense damage was inflicted on the country's infrastructure, especially its communications links, and on property, crops and livestock.
The Financial Times of May 7 reported that more than 520,000 sq km were inundated, while the Guardian of May 9 said that more than US$500,000,000 worth of crops and livestock had been destroyed.
The country's main port, Chittagong, was crippled and the entire salt producing industry around Cox's Bazar destroyed.
Shrimp cultivation, an important source of foreign exchange, was washed away and vast quantities of fuel stored at the oil refinery in Chittagong were contaminated by sea water.
On May 2, the Minister for State for Relief, Lutfur Rahman, said that property worth US$1,500 million had been destroyed in 13 districts in the coastal region.
The Chief of Staff of the Air Force, Vice-Marshal Momtazuddin Ahmed, confirmed publicly for the first time on May 10 the claim made eight days earlier by the head of the opposition Awami League Sheikh Hasina Wajed that there had been extensive damage to the country's small fleet of aircraft.
As many as 44 military planes and helicopters had been badly damaged, he acknowledged.
Naval ships in Chittagong were also destroyed on the night of the cyclone, and unofficial estimates suggested that the total loss to the navy and air force would exceed US$2,500 million.
On May 11 the Finance and Planning Minister Saifur Rahman said that the cyclone had cost the country US$3,000 million in economic losses and had rendered 4,000,000 people homeless.
Pledges of international assistance
By mid-May the government's request for emergency relief supplies estimated at just over US$670,000,000, with an additional US$740,000,000 for reconstruction, had met with pledges totalling only US$450,000,000.
By May 23, according to the UN information service, the aid actually received by the government of Bangladesh amounted to just over US$250,000,000.
UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, who had appealed for international aid on May 3, made a subsequent emergency appeal on May 17 for $168,000,000.
Meanwhile, the World Health Organization (WHO) called for US$3,000,000 to purchase medical supplies [see also p. 38218], while UNICEF advanced US$1,000,000 from its Emergency Relief Fund and announced that it was seeking a further US$5,000,000 to restore village water systems.
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) said that it was providing US$800,000 in relief assistance.
By far the largest pledge was US$100,000,000 from Saudi Arabia.
The United States on May 1 donated US$2,000,000 in medical supplies and promised another US$20,000,000.
On May 2 the European Communities (EC) pledged US$12,000,000 and on May 14 agreed to provide a further US$67,000,000 in emergency aid.
On May 8 the United Kingdom announced a further £2,000,000 (US$3,200,000) in aid bringing its total individual contribution to £6,500,000 (US$10,300,000).
On May 20 an additional grant of £5,000,000 (US$8,000,000) was announced.
Offers of assistance came also from Australia Canada, Norway and Switzerland as well as a number of Asian countries including Japan, India and Pakistan
On May 30 the Aid to Bangladesh Consortium (a grouping of countries and multilateral agencies under the auspices of the World Bank) announced that it was increasing longer-term assistance to Bangladesh by allocating US$2,300 million for the 12 months running to June 1992.
US task force for relief efforts
On May 20 the government signed an accord with the USA agreeing to the participation of a US task force to help co-ordinate government relief efforts.
On May 11 it had been announced that a US task force including helicopters, amphibious landing ships and construction workers would be sent to help with disaster relief operations.
Opposition parties described the involvement of US military personnel in relief efforts as an "American takeover of Bangladesh's defences" .
On May 29 the commander of the US force, Maj.-Gen.
Henry Stackpole, said that about 400 US Marines and engineers would remain in the country until June 15.
Charges of government mismanagement
There were reports that the government's handling of relief efforts had prompted widespread criticism from opposition parties and some sections of the political establishment.
The criticism focused especially on the government's delay in completing cyclone damage assessment and, except for a request for more helicopters, its failure to provide aid agencies with a detailed list of emergency supply needs.
It was also criticized for failing to anticipate the catastrophe.
In a televised speech on May 1, Zia appealed for national unity, saying that "there may be differences of opinion in a democracy…[but]this is not the time for differences" .
On May 7 she announced that the armed forces would work "alongside the civilian authority" in co-ordinating relief efforts and that a new command structure, reportedly dominated by military personnel, would be established.
This announcement came in the wake of a growing number of reports that the civilian government had failed adequately to supervise the distribution of relief.
Charges of government mismanagement were compounded by reports of corruption among food wholesalers, lorry owners and trawlermen.
During a parliamentary debate on May 10, Sheikh Hasina accused the government of incompetence and demanded that the entire relief operation be handed over to the army.
On May 19 Radio Bangladesh reported that acting President Shehabuddin Ahmed had "expressed dissatisfaction" at the government's handling of relief efforts.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Anti-government protests — Cabinet reshuffle
During the course of May the government of South Korea was shaken by the most serious unrest since President Roh Tae Woo came to power in 1988.
Although the protests were largely confined to the student population, they went beyond the country's usual "Spring protests" both in their size and the violence which accompanied them.
The catalyst for the unrest was the death of Kang Kyong Dae on April 26.
Kang, a student at Seoul's Myungji University, was beaten to death by riot police armed with steel pipes while taking part in an anti-government demonstration.
The wave of protests which resulted from the incident included a demonstration in Seoul on April 29 involving some 30,000 students.
After holding a memorial service for Kang, the students, armed with missiles and petrol bombs, attempted to march into the city centre but were held back by 6,000 riot police using tear gas and water cannon.
After fierce clashes, the protesters broke into smaller groups and there were further reports of violence elsewhere in the city late into the night.
There were similar protests on the same day in Pusan, Kwangju and several other cities, when anti-government sentiment was increased by the self-immolation of a student from Chonnam National University.
Shouting anti-Roh slogans, Park Seung Hee poured paint-thinner over herself and ignited it.
She was hospitalized in a critical condition after suffering third-degree burns, and died 21 days later.
Replacement of Home Affairs Minister
In an attempt to defuse the protests Roh dismissed his Minister for Home Affairs, Ahn Eung Mo, on April 27 and replaced him with Lee Sang Yeon.
He also gave assurances that those responsible for Kang's death would be prosecuted and, on May 2, issued an apology for the killing, stating that he was "deeply sorry for causing the people pain and sorrow" .
The new Home Affairs Minister on May 4 announced a series of procedural changes designed to improve public confidence in the police and to prevent further instances of brutality.
These included minimizing the deployment of the plainclothes units — the so-called "Skeleton Corps" — whose function it was to pursue and arrest protesters, reducing the use of tear gas, and prohibiting the use by riot police of equipment (such as steel pipes) other than that which had been officially provided.
Throughout the first half of May there were daily demonstrations in Seoul and other cities, and at least four more instances of self-immolation.
Increasingly the protesters demanded the resignation of the government and the introduction of democratic reforms.
Roh responded by accusing the protesters of seeking to overthrow the country's "liberal democratic system" , and insisted that Cabinet changes "can never be dictated by opposition parties or activists" .
On May 9, the first anniversary of the formal inauguration of the ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP — see pp. 37456-57), there were concerted demonstrations by workers and students in at least 88 South Korean towns and cities, involving more than 200,000 people.
There was an even larger turnout on May 14 when funeral marches for Kang were held in the capital and elsewhere.
Some 22,000 police sealed off central Seoul in order to prevent between 75,000 and 150,000 marchers from carrying Kang's coffin though the city centre.
Volleys of tear-gas shells were fired and an estimated 2,000 petrol bombs thrown throughout the day as the protesters attempted to breach the police lines.
The continuing protests merged on May 18 with the commemoration of the 11th anniversary of the brutal suppression of the Kwangju uprising [see pp. 30606-07].
There were large demonstrations in Seoul, Pusan, Inchon, Taegu, Masan, Chunchon and Suwon, with frequent clashes between demonstrators and riot police.
In Kwangju itself, more than 100,000 people took to the streets where they fought running battles with riot police late into the night.
In Kwangju a protester received a near-fatal beating by police in an incident which served to give fresh impetus to the protests.
In Seoul a 38-year-old woman set herself on fire and leapt to her death in front of Yonsei University, and two other people were hospitalized after setting themselves on fire during the May 18 demonstrations, bringing to eight the number of self-immolations (six of them fatal) associated with the current protests.
Announcement of Cabinet reshuffle
Although the demonstrations subsided in scale after May 18, there were continued clashes between anti-government protestors and police in Seoul and other cities.
On May 22 a 25-year old man committed suicide in Kwangju by leaping in flames from the roof of the mortuary building which contained the body of Park Seung Hee.
On the same day Prime Minister Ro Jai Bong resigned to indicate his assumption of responsibility for the continuing unrest.
President Roh appointed a former Education Minister, Chung Won Shik, as Prime Minister on May 23, and, on May 26, he made several other changes among the senior members of the Cabinet.
A former Prosecutor General, Kim Ki Choon, was appointed as Justice Minister; the head of the Office of Bank Supervision and Examination, Rhee Yong Man, became Finance Minister; the Vice Minister of the Economic Planning Board, Jin Nyum, was named Minister of Energy and Resources; whilst Ahn Pil Joon, a retired army general, became Minister of Health and Social Affairs.
The remainder of the Cabinet was left unchanged.
(An earlier change had been made on April 25 when Kwon Hwi Hyuk had been appointed as Director of the Environment Agency after his predecessor Huh Nam Hoon was dismissed in response to the contamination of the water supply in Taegu through the dumping of 300 tonnes of phenol, a caustic chemical compound.)
The new Prime Minister stated that his first priority would be the restoration of order.
He denied opposition claims that he was a hardliner, however, and promised that he would take "a rational and reasonable approach" towards the current unrest, rather than employing "harsh measures" .
On the day of his appointment an amnesty was granted to 258 prisoners who had been accused or convicted of political crimes under the country's draconian National Security Law.
In addition to the Cabinet changes and the amnesty, Roh also announced several reform measures in a bid to restore public confidence in his government.
In a nationally televised speech on May 29 to a joint session of the Cabinet and senior members of the DLP, Roh announced tax reforms, a guarantee of the right to hold peaceful assemblies, and stricter measures to combat real estate speculation.
He also gave an assurance that he was abandoning plans to alter the Constitution so that the executive would be prime ministerial rather than presidential.
The opposition had persistently opposed such a change, arguing that Roh — who was constitutionally prohibited from serving more than one five-year term as President — was planning to use it as a means of retaining power.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Further setbacks to township peace
An all-party conference called by President F. W. de Klerk for May 24 and 25 to seek an end to the worsening violence in the black townships fell victim to the continuing deterioration in relations between the government and the African National Congress (ANC), which in the end boycotted the meeting.
Participants at the "peace summit" thus included only the ANC's main rival, the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party, and some representatives from various minority groups.
The ANC, the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), the South African Communist Party (SACP), the Azanian People's Organization (AZAPO), the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) and the churches all stayed away, as did the main white opposition, the Conservative Party, although the small, neo-fascist Afrikaner Resistance Movement led by Eugene Terreblanche did attend.
In Parliament on May 2 de Klerk (who had announced the proposed all-party conference on April 18 — see p. 38131) said that he intended to go ahead with it with or without the ANC, which had set a deadline of May 9 for its demands to be met.
Principally, the ANC had asked for (i) the dismissal of the Law and Order and the Defence ministers;(ii) decisive government action to halt violence in the townships; and (iii) a ban on the carrying of the traditional weapons which Inkatha supporters allegedly used in township fights which had caused some 900 deaths since January, and approximately 10,000 deaths since September 1984.
At the same time de Klerk offered a number of concessions, apparently to appease the ANC.
They included a sweeping revision of the Internal Security Act so as to end detention without trial, as provided for in the "Pretoria Minute" agreement between the government and the ANC in August 1990 [see p. 37642]; a proposal to offer Cabinet seats to blacks during a transitional period while a new constitution was being negotiated; the appointment of a neutral chairman of the constitutional conference; and the appointment of an independent judge or jurist to investigate incidents of violence.
Following a discreet initiative by the Rev. Frank Chikane, general secretary of the South African Council of Churches, the ANC was reported on May 11 to have agreed to extend its May 9 ultimatum by a week, apparently to allow the government more time to persuade the Inkatha leader, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, to disarm his followers.
On May 9, de Klerk was reported to have said that the carrying by Zulus of spears and other accoutrements, which Chief Buthelezi insisted were "cultural" in purpose, would still be permitted, provided they were not "misused" .
The ANC had demanded that the carrying of weapons be outlawed, and appeared dissatisfied by de Klerk's failure to impose such a ban.
On May 10 the government published a list of banned weapons which appeared to exclude spears, and specifically excluded "ceremonial battle axes" .
On May 13 the Congress of Traditional Leaders of South Africa issued a statement condemning the arguments used to defend the carrying of traditional weapons and stating that the carrying of axes, spears, assegais and shields at rallies and in urban areas was "a gross distortion of our people's customs and traditions" .
Inkatha issued a statement the following day alleging that the ANC's call for a ban on traditional weapons was an attempt to divert attention away from "the real issues underlying the violence" .
It claimed that very few of those who had died in the violence had been killed by traditional weapons, that 75 per cent of deaths were caused by bullets and 20 per cent by hacking with weapons which could not be described as traditional.
The other 5 per cent of deaths were caused by various weapons and methods, including burning.
Reports persisted throughout May that the security forces were turning a blind eye to the activities of Zulu mobs in the townships, allegedly waiting to respond until local citizens retaliated against the Zulus' attacks.
As a precondition to a meeting he had with de Klerk on May 8, Nelson Mandela, the deputy president of the ANC, had insisted that the government must announce a ban on the carrying of all "dangerous" weapons, undertake to phase out single men's hostels in the townships, and halt the use by police of "unacceptable" crowd-control measures — mainly the use of live ammunition.
Suspension of constitutional talks
In a speech on May 16 Mandela warned that the ANC would refuse further talks with the government on a post-apartheid constitution unless all weapons were banned.
On the eve of an ANC national executive committee meeting to discuss the government's failure to satisfy its ultimatum, Mandela said that violence could spread to white residential areas once people realized that "the government is working with a black organization that is killing our people" .
On May 18 the ANC announced that it would not participate in further constitutional discussions with the government, "or in any all-party congress to discuss the mechanisms for drawing up a new democratic constitution" .
It reiterated its refusal to join de Klerk's "unilaterally called" conference on violence which was to be held in Pretoria on May 24 and 25.
Two days later, in an attempt to win concessions from the Zulu leadership on the carrying of weapons, de Klerk flew from Cape Town to Ulundi, capital of the KwaZulu homeland, to meet Buthelezi, and his nephew, the pro-Inkatha King Goodwill Zwelithini.
After the meeting it was announced that the Zulus had agreed to support restrictions on the carrying of weapons in areas of unrest.
The announcement was widely hailed in the media as a breakthrough, but the extent of the restrictions was not specified.
In a television interview next day — May 21 — Pallo Jordan, the ANC chief spokesman, said that a resumption of talks with the government was "possible" if a conference were convened by a "neutral party" such as a group of religious leaders.
Addressing the "peace summit" on May 24, de Klerk attacked the ANC's boycott, while Buthelezi denied that Inkatha had a policy of using violence.
The conference should aim to keep the ANC in the peace process, he said.
Fate of political prisoners
Hanging over the increasingly tense political situation throughout May was the fate of more than 100 prisoners taking part in a mass hunger strike which began on May 1 and was still continuing at the end of the month.
The health of some of the hunger strikers was reported on May 31 to be precarious.
Under the terms of the Pretoria Minute, all political prisoners were to be released by April 30 but the deadline had passed with more than 1,000 people with claims to political prisoner status still in custody, according to the group Lawyers for Human Rights.
On April 30 de Klerk had told parliament that political prisoners still in prison would be freed within days, and he criticized the ANC for allegedly failing to provide a list of those it regarded as political detainees until April 25 [see p. 38131].
On May 31 he was quoted as saying that he was satisfied that all prisoners who qualified for political status had been released but that officials were still sifting petitions.
On May 21 the entire ANC leadership observed a 24-hour fast in solidarity with the prisoners.
Atmosphere of violence in townships
With atrocities occurring in many townships almost daily, a member of the Inkatha Freedom Party central committee, Musa [Myeni, warned on May 5 that the party would deploy 100,000 armed men in Soweto township on the Johannesburg outskirts, and 250,000 nationally, unless the ANC halted its violence within seven days.
Two days earlier, Myeni had escaped unhurt after a hand grenade was thrown into his house in Soweto.
Myeni's warning came three weeks after it was reported that the ANC was forming "self-defence units" in the townships, a measure condemned by a South African police spokesman as "a recipe for civil war" [see p. 38132].
It followed a week in which more than 120 people were reported killed in township fighting.
The day after Myeni's warning, Buthelezi distanced himself from it in a statement denying that any decision had been taken to deploy fighters.
 "Unlike the ANC, we have no cadres trained in the art of war," he said.
Victims of the intensifying violence included two nephews of Mandela killed by gunmen at their home in Soweto on May 3.
Among the most widely reported incidents, six people were killed by unknown gunmen as they waited in a taxi queue in Vosloorus township south of Johannesburg on May 1, while nine other people were said to have been killed in other incidents the same day.
At least 27 people were said to have been massacred on a squatter site at Swaniesville near Johannesburg on May 12 by Zulu attackers from a nearby hostel, armed with spears and said to number around 1,000.
Police reported that at least six people died in a gun battle involving ANC and Inkatha supporters and police at Tembisa township on May 9.
On May 15 it was reported that 201 people had died in the violence during the month so far.
By the end of the month, the figure was reported to be "about 300" .
A wave of unexplained and apparently random bomb explosions occurred in central Johannesburg on May 17, wounding 12 people, black and white.
Police found and defused a number of limpet mines.
On May 26, King Goodwill Zwelithini launched a strong attack on Mandela and the ANC at a mass rally of some 40,000 Inkatha followers armed with traditional weapons, in a Soweto sports stadium.
The king demanded an apology from the ANC whose followers, he said, had insulted the Zulus.
In a fiery speech at the "peace summit" on May 24, the king had warned the ANC against verbal attacks on his people, which he called "killing talk" , and said that he would not acquiesce in demands to give up the bearing of traditional weapons.
Conviction of Winnie Mandela
The trial of the wife of the ANC deputy president which had begun on Feb. 4 before the Rand Supreme Court [see p. 37992]reached its climax on May 14 when Mr Justice Stegmann sentenced Winnie Mandela to a six-year prison term.
She had been found guilty the previous day on charges of conspiracy to kidnap, and as accessory after the fact to assault.
The severity of the sentence caused surprise, with an ANC statement expressing "dismay" .
Nelson Mandela, who was not in court, reacted immediately, insisting that his wife was innocent of any crime.
He added that the sentence would not influence his negotiations with de Klerk on South Africa's future.
Winnie Mandela and Xoliswa Falati, who was also imprisoned for six years, were both released on bail pending an application for leave to appeal.
John Morgan, her driver, was given a one-year suspended prison sentence, and was also expected to appeal.
Commenting on the severity of the sentences, Mr Justice Stegmann said that Winnie Mandela's leadership position compounded her culpability, as did her lack of remorse.
Winnie Mandela told supporters that she had been found guilty by the media.
The case had arisen from the kidnapping of four youths from a Methodist manse in Soweto in 1988.
The youths were held prisoner at the Mandela home where they were subjected to vicious assaults.
The body of one of the four, "Stompie" Moeketsie Seipei, was subsequently found on waste ground, and one of Winnie Mandela's bodyguards was sentenced to death for his murder [see pp. 36452; 37441].
The trial of Winnie Mandela had been marked by intense media and public interest, and was widely seen as having brought about the collapse of her personal popularity among ANC followers.
Much was made in the media of the activities of Winnie Mandela's Soweto bodyguards, nicknamed the "Mandela United Football Club" , who were said to have led a reign of terror in the township, at which she had connived.
Her high-handed personal style, it appeared, had created widespread hostility to her, which surfaced in the course of the trial, especially when it became known that there had been blatant intimidation of witnesses.
Four co-defendants skipped bail, a state witness disappeared, and other plaintiffs agreed to testify only after protection was agreed.
Two weeks before the end of her trial, Winnie Mandela experienced what commentators treated as a major political setback when she was heavily defeated in elections for the national presidency of the ANC women's league, which she had earlier been expected to win unchallenged.
The position would have qualified her automatically for entry to the ANC national executive committee.
A decision on Winnie Mandela's application to appeal was expected during June.
If accepted, the appeal process could take as long as three years, according to reports.
On May 30, it was reported that two of the missing witnesses in the trial had been kidnapped and smuggled to Zambia where one of them, Gabriel Pelo Mekgwe, was being held by ANC activists, and the other, Katiza Cebekhulu, was in prison.
Armed attack by white farmers
Some 300 armed white farmers associated with the neo-fascist Afrikaner Resistance Movement led by Eugene Terreblanche were fired on by police protecting black squatters from their attack at a settlement near Ventersdorp, 120 km west of Johannesburg, on May 11.
Four of the farmers were wounded.
This was thought to be the first time for nearly 70 years that police had fired on a white crowd in South Africa.
Calm was restored after the Law and Order Minister, Adriaan Vlok, arrived by helicopter to reason with the farmers.
The incident was seen as reflecting growing white concern over government plans to return some land to blacks under proposals expected to be debated in parliament during June and July.
Visit of former UK Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher, the former United Kingdom Prime Minister, arrived in Cape Town on May 15 on a one-week visit as the guest of de Klerk.
South African government sources were reported to have hinted that Thatcher might be called upon to help negotiators reach a constitutional settlement, although it was unclear what role she might have.
AFRICA
LESOTHO
Government changes
Col. Elias Tutsoane Ramaema was reported by Radio Lesotho on May 2 to have been sworn in as Chairman of the ruling Military Council, following the overthrow of Maj.-Gen.
Justin Lekhanya on April 30 [see p. 38132].
Lt.-Col. Moabi Mothibeli and Tsiliso Lehohla were sworn in as Military Council members.
Three new appointments were announced to the Council of Ministers: Maj.-Gen.
J. L. Dingizwayo (Agriculture), Col. Molefi Khoele (Health), and Col. Papai Mthakathi (Employment, Social Security and Pensions).
Lt. Pius Molapo, hitherto Employment Minister, became Minister of Foreign Affairs, and of Information and Broadcasting, and A. L. Thoahlane, hitherto Health Minister, became Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Affairs.
Ramaema on May 13 announced the repeal of legislation banning political parties and was quoted as promising a restoration of democracy by means of elections by June 1992.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Peace agreement ending civil war
Rising expectations of a successful conclusion of peace talks between the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-Workers' Party (MPLA-PT) government and the United States-backed National Union for Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) were realized on May 1, when a ceasefire was agreed and a peace agreement initialled [see also page 38133]to end a civil war which had raged since independence from Portugal in 1975.
The talks were held at Bicesse near the Portuguese resort of Estoril near Lisbon, with Portuguese mediation and with US and Soviet observers present.
The year-long process was threatened at every stage by continuing reports of fighting, which persisted during April and the first two weeks of May.
It was nevertheless agreed on May 1 that there would be an end to hostilities in mid-May, to be followed by the formal signing of the peace documents at the end of the month.
Also in accordance with the agreement, the government gazette announced that a multiparty system had come into effect on May 11.
Throughout the fortnight to May 15 when the ceasefire was due to come into effect, there were reports of fighting, in places heavy, with both sides making accusations.
UNITA was said to have continued to shell the eastern town of Luena, and to have launched attacks in other places, until a matter of hours before the ceasefire came into effect.
UNITA accused the government of using chemical bombs in the eastern province of Moxico, and said that at least 500 civilians were killed there between May 1 and 13.
Despite these setbacks, it was announced in Lisbon on May 15 that the two sides had formally confirmed to the Portuguese Prime Minister, Anibal Cavaco Silva, that they had accepted the ceasefire.
On May 14 at 10 p.m.
Greenwich Mean Time, Jonas Savimbi, the UNITA leader, telephoned his organization's radio station, known as "Voice of the Resistance of the Black Cockerel" , and arranged for the ceasefire order to be broadcast.
The ceasefire came into effect throughout the country at midnight.
On May 27 it was reported that the last 119 Cuban troops remaining in Angola had arrived home in Havana, five weeks ahead of schedule [see pp. 36479-81 for 1988 agreement under which the Cuban troops were to be withdrawn].
The formal signing of the peace agreement took place in Lisbon on May 31, in the presence of the US Secretary of State James Baker, the Soviet Foreign Minister Aleksander Bessmertnykh, UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, and President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
Resumption of Rome peace talks
A sixth round of peace talks finally opened in Rome on May 6 between the government and the South African-backed rebel Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo).
The talks, repeatedly postponed since April 8 apparently because of failure to agree an agenda, soon got into difficulty, although it was reported on May 9 that the MNR had made a concession in allowing relief columns through to Mozambican refugees in Malawi.
On May 14 Radio Maputo complained that the MNR was blocking progress by trying to introduce new agenda items [see p. 38133].
Main topics of the latest talks were said to be the new pluralist political system, a draft electoral law, and a timetable and monitoring arrangements for multiparty elections due to be held in 1992.
The MNR was reported to have refused to discuss a ceasefire until these matters were agreed.
On May 18 it was reported that the United States had sent its Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, Herman Cohen, to Rome to try and move the talks forward.
On May 29 it was reported that the two sides had agreed a compromise, to allow the talks to proceed.
Amid continuing military claims and counter-claims by both sides, there was evidence that the MNR had stepped up its attacks to coincide with the Rome meetings.
Over the weekend of May 11-12, power lines from South Africa supplying Maputo's electricity were sabotaged, while vehicles were attacked on the main road north; the main rail link with South Africa was also cut.
There were fresh allegations of MNR atrocities.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Further setbacks to political reform
Following postponement of the national conference on constitutional reform, originally set for April 29, a session of the conference preparatory commission was expected to begin on May 2.
However, this too was called off at the last minute, apparently because of opposition outrage over a massacre at Mbuji-Mayi in central Zaire.
It was originally reported that nine people had been killed and 30 wounded in Mbuji-Mayi, a diamond mining town, during violent demonstrations on April 13, 14 and 15 [see p. 38133].
However, in reports between April 30 and May 2 quoting human rights activists, it emerged that 42 people had been killed and that 28 others were seriously wounded by the security forces.
In the course of a demonstration in Kinshasa, the capital, on May 14, two training college students were reported shot dead and a further 15 wounded in a confrontation with security forces, five of whom were also said to have been wounded.
Voix du Zaïre radio said that enraged students set on the junior education minister, Issalu Isangi, who was badly beaten up.
Issalu, nicknamed "Mother Courage" after she defied security forces bent on attacking students during campus violence in May 1990, was reported on May 22 to be in satisfactory condition in hospital in Johannesburg.
Conclusion of Lubumbashi massacre trial
The Supreme Court in Kinshasa passed sentence on May 16 on eight of those held responsible for a massacre by troops at Lubumbashi University in May 1990 [see p. 37553].
The eight included the former governor of Shaba province, Koyagialo Ngbase te Geremgbo, who was sentenced to 15 years penal servitude.
Two former students were sentenced in absentia to life imprisonment.
Official reports of the affair said that one student died and 30 others were hurt after troops including members of the presidential guard attacked the university during the night of May 11-12, 1990.
Independent reports, supported by evidence collected by the human rights organization Amnesty International, said that several dozen students were massacred.
AFRICA
UGANDA
Arrests in north
At least 1,600 people were reported on May 11 to have been arrested in northern Uganda following a military crackdown in areas north of Gulu in which scores of dissidents were said to have been killed.
Local press reports quoted the Minister of State for Defence, Maj.-Gen.
David Tinyefusa as saying that 150 of those arrested were "confirmed rebels" and that at least 180 rebels had been killed in a battle with troops on May 7 at Padibe, 40 km north of Gulu.
The assault on alleged centres of dissidence in northern areas followed the arrest on treason charges of the Minister of State for Foreign and Regional Affairs, Omara Atubo, and 17 others, on April 17 [see IN BRIEF p. 38137].
All 18 appeared before magistrates in Kampala on May 7 and were referred to the High Court.
Four members of the National Resistance Council (parliament), Zachary Olum, Irene Apiu, Michael Alip Atepo and Okodi Levi, were arrested at the same time.
AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Upsurge of discontent
Sporadic student troubles during April hardened into protest demonstrations during May, with the use of tear gas against hundreds of students and schoolchildren in the streets of Bangui and reports of violence and destruction.
Most protest was directed at the government's failure to pay salaries, overdue for several weeks.
Civil servants remained on strike following a call on April 29 by the five main unions for an unlimited stoppage.
President André Kolingba called on May 18 for an end to strife in return for the promise of accelerated political reform.
Despite similar appeals by government officials, public discontent remained at a high level, and most workers continued their strike.
Government changes
On April 16 the newly appointed Prime Minister, Edouard Frank, reshuffled his Cabinet formed on March 20 [see p. 38086].
Jean Kpwoka was appointed to the Justice Ministry, replacing Pejot Pekan; Etienne Goyemide replaced Michel Brenidjet at Primary, Secondary and Technical Education, Youth and Sports; Geneviève Lombilo became Minister of Public Health and Social Affairs, replacing Georgette Monglet; Edouard Akapekabou took over the Ministry of Mines and Energy, Geology and Water Resources from Omoua Akirebi; and, at the Ministry of Finance, Commerce, Industry, and Small and Medium-Scale Enterprises Auguste Tene Koezoua replaced Enzi Paytine Oyigoua.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
Government's growing unpopularity
The political situation continued to deteriorate during May, apparently little affected by President Paul Biya's decision the previous month to appoint a Prime Minister, Sadou Hayatou [see p. 38135], and a "transitional" government which was in effect barely changed in its composition.
The government had recorded 20 deaths thus far in the month-long protest campaign, whereas opposition estimates gave a death toll of 45.
Students and opposition parties continued to demand a national conference on Cameroon's political future.
Despite Hayatou's appeal for calm and his announcement of a policy of "dialogue, consultation and national reconciliation" , a meeting on May 2 at Yaoundé University between students and the chancellor to prepare for a consultation with Hayatou broke up with the arrival of troops.
A demonstration in Yaoundé on May 4 by a reported 5,000 people demanding a democratic system apparently passed off peacefully.
On May 6, independent reports said that students had evacuated the university after it was stormed by gendarmes, with resulting numerous casualties.
Radio Cameroon said that two people were killed, many injured and 219 arrested; it also alleged that "certain foreign radio stations" were carrying on a disinformation campaign against Cameroon.
Other reports had spoken of 20 dead and 1,000 arrests.
There were reports of demonstrations and lawlessness in some provincial towns.
At a meeting on May 10 and 11 in the northern town of Bamenda, 18 of the 21 opposition parties issued a call for a general strike on May 16 and 17 and a programme of civil disobedience and demonstrations on May 19 and 20.
They were reported to have threatened to convene a national conference themselves unless Biya announced his intention of doing so by May 24.
The call was denounced by the ruling Cameroon People's Democratic Movement (RDPC).
In the eastern town of Douala a crowd of about 50,000 demanding the overthrow of Biya was confronted by troops on May 16, but refused to disperse.
It was reported that four people were killed.
Opposition groups and supporters boycotted celebrations of the national day on May 20.
On May 7, at the end of a visit to Washington, Biya had said in a radio interview that presidential elections would be held before the end of the year.
Elections had last been held in April 1988 for a five-year term [see p. 36009].
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Continuing tensions and instability
Amid reports of continuing subregional tensions, including incursions into Sierra Leone by Charles Taylor's rebel National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), the field commander of the 10,000-strong Economic Community of West African States Ceasefire Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) appealed to Taylor on May 6 to work for peace.
Maj.-Gen.
Rufus Kupolati (who took over as ECOMOG field commander from Gen. Joshua Dogonyaro on Feb. 20) saw Taylor at Kakata, Margibi County, when Taylor was reported to have denied that his group intended to continue fighting.
However, reports continued of instability throughout the country, and of persistent fighting on the Sierra Leone border [see also below, this page].
Kupolati was reported to have given an assurance that the ECOMOG force would remain in Liberia.
A United States congressman, Mervyn Dymally, chairman of the House of Representatives subcommittee on Africa, visited Liberia in early May and urged Amos Sawyer, interim President of Liberia [see p. 38134], and Taylor to attend new peace talks in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, on May 23.
Both were reported to have agreed, but the talks were called off at the last minute.
On April 21, Taylor said in a radio interview that President Joseph Momoh of Sierra Leone was blaming Liberians for what was in fact an uprising in his own country.
On May 3 it had been reported that Sawyer's interim government, appointed on April 19, was ready to resign, apparently as a preliminary to offering the NPFL a power-sharing arrangement; no more was heard of this proposal, however.
The NPFL apparently continued to control most of Liberia outside the capital.
On May 13 it was reported that Taylor's forces had received a cargo of military equipment from Libya through the port of Buchanan, and that the rebels were freely using supply routes through Côte d'Ivoire.
AFRICA
GUINEA
Anti-government general strike
A spate of public protests and strikes by teachers and others, demanding better pay and a relaxation of government austerity measures, came to a head on May 6 when the National Confederation of Guinean Workers (CNTG) called an indefinite general strike.
In an effort to defuse growing social tensions, the increasingly uneasy government of President Lansana Conte had the previous day announced a two-stage doubling of public-sector pay, improved family allowances, and the halving of ministerial salaries, but these measures were rejected as insufficient.
Scuffles were reported between demonstrators and police.
There was a limited return to work on May 8 after a broadcast appeal by Conte.
With the return to Conakry, the capital, on May 17 of the Guinean opposition leader Alpha Conde, in exile since 1956, seven political parties and trade unions immediately announced the formation of an Alliance for the Introduction of Democracy (AID) to press for a national conference on Guinea's political future.
An attempt on May 19 to hold an opposition rally was broken up by police using tear gas, just as Conde arrived to speak.
On May 21 the government banned public meetings.
AFRICA
SIERRA LEONE
Intensification of fighting with Liberian rebels
Sierra Leone's 3,000-man army found itself facing an intensifying struggle throughout May against forces of the Liberian rebel National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), despite denials of any involvement by the NPFL leader Charles Taylor [see also above.
this page].
Aid workers in Freetown were quoted as estimating that between 3,000 and 5,000 Sierra Leonean civilians and Liberian refugees had been killed by the NPFL since incursions began in March [see p. 38136], and the International Committee of the Red Cross in Geneva was quoted on May 4 as saying that 10,000 people had fled from the border area.
There were several lurid reports of atrocities in the border area.
On May 8 the Sierra Leoneans were reported to have recaptured three border towns, and on May 20 to have retaken seven more towns.
Nigerian and Guinean troops were reported to have joined Sierra Leonean units along the border.
According to British press reports from Freetown, the Sierra Leone capital, the NPFL forces had penetrated some 150 km inside Sierra Leone by mid-May, and intended to destabilize the country and so reduce the effectiveness of the 10,000-strong Nigerian-led Economic Community of West African States Ceasefire Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) force in Liberia.
ECOMOG's continuing presence in Liberia had prevented the NPFL from seizing the country's capital, Monrovia.
President Joseph Momoh had appealed for assistance from the United Kingdom and the United States during April, but there were no indications that either country intended to commit troops or to supply lethal equipment.
AFRICA
MALI
Continuing instability
Following several days of disorders in Bamako, the capital, and other towns, Radiodiffusion-Télévision Malienne reported on May 3 that the head of state, Lt.-Col. Amadou Toumani Touré, had ordered the arrest of four former army generals.
All four had been cashiered following the overthrow of former President Moussa Traore on March 26.
On April 28, several thousand supporters of Touré's regime staged a pro-democracy march through Bamako during which, according to Radio France Internationale, calls were made for information on the "barons of the old regime" .
The arrests were in response to these demands, the radio said.
In previous days there had been violent clashes between students and police, which left 47 people wounded in Bamako, and there were reports of similar incidents in Gao, Sevare and Mopti.
There were also reports of clashes between black Africans and Arabs, and between Tuareg insurgents and security forces, amid reports of continuing tension in the Tombouctou, Gao, Sevare and Mopti areas.
Foreign visits
During the first two weeks of May Touré visited Algeria, Libya, Côte d'Ivoire and Burkina for meetings with their heads of state.
A member of the ruling Transition Committee for the Salvation of the People (CTSP), Demba Diallo, visited Niger for talks with President Ali Saibou.
Prime Minister Soumana Sacko visited France on May 2-5, returning with a pledge of F90,000,000 (about US$15,200,000) in immediate emergency aid, following talks with Jacques Pelletier, the Co-operation and Development Minister.
AFRICA
TOGO
Government changes
In the midst of the continuing public disorder which had accompanied demands for his resignation in recent weeks, President Gnassingbe Eyadema stood down on May 14 from the post of Defence Minister which he had held since seizing power in 1967.
The Defence portfolio was transferred to Gen. Yao Mawulikplimi Amegi, hitherto Minister of the Interior and Security, whose portfolio went to Yao Komlanvi, hitherto Minister of Environment and Tourism.
Komlanvi's portfolio went to Inoussa Bouraima.
At National Education and Scientific Research, Tchaa-Kozah Tchalim was replaced by Yao Amelavi Amela.
Beset by rioting, strikes and murders since March, as students and citizens demanded, and were promised, political reform, Togo remained tense throughout May pending the planned national conference on its political future, which was finally set for June 10-20.
On May 11 the Interior and Security Minister broadcast an appeal for an end to an "intolerable resurgence of banditry" .
Schools, shut on April 9 after rioting rendered them unmanageable [see p. 38135], were ordered to reopen on May 6 but, in Lomé (the capital) at least, pupils boycotted classes.
AFRICA
KENYA
Arrest of leading dissident
Jaramogi Oginga Odinga, a former Kenyan Vice-President (under Jomo Kenyatta in 1964-66) and a leading critic of President Daniel arap Moi's insistence on a one-party political system, was arrested on May 7, the day before he was to have appeared before the High Court.
Odinga, aged 80, was reported to have been interrogated by police in Nairobi before being driven back to his home near Kisumu 400 km away.
No official reason was given for his arrest.
Odinga had planned to appeal to the High Court against the government's refusal to register his National Democratic Party (NDP), whose formation on Feb. 13 [see p. 37995]was seen as a direct challenge to the one-party rule of Moi's Kenya African National Union (KANU).
[For Odinga's May 1982 expulsion from KANU and the approval the following month of the constitutional amendment on a one-party state see p. 31658; for 1969 banning of Odinga's former party, the Kenya People's Union, see p. 23703.]
In a statement on May 10, Odinga vowed to carry on his fight for political pluralism.
Moi, in a speech on May 15, again attacked multipartyism, referring to the concept as "mobocracy" .
Gitobu Imanyara, a civil rights lawyer and editor of the Nairobi Law Monthly, who had been arrested and charged with sedition on March 5 over an article alleging tribal favouritism [see pp. 38088-89], was again refused bail by the High Court on May 9.
Imanyara had also published the NDP's manifesto.
The government was reported on May 25, however, to have withdrawn the charge.
The newly elected chairman of the Law Society of Kenya, Paul Muite, who had been vilified in the pro-government media since he called on March 10 for the NDP's legalization, was on May 15 alleged by a pro-government lawyer, Kokonya Mkolongolo, to be using Odinga as a front for his own political ambitions.
Mkolongolo alleged in a press statement that the United States ambassador, Smith Hempstone, had been recalled as a result of "misleading information" given him by Muite [see also p. 38136].
A USA embassy spokesman dismissed the claim as baseless.
In the latest anti-American outburst, the pro-government Kenya Times alleged on May 6 that the USA was bribing Kenyan workers in a secret plot to take control of the trade unions.
The US embassy described the charge as "ridiculous" .
Government changes
On May 13 it was announced that Moi had moved the Industry Minister, Dalmas Otieno, to the vacant Manpower Development and Employment Ministry.
His previous portfolio went to John Kyalo.
At the same time Amos Wako was appointed Attorney General, replacing Guy Matthew Muli, who was appointed to the Court of Appeal.
On May 12 it was announced that the Speaker of the National Assembly, Moses Kiprono arap Keino, had resigned.
On May 22 the Deputy Speaker, Kalonzo Musyoka, was imprisoned over a land sale scandal.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Secession of the north
The secession of the north-east part of Somalia to form an independent state — the Somaliland Republic — was confirmed on May 18 by the president of the Somali National Movement (SNM), Abdel-Rahman Ahmed Ali.
Broadcasting on Radio Somalia that same day, Ahmed Ali said that an interim administration would be formed and that multiparty elections would be held after two years; fraternal and co-operative relations would be maintained with the interim Somali government in Mogadishu.
On May 28 the SNM announced that Ahmed Ali had been elected to the presidency of the new republic, and that a civil service, judiciary, central bank governor and relief co-ordinator would be appointed.
The territory affected by the secession had been the British Somaliland Protectorate until July 1960, when it had merged with the territory to the south — which had been a UN trust territory, and before that an Italian colony, known as Somalia — to form an independent Somalia.
Its inhabitants were predominantly the members of the Issaq clan, and the SNM had been formed there in May 1988.
The foreign press reported strong pro-independence feeling in Hargeisa, the principal northern town, which had been heavily bombed by forces of former President Mohammed Siyad Barre between May and August 1988 [see pp. 36005; 36390; 36757].
The secession move followed the failure of would-be mediators — notably the Egyptian, Italian and Djibouti governments — to secure the participation of the SNM and the Somali Patriotic Movement (SPM) in negotiations with the interim administration formed by the United Somali Congress (USC) in Mogadishu after the March overthrow of Siyad Barre [see pp. 37946-47].
On May 17, local leaders meeting with SNM representatives at the town of Burao in the north-east had given their support to the secession; according to Le Monde of May 16 and 21, SNM leaders favoured a federalist solution but had bowed to this grasssroots opinion.
A communiqué released by the USC on May 18 rejected the secession as "destructive" and a contravention of recent accords between the USC and the SNM.
On May 29 the USC said that it would be receptive to dialogue with all groups at talks to be held shortly in Djibouti.
AFRICA
CHAD
Former President Goukouni Oueddei returned to Chad for the first time in nine years on May 18-19, meeting with President Idriss Déby and reportedly discussing the proposals for a multiparty system due to be introduced in January 1992.
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
The new Interior Minister was announced on May 13 as Ahmed Bulaleh Barreh.
On May 23 there were reports of a 20-day hunger strike by Mohammed Moussa Ali Tourtour, leader of the opposition Movement for Unity and Democracy (MUD), in protest against his detention on April 8.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Diagnosis of Graves's disease in President Bush
The administration of President George Bush was subjected to its first serious alarm concerning the 66-year-old President's health when, on May 4, Bush was hospitalized after developing a rapid and irregular heartbeat.
He was subsequently diagnosed as having Graves's disease.
The President's heart irregularity, known as arterial fibrillation, occurred during a jogging session at Camp David, Maryland.
Bush became tired and breathless and, after an examination at the camp's infirmary, he was flown to the Bethesda Naval Medical Centre in Washington DC.
He remained in hospital for two nights whilst prescribed medication re-established a regular heartbeat.
Tests indicated that Bush's general state of health was good, and that there was no sign of heart disease.
In the ensuing days the President's health was closely monitored and, after a further burst of accelerated and irregular heart activity on May 7, it was announced on the following day that the source of Bush's condition was an over-active thyroid gland.
After a further examination at Bethesda, it was revealed on May 9 that Bush was suffering from Graves's disease, the same thyroid disorder which had affected his wife, Barbara, since 1989.
Graves's disease is a malfunction of the body's immune system whereby antibodies mistakenly attack the thyroid gland.
The gland — which produces thyroxin, a hormone which regulates metabolism and organ function — becomes enlarged and secretes excess levels of the hormone, causing a whole range of possible symptoms including irregular heart rhythms.
If diagnosed and treated correctly, the disease is not life-threatening.
The standard treatment involves either the removal of the thyroid gland or — as in Bush's case — its destruction through radioactive iodine treatment; in either case the patient is required to take daily thyroid replacement medication.
The President underwent an extensive medical examination on May 21 during which his doctors declared themselves satisfied with the progress of his treatment.
Bush was described as having lost 12 to 13 lb in weight and admitted to feeling considerable mental and physical fatigue.
The fact that both Bush and his wife had contracted the disease (a coincidence estimated at around one in 3,000,000), together with the discovery in 1990 of lumpus (another auto-immune disease) in Bush's dog, Millie, led to the initiation of tests on the drinking water in all houses used by the Bush family to see if there could be an environmental cause of their ailments.
Bush's reiteration of faith in Quayle's competence — Nomination of Powell for further term as military chief
Bush was not subjected to a general anaesthetic during his hospital treatment, and at no point did he relinquish executive responsibility to Vice-President Dan Quayle.
Doubts over Bush's health, however, provoked renewed public debate over Quayle's competence.
On May 8 Bush reiterated his faith in Quayle, criticizing the press for "pounding on him when he's doing a first class job" , and repeating his determination to retain him as the Republican Party's 1992 nominee for Vice-President.
The speculation that Quayle might be dropped in 1992 in favour of Gen. Colin Powell was further dampened when on May 23 Bush nominated Powell for a second two-year term as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Denial by Bush of "October Surprise" 1980 deal with Iran
President George Bush, responding formally for the first time on May 3 to a growing controversy, rejected as "sickening" the allegation that he had participated in a secret Paris meeting with Iranian officials in 1980 in order to reap electoral advantage by delaying the release of 52 US hostages held in Iran.
Bush denied that he had been in Paris and called for an end to the "rumour-mongering" concerning the affair.
Some commentators, however, regarded as significant the limited nature of the President's rebuttal, which did not address the wider allegation of a Republican Party-Iranian deal.
The Democratic Speaker of the House of Representatives, Tom Foley, described the allegations as "very serious" , and stated that he and his colleagues were considering initiating a formal investigation into the affair.
Long-standing but unproven allegations, supported by a chain of circumstantial evidence, suggested that senior members of the 1980 presidential campaign of Ronald Reagan had negotiated a deal with the revolutionary government of Iran.
Under the terms of the deal purportedly sealed in Paris, the Iranians would not free the US hostages until after the 1980 presidential election, thus ensuring that President Jimmy Carter's bid for re-election would gain no credit from an "October Surprise" release.
In return, the Reagan team, when in government, would supply weapons and spare parts to Iran for use in its war against Iraq.
A key figure in the conspiracy was alleged to have been William Casey.
The hostages, who were held for 444 days following the seizure of the US embassy in Tehran in September 1979, were released within minutes of Reagan being sworn in as President on Jan. 21, 1981.
Casey, appointed head of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) by Reagan, was believed to have been deeply involved in the subsequent Iran-contra scandal whereby the Reagan administration undertook the clandestine shipment of arms to Iran.
The story resurfaced in its most recent form in an article by Gary Sick in the New York Times in April, which suggested that Bush (Reagan's vice-presidential running-mate on the Republican ticket) had personally participated in the Paris meeting.
Sick, an academic specializing in Iran, had been on the staff of Carter's National Security Council at the time of the hostage crisis.
Having initially believed the story to be "fanciful" , Sick said that his mind had been changed as a result of "the weight of testimony" provided by the hundreds of interviews which he had conducted whilst researching the affair.
Sick also suggested that several people claimed to have seen Bush at the Paris meeting, although he admitted that he was not yet convinced of the veracity of this aspect of the affair.
The story was also fuelled by a book, My Turn to Speak, written by Abdolhassan Bani-Sadr, who had been President of Iran in 1980-81.
The State Department's initial refusal to issue Bani-Sadr with a visa to visit the USA to promote his book, followed by its sudden reversal of this stance, had the effect of increasing press interest in the former Iranian President.
Speaking in Paris on May 2, Bani-Sadr confirmed that "certainly there was a secret deal between the Iranian mullahs and the candidates Reagan and Bush to delay the release of the hostages in exchange for…arms" .
He stated that Bush had not been present during the Paris negotiations, but claimed that the Reagan delegation had included Casey.
In an interview in Washington on May 6, however, Bani-Sadr acknowledged that, as he had not been directly involved in the negotiations, he had no first-hand knowledge of the alleged deal.
The foreign affairs committee of the House of Representatives heard evidence from Sick and Bani-Sadr.
On May 8, the day of the latter's appearance before the House, Bush described the allegations against himself as "grossly untrue, factually incorrect, bald-faced lies" .
It was again noted that he did not deny the wider allegation that other members of the Reagan election campaign had been involved in such a deal.
Conflict over defence budget
The Democrat-controlled House of Representatives on May 21 rejected the 1992 defence budget of President Bush.
The House then went on to pass its own defence budget which seriously undermined the future of the B-2 "Stealth" bomber programme and the Strategic Defence Initiative (SDI).
The stage for a confrontation had been set when, on May 7, two subcommittees of the House armed services committee voted radical cuts in the B-2 and SDI programmes.
The procurement subcommittee spurned the intensive lobbying efforts of the air force and the Northrop Corp. in deciding to limit production of the $864 million bomber to the 15 already under assembly.
The Democrat majority on the research and development subcommittee voted to cancel outright the "Brilliant Pebbles" programme — the scheme to destroy incoming ballistic missiles by orbiting more than 1,000 small missiles in space — which constituted the centrepiece of the current SDI project.
In addition to cutting $1,600 million from the administration's $5,200 million SDI request, the subcommittee voted to transfer authority over $858 million in ground-based "theatre missile defence" programmes from the SDI Organization to a new office run by the army.
The SDI Organization had been widely accused of incompetence and waste in its use of the $20,900 million spent on SDI since 1984.
The House decisively rejected Bush's proposed budget on May 21, by 287 votes to 127, with 37 Republicans voting with the 249 Democrats and one independent.
Notwithstanding threats of a presidential veto from Bush and Defence Secretary Dick Cheney, on the following day the House approved a defence budget drawn up by its armed services committee.
The House's $292,000 million defence authorization bill, approved by 268 votes to 161, maintained spending levels in line with those requested by the Bush administration, but radically altered the order of priorities among the weapons systems.
It followed the committee's recommendations in eliminating any further funding for Brilliant Pebbles, and provided only $3,500 million for the SDI anti-missile programme, considerably less than the $5,200 sought by the White House.
It also included the committee's limit of 15 B-2s, 60 fewer than requested by the Bush administration.
Some systems which had performed well during the war with Iraq — such as the M-1 battle tank and the F-14 and F-16 fighter aircraft — received a higher level of funding than that requested in the Bush budget.
In a major departure from tradition the bill also permitted women pilots to fly combat missions, subject to the agreement of the air force and the navy.
The House defence budget also reversed existing Defence Department policy by permitting US service personnel and their dependents serving overseas to obtain abortions at their own expense at military health facilities.
The controversial clause, included by a vote of 220 to 208, was regarded as evidence of greater sympathy within the 102nd Congress than its predecessor towards the pro-choice lobby.
A similar proposal had been defeated in 1990.
Approval by House of "Brady bill" 
The House of Representatives on May 8 approved by the unexpectedly wide margin of 239 votes to 186 a bill which imposed a seven-day waiting period on the purchase of handguns.
Although modest in scope and requiring Senate and presidential approval before becoming effective, the legislation — known as the "Brady bill" — was of the utmost symbolic importance in that it represented a historic defeat for the National Rifle Association (NRA), one of the country's most powerful interest groups.
In September 1988 a similar bill had been defeated in the House by 46 votes.
The bill acquired its name from its best-known sponsor, James Brady, a White House press officer who was shot by a handgun and crippled in the 1981 assassination attempt on President Ronald Reagan.
It was based upon successful legislation in 21 of the country's 50 states and, according to public opinion surveys, was supported by 90 per cent of the public, 90 per cent of police officers and 87 per cent of handgun owners.
The aim of the bill was to curb the sale of firearms to convicted felons (by allowing police seven days in which they might, but were not compelled to, check the criminal record or mental health of a potential purchaser), and to impose a "cooling-off" period for would-be purchasers.
The NRA, which traditionally wielded a degree of influence out of all proportion to its 2,600,000 members, as usual forcefully combated the bill.
Harley O. Staggers, a Democratic member of the House for West Virginia, initiating a bill proposing a point-of-sale background check which, whilst on the face of it more stringent than the Brady bill, was full of loopholes and would have taken years to implement.
The NRA's expensive campaign was defeated by a lobbying effort, fronted by the wheelchair-bound Brady, which was as professional as its own.
The support of Reagan, a lifetime opponent of gun laws and a member of the NRA, who endorsed the bill on March 28, was also seen as crucial in persuading sufficient legislators to defy the pro-gun lobby.
President George Bush, a long-term member of the NRA, had stated on the eve of the vote that he would veto the bill unless it was attached to an omnibus anti-crime package which constituted one of the administration's legislative priorities for 1991.
Vote by Senate to ban honoraria
The Senate voted by 72 to 24, on May 21, to prohibit its members from accepting speaking fees — honoraria — from special interest groups.
It also resolved by 49 votes to 46 to set stringent limits on the amount of outside income senators could receive, including the proceeds from individual investment portfolios.
The enactment of both provisions remained far from certain, however, as they were attached to a campaign finance bill which had yet to receive congressional assent and which faced a threatened veto from President Bush.
The provision restricting investment income was also thought to be of dubious constitutionality.
A similar campaign finance bill (including the honoraria ban and limitation on outside income) was passed by the Senate in 1990 but was lost at the end of the congressional session when the two Houses failed to agree upon the final form of the legislation.
The House had passed legislation in 1989 (effective from January 1991) to prohibit the receipt of honoraria by its members, but compensating them by raising their salaries.
Similar legislation had also been passed by the Senate, but, reluctant to approve similarly large pay increases for itself, the Senate had voted to reduce gradually the annual total of honoraria which its members could receive [see also p. 37037].
The 1991 limit was set at $23,068, not exceeding $2,000 per appearance.
The current annual salary for a senator amounted to $101,900 compared with $121,100 received by members of the House.
Appointment to Senate
The Democrat Governor of Pennsylvania, Robert P. Casey, on May 8 named Harris Wofford, the state Secretary of Labour and Industry and a former adviser to President John F. Kennedy, to fill the Senate vacancy created by the death of Republican Senator John Heinz on April 4.
Wofford immediately announced that he would also contest the special election scheduled for November 1991 to determine who would serve the remainder of Heinz's unexpired term.
The Pennsylvania contest was seen as crucial to the Republican Party's efforts to regain control of the Senate in 1992.
Adoption of new travel rules after investigation into Sununu's use of military aircraft
President Bush on May 9 issued new travel rules designed to exercise greater control over the use of military aircraft by members of his administration, particularly the White House Chief of Staff, John Sununu.
The new travel policy required a case-by-case approval of all requests by senior members of government for the use of military aircraft, except those by the Secretary of State, the Attorney General and the Secretary of Defence.
The changes, which took immediate effect, resulted from an inquiry launched on April 22, following the disclosure that Sununu had made more than 70 trips on military aircraft since April 1989.
The trips, made at public expense, included those made for political — Republican party — purposes and for personal reasons including dental appointments and skiing trips.
Of 77 trips aboard specially commandeered aircraft in the past two years, Sununu had designated only four as unofficial.
The total cost was estimated at $600,000, although only around $60,000 was reimbursed to the government either by Sununu or by the Republican Party.
In his report on the affair, Counsel to the President, C. Boyden Gray, absolved Sununu of ethical violations, but found a series of errors in the reimbursement, reporting and categorization of the trips.
The controversy over Sununu's travelling arrangements was symptomatic of the degree to which Sununu, widely described as combative, had alienated many leading government and media figures.
Bush's unusually forthright response to the developing scandal was illustrative of his sensitivity to allegations of official extravagance, and his resolve to distance his administration from the spendthrift years of the Reagan regime.
The public rebuke of Sununu was also widely interpreted as a deliberate attempt to undercut some of the authority of his powerful Chief of Staff.
The day after the announcement of the new travel policy it was revealed that Bush's former Education Secretary, Lauro Cavazos, was under criminal investigation for the abuse of air travel privileges whilst in office.
Replacement of CIA director
At a press conference on May 8, Bush announced the unexpected resignation of William Webster, 67, as director of the CIA, effective from May 26.
Praising Webster for his "integrity, effectiveness, and insight" , Bush stated that he had only been informed of the development on May 7.
Webster, who also attended the press conference, gave no reason for his decision other than to suggest that it was "a good time to go" .
He stated his intention to "pursue other avenues, in the private sector" .
Appointed in 1987, Webster ensured that the CIA kept a relatively low profile and thereby achieved some success in rehabilitating the tarnished image of the agency in the aftermath of the Iran-contra scandal.
Although Bush (hiimself director of the CIA in 1975-76) characterized Webster's tenure as CIA chief as "superb" , it was widely reported that there was considerable dissatisfaction within the US administration, notably over the allegedly poor quality of the agency's intelligence gathering associated with both the 1991 war against Iraq and the 1989 invasion of Panama.
Webster's resignation came only a month after a fire in the US embassy in Moscow, which apparently led to the loss of computer disks and other sensitive material when Soviet firefighters, possibly including State Security (KGB) agents, were allowed to move unescorted through parts of the building.
Appointment of new CIA chief
Bush announced on May 14, the choice of Robert M. Gates, Deputy National Security Adviser since 1989, as Webster's successor.
As a specialist on the Soviet Union, Gates was known to believe that the expectations of economic reform in the Soviet Union had far exceeded the ability of the leadership to achieve them.
Along with Defence Secretary Dick Cheney he was known as one of the administration's leading pessimists concerning the political future of Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev.
Gates, 48, joined the CIA in 1968 and rose to become deputy director in 1986 under Webster's predecessor, William Casey.
He was President Reagan's first choice to head the agency when Casey died in 1987 [see p. 35182].
At that time, however, in the face of Senate opposition, Gates withdrew after the opening round of confirmation hearings, in what was generally considered to be an attempt to avoid answering detailed questions concerning his involvement in the Iran-contra scandal [see p. 35187].
In announcing his nominee, Bush described Gates as "a man of honour" , and he stated that he had "no qualms" and that his initial soundings concerning the forthcoming Senate confirmation process had been "positive" .
Collapse of commercial banks
The federal government declared the Madison National Banks of Washington DC and Virginia insolvent on May 10.
It closed the banks and immediately sold them to the Richmond-based Signet Banking Corp.
The $18,000,000 sale marked the second failure of a commercial bank in the US capital within the past year, the National Bank of Washington having collapsed in 1990.
The Madison banks collapsed after sustaining huge losses on real estate loans, many of which were made to the banks' directors, employees and their relatives.
Rioting in Washington DC
Riots erupted in the Mount Pleasant area of Washington DC, on May 5, hours after a police officer shot and critically wounded a Hispanic man.
The police claimed that the man was armed with a knife and was shot whilst resisting arrest.
The unrest lasted for three days and constituted the largest outbreak of racial violence in the US capital since the assassination of the Rev. Martin Luther King in 1968.
The Mount Pleasant community — comprising a volatile mixture of poor central American immigrants (particularly Salvadoreans, Guatemalans and Dominicans), many of whom had entered the USA illegally — was increasingly under pressure from the "gentrification" effects of white middle class professionals moving into the area.
As news of the shooting spread through the city, bands of Hispanic youths took to the streets in the early evening.
Initially the anger of the growing crowd was directed towards the police, who were bombarded with rocks and bottles.
As the disturbances grew, however, there were increasing reports of looting and the destruction of property.
Although police responded with tear gas, they were instructed by the newly elected city Mayor, Sharon Pratt Dixon, not to aggravate the situation by making arrests.
During May 6 Dixon met with leaders of the Hispanic community and acknowledged many of their grievances.
During the evening, however, the rioting erupted anew, with an increasing number of black youths becoming involved.
As the looting intensified Dixon vowed to quell the violence "by any means necessary" .
Declaring that the situation was "clearly a state of emergency" , she imposed a curfew from midnight to 5 a.m. in the Mount Pleasant and Adams-Morgan neighbourhoods.
She also ordered police to cordon off the area and to begin arresting those responsible for the disturbances.
The curfew was reimposed from 7 p.m. to 5 a.m. on May 7-8 and May 8-9.
Although there were sporadic outbreaks of unrest, there was no repetition of violence on the scale hitherto seen.
Opinion over Dixon's handling of the riots was divided between those who criticized her for showing too much restraint towards law-breakers, and those who cited her cautious approach as instrumental in calming the disturbances.
Although the riots caused considerable damage and resulted in the arrest of some 90 people, nobody was killed or seriously wounded.
Filing of charges in Kennedy rape case
William Kennedy Smith, nephew of Senator Edward Kennedy, was charged on May 9 with one felony count of sexual battery (the definition of rape under Florida law) and one misdemeanour count of battery.
The charges followed a five-week investigation into allegations that a woman was raped at the Kennedy family's estate in Palm Beach in the early hours of March 30.
Smith, 30, a medical student at Georgetown University Medical Centre, responded to the charges by reiterating that he "did not commit an offence of any kind" .
He surrendered himself to police in Palm Beach, Florida, on May 11 and was released after posting a $10,000 bond before the Palm Beach County sheriff.
The nine-page affidavit, filed by State Attorney David Bludworth in conjunction with the charges, documented the bruises found on the body of the alleged victim, and also stated that she had passed two polygraph tests on her statements to the police.
It also included statements by the Palm Beach police detailing how they were misled when they went to the estate to speak with Senator Kennedy and Smith on March 31.
The subsequent release of 1,300 pages of witness interviews and depositions collected by the police during their investigation contained many inconsistencies, but appeared to contradict Senator Kennedy's assertion that he learned of the alleged assault only after returning to Washington DC on April 1.
The police stated that they were examining the evidence to determine whether to file obstruction-of-justice charges against members of the Kennedy household.
In addition to its involvement of the country's most famous political family, the case also acquired constitutional implications — relating to the First Amendment's guarantee of freedom of speech — when charges were also filed against The Globe newspaper, a national supermarket tabloid, for having violated a 1911 Florida law by publishing the name of the woman.
Bludworth stated that he was still considering whether to bring similar charges against NBC News and the New York Times which also disclosed the name of the woman.
It was thought unlikely that, even if successfully applied, the Florida statute could survive an appeal process.
In 1989 the Supreme Court overturned a $97,000 damage award by ruling that a rape victim could not use the law to sue the Florida Star, a Jackson-based weekly, for having published her name.
However, the Court cautioned that its ruling did not mean that "a state may never punish publication of the name of a victim of a sexual offence" .
Reinstatement of Los Angeles police chief
The Los Angeles police chief Daryl F. Gates was reinstated in his job on May 14 after Superior Court Judge Ronald Sohigian ruled that the city's civilian police commission had acted improperly in suspending him.
Mayor Tom Bradley said that the ruling "cannot be allowed to stand" and gave notice that an appeal would be lodged against it.
Gates had been put on inactive duty pending an investigation of the videotaped beating of a black motorist by a group of city police on March 3.
It was reported on May 13 that a grand jury had decided not to indict any of the 17 officers who stood by and watched whilst their colleagues repeatedly punched and kicked the handcuffed man.
The grand jury had earlier indicted four officers who participated in the assault.
Visit by Queen Elizabeth
Queen Elizabeth II paid an official nine-day visit to the USA starting on May 14, and became the first United Kingdom sovereign to address the US Congress, meeting in joint session on May 16.
In her 15-minute speech she spoke of the two countries' shared ideals, including democracy, stability and a rejection of the power which "grows from the barrel of a gun" .
She applauded British-US co-operation in the Gulf war, the "outstanding leadership of your President and the courage and prowess of the armed forces of the United States" .
She described the UK as "at the heart of a growing movement towards greater cohesion within Europe" , adding that it was "Britain's prime concern to ensure that…it works in growing harmony with the United States" .
During the visit the Queen also went to Texas and Florida, where on May 20 she conferred an honorary knighthood on Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, commander of the allied forces in the Gulf war, for his "distinguished leadership" .
Before returning home she paid a private visit to Kentucky.
AMERICAS
CUBA
Release of political dissident
Elizardo Sánchez Santacruz, a political dissident widely recognized as a prisoner of conscience, was released from prison by the Cuban authorities on May 5.
Sánchez had in August 1989 been sentenced to two years' imprisonment for spreading false information "detrimental to international peace" to foreign journalists following the July trial and execution of senior army officers for drug trafficking [see pp. 36731; 37069].
He confirmed that he intended to remain in Cuba and would campaign for the legalization of the Cuban Commission on Human Rights and National Reconciliation Committee (CDHRNC), which he led [see also p. 37070]; he also intended to reapply for his old post as professor of philosophy at Havana University.
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Murder of politician
Dianora Perez, a leading member of the Democratic Socialist Party (PSD — part of the governing coalition), was shot dead in the capital Guatemala City on May 1 by gunmen who escaped arrest.
Cabinet Changes
Richard Aitkenhead, hitherto Economy Minister, on April 12 succeeded as Finance Minister Irma Zelaya Rosale, who lft her post due to ill-health, caused by pressure of work.
Aitkenhead was succeeded at Economy by Juan Luis Mirón.
The Interior Minister, Col. Ricardo Méndez Ruiz, resigned for "health reasons" on April 26 and was replaced by Fernando Hurtado, hitherto a "human rights assistant" to President Jorge Serrano Elias.
Méndez had suffered a heart attack the previous month but, although he was reportedly advised by his doctors to avoid pressure, he had been mentioned as a possible leader of the government delegation in resumed peace talks with the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity (URNG) guerrilla leaders in Mexico in late April [see p. 38141].
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Peace talks
UN-sponsored peace talks between the Salvadorean government and the opposition Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN), launched in Geneva in April 1990 [see p. 37372], continued with meetings in Mexico City on April 4-27, 1991, and a fresh round of talks in Caracas, Venezuela, commencing on May 25.
The Mexico City meetings, the first to be attended by FMLN field commanders, produced agreement on a package of proposed constitutional amendments, which the FMLN had stipulated as a precondition to a ceasefire.
The constitutional changes would require approval by two consecutive Legislative Assemblies (i.e. the outgoing Assembly, and the new Assembly elected on March 10 — see p. 38093) before coming into force.
They received preliminary approval in the outgoing Legislative Assembly on April 29 and 30.
Under these amendments the Public Security Corps would become part of a civilian ministry following the end of hostilities; Supreme Court of Justice members would need to be elected by two-thirds of the Legislative Assembly; and funding from the state budget for the judiciary would be guaranteed.
A set of amendments which would allow the leftist Democratic Convergence to be represented on an expanded supreme electoral tribunal ran into opposition from within the ruling right-wing Nationalist Republican Alliance (Arena), but were approved in modified form following last-minute pressure from diplomats and UN mediators.
President Alfredo Cristiani told the new Legislative Assembly which opened on May 1 (not June 1 as given on p. 38093) that final ratification of the amendments should be conditional on a ceasefire coming into effect.
It was hoped that the Caracas talks would follow up the agreement on constitutional amendments with a detailed agreement on ceasefire terms and on how to deal with members of the military guilty of human rights violations.
The UN was to be asked to appoint a "truth commission" to investigate human rights violations since 1980.
On May 20 the UN Security Council approved the creation of the UN Observers for El Salvador (Onusal)— a 170-member team which from July 1 would monitor any agreement reached on human rights.
Continuing armed conflict
Throughout April and May armed conflict continued.
Almost half the country was reported to be without electricity on April 29 and on May 4-5 following FMLN sabotage, and FMLN sources reported a renewed army offensive on May 15.
The FMLN maintained that the constitutional amendments given initial approval fell short of those agreed on in Mexico City, while the government warned that FMLN military operations could jeopardize the peace process.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Release of hostages
Two Colombian journalists, the last remaining hostages of the nine kidnapped by the "Extraditables" group between August and November 1990, were freed on May 20 in Bogotá, the capital, as the government continued to negotiate with the Medellín and Calí cartels the terms of surrender of leading "drug barons" .
Following their release the surrender of Medellín cartel leader Pablo Escobar Gaviria was reported to be imminent.
Francisco Santos Castillo, editor of Colombia's leading daily El Tiempo, had been held since Sept. 19, 1990 [see p. 37772].
Maruja Pachón, director of the national film institute, had been held since Nov. 7, 1990.
The Extraditables were seeking to force concessions from the government over a 1984 extradition treaty with the United States and over policy towards convicted traffickers [for releases or killings of five hostages since January 1991 see pp. 37957; 38001].
On May 15 two commissions of the Constitutional Assembly (elected in December 1990 — see pp. 37914; 38001) resolved to support a proposed constitutional amendment to prohibit the extradition of Colombians to other countries.
Killings of journalists and former Justice Minister
On the night of April 24-25 a reporter and a photographer from the Bogotá newspaper El Espectador who were investigating a November 1987 massacre by paramilitaries were found dead at Segovia, 700 km north-west of the capital.
Former Justice Minister Enrique Low Murtra, 52, was killed by gunmen at La Salle University in Bogotá on April 30.
In 1987 he had led a campaign for the extradition of drug traffickers.
On May 20 two radio journalists were shot dead in Florencia, in the south of the country, as they drove to work.
Agreement on peace talks
An agreement signed on May 17 by representatives of the Simón Bolívar Guerrilla Co-ordinating Board (CNGSB) and the government arranged for peace talks to be held by the two parties in Caracas, Venezuela, on June 3.
On May 1 it had been reported that the Colombian government was willing to talk with the guerrillas, after three representatives of the two groups within the CNGSB (the FARC and the ELN — see p. 38001) had occupied the Venezuelan embassy in Bogotá seeking diplomatic asylum.
On May 31, in the southern mountains of Colombia, 130 members of the Quintín Lame group surrendered their weapons to the authorities.
AMERICAS
PERU
Changes to agricultural land law
Changes to the law relating to agricultural land introduced in late April and early May constituted the first major reform of land-tenure legislation since 1969.
They were interpreted as an attempt to create a wider market in cultivated land.
Restrictions on the private ownership and sale of agricultural land were lifted, and land redistributed under previous agrarian reforms might now be used as collateral against agricultural loans.
Peasant co-operatives were allowed to opt to become limited liability companies, shares in which might subsequently be sold to those who were not themselves farmers.
Tenant farmers with a year's rent arrears might be evicted on a fortnight's notice.
Anti-drug accord with United States
An outline agreement between the Peruvian and United States governments on supressing cocaine trafficking was signed in Lima, the Peruvian capital, on May 14.
President Alberto Fujimori told the Peruvian Congress the next day that the accord would help combat the alliance of drug traffickers with "terrorist subversion" .
The document envisaged six months of bilateral negotiations over programmes and funding.
A single government institution would be created in Peru to bring about "the eradication of the illegal coca crop and the sale of its derivatives" through measures of economic reform, crop substitution and internal security.
Up to US$100,000 a year in US aid was reported to be involved — about US$60,000,000 to be used for crop substitution programmes and the remainder for military training and equipment.
Fujimori told the joint session of the Congress that the criminalization of Peru's 250,000 coca-producing peasants was an inadequate response to the problem.
The use of biochemical defoliators to destroy coca plants was also rejected.
[For Fujimori's September 1990 rejection of US military aid to combat drug trafficking, see p. 37708; for April 1991 controversy in Bolivia over use of US anti-narcotics personnel see p. 38143.]
Guerrilla attacks
On April 26 a car bomb explosion outside the offices of the private Liberty and Democracy Institute (ILD) in Lima was attributed to the Maoist Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) movement.
The Institute's director, Hernando de Soto, was a presidential adviser who represented Peru in the drug accord negotiations.
Among at least 12 people killed in other incidents in Junín and Lima were an Australian nun and a Canadian pastor, killed by Sendero Luminoso guerrillas in separate incidents in the week May 20-25.
Arming of peasant patrols
It was planned to increase the number of Rondas Campesinas (peasant self-defence patrols) armed by the government from 41 to 175 by the end of May.
This policy was attracting criticism from former military leaders and the Catholic Church, as well from the left.
It was claimed that it made rural communities vulnerable to guerrilla reprisals.
On April 26 Shining Path guerrillas had killed 16 ronderos and set fire to houses in the town of Nuevo Progresso in Ayacucho department.
AMERICAS
ANDEAN PACT
Caracas Declaration
The Caracas Declaration, providing a framework for the creation by January 1992 of a free-trade zone between the five Andean Pact member countries (Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela) was signed by the presidents of these five countries on May 18 at an Andean Pact summit meeting in Caracas, the Venezuelan capital.
The Declaration envisaged the abolition of all tariffs within the zone, although Ecuador was to be permitted to dismantle its strongly protectionist system in two stages — 50 per cent of its tariffs would be lifted by the end of 1991, and the remainder by June 30, 1992.
During 1992 the Andean Pact countries would adopt a joint tariff policy for trade with the rest of the world, and subsequent measures of integration would include joint export promotion, equal commercial aviation rights and access to airport facilities, reforms of state administration and the encouragement of foreign investment.
By 1995 the zone was expected to be operating as a fully integrated common market of 90,000,000 people.
It was also agreed at the summit that Peru should receive US$40,000,000 in aid from the other four Pact members to help it regain access to international credit lines.
A proposal was made to United States President Bush for a meeting to discuss the problem of drug production and trafficking, to be attended by representatives of the five Andean Pact countries.
The meeting in Caracas was the last of a series of five meetings planned in February 1989 to reactivate the Andean Pact.
The Pact was founded in 1973 and had included Chile as a member until 1976.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Pinochet's foreign tour
Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, C.-in-C. of the army, visited Brazil, Portugal and the United Kingdom on May 10-18.
Defence Minister Patricio Rojas Saavedra said that the general had been authorized to travel until June 5 "to visit foreign defence companies which supply the Chilean army" , although his visits to each country were described as private.
Pinochet, 75, visited Brazil on May 10-14 and Portugal on May 15-17, meeting with arms suppliers in both countries.
He spent some hours in the United Kingdom on May 18, visiting a plant of Royal Ordnance, a British Aerospace subsidiary, to review the development of a multiple rocket artillery system which had been the subject of a contract signed in September 1990 by Royal Ordnance and the Chilean firm Famae.
When it was first announced on April 26, Pinochet's visit to the United Kingdom had caused protests from Labour members of parliament who recalled the human rights abuses of the general's period of rule from 1973 to 1990.
South African officials on May 10 confirmed that Pinochet would visit that country, but by May 16 this visit had been cancelled.
Following closely on President Patricio Aylwin's European tour in April [see p. 38143], Pinochet's abbreviated trip was regarded by some observers as an attempt to assert the continuing role of the Chilean military in domestic politics.
AMERICAS
SURINAM
General election
A general election held on May 25 resulted in the New Front for Democracy and Development, a coalition of the Indian, Javanese and mixed-race ethnic groups along with the Labour Party, winning 30 of the 51 seats in the National Assembly.
The election had been called by the interim government installed following the December 1990 military coup [see pp. 37912-13; 37958].
Monitored by a 40-member delegation from the Organization of American States (OAS), it was reported to have passed off peacefully, with a 65-70 per cent turnout in the capital Paramaribo.
The military-backed National Democratic Party (NDP), led by Vice-President and Prime Minister Jules Wijdenbosch [but see p. 37958 for his resignation in January as NDP chair], won 12 seats, a significant improvement on its three seats in the previous Assembly.
A new coalition, Democratic Alternative"91, composed of four small anti-military parties, took nine seats.
It had campaigned, like the New Front, for a commonwealth-style union with the Netherlands.
Both coalitions wanted changes in the Constitution to bar the military from future involvement in politics.
The New Front's parliamentary majority was four short of the two-thirds majority required to push through constitutional changes and to ensure the election of its choice of presidential candidate — both principal functions of the Assembly in the intended transition from military rule.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Resignation of Economy Minister
Economy Minister Zélia Cardoso de Mello, 37, left office on May 8 together with about 50 other officials.
Her successor, Marcílio Marques Moreira, 59, was a former banker and current ambassador to the United States.
Taking office on May 10, he brought in an older team of officials who were said to represent a shift to the right in economic policy and a less high-profile negotiating style.
Among supporters of Cardoso de Mello who left office at the same time as her were Infrastructure Minister Eduardo Teixeira (appointed in March — see p. 38095), chief foreign debt negotiator Jorio Dauster, president of the Central Bank of Brazil, Ibrahim Eris, and president of the state-owned Banco do Brasil, Alberto Policarpo.
Cardoso de Mello had told President Fernando Collor de Mello of her intention to resign on May 6, but was asked to stay on until her replacement could take office.
Factors in the resignation of Cardoso de Mello's team — which had been responsible for the anti-inflation programmes of March 1990 and February 1991 — were variously said to include the unpopularity in business and banking sectors of their interventionist policies, the combative style adopted in negotiations with international debtors, recent clashes with members of the President's inner circle, including regional development secretary Egberto Baptista who had been accused of malpractice, and Cardoso de Mello's affair in 1990 with the then Justice Minister Bernardo Cabral [see p. 37773].
Joao Santana was appointed Infrastructure Minister and Francisco Gros president of the Central Bank, a post he had previously held in February-April 1987.
General strike
On May 22-23 a 48-hour general strike, in protest against the recessionary effects of the government's anti-inflation policies and led by the Central Unica de Trabajadores (CUT), failed to secure wide support.
In Sao Paulo some public transport was affected, shops closed and banks worked with reduced staff, but in Rio de Janeiro and Brasília most services operated as normal.
AMERICAS
PARAGUAY
Municipal elections
Municipal elections, the first to be held since the country gained its independence 180 years before, were held on May 26.
An estimated 1,400,000 people were eligible to vote to elect officials who in the past had been appointed by the President.
The unexpected winner of the important mayorship of the capital, Asunción, was Carlos Alberto Filizzola, 31, a medical doctor and political unknown.
As leader of an independent broad-based movement, Asunción For All (Asunción Para Todos (Apto), Filizzola defeated the candidates of both major parties.
Filizzola took 34 per cent of the vote, the candidate of the ruling Colorado Party (PC) took 27 per cent and that of the Liberal Party (PL) 20 per cent.
The candidate of the Febrerista Revolutionary Party (PFR) came fourth with 10 per cent.
Widespread complaints were reported that voters' lists were missing and that some ballot stations were not operational.
Full official results had yet to be released.
Cabinet change
Ubaldo Scavone was appointed as Minister for Industry and Commerce on May 23 in place of Antonio Zuccolillo Moscarda who became a presidential economic adviser.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Relations with Soviet Union
Visit by CCP general secretary to Soviet Union
Jiang Zemin, general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), paid a historic visit to the Soviet Union on May 15-19 for talks with his Soviet counterpart, President Gorbachev.
Jiang's visit to the Soviet Union was the first by a CCP general secretary since Mao Zedong's 1957 visit to Moscow for celebrations marking the 40th anniversary of the October Revolution [see pp. 15899-902].
Gorbachev's visit to China in May 1989, although overshadowed by massive pro-democracy demonstration in Beijing, had marked the formal normalization of state and party relations between the two countries after almost 30 years of enmity [see pp. 36640-42].
In April 1990 Li Peng had paid a visit to the Soviet Union, the first by a Chinese Premier for 26 years [see pp. 37373-74].
Jiang Zemin's delegation included the Minister of National Defence, Gen. Qin Jiwei, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Qian Qichen and the Minister of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade Li Lanqing.
During his visit Jiang held talks with Gorbachev, Soviet Premier Valentin Pavlov and Supreme Soviet Chairman Anatoly Lukyanov.
Border agreement — Communiqué
Qian Qichen and his Soviet counterpart Aleksandr Bessmertnykh signed an agreement on the demarcation of the eastern section of the Sino-Soviet border on May 16.
However, no details of the agreement were published.
The agreement had been initialled on April 29 at the end of the fifth round of Soviet-Chinese talks on border issues held in Moscow.
A joint communiqué issued on May 19 said that the talks between Jiang and Gorbachev had been held in a "friendly, frank and businesslike atmosphere" and had covered "the whole range of Soviet-Chinese relations" .
On the border issue, both sides agreed to continue intensive discussions on the remaining disputed sectors.
On the socio-economic situation in each country, the two sides noted that it was "difficult for socialism as a new social structure to avoid complexities and contradictions in its development" .
Reforms were necessary to "reveal the potential of socialism" .
On the international situation, the communiqué covered Soviet-United States relations and disarmament, Korea and the Gulf.
On Cambodia, the two sides agreed that the UN "framework document" [see p. 37654]was a "good foundation" for the achievement of an all-embracing political settlement.
Visit to China by Soviet Defence Minister and Foreign Minister
Marshal Dmitry Yazov, the Soviet Defence Minister, visited China on May 3-7.
According to the Xinhua news agency on May 3 it was the first Soviet delegation led by a Defence Minister to visit China.
The Japanese Kyodo news agency reported on May 7 that Yazov and his Chinese counterpart, Gen. Qin, failed to finalize details of an arms deal during the visit.
Some reports had speculated that an agreement would be signed providing for China's purchase of 24 Soviet-built Su27 advanced combat aircraft.
However, the Far Eastern Economic Review of May 30 reported that the two sides had signed an agreement allowing Chinese air force pilots to be sent to the Soviet Union for training on Su27s.
Bessmertnykh had paid his first visit to China on March 31-April 2.
The visit came in the aftermath of the signing of a Chinese commodity loan agreement with the Soviet Union in March [see p. 38105].
Internal security, politics and economy
Asia Watch report on dissident trials — Release of dissident union leaders
In a report issued on May 30 the New York-based human rights organization Asia Watch claimed that there had been a large number of dissident trials in China during the previous six months.
The report said that the trials generally lacked any due process of law and most were held in secret.
It also alleged that the great majority of those arrested in 1989 after the military crackdown on the pro-democracy movement were still unaccounted for.
Han Dongfeng, leader of the Beijing Autonomous Workers' Union (BAWU), was released from prison in late April after being detained without trial for 22 months.
Li Jinjin, the union's legal adviser, was also released after serving a similar term of imprisonment without trial.
New acting governor of Guangdong
Zhu Senlin, hitherto Canton city party secretary, was appointed on May 10 as the new acting governor of Guangdong province.
He replaced Ye Xuanping who had been elected to the largely honorific post of Vice-Chair of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference in early April [see p. 38145].
Major coal mine disaster
The official Xinhua news agency reported on May 7 that a "huge gas and coal dust explosion" at a coal mine in the northern province of Shanxi on April 21 had killed all 147 miners working there.
It was China's worst coal mine disaster in 30 years.
According to Xinhua, an initial analysis had indicated that it was "a major accident of irresponsibility" arising from "insufficient investment" when the mine was renovated after a similar disaster in 1980.
Continued devaluation of yuan — ADB loan — Reported request for Japanese loan
The government continued its policy of devaluing the yuan in small, frequent steps during May [see p. 38146 for initiation of this policy on April 9].
As of May 18 the yuan was being traded at an official central rate of US$1.00=5.3199 yuan, compared with US$1.00=5.2819 yuan on April 20.
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) resumed lending to China on May 28 after a two-year break, approving a US$70,000,000 loan to finance the building of a bridge in Shanghai.
The ADB had frozen lending to China following the June 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre.
The Kyodo news agency reported on May 14 that the Chinese government had requested Japan to provide 700,000 million yen (about US$5,000 million) in new loans for resources development projects.
In November 1990 Japan had reactivated a development loan programme to China which had been frozen after the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre [see p. 37859].
Tibet
40th anniversary of "liberation" of Tibet
The Chinese authorities organized low-key celebrations on May 23 to mark the 40th anniversary of the "liberation" of Tibet.
The festivities specifically marked the signing on May 23, 1951, of the so-called "17-point agreement" which legitimated China's annexation of the previously independent Tibet [see p. 11610; see pp. 11101-04 for China's invasion of Tibet in October 1950].
Tens of thousands of Chinese troops were stationed in Lhasa, the Tibetan capital, on May 23 to prevent the outbreak of any pro-independence demonstrations.
At the same time, all foreign journalists were barred from entering Tibet.
However, the Guardian of May 28 said that reports had reached Beijing of a brief anti-Chinese protest outside the Jokhang Temple in Lhasa on May 26.
Meeting between Bush and Dalai Lama
The exiled Tibetan spiritual leader, His Holiness Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, met with US President Bush in Washington on April 16 [see p. 38097 for Dalai Lama's visit to the United Kingdom in March].
The talks were regarded as significant given that on previous visits to the United States, the Dalai Lama had not been granted a meeting with the President.
China lodged a "strong protest" over the meeting with the US ambassador to China, James Lilley.
Lilley was told that the meeting was "an act of gross interference in China's internal affairs" and had "hurt the feelings of the Chinese people" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Internal security — Relations with China and eastern Europe
Repeal of sedition statute — Arrest of pro-independence activists
On May 17 the Legislative Yuan approved a motion to repeal the draconian Statute of Punishment for Sedition, which had been in force since 1949.
The statute, which authorized the death penalty for a number of vaguely defined charges, had been one of the main instruments used by the ruling Kuomintang to suppress opposition.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of May 30 the statute had been repealed in an attempt to calm reaction amongst students and the opposition following the arrest of four pro-independence activists on May 9.
The four, Liao Wei-cheng, Lin Yin-fu, Chen Cheng-jan and Wang Hsiu-hui, were reported to be linked with the outlawed, Japanese-based Association for Independent Taiwan.
They were indicted for "conspiring to commit sedition" , but were released on bail.
Following the arrests, students in Taipei launched a series of protests, including a four-day sit-in at the city's central railway station.
The repeal of the sedition statute failed to avert a march by 10,000 students through Taipei on March 20, during which calls were made for the resignation of the Prime Minister, Gen. Hau Pei-tsun.
Lifting of martial law on offshore islands
On May 7 the Executive Yuan lifted martial law on the offshore islands of Matsu and Chinmen (Quemoy), both of which were situated close to the Chinese mainland.
Martial law had remained in effect on the islands after it had been lifted throughout the rest of Taiwan in mid-1987 [see pp. 35378-79].
Residents of the islands had protested against the retention of martial law after President Lee Teng-hui ended the "Period of Communist Rebellion" and repealed the "Temporary Provisions" on April 30-May 1, 1991 [see p. 38146].
Visit to China by Taiwanese delegation — Abolition of rewards for defectors
The first formal visit by a Taiwanese delegation, the Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF), to the Chinese mainland ended on May 5 [see p. 38146 for start of visit on April 28].
During the visit the SEF delegation, headed by its secretary-general Chen Chang-wen, held two rounds of talks with officials from the Chinese State Council's Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO).
In an interview with the Taiwanese newspaper Chung Yang Jih Pao of May 6, Chen said that the tasks of the visit had been fulfilled, but that "repeated efforts will be required to handle the many details in the future" .
The TAO director, Wang Zhaoguo, said on May 3 that the talks had achieved "initial success" and had promoted understanding and consensus.
On May 2 the Defence Ministry announced that it had cancelled measures encouraging mainland Chinese soldiers to defect to Taiwan by offering gold or cash rewards.
Visit to Soviet Union and eastern Europe by trade delegation
A 62-member trade delegation, headed by Chiang Pin-kung, a Vice-Minister of Economic Affairs, left Taiwan on May 18 for a 20-day tour of Poland, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, the Soviet Union and Hungary.
Chiang was the highest-ranking Taiwanese official to visit the Soviet Union.
Government sources announced on May 20 that Taiwan was planning to offer economic aid to all five countries in order to "promote substantive relations with them" .
On May 25 the Taiwanese Board of Foreign Trade released figures which showed that trade between Taiwan and eastern Europe had amounted to US$194,100,000 during the first four months of 1991 an 82.4 per cent increase over the same period in 1990.
Exports to Eastern Europe had increased by 67 per cent to US$81,500,000, while imports from the region had increased by 95.8 per cent to US$112,600,000.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Meat rationing
The Mongolian government introduced meat rationing on May 17.
Three days earlier National Development Minister Jamyangiyn Batsuur had appealed for emergency foreign aid to combat serious shortages of foodstuffs and medicines.
Rice, flour, sugar and vegetable oil were already rationed.
Meat was the predominant ingredient of the Mongol diet, with average consumption of eight kilogrammes per person per month.
The ration in the cities, where around half of the 2,000,000 population lived, would now be three kilogrammes per person per month.
The press accused the government of having created the shortage by failing to implement fully the state purchasing plan from herdsmen in the provinces, but herdsmen were also reported to be reluctant to sell to the state in anticipation of higher state purchasing prices.
Transport problems resulting from the withdrawal of cheap Soviet oil supplies and the drastic cut in other forms of Soviet economic assistance were also identified as factors.
A presidential order concerning the maintenance of public order and severe punishment for offenders had been reported by the ruling Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party newspaper Unen on April 3.
It appeared to be targeted particularly at black marketeers and speculators hoarding goods to create artificial shortages.
Privatization law
The People's Little Hural, Mongolia's standing parliament, on May 22 approved privatization legislation.
Privatization would fall into two categories: the sale of state-owned shops and restaurants, which had in fact been under way since May 1; and the sale of state-owned factories and enterprises, 40 per cent of which were envisaged to be in private hands within three years.
The government was to issue vouchers to every citizen to enable them to buy shares in factories and enterprises.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Visit by Chinese Premier — Revised position on UN membership
Li Peng, the Premier of China, arrived in Pyongyang on May 3, at the start of a three-day state visit to North Korea.
The two main issues thought to have been on the agenda for Li's visit were South Korea's intention to apply for separate membership of the UN (North Korea favoured the two Korean states sharing a single UN seat), and the growing pressure for the North Korean government to allow international inspection of its nuclear facilities, an issue at the heart of the current normalization talks between North Korea and Japan [see below].
Li's visit was officially hailed as an illustration of the traditionally close ties between the two communist states.
However, there was widespread speculation that, during the course of the visit, Li had made it clear to his hosts that China would not use its UN Security Council veto to block an application for separate membership by South Korea, a country with which China was enjoying expanding trade and diplomatic links.
Prior to the visit this position had been implied by the Chinese government.
The Soviet Union, with which South Korea had established full diplomatic relations in 1990, had previously promised to support the South Korean application.
This conjecture was reinforced when, on May 28, the North Korean Foreign Ministry issued a terse statement which announced that the government had decided to apply for membership of the UN.
The communiqué, dated May 27, reiterated Pyongyang's past efforts to avoid formalizing a "permanent split" of the Korean peninsula through dual membership, but concluded that "we have no alternative but to enter the UN at the present stage as a step to tide over such temporary difficulties created by the South Korean authorities" .
South Korean diplomats immediately welcomed the North Korean volte face as "a positive step" in improving relations between the two Korean states.
This sentiment was widely echoed by representatives of other countries, many of whom expressed the belief that, if the Korean application were accepted, then the UN could provide a valuable forum for discussions between the two states.
Third round of talks with Japan
Representatives of Japan and North Korea met in Beijing on May 20 for the third round of the ongoing normalization talks.
The two days of scheduled meetings were deadlocked, however, by the Japanese insistence that North Korea open its nuclear facilities to international inspection in line with the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty which North Korea signed in 1985.
Recent US intelligence claims, backed by satellite photographs, suggesting that the North Korean government was developing a nuclear bomb, were vigorously denied by the Pyongyang government.
The North Korean delegation maintained its established position that issues such as nuclear inspection could be discussed only when relations with Japan had been normalized and could not be included within the normalization process itself.
It also reiterated its demand that the United States should allow simultaneous inspection of its alleged nuclear weapons based in South Korea.
The talks were extended for a third day after the Japanese agreed to drop the nuclear inspection demand during the current session.
Nevertheless, the discussions broke down in acrimony on May 22 after the Japanese delegation raised the issue of a Japanese woman allegedly abducted by North Korean agents 13 years earlier.
The existence of the woman had been confirmed by a female North Korean agent detained in South Korea after planting a bomb on a South Korean airliner in 1987.
Deputy Foreign Minister Chon In Chon, the leader of the North Korean delegation, accused the Japanese of using the issue as a means of sabotaging the negotiations.
He stated that he would only attend any further rounds of the normalization talks if a Japanese apology for the incident was forthcoming.
First direct chartered flight from Japan
The first direct chartered flight between the two countries was made when a North Korean airliner flew from Nagoya to Pyongyang on May 17.
The aircraft carried some 100 passengers, most of whom were pro-North Korean residents of Japan and journalists invited by the airline.
Death of Ho Dam
Ho Dam, 62, one of North Korea's most senior statesmen and, since 1983 a member of the politburo of the ruling Korean Workers' Party and Chairman of the Committee for the Peaceful Reunification of the Fatherland, died in Pyongyang on May 11 after a long illness.
Ho had served as Foreign Minister between 1970 and 1983, during which time North Korea aggressively competed against South Korea for international recognition.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Death of Shintaro Abe
Shintaro Abe, 67, leader of the second-largest faction in Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), died on May 15, after being hospitalized since January with a liver complaint.
As one of Japan's most senior political figures, prior to becoming ill Abe was widely believed to be the most likely successor to Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu upon the expiry of his current term in October.
First elected to the lower house of the Diet in 1958, Abe had been Chief Cabinet Secretary in 1977 and, after failing to win the party leadership in 1982, he served as Foreign Minister between 1982 and 1986.
Abe was a prominent candidate for the leadership in October 1987, but eventually withdrew in favour of Noboru Takeshita, in what was widely believed to have been an agreement that he would succeed Takeshita after his two-year term.
In early 1989 the Recruit scandal forced Takeshita from office prematurely [see p. 36589], but also implicated Abe to such an extent — it forced him to resign as LDP secretary-general — that the premiership once again eluded him.
After the brief administration of Sosuke Uno, Kaifu was plucked from obscurity in order to act as caretaker Prime Minister until such time as the Recruit scandal had receded.
Despite his failing health — it was rumoured, but never confirmed, that he was suffering from cancer — Abe continued to harbour ambitions for the premiership.
Abe's death was also a blow for the ambitions of other Recruit-tainted veteran LDP leaders, including former Prime Ministers Takeshita and Yasuhiro Nakasone (the latter having recently rejoined the LDP after serving a two-year period of atonement outside the party).
On May 19 Shin Kanemaru, leader of what was still generally considered to be the Takeshita faction in the LDP, announced that his grouping would field a candidate for the LDP leadership election in October.
Other possible candidates were Kaifu himself, Kiichi Miyazawa, a former Finance Minister and leader of the third-largest faction, and Michio Wanatabe, leader of the faction formerly headed by Nakasone.
The future of Abe's faction was unclear, for it contained many members who were thought to have joined in the belief that Abe was next in line for the office of Prime Minister.
With the death of Abe, it possessed no figure with sufficient authority to make a credible challenge for the leadership, and many commentators predicted that it would fracture and split.
Rail crash
The country's worst rail accident since 1963 occurred in Shiga prefecture, near Kyoto, on May 14, when two passenger trains collided head-on on a single track, killing 42 people and injuring more than 400.
Kaifu's tour of south-east Asia — Apology for Japan's past behaviour
On May 3 Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu became the first Japanese head of government to issue an unambiguous apology to countries of south-east Asia for Japan's actions during the Pacific War.
Issued 46 years after the war's end, the apology was seen as part of an on-going process whereby Japan was attempting to improve its relationship with its neighbours in order to enable it to play a diplomatic and political role within the region which was commensurate with its economic power.
Speaking in Singapore, Kaifu broke from the tradition established by his predecessors by issuing an unequivocal expression of remorse.
He said: "I express our sincere contrition at Japanese past actions that inflicted unbearable suffering and sorrow upon a great many people of the Asian-Pacific region." 
The apology followed that made a year earlier to South Korea for Japan's colonial subjugation of the Korean peninsula from 1910 to 1945.
Kaifu also expressed his determination "not to let history repeat itself" and stated that "the Japanese people are resolved never again to repeat those actions which had tragic consequences" .
He also suggested that he would seek to change school textbooks in order to reflect more accurately the brutality and aggression displayed by the Japanese military before 1945.
The textbook issue had been a persistent irritant in relations between Japan and its neighbours.
Kaifu expressed his determination "to step up our effort to ensure that today's young people — tomorrow's leaders — gain a full and accurate understanding of modern and contemporary Japanese history" .
Kaifu emphasised that Japan would continue to try to help resolve regional conflicts, particularly the conflict in Cambodia.
He also addressed directly the unease expressed in some neighbouring countries over his government's desire to send units from the Self-Defence Forces to assist US-led coalition forces in the Gulf war with Iraq [see pp. 38010; 38098].
 "This action," he said, "does not mean that Japan is assuming a military role in the international community and does not represent any change in Japan's basic defence policy." 
He reminded those who felt such concern that "since the war, Japan has dedicated itself to a purely defensive posture under our peace constitution and vowed never again to become a military power such as might pose a threat to other countries" .
Kaifu's Singapore speech, delivered to an audience of politicians, businessmen, foreign diplomats and journalists, was the key address of a 10-day tour of five south-east Asian countries which had begun on April 27 and which took in Malaysia, Brunei, Thailand, Singapore, and the Philippines, as well as a meeting with leaders of the rebel National Government of Cambodia in Bangkok, on May 1, the day that the ceasefire came into effect [see p. 38194].
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Urbco elections — Fresh round of airport talks
Elections were held on May 6 for 27 Urban Council (Urbco) seats.
In a turnout recorded at only 23 per cent, the United Democrats of Hong Kong (UDH) led by Martin Lee [see p. 37376; 37672]emerged as the largest single grouping.
The UDH won 11 seats and other "liberal" groupings three, while the conservative Liberal Democratic Federation (LDF) won three of the seven seats it contested, pro-Beijing groups won two, and the remainder went to independents.
Fresh round of airport talks
Officials from the United Kingdom and China meeting in Beijing on May 18-22, failed to reach agreement on the construction of a new airport [see pp. 37961; 38147].
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
State developments
Jammu and Kashmir
All-India Radio reported on May 6 that 66 "Pakistan-trained militants" had been killed by the Indian security forces the previous day in Jammu and Kashmir.
The militants had been intercepted in the Tithwal sector whilst crossing the Line of Actual Control from Azad Kashmir (the Pakistan-controlled sector) into India.
The incident occurred at the end of a week of unusually heavy artillery and small-arms skirmishing between Indian and Pakistani troops across the Kashmir border.
On May 7 a Pakistan Foreign Affairs Ministry spokesman "strongly condemned" the killings.
However, the Indian Prime Minister, Chandra Shekhar, warned on May 10 that Pakistan would pay a "heavy price" if it did not refrain from sending infiltrators and saboteurs into Jammu and Kashmir.
On May 8 as many as 14 people were killed and 24 injured when the security forces opened fire on a rally in Srinagar, the state's summer capital.
The rally had been organized to mourn the guerrillas killed on the border on May 5.
The New York-based human rights organization Asia Watch issued a report on May 4 which accused both the Indian government and militant groups of committing substantial human rights abuses in Jammu and Kashmir.
The report accused security forces of "a deliberate campaign of terror" which included shooting unarmed civilians.
Militants had also violated humanitarian standards with summary executions, kidnappings and assaults against civilians.
Punjab
In a highly critical report on the Punjab released on May 10 the international human rights organization Amnesty International claimed that over 10,000 Sikhs were being detained in the state without trial [see p. 38151 for April announcement of release from detention of Sikh youths detained for minor offences].
The report cited numerous examples of arbitrary arrest, torture and extra-judicial killing and called on Indian politicians to use the general election of May and June to commit themselves to ending seven years of "rampant human rights abuses" in the state.
Assam
All-India Radio reported on May 15 that the Assam government had invoked the National Security Act (NSA) for three months "as a precautionary measure" in view of the elections in the state in June.
The NSA empowered the state authorities to detain any person without trial for one year.
Andhra Pradesh
Naxalite guerrillas of the People's War Group (PWG) of the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist) kidnapped the Andhra Pradesh youth Congress (I) president, P. Sudhir Kumar, on May 12.
Kumar, the son of the former External Affairs Minister P. Shiv Shankar, was released on May 13 after the (Congress (I)) state government had freed four PWG members from Vishakhapatnam central jail.
Economy
Credit offer by Hinduja group
The Financial Times of May 16 reported that the Indian government had been offered US$1,200 million in suppliers credits by the Hinduja group, the London-based trading and financial company.
The proposal, described in the report as "unprecedented" , was apparently intended to signal the Hinduja's long-term confidence in the Indian economy.
Under the terms of the proposal, the government would receive a US$1,000 million loan for the purchase of oil and petroleum products and US$200,000,000 for fertilizers and non-ferrous metals.
India's deteriorating foreign exchange situation had forced the government to adopt drastic import curbs in March [see p. 38151], which had led to an immediate reduction in the import of manufacturing components and metals.
In an interview with the Financial Times of May 8, Attila Karaosmanoglu, the World Bank's vice-president for Asia, said that Western donors had started to raise short-term funds to help India overcome its fiscal and balance-of-payments crisis.
Border talks with China
The third meeting of the Sino-Indian joint working party on the border issue was held in Beijing on May 13.
The first meeting had been held in Beijing in mid-1989 [see p. 37352]and the second meeting in New Delhi on Aug. 30-Sept. 1, 1990.
The delegations were headed by Chinese Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs Xu Dunxin and the Indian foreign secretary Muchkund Dubey.
The official Chinese news agency Xinhua reported on May 13 that the talks had "further promoted mutual understanding" .
The Press Trust of India news agency reported on the same day that the two sides had agreed to finalize arrangements for reopening consulates-general in Bombay and Shanghai.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
General election
The first multiparty general election since 1959 was held in Nepal on May 12 [for 1959 election see p. 16826].
The elections to a new 205-member House of Representatives resulted in a victory for the Nepali Congress, which formed a new government in late May, and marked the final stage of a 15-month democratization process which had resulted in the destruction of the old panchayat system, under which political parties had been banned and most political power had rested in the hands of the monarch, King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Deva [see p. 37856 for chronology of events leading to the adoption of a new constitution in November 1990].
Election campaign and polling
Campaigning was frequently violent, with as many as 20 people killed.
The Guardian of May 11 commented that Indian-style "political gangsterism" had been noticeable during the campaign.
According to the Nepali Election Commission, 25 people were injured in election-day violence and voting was stopped in 21 rural stations after charges of "booth capturing" .
However, international observers described the polling itself as generally fair and peaceful.
Election results — Defeat of Prime Minister
The Nepali Congress won a clear majority of 110 seats, with the second largest party, the United Nepal Communist Party (UNCP), winning 69 seats.
The election was contested by 1,126 candidates representing 20 political parties and 219 independents.
Election results
Nepali Congress110
United Nepal Communist Party69
United People's Front9
Nepal Sadbhavana Party6
National Democratic Party (Chand) 3
Nepal Mazdoor Kisan Party2
Communist Party of Nepal (Democratic-Manandhar) 2
National Democratic Party (Thapa) 1
Independents3
Total205
The UNCP performed extremely well in the capital, Katmandu, winning four of the city's five seats.
The incumbent Prime Minister and Nepali Congress president, K. P. Bhattarai, was narrowly defeated in Katmandu by the UNCP general secretary, Madan Bhandari.
Bhattarai tendered his resignation to the King on May 14 but was asked to stay in office until the formation of a new Cabinet.
A number of former Prime Ministers under the panchayat system, contesting the election as candidates of the National Democratic Party, were easily defeated by both Nepali Congress and UNCP candidates.
New Prime Minister and Cabinet
Girija Prasad Koirala, the 65-year-old Nepali Congress general secretary, was appointed as Prime Minister on May 26.
Koirala's brother, B. P. Koirala, had served as Prime Minister in 1959-60 following the country's previous brief experiment in multiparty democracy.
Koirala announced a new Cabinet on May 29 which included one woman (Sailja Acharya) and only one person who not been elected as a member of the House of Representatives (Basu Dev Risal).
In a speech delivered at the Cabinet's swearing-in ceremony, Koirala said that Nepal was entering "a new era of full-fledged democracy" but warned of "a very grave and deteriorating economic condition" .
Girija Prasad KoiralaPrime Minister; Defence; Foreign Affairs; Finance; Health; Royal Palace Affairs Gopal Man ShresthaCommerce Sher Bahadur DeupanHome Affairs Dhundi Raj ShastriIndustry Tara Nath BhattLaw and Justice; Parliamentary Affairs Basu Dev RisalWater Resources; Communications Jagan Nath AcharyaLand Reform Management Sheikh IdrisSocial Welfare, Labour and Co-operation Bal Bahadur RaiHousing and Physical Planning Sailja AcharyaForests, Soil Conservation and Agriculture Ram Hari JoshiEducation and Culture Ram Chandra PaudyelLocal Development Chiranjibi WagleLocal Supply Maheshwore Prasad SinghGeneral Administration Khum Bhadur KhadkaPublic Works and Transport 
New Nepalese Cabinet
Election of opposition leader
On May 25 Man Mohan Adhikari, president of the UNCP, was elected as leader of his party's parliamentary group and therefore official leader of the opposition.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Local elections
Against a background of continuing civil war between government forces and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) in the northern and eastern provinces, local elections were held throughout the rest of the island on May 11, resulting in a sweeping victory for the ruling United National Party (UNP).
The UNP won control in 156 out of 194 village councils, 26 out of 32 urban councils, and nine out of 10 municipal councils including the capital, Colombo.
In two councils the UNP's ally, the Ceylon Workers' Congress, was successful, and one was won by pro-UNP independents.
The high turnout, at 75-80 per cent, was regarded as giving the UNP a more convincing mandate than the low-turnout elections won by Ranasinghe Premadasa and the UNP in 1988 and 1989 [see pp. 36394-95; 36467].
Opposition parties contested some elections in a loose left-wing United Front alliance.
The main opposition party, however, the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) led by Sirimavo Bandaranaike, was criticized for failing to build greater unity with the smaller Lanka Sama Samaja party (LSSP), the Communist Party, the Nava Sama Samaja party (NSSP) and the Bahejana Nidahas Pakshaya (BNP) led by Mrs. Bandaranaike's daughter Chandrika Kumaranatunge.
The election proceeded in an atmosphere relatively free of violence, although the SLFP complained of fraud and of UNP manipulation of the government-controlled media.
Various emergency regulations were relaxed for the week prior to the poll to allow campaigning to proceed, but were reintroduced from midnight on May 11-12.
Expulsion of UK High Commissioner
The United Kingdom high commissioner, David Gladstone, was declared persona non grata on May 29 and left the country 11 days later.
Mark Lennox-Boyd, Under-Secretary of State at the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office, told the UK Parliament on June 11 that the expulsion, linked to complaints that Gladstone had interfered in the elections by entering a polling booth and by registering a complaint with police alleging malpractice and multiple voting, was apparently intended to stifle Gladstone's criticism of Sri Lanka's "unsatisfactory human rights record" .
The UK government, he said, had responded by cancelling high-level visits and "reviewing other aspects of our relationship" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Passing of Sharia bill — New charges against Bhutto — Consortium aid offer — Appointment of woman minister
On May 16 the National Assembly voted to approve the Sharia Bill [see p. 38152]enforcing Islamic law.
The Senate endorsed the bill on May 28, after rejecting a series of amendments moved by opposition parties which described the legislation as fundamentalist and undemocratic.
The bill would take effect after receiving the assent of President Ghulam Ishaq Khan.
A report in the Independent of May 18 said that only 138 MPs in the 217-seat National Assembly had taken part in the voting.
MPs of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) voted against, the PPP leader and former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto condemning the bill on May 15 as "a conspiracy to turn Pakistan into a theocracy" which would "undermine elected institutions" .
The Muhajir Qaumi Movement (MQM), an ally of the ruling Islamic Democratic Alliance (IDA), abstained from voting, while the fundamentalist Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam boycotted the proceedings, claiming that the bill was not sufficiently Islamic.
Reports suggested that the implementation of the bill would be opposed by women's groups and non-Moslem minorities.
New charges against Bhutto
New charges alleging the misuse of secret service funds amounting to Rs95,500,000 (about US$4,135,000) were brought against Bhutto on May 13.
Bhutto denied the charges, although she refused to give details of how the funds were spent, saying that "such disclosure would not be in the national interest" .
Meanwhile, the Independent of May 13 reported that Bhutto's husband, Asif Ali Zardari, had been charged with criminal conspiracy leading to the death of political opponents.
On May 5 a special court had acquitted Zardari of fraudulently obtaining a bank loan.
Consortium aid offer
It was reported on May 7 that a meeting in Paris of the Aid to Pakistan Consortium, made up of 14 Western countries and the World Bank, had approved aid totalling US$2,300 million.
An additional US$174,000,000 in assistance for Afghan refugees was also approved.
(In October 1990 the United States had suspended aid following congressional objections directed at Pakistan's nuclear programme — see p. 37764.)
Appointment of woman minister
It was reported on May 20 that Syeda Abida Hussain had been appointed adviser on population welfare to the Prime Minister and thus the government's first woman member with Cabinet status.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Acceptance of UN peace plan
On May 27 President Najibullah announced that his government would accept a ceasefire with the mujaheddin in order to allow the implementation of a UN peace plan.
The offer of a truce followed a statement broadcast on Kabul radio on May 22 saying that the government had accepted the terms of a comprehensive peace settlement set out by the UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar on May 21.
The plan envisaged a ceasefire between the mujaheddin and government forces; a cessation of arms supplies by all countries involved in the conflict; an end to all external interference; and the right of Afghans to choose their own government.
In a speech on Kabul radio Najibullah said that he had ordered all provincial governors and local organizations to declare a ceasefire in their areas provided the mujaheddin agreed to abide by it.
On May 23 the head of the Hezb-e Islami, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, rejected the UN plan, saying that there was no question of accepting a settlement under the Najibullah regime.
The Prime Minister of the Pakistan-based Afghan Interim Government (AIG), Abdur-Rabbur Rasul Sayaf, dismissed the plan as an "affront" to the memory of the 1,500,000 Afghans who had died during 12 years of civil war.
On May 28 the president of the AIG, Seghbatullah Mujjaddedi, also rejected the government's truce offer, saying that "if Najibullah is there, there can be no ceasefire" .
The latest UN peace plan followed proposals unveiled on May 10 by ex-king Zahir Shah which called for the establishment of a national committee including mujaheddin leaders, free elections and a parliamentary system.
Reported cessation of US aid
Reports on May 13, quoting United States government officials, said that the US administration had sought no new funding for the mujaheddin in its proposed budget for 1992.
Although final proposals had not yet been made public, it was understood that the US administration was "tiring" of the war.
On May 13 a mujaheddin spokesman said in Peshawar that "we are determined to continue the fight…with or without aid from the Americans" .
Resignation of AIG minister
It was reported on May 5 that the Interior Minister in the AIG and a member of the Hezb-e Islami, Yunus Khales, had resigned after accusing his colleagues of "complicity" with the Kabul-based government.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Sentencing of politicians — Reopening of universities
The Far Eastern Economic Review of May 23 reported that 34 opposition politicians had recently been sentenced — some in absentia— to prison terms of up to 25 years after being found guilty of high treason.
The 34 were members of the National League for Democracy (NLD), the country's main opposition party, and all but nine had been elected as Constituent Assembly deputies in May 1990 [see pp. 37457-58].
The State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), the country's ruling military junta, had prevented the Assembly from convening and had subsequently frustrated attempts by the NLD to establish a government.
Universities and colleges reopened on May 15.
Educational institutions had been closed down in 1988 at the height of the abortive student-led anti-government uprising [see pp. 36221-24].
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Lifting of martial law
Martial law, in force since the Feb. 23 military coup [see p. 38003-04], was lifted in most areas of the country on May 3, although the interim government retained it in 21 sensitive border provinces and districts.
On May 9 the military-appointed National Legislative Assembly (NLA) lifted a ban on political gatherings and political activity imposed by the ruling junta on Feb. 23.
Naming of "unusually wealthy" politicians by anti-corruption committee
In its first announcement since starting investigations into 25 politicians in late February, the Asset Verification Committee (AVC, a military-appointed anti-corruption body) named four ministers who had served under ousted Premier Chatichai Choonhaven as being "unusually wealthy" .
The four were Police Capt. Chalerm Yubamrung, Pramual Sabhavasu, Maj.-Gen.
Pramarn Adireksarn and Montree Pongpanit.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Ceasefire
For the first time in the 12-year Cambodian civil war the opposing factions began implementing a ceasefire on May 1.
The ceasefire was initiated in an attempt to increase the chances of agreement on a stalled UN peace plan [see p. 37654]at a meeting of the Cambodian factions in Jakarta (Indonesia) in early June.
Mid-way through May the main rebel group, the Khmers Rouges, made it clear that it would no longer observe the ceasefire if the Jakarta talks collapsed without an agreement on the UN plan.
The call for a voluntary, temporary ceasefire had been issued on April 22 by France and Indonesia (co-chairs of the Paris International Conference on Cambodia) and UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar.
The State of Cambodia (SOC) government in Phnom Penh announced its acceptance of the appeal on April 24.
Two days later the rebel National Government of Cambodia (NGC, comprising representatives of all three rebel factions) announced that it was "happy to accept" the appeal.
At the same time the four factions also backed calls for a fresh round of peace talks in Indonesia on June 2-4.
Progress of ceasefire — Visit by UN mission
Although each side accused the other with ceasefire violations throughout May, observers noted a definite lull in the fighting.
Thai officers stationed along the Cambodian border reported only scattered incidents in northern and north-western Cambodia, with no fighting along the border.
Officials in Cambodian hospitals reported a fall in the number of casualties admitted with gunshot or shell wounds; the numbers admitted with injuries from landmines remained the same.
A four-member UN fact-finding mission headed by Maj.-Gen.
Timothy Dibuama of Ghana visited Cambodia on May 12-17 for talks with the leaders of the warring factions.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Relations with Soviet Union — Party affairs
Visit to Soviet Union
Do Muoi, Chairman of the Vietnamese Council of Ministers, and Nguyen Van Linh, secretary general of the ruling Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV), paid separate visits to the Soviet Union during May.
During his May 5-9 visit Do Muoi held talks with his Soviet counterpart Valentin Pavlov.
Topics discussed included the fresh set of trade and economic relations agreements signed by the two sides in January [see p. 38005].
The Far Eastern Economic Review of May 23 speculated that Do Muoi "may have won an extension of the deadline for switching from accounting in transferable roubles to hard currency, set for April 1" .
Do Muoi and Pavlov also discussed the repayment of Vietnam's estimated US$10,000 million debt to the Soviet Union, which was slowly being paid off with deliveries of food produce and consumer goods.
Nguyen Van Linh visited the Soviet Union on May 8-13, on May 11 holding talks with President Mikhail Gorbachev.
The official Soviet news agency Tass reported on May 12 that the two had discussed "the significance of Soviet-Vietnamese, Soviet-Chinese and Vietnamese-Chinese relations for each of the countries" .
The timing of Nguyen's visit was regarded as significant by some commentators, coming a few days before the arrival in Moscow of the general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, Jiang Zemin [see p. 38189].
Results of party purge
On May 3 the Foreign Ministry reported on a "rectification campaign" launched within the CPV in 1987.
Between 1987 and 1990, over 206,000 party members were "disciplined" , of whom 78,200 were "removed" from the party.
During the same period over 303,200 people were admitted to the party, which had some 2,155,000 members.
Death of Hoang Van Hoan
The Associated Press news agency reported on May 23 that Hoang Van Hoan, a former member of the CPV politburo who defected to China in 1979 [see p. 29876], had died in exile at the age of 86.
ASIA-PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Inconclusive talks on US bases
The Philippines and United States governments ended inconclusively on May 3 their seventh round of negotiations to renew the agreement on US military bases in the Philippines which was due to expire on Sept. 16, 1991.
The key unresolved issues remained the duration of the new treaty and the level of financial compensation to be paid by the USA.
[For start of negotiations in May 1990 see p. 37458.]
President Corazon Aquino of the Philippines was pressing for a seven-year treaty with an annual US$825 million in compensation (comprising $400 million in cash grants and the remainder in concessions including debt reductions and trade concessions).
US negotiator Richard Armitage, however, put forward a 10-year agreement with $360 million annually in compensation and a further $160 million going to the Philippines Assistance Programme (PAP).
Under the 1987 Philippines Constitution, once the existing bases agreement expired, "foreign military bases, troops or facilities shall not be allowed in the Philippines except under a treaty duly concurred in by the Senate [upper house of parliament]…and recognized as a treaty by the other contracting state" .
Despite strong popular support for a continued US presence, it was not clear whether a new treaty would command the 16 votes (two-thirds majority) required in the 24-member Senate.
There was speculation that the negotiations would become an issue in the campaign for the presidential and congressional elections due in May 1992.
Conviction of Salas
Rodolfo Salas, a leading member of the illegal Communist Party of the Philippines-Marxist Leninist, on May 14 was convicted of rebellion and sentenced to six years' and a day in prison; Salas had been arrested in 1986 [see p. 34872].
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
UMNO election victories — Arrests in Sabah
On May 11 the United Malays National Organization (UMNO), the largest party at national level, won a seat in the Sabah State Assembly for the first time, defeating the candidate of the ruling United Sabah Party (Parti Bersatu Sabah — PBS) which had been part of the UMNO-led National Front central government coalition until just before the October 1990 general election [see pp. 37780-81].
At a by-election in the Usakan constituency, UMNO's candidate, Tun Datuk Mustapha Harun, won 5,670 votes as against 3,100 for the PBS.
[For July 1990 Sabah state elections see p. 37612.]
On May 4 UMNO had won the by-election to the federal House of Assembly in Bayu in northern Kedah state, albeit by a reduced majority of 3,592 votes against the main opposition Parti Islam (PAS).
In the 1990 general election the UMNO candidate in Bayu had won by a majority of 5,774.
Arrests in Sabah
Jeffrey Kitingan, the younger brother of Sabah's Chief Minister Datuk Joseph Pairin Kitingan, was arrested on May 13 on charges of "involvement in a plot to pull Sabah out of Malaysia" .
Kitingan, 43, who held no official position, was reported to have recently acquired influence among youth groups in the state.
Analysts regarded the arrest as an indication of the increasingly strained relations between the PBS and UMNO, following the former's withdrawal from the National Front coalition in October 1990.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Report of Royal Commission into Aboriginal cell-deaths
The Report of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody (first set up in August 1987 — see p. 35378), tabled in the Federal Parliament on May 9, called upon Australia to improve the treatment of its black minority and, thereby, to honour its international obligations.
The document contained the findings of a three-year investigation into the deaths of 99 Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders in police custody or in youth detention institutions between 1980 and 1987.
Based on a study undertaken by the Commission in August 1988, the report found that Aborigines — who constituted 1.1 per cent of Australia's total population — accounted for 29 per cent of those taken into police custody nationwide.
In Western Australia — where more cell-deaths had occurred than in any other state — Aborigines were taken into police custody at a rate 43 times that of non-Aborigines.
Of the 99 Aboriginal deaths under review, 30 resulted from hanging, 11 from head injuries, two from gun-shot wounds, 19 from natural causes and only five from alcohol abuse.
A total of 43 of the victims had been separated from their families in childhood by state authorities, all but two had left school before completing their secondary education, and 43 had been charged with a criminal offence by the age of 15.
Many of the victims were in poor health and, in some cases, had been incarcerated by the police on the assumption that they were drunk when in fact they were suffering from diseases which were life-threatening when treatment was withheld.
In addition to finding such evidence of police racial stereotyping, the Commission also found instances where police officers had lied under oath, fabricated evidence, neglected black prisoners and wrongly imprisoned Aborigines.
It was recommended that criminal charges be filed in such cases.
However, the Commission did not find evidence of deaths having resulted from deliberate brutality by police or prison officers, as had been alleged by some of the victims' families.
In the case of an Aboriginal teenager, John Pat, whose death in a Western Australian police cell in September 1983 led to public pressure to establish the inquiry, the Commission found that the victim had died after being injured in a brawl started by an off-duty policeman.
It was also found that the victim had been assaulted at the police station while in a semi-conscious state, and that, subsequently, the police had concealed and falsified evidence, and conducted a defective internal inquiry.
The report did not, however, make any recommendations of disciplinary measures against those concerned.
In 1984 an all-white jury had unanimously acquitted five Western Australian police officers on charges arising from Pat's death.
The 339 recommendations contained within the wide-ranging 5,000-page report covered policy and procedural changes throughout the Australian criminal justice system.
It also included proposals to educate non-Aboriginal Australians about the culture of the country's indigenous population, and to remove the causes of distrust and enmity between the two communities.
Foremost amongst the measures proposed in the latter instance was increased Aboriginal access to land, an issue upon which little progress had been made — with the possible exception of the sparsely populated Northern Territory — and which remained at the heart of much Aboriginal discontent.
New South Wales elections
The conservative Liberal-National Party coalition government of Nick Greiner narrowly retained power in state elections in New South Wales held on May 25.
Initial results gave the conservative coalition 47 seats in the 99-seat legislature of Australia's most populous state, compared with 60 in the outgoing legislature.
The Australian Labor Party (ALP) won 46 seats, with four seats being won by independents.
The remaining two seats were in doubt for several days before being awarded to the conservative coalition as a result of the distribution of preferential votes.
With some votes still to be counted, the coalition had won around 44 per cent of the 3,600,000 votes cast, a fall in support of some 5 per cent compared with the election of 1988.
The ALP, however, appeared to have increased its vote by only 1 percentage point, to 39.5 per cent.
The Australian Democrats increased their vote by some 2 percentage points to around 5.5 per cent without winning a seat, while the vote for the independent candidates rose by 0.7 points to almost 11 per cent.
Greiner, the state's Liberal Premier, had called the election 10 months sooner than required and had entered the campaign confident that he would increase his majority.
Although ostensibly the election was called because of the refusal of the ALP-dominated upper house of the state legislature to approve industrial relations legislation ending compulsory trade unionism, many observers suspected that Greiner had sought an election in order to capitalize on a recent string of problems associated with the ALP at federal and state level.
As New South Wales was the only state without an ALP government, the Liberal-National coalition was widely expected to benefit from the current unpopularity of the Hawke government, an expectation apparently supported by opinion polls published during the campaign which gave the coalition a lead of up to 16 percentage points over Labor.
Speaking after the election Greiner said that it was too early to assess "why I didn't get it right, and why almost no one in the community got it right" .
Bob Carr, the state leader of the ALP, suggested that voters had rejected the coalition because of Greiner's "arrogance" .
Although the Liberal-Nationals eventually retained power in the state by forming a minority government, the result was a serious blow for the coalition at federal level.
It had been hoped that an emphatic victory in New South Wales would lay the groundwork for a conservative victory at the next federal election, due by March 1993.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KIRIBATI
General election
President Ieremia Tabai was amongst the 39 successful candidates in the general election for Kiribati's House of Assembly (Maneaba).
The election, the fourth since independence in 1979, was held on May 8, with an additional round of run-off contests on May 15.
At least 15 incumbents, including two Cabinet Ministers, lost their seats.
Tabai, who had been President since independence, was constitutionally prohibited for serving a further term in office.
Nevertheless, the fact that he sought re-election to the legislature was widely interpreted as indicative of a desire to use his influence — he was thought to have maintained an overall majority in the new House — to secure the presidency for his friend and colleague, Vice-President Teatao Teannaki, the elected member for Abiang.
It also dampened recent speculation that Tabai was seeking lucrative jobs outside Kiribati.
Under the country's Constitution the President was elected by popular vote from a list of candidates drawn up from among members of the House.
In addition to Teannaki, the other candidates for the presidential elections, scheduled for July 3, were representatives Beniamina Tinga of Nikunau and Boanareke Boanareke, of Tamana, both of whom were supporters of Tabai, and Roniti Teiwaki, an independent member of the House for South Tarawa.
ASIA — PACIFIC
WESTERN SAMOA
Appointment of new Cabinet
Western Samoa's new Fono (unicameral legislature) assembled for the first time on May 7, following the country's first general election under universal suffrage on April 5.
As anticipated, the assembly elected the leader of the victorious Human Rights Protection Party, Tofilau Eti Alesana, for a further three-year term as Prime Minister.
On May 14 Eti made wholesale changes in the composition of his Cabinet, retaining only two of the ministers who had served in his previous administration.
Amongst the new appointees was Fiame Naomi, the first woman to serve within a Western Samoan Cabinet.
New Western Samoan Cabinet
**Tofilau Eti AlesanaPrime Minister; Foreign Affairs; Broadcasting; Police and Prisons; Attorney General
Tuilaepa Sailele MalielegaoiFinance
*Toi AukusoPost Office and Telecommunications; Women's Affairs
**Jack NetzlerAgriculture, Forests and Fisheries; Transport; Civil Aviation
*Fiame NaomiEducation; Youth, Sports and Culture; Labour
*Sala VaimiliHealth
*Faasootauloa PatiLands and Environment
*Leafa VitalePublic Works
*Fuimaono LotomanJustice
*New appointment.
**Altered portfolio.
The relative party strengths within the new Fono were given as follows: HRPP 30; Samoan National Development Party (SNDP) 14; independents 3.
The tradition whereby legislators tended to defect to the governing party following an election, however, meant that such assessments were liable to frequent change.
An added factor of uncertainty also arose from election petitions filed in the Supreme Court against 11 of the successful candidates.
All were accused of corrupt or illegal practices, mostly involving the distribution of food, drinks or money to voters.
ASIA — PACIFIC
FEDERATED STATES OF MICRONESIA
Choice of new President following general election
Bailey Olter, 59, a native of the state of Pohnpei, was unanimously elected President of the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) by the country's unicameral National Congress on May 11.
Together with Jacob Nena, 49, of Kosrae, who was elected Vice-President, Olter was sworn into office by Supreme Court Chief Justice Edward King in a brief ceremony immediately after the election.
Under the FSM's electoral system the 14-member Congress was composed of 10 senators, each elected for a two-year term, and four at-large senators — one each elected for a four-year term from the four states, Chuuk (formerly known as Truk), Kosrae, Pohnpei and Yap.
Following a general election the first task of the new legislature was to choose the country's President and Vice-President from amongst its four at-large senators.
Olter, Vice-President until his defeat in the 1987 general election, succeeded John R. Haglelgam, who had been President since 1987.
At the general election on March 5, Haglelgam failed to secure re-election as the at-large senator for Yap.
Shortly after his defeat he announced his retirement from politics.
The country's Vice-President, Hirosi Ismael, was also defeated in his bid to win re-election as the at-large senator for Kosrae.
The western Pacific republic of the FSM comprised some 100,000 people and more than 600 islands spread 2,900 sq km across the Caroline Islands archipelago.
Originally one of the four constituent elements of the UN Trust Territory of the Pacific created in 1947, the FSM initially signed a Compact of Free Association with the United States in 1982 which gave the country internal self-government and US economic aid in return for continuing US control of its defence and foreign policies [see p. 32130].
The USA declared the UN Trusteeship terminated in 1986 [see p. 35002], a step eventually endorsed by the UN Security Council in December 1990.
EUROPE
FRANCE
Appointment of Cresson as Prime Minister
On May 16 Edith Cresson, 57, was sworn in as Prime Minister, replacing Michel Rocard.
Speaking on television on May 15 President François Mitterrand declared that her appointment, as France's first woman Prime Minister, was intended to provide fresh élan ( "vigour" ) as France approached the introduction of the single European market from Jan. 1, 1993.
Rocard, 60, leader of the social democrat wing of the Socialist Party (PS), had resigned on May 15 after weeks of increasing speculation as to the future of his minority government [see below; see p. 37869 for narrow survival of vote of no confidence in November 1990].
Cresson, known as a longstanding supporter of Mitterrand (who celebrated a decade as President on May 10), was seen as representing the left wing of the PS.
An economist by training, she had held a succession of ministerial portfolios in 1981-86, at Agriculture, External Trade and Tourism, and Industrial Redeployment and Foreign Trade.
She earned a reputation for forthright defence of French industry, regarding Japan as a particular adversary and a threat to French jobs.
When the PS returned to power in mid-1988 she became European Affairs Minister-Delegate but resigned in October 1990 [see p. 37784], declaring France to be "in danger of being undermined by a lack of industrial motivation" .
Urba party financing scandal
A growing scandal over illegal funding of the PS and of Mitterrand's 1988 presidential re-election campaign came to a head in April.
On April 7, Justice Minister Henri Nallet (Mitterrand's campaign treasurer in 1988) ordered an examining magistrate, Thierry Jean-Pierre, to desist from seizing papers from the Paris-based consulting firm Urbatechnic ( "Urba" ).
According to The Impossible Investigation, a book by police Inspector Antoine Gaudino published in October 1990, Urbatechnic had made payments allegedly worth F25,000,000 (rather than the official figure of F100,000) towards Mitterrand's presidential campaign.
On April 9 the opposition Gaullist Rally for the Republic (RPR), the Union for French Democracy (UDF) and the Union of Centre Democrats (UDC) tabled a motion of no confidence in Rocard's government on the grounds that the "independence of the judiciary" had been endangered.
On April 11 the motion, the 11th since Rocard came to power in 1988, was defeated 289-261 after failing to win the support of the Communist Party (PCF).
A court of appeal in Angers ruled on April 19 that Jean-Pierre's investigations into Urbatechnic had been carried out in conformity with the law, and on May 16 magistrates held a day of action on the theme of justice and liberty.
(Similar, more strongly supported protests had been held on Oct. 23 and Nov. 30, 1990.)
Meanwhile, in a move re-emphasising that parties across the political spectrum were affected by the issue of illegal funding, the PS on April 24 proposed the establishment of a parliamentary commission of inquiry to investigate all such illegal payments before the January 1990 law which granted the parties public funding.
(The 1990 law — see pp. 37684-85 — and a July 1988 law both allowed for amnesties for politicians who had received illegal campaign funds hitherto, although not for those making such contributions.)
The Independent of May 2 pointed out that with two minor cases concerning Urbatechnic going through the courts the commission "would probably have to declare most of Urba's affairs sub judice and thus spare the socialists themselves" .
The National Assembly approved the establishment of this commission on May 14.
Other pressures on Rocard government
Rocard had come under increasing pressure in the National Assembly (lower house of parliament) where he was dependent on alliances with either the right or the PCF in order to get legislation approved.
The Times of April 26 commented on the "apparent impotence of the government to sustain its legislative agenda" .
During April he was obliged to withdraw two bills (one of which changed voting rules in regional elections) and to postpone another for fear that they would be defeated.
On April 9 a bill on territorial administration (continuing the process of administrative decentralization begun in 1982 — see pp. 37327-28) was adopted in the National Assembly by 287 to 286, thanks to support from 11 independents and one UDC member, with three crucial abstentions and with the PCF as well as the RPR, the UDF and the majority of the UDC voting against.
On April 18 the National Assembly adopted the bill on financial solidarity between communes, with the PS voting in favour, the RPR against, the PCF abstaining and the UDF and UDC not participating [for details see pp. 38113-14].
Le Monde of June 9-10 estimated that in the 50 major, policy-determining laws of the 270 passed during Rocard's term as Prime Minister, Rocard had relied on the support of the right and centre nearly three times as often as he relied on the PCF.
Disunity within the PS was evident at the party's ordinary national convention held on April 6-7 in Cachan, south of Paris.
The debate on the "new international order" to follow the Gulf war was overshadowed by jostling between leading contenders for the succession to the party leadership, and ultimately for the succession to Mitterrand (although presidential elections were not due until 1995).
Pierre Mauroy, PS first secretary (and Prime Minister in 1982-84), proposed transforming the PS convention due in late 1991 into a full congress, which would agree a new party platform in advance of regional elections due in March 1992.
It was decided that the PS leadership would make a decision on the issue in June.
[For March 1990 disunity at PS congress see p. 37330; for April 1991 opposition accord see p. 38156.]
Appointment of new Council of Ministers
Key portfolios remained largely unchanged in the new Council of Ministers appointed on May 16.
In a move meeting with approval from the financial markets Pierre Bérégovoy retained responsibility for the economy, finance and budget; reflecting Cresson's commitment to industrial regeneration, his responsibilities were expanded [see attachments of Ministers-Delegate].
Jean-Louis Bianco was previously chief of staff at the presidential office.
Martine Aubry was daughter of EC Commission President Jacques Delors.
Addressing the National Assembly on May 22 Cresson said that she intended to consolidate the strengths of the French economy, which she defined as "a strong franc, inflation under control [and]rigorous control of public spending" .
She pledged to promote a Europe-wide industrial policy, identifying cars and electronics as key sectors.
Unemployment was, she said, "the primary cause of the inequalities in our society" and 300,000 new jobs had to be created each year.
On May 30 Bérégovoy announced measures to reduce spending by a further F6,000 million (in addition to cuts of F10,200 million in March — see p. 38113).
In order to harmonize value added tax rates within the EC, VAT on items such as flowers, building land and artworks was increased (a move expected to raise an extra F2,000 million in revenue in the second half of 1991); VAT on cars would be reduced to 18.6 per cent from Jan. 1, 1993.
Edith Cresson (PS)(f.)
Prime Minister Ministers of State
French Council of Ministers
**Lionel Jospin (PS) National Education
*Pierre Bérégovoy (PS) Economy, Finance and Budget
*Roland Dumas (PS) Foreign Affairs
**Jean-Pierre Soisson (France Unie) Civil Service and Administrative Modernization
*Michel Delebarre (PS) Cities and Regional Planning Ministers
*Henri Nallet (PS) Keeper of the Seals, Justice
*Pierre Joxe (PS) Defence
*Philippe Marchand (PS) Interior
**Jack Lang (PS) Culture and Communication, Government Spokesperson
*Louis Mermaz (PS) Agriculture and Forestry Jean-Louis Bianco Social Affairs and Integration Martine Aubry (f.)
Labour, Employment and Vocational Training
**Paul Quilès (PS) Equipment, Housing, Transport and Space Research
**Edwige Avice (PS)(f.)
Co-operation and Development
**Louis Le Pensec (PS) Overseas Departments and Territories
*Hubert Curien (PS) Research and Technology
*Jean Poperon (PS) Relations with Parliament Frédérique Bredin (PS)(f.)
Youth and Sports
**Brice Lalonde (Ecology Generation) Environment Ministers-Delegate
*Michel Charasse (PS) Budget (attached to Bérégovoy) Dominique Strauss-Kahn (PS) Industry and Foreign Trade (attached to Bérégovoy)
*François Doubin (France unie-MRG) Trade and Artisan Industries (attached to Bérégovoy)
**Jean-Marie Rausch (France unie) Posts and Telecommunications (attached to Bérégovoy) Michel Sapin (PS) Justice (attached to Nallet)
*Elisabeth Guigou (PS)(f.)
European Affairs (attached to Dumas)
**Catherine Tasca (f.)
Francophone Countries (attached to Dumas)
*Bruno Durieux Health (attached to Bianco)
**Georges Kiejman Communication (attached to Lang)
*Jean-Michel Baylet (France unie-MRG) Tourism (attached to Quilès)
*Held same post in outgoing Council of Ministers.
**Altered responsibilities.
(f.) indicates woman minister.
16 secretaries of state were nominated on May 17.
Intelligence service reorganization
Joxe announced on May 6 plans to create a "central organ, within the Ministry of Defence, bringing together all the competences which now exist within the domain of military intelligence" .
The Gulf War, he said, had revealed the "weakness of our own intelligence services" and their "extreme dependence" on United States sources.
France would launch two Helios spy satellites in 1994 and 1995 to supplement the Spot satellite already in orbit, which could not send detailed photographs of the ground.
Urban rioting
Aissa Ihich, 18, a Frenchman of Arab origin, died in police custody after he and several others were arrested during riots and looting in Mantes-la-Jolie, west of Paris, and in other poor suburbs on the weekend of May 25-26.
Ihich died of an asthma attack, his family alleging that police refused to give him medicine which they had brought to the police station.
On May 28 around 1,000 protesters marched in silence through Mantes-la-Jolie.
Cresson promised an inquiry into the incident.
[For riots in Vaulx-en-Velin, Lyon, in October 1990 and in Sartrouville in March 1991 see pp. 37869; 38114.]
Mitterrand's visit to Soviet Union
Mitterrand made a brief working visit to Moscow on May 6 for talks with President Gorbachev.
In a joint press conference the two leaders supported a Middle East peace conference and the creation of a Palestinian state.
Mitterrand also affirmed that he would campaign for as much assistance as possible to "help President Gorbachev and perestroika" .
[For Gorbachev visit to Paris in October 1990 see pp. 37758; 37789.]
Franco-German summit
At a Franco-German summit in Lille, France, on May 29-30 Mitterrand outlined to German Chancellor Helmut Kohl his ideas for strengthening the arms trade proposals recently presented by US President Bush [see p. 38217].
Mitterrand suggested extending Bush's measures to chemical and biological as well as conventional weapons and applying the plan globally.
Mitterrand also said that French troops would not participate in NATO's planned Rapid Reaction Force [see pp. 38170-71].
EUROPE
GERMANY
Resignation of Bundesbank president — party developments
On May 16 Karl Otto Pöhl, 61, announced that he was stepping down as president of the Deutsche Bundesbank, although his second eight-year term [see p. 35724]was not due to expire until end-1995.
On May 29 he brought forward his proposed departure date from Oct. 31 to July 31 after the Cabinet confirmed that the bank's vice-president, Helmut Schlesinger, 66, would succeed him and that Hans Tietmeyer, 59, would be vice-president.
Tietmeyer was expected to succeed Schlesinger in 1993 when the latter reached retirement age.
Pöhl said that his decision had been made to give himself more time for his family and private interests and was prompted by "neither resignation nor frustration" .
Nevertheless, it came after a series of disagreements with the government over the previous 18 months.
Pöhl, a member of the Social Democratic Party (SPD), had been openly critical over the introduction of economic and monetary union with what was East Germany [see pp. 37259; 38115]and had clashed with the government over economic and monetary union plans within the European Communities [see p. 37719], the deteriorating domestic economy, and plans for the reorganization of the central bank to incorporate the five eastern Länder (states).
[For disagreement at G-7 meeting in April with United States Treasury officials over German interests rates see p. 38170.]
Newspapers also cited, as an additional factor behind Pöhl's departure, concern for his personal safety.
[For April 1991 assassination of Detlev Rohwedder see p. 38155.]
Schlesinger joined the Bundesbank in 1952 and became vice-president in 1959.
He built a reputation as a "hardliner" as compared with Pöhl's more pragmatic approach and his nomination was intended to reaffirm the government's continued commitment to price stability.
Tietmeyer was on the board of the Bundesbank and had until 1988 been an economic adviser to Chancellor Helmut Kohl [see also p. 36497].
Radical split from Greens
On the weekend of May 11-12 a group of about 200 radical ecologists and feminists broke away from the Greens to form the Ecological Left/Alternative List.
Former member of the Bundestag (lower house of parliament) Jutta Ditfurth led the breakaway.
In the December 1990 general election the Greens had failed to win parliamentary representation [see pp. 37904-05], but had since then improved their position in state elections in Hesse and the Rhineland-Palatinate.
Criticizing the Greens for becoming a "bourgeois party" , Ditfurth accused them of being too keen to ally with the SPD (in Hesse and Lower Saxony), and of abandoning, at a tumultuous April 26-28 congress in Neumünster (Schleswig-Holstein), the rotation of party posts.
Realist or "realo" Green delegates had not succeeded at Neumünster in ending the separation of party and parliamentary office, nor in electing their supporters to the leadership, Ludger Volmer and Christine Weiske being elected as spokespersons.
However, meeting again in Cologne on June 8-9, Green delegates elected Heide Rühle as party manager, and supported seeking a coalition with the SPD after the next general election.
CDU party financing scandal verdicts
On May 8 the Düsseldorf district court imposed a fine of DM675,000 on Walther Leisler Kiep, the treasurer of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), for depriving the state of DM17,500,000 in tax revenue (US$1.00=DM1.7463 as at May 3, 1991).
Between 1971 and 1981, 15 companies had been able to transfer untaxed funds to the CDU (and to the Free Democratic Party (FDP) and the Christian Social Union (CSU)) via a Cologne-based foundation.
[For earlier party financing scandals see pp. 35015-16; 34829; 34446-47.]
SPD-FDP coalition in Rhineland-Palatinate
On May 21 Rudolf Scharping (SPD) was sworn in as Minister President of an SPD-FDP "red-yellow" coalition in the Rhineland-Palatinate following the CDU's election defeat there in April [see pp. 38155-56].
Hamburg was also governed by a "red-yellow" coalition [see p. 35723].
Following the Rhineland-Palatinate election the CSU threatened to withdraw from the governing CDU/CSU/FDP coalition at federal level, but after a five-hour meeting on May 8 the parties agreed to work towards common policies on such issues as abortion and immigration, and to reassert their traditional values.
SPD congress
At a federal congress on May 28-31 in Bremen 97.4 per cent of delegates voted in favour of the election of Björn Engholm, 51, as chair of the SPD in place of Hans-Jochen Vogel, 65, who was retiring after four years (but would remain chair of the SPD faction in the Bundestag.
The move was widely described as marking the culmination of the "rejuvenation" of the SPD which, despite its poor performance in the December 1990 general election [see pp. 37904-05]and dissention within the party during 1990 over unification, was currently in government in 10 of the 16 Länder.
Engholm, entered the Bundestag in 1970, was seen as more centrist, northern and closer to the trade union movement than his rival Oskar Lafontaine, who stood unsuccessfully for Chancellor in 1990 and declined the leadership of the party at that time [ibid.].
Engholm was described by the Neue Zürcher Zeitung as the "political grandson" of former Chancellor Willy Brandt and by the Economist as a follower of the "pragmatic brand of social democracy" espoused by former Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, under whom he served as Education Minister until 1982.
In 1988, after two unsuccessful attempts, Engholm had been elected Minister President of his home state of Schleswig-Holstein [see pp. 36044-45; 35722-23].
On May 31 delegates approved a motion supporting an amendment to the Constitution confining the operations of the Bundeswehr (federal defence forces) outside the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) area to participation in missions of the UN "blue beret" peacekeeping forces.
The vote represented an achievement for Engholm's new leadership, since many rank and file members were suspicious even of this level of German military activity internationally.
(The Greens at their Cologne conference in June — see above — rejected the idea of German participation in UN peacekeeping forces.
See below for position of the Kohl government on this issue.)
Delegates also voted by a margin of one in favour of government and parliament remaining in Bonn but were almost unanimous in favouring a referendum on the issue.
Proceedings against former East German communist officials
On May 20 the former Chairman of the East German Council of Ministers, Willi Stoph, 76, the Minister of National Defence in 1985-89, Heinz Kessler, 71, and two members of the former East German National Defence Council, Fritz Streletz, 71, and Hans Albrecht, 81, were arrested on charges of incitement to manslaughter in connection with the East German government's "shoot-to-kill" policy towards those trying to escape to the West.
Both Stoph and Kessler had been arrested in late 1989 in connection with corruption investigations [see p. 37107], but had been released in January and February 1990 respectively.
There were reports that Kessler was planning to flee to the Soviet Union.
[For Soviet transfer of the former East German leader Erich Honecker in March 1991 see p. 38110.]
Other cases are listed below.
On May 8 the Berlin Justice Senator (minister) announced that three former officials of the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS — the successor to the Socialist Unity Party of (East) Germany) had been charged in connection with the disappearance of DM107,000,000 of PDS funds in late 1990.
PDS vice-chair Wolfgang Langnitschke and former treasurer Wolfgang Pohl were charged of with breach of trust, and PDS member Karl-Heinz Kaufmann with being an accessory.
On May 14 Wolfgang Berghofer, the former reformist mayor of Dresden [see pp. 37827; 37170], was reported to have been charged with electoral fraud in the May 1989 municipal elections.
On May 22 the Berlin Justice Senator announced that the former State Security Minister, Erich Mielke, 83, had been charged with incitement to murder in connection with the "shoot-to-kill" policy.
On April 27 charges including illegal telephone tapping, embezzlement, and helping to falsify election results had been brought against Mielke, who was already in prison [see p. 37828].
Trial of Interior Minister's attempted assassin
The Land court in Offenburg ruled on May 7 that Dieter Kaufmann, 37, who had attempted to assassinate Interior Minister Wolfgang Schäuble in October 1990 [see p. 37763], was mentally unfit to stand trial; he was sent to a closed psychiatric hospital.
Kohl's US visit — Germany's foreign policy role
On a visit to the United States on May 19-21 Kohl, accompanied by Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher, assured his hosts that his government did "not want to see the long-standing Atlantic alliance in any way weakened, still less replaced by a European structure" .
In response to criticism of Germany's formal rejection of military involvement in the Gulf war, Kohl said that he aimed "to establish a clear constitutional basis in Germany" for German troops to serve outside the NATO area under the auspices of the UN or the Western European Union (WEU).
Kohl, who rejected the "blue beret option" as insufficient, would need a two-thirds majority in the Bundestag for his proposals [see above for SPD congress vote approving German involvement only in UN peacekeeping operations].
The issue of German military involvement abroad became slightly blurred in late April when a total of 750 Bundeswehr troops were sent to Iran to build camps for Kurdish refugees [see pp. 38127-28].
The government maintained that this operation was humanitarian rather than military, but the SPD attacked it as unconstitutional.
German minesweepers had also been sent to the Gulf to clear mines and two German navy planes were reportedly helping with cleaning up the oil slick there.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
By-elections and local elections
The prospect of Prime Minister John Major calling an early general election (due by mid-1992) in June 1991 was ruled out by the poor performance of the ruling Conservative Party in parliamentary by-elections in two Welsh constituencies on April 4 and May 16, and in local elections in England and Wales on May 2.
[For March 1991 by-election see p. 38110.]
On April 4 in Neath Labour retained the seat with a reduced majority of 9,830 (as compared with 20,578 in the 1987 general election — see p. 35283).
Labour won 51.77 per cent of the vote (63.37 per cent in 1987), the Welsh nationalists Plaid Cymru 23.44 per cent(6.41 per cent ), Conservatives 8.52 per cent (16.15 per cent ), Liberal Democrats 5.76 per cent and Social Democrats 5.26 per cent .
On May 16 in Monmouth Labour captured the formerly Conservative seat with a majority of 2,406 (as compared with the Conservative majority of 9,350 in 1987).
Labour won 39.32 per cent of the vote (27.68 per cent in 1987), Conservative 33.98 per cent(47.53 per cent ) and Liberal Democrat 24.7 per cent .
Plaid Cymru, standing as Plaid Cymru/Green, won less than 1.1 per cent.
Both Labour and Liberal Democrats made gains in elections held on May 2 for over 12,000 seats on 369 local (district) councils in England (excluding Greater London) and Wales.
The Conservatives suffered a net loss of 890 seats, while Labour and Liberal Democrats made net gains of 490 and 520 respectively.
Key issues during the by-elections and in the local election campaign were health policy, the economic recession, and the government's proposed council tax to replace the community charge ( "poll tax" ) in financing local government [see below].
New national health service (NHS) legislation came into effect on April 1 [see p. 37582]and included provisions for hospitals to become self-administering bodies and for general practitioners to control their own budgets.
Immediately before the local elections two of the new self-governing hospital trusts announced 1,000 redundancies.
On May 9 Labour leader Neil Kinnock claimed in the House of Commons that the reforms meant that the clinical needs of patients were coming second to commercial considerations.
The day after the Monmouth by-election Major accused Labour of "lying" over the health service during the campaign.
Unemployment figures for March, announced on April 18, showed the sharpest monthly rise since 1945, to 2,081,000 or 7.4 per cent of the workforce.
On May 16 the figure for April was announced, showing a further increase to a seasonally adjusted figure of 2,175,100 (7.6 per cent).
On May 14 Robin Leigh-Pemberton, governor of the Bank of England, warned against lowering interest rates, since this "would add to inflationary pressures just as the [economic]upswing is beginning" (although there was a further cut in the base rate, from 12 per cent to 11.5 per cent, on May 24).
The annual retail prices inflation rate for the 12 months ending April (announced on May 17) showed a sharp fall to 6.4 per cent(from 8.2 per cent a month earlier).
As foreshadowed on March 21 [see p. 38111], details of a new council tax to replace the discredited poll tax were announced on April 23.
The new council tax would (i) be introduced from April 1993;(ii) reflect the capital value of a property occupied by two adults, with a 25 per cent discount for single people; and (iii) be calculated from property values in seven bands.
The government claimed that the new arrangements would leave two out of three households better off.
Labour argued that its "fair rates" scheme would make average households better off.
The Liberal Democrats favoured a form of local income tax.
Eric Heffer, Labour MP for Liverpool, Walton, died on May 27, making necessary a by-election which was subsequently set for July 4.
Halving of Guinness sentence
On May 16 the Appeal Court halved the five-year prison sentence given to former Guinness chairman Ernest Saunders in August 1990 for "massive fraud" in connection with the Distillers Company takeover bid [see p. 37662].
The prison sentence of Saunders's co-defendant Anthony Parnes was also reduced, from 2@1/2 years to 21 months.
EUROPE
BELGIUM
Immigrant riots
On the nights of May 10, 11 and 12, young north African immigrants clashed with police in the Brussels suburbs of Forest and Saint-Gilles; over 200 youths were arrested.
There was further rioting on May 14 in Molenbeek, west of Brussels, where a police station was attacked, shops looted and fire bombs thrown as police sought to control a crowd of some 600 people.
(The Molenbeek gathering had been staged initially to protest against a demonstration by the right-wing Flemish nationalist Vlaams Blok, although in the event the Vlaams Blok demonstration was banned.)
The May 10 riots began after police stopped a Moroccan on his moped and demanded to see his papers.
Police stated that although the troubles appeared at first to be spontaneous, both left- and right-wing extremists, Islamic fundamentalists and drug dealers had soon moved in.
According to a 1988 census about one-quarter of Brussels' population of 9,927,000 comprised foreign nationals, including 135,000 from Maghreb countries; many thousands more north Africans were known to have arrived illegally since then.
The Belgian government on May 17 reaffirmed its commitment to the integration of immigrants.
Police forces, which were controlled by individual communes, would be reinforced and co-ordination improved, and police recruitment would aim to attract north Africans.
Communes would receive a proportion of the fines levied in connection with the violence to allow them to meet increased expenditures.
The Times of June 8 reported that following the riots the government had granted Belgian nationality to 40,000 immigrants, most of whom came from north Africa, and had made it easier for those born in Belgium of foreign parents to gain citizenship.
EUROPE
ITALY
Local elections
On May 12 and 13 around 1,000,000 Italians voted in elections for 28 municipal authorities and for the provincial government of Caserta, near Naples.
The failure of the Democratic Party of the Left (PDS — formerly the Communist Party — PCI) to hold its position as the second electoral force was unprecedented in any post-war elections of comparable scope.
The ruling Christian Democrats (CD) showed a slight increase in support, winning 37.7 per cent of the vote overall.
The Socialist Unity Party (PSU — formerly the Italian Socialist Party) won 20 per cent(compared with 15.4 per cent in the more extensive local elections of May 1990 — see pp. 37468-69).
The PDS vote plunged to 16.4 per cent(compared with 24.0 per cent ).
The breakaway Communist Refoundation [see below]polled 2.6 per cent of votes cast, overtaking some of the smaller parties in the coalition government.
The regional autonomy parties continued to make gains in the north, but won only 2.5 per cent of the overall vote.
Communist Refoundation congress
The group led by Armando Cossutta and Sergio Garavini which had opposed the conversion of the PCI into the PDS in February 1991 [see p. 38021]founded the Communist Refoundation party (RC) at a congress in Rome on May 4-5.
The group had registered 143,000 members since the split.
[See also above.]
Mafia killings
Interior Minister Vincenzo Scotti sent a senior anti-Mafia official, High Commissioner Domenico Sica, to the Calabria region in southern Italy after the killing of eight people on May 2-6.
Sica met with police chiefs and magistrates to discuss the clan warfare among members of the local"ndragheta — the Calabrian version of the Mafia — which was reported to have been triggered by the police break-up of drug, kidnapping and money-laundering rackets.
On May 13 President Francesco Cossiga publicly revoked the powers of Giovanni Galloni, Vice-President of the Consiglio Superiore della Magistratura (CSM — the supervisory body of the judicial system).
Although Cossiga was not empowered to remove Galloni from office, he took the unprecedented step of declaring that Galloni could no longer exercise powers delegated by the President (who was ex officio President of the CSM).
Cossiga commented publicly on Galloni's apparent incapacity to handle complex Mafia and drug-trafficking investigations.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Local elections
In elections on May 26 for municipal administrations and for 13 of Spain's 17 regional governments the ruling Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) slightly increased its overall support but lost control of several large cities.
The conservative Popular Party (PP) increased its share of the vote to 25.2 per cent, and gains by the communist-led United Left (IU) made it the third most important political force, holding the balance of power in a number of regional and city governments.
The PSOE received 38.4 per cent of the vote, compared with 36 per cent in the last local elections in 1987 [see pp. 35525-26].
The PP's 25.2 per cent compared with its 21 per cent in 1987; the IU polled 8.5 per cent(6.9 per cent ).
The Democratic and Social Centre (CDS) won only 3.87 per cent of the votes (9.67 per cent in 1987), and its leader Adolfo Suárez (Prime Minister from 1976 to 1981) promptly resigned.
Significant results in major cities included the loss of overall PSOE control in Valencia and in Seville (the home town of Prime Minister Felipe González and many of his associates).
In both cities coalitions of the PP with right-wing regional groups now seemed a possibility.
In Barcelona and other localities the PSOE would need the IU as a coalition partner, while the PP for the first time won an overall majority in the city of Madrid.
Strikes
Stoppages called by the unions on May 8, 14, 17 and 20 for improvements in pay and conditions were strategically timed for the run-up to the local elections.
Around 150,000 workers, mainly state employees, at Iberia (the main airline), RENFE (the state-owned railway company), and Telefónica, and Aviaco and Campsa fuel distribution workers supported the stoppages called by the CCOO (Confederación Sindical de Comisiones Obreras), the UGT (Unión General de Trabajadores) and the SATT.
May 24 saw further nationwide strikes and demonstrations in 12 cities.
Visit to UK by González — Discussions on Gibraltar
On his first official visit to the United Kingdom on May 7-8 González met with UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd and Prime Minister John Major.
The main themes of discussion were the European Communities (EC) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
González also said that the problem of Gibraltar continued negatively to affect relations between the two countries.
He referred in a May 8 press conference to the refusal of Gibraltar's Chief Minister José (Joe) Bossano to allow Spain access to Gibraltar's international airport (as agreed in 1987).
Press reports said that a proposal for joint sovereignty over Gibraltar was discussed, but there was no official confirmation.
Visa deadline for Maghreb visitors
By May 3 up to 500 Moroccans were being turned back daily from the southern Spanish port of Algeciras as they attempted to enter before May 15, when a visa became necessary for visitors who were citizens of Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Mauritania.
Substantial damage was done to a ferry boat by 167 Moroccans in Algeciras overnight on April 27-28; they were being held on it prior to their repatriation for having failed to meet existing immigration requirements.
Spain was reported to have come under pressure from the EC's Schengen group to tighten up immigration control; the ultimate aim of the current Schengen Agreement signatories (the Benelux countries, France, Germany and Italy) was the abolition of border controls throughout the EC with an accompanying strengthening of external frontiers.
Spain and Portugal had joined the system as observers in November 1990, in the hope of joining in June 1991 [see pp. 37535; 37870].
EUROPE
COUNCIL OF EUROPE
Drug control conference
Ministers from 29 European countries met in Oslo, Norway, on May 9-10 for a conference on the control of drug trafficking in Europe.
The meeting was organized by the Pompidou Group, set up by the Council of Europe in 1971 to combat drug abuse and drug trafficking [see also p. 37394].
Delegates stressed the need for increased co-operation with eastern European countries, where the recent liberalization and the relaxation of border controls had offered drug traffickers the opportunity both of fresh markets and of trade routes into western Europe.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Discussions on economic and monetary union
Finance ministers of the European Communities (EC) and European central bank governors held an informal meeting in Luxembourg on May 11 as part of negotiations on economic and monetary union (EMU) under way since December 1990 [see pp. 37905-06].
At the meeting Jacques Delors, the President of the EC Commission, proposed the inclusion of a clause in the EMU treaty which would allow a future United Kingdom parliament, rather than the current one, to make a decision on the final goal of "stage three" of economic and monetary union.
As currently envisaged, "stage three" involved the transfer of powers to a European central bank and the creation of a single European currency (rather than a "hard ecu" used in parallel with existing European currencies as proposed by the UK — see p. 37969).
The compromise was described by the Independent of May 13 as "an attempt to help the [UK]Prime Minister to avoid a damaging Tory split over Europe in the run-up to a general election" .
However, it was greeted by Conservative backbenchers as an "ingenious fudge" and 105 Conservative MPs, led by members of the anti-federalist Bruges Group, signed a motion on May 21 calling on the Prime Minister to reject moves towards EMU.
The meeting also agreed in principle on the need for member countries to establish, ideally by the end of the year, medium-term strategies to align the economic performance of EC member countries.
Achieving greater economic convergence among EC members in such areas as inflation, budget deficits and interest rates was regarded by Germany in particular as a prerequisite for EMU.
[See p. 38115 for comments in March 1991 by the then Bundesbank president Karl-Otto Pöhl.]
The meeting had originally proposed the development of such strategies for the weakest EC economies (i.e. Greece, Italy and Portugal) but several ministers argued that they should be undertaken by all members.
At the beginning of May the Spanish government resubmitted proposals to reduce north-south economic disparities within the EC.
These envisaged (i) an "interstate compensation fund" to invest in "physical and human capital" in EC states where GDP per capita was below 90 per cent of the EC average;(ii) contributions to the EC budget from member countries based on their "relative prosperity" ; and (iii) a relaxation of regional fund regulations to allow states to match EC funding according to their "financial capacity" .
The proposals were described by the Financial Times of May 4 as "greatly complicat[ing]" already difficult negotiations.
Linkage of Swedish krona to ECU
On May 17 the Sveriges Riksbank (Swedish central bank) unilaterally linked the Swedish krona to the European currency unit (ECU).
[For similar step taken by Norway in October 1990 see p. 37782.]
In Sweden's case the move was to be seen in the context of the government's declared intent to apply for EC membership (the date for this application was subsequently set formally for July 1, 1991).
Swedish Finance Minister Allan Larsson said on May 17 that Sweden would like to join the exchange rate mechanism of the European monetary system (EMS) "as soon as possible" and to participate in discussions on EC economic and monetary union.
Agreement on 1991/92 agricultural price support measures
On May 24 after a week of intensive negotiations the Council of (Agriculture) Ministers agreed (with only Italy voting against) on the agricultural price and support measures for 1991/92.
The Commission made concessions in some areas but, backed by the Netherlands and the UK, succeeded in staying within the expenditure ceiling of ECU32,500 million set in February 1988 [see p. 35914].
Other member countries had pressed for an increase to help cover the cost of integrating east German agriculture into the common agricultural policy (CAP).
[For Commission's original proposals presented in February 1991 see pp. 38022-23.]
Under the agreement most agricultural prices would be frozen or cut.
The strictest measures were to affect cereals, milk and beef — the sectors with the largest surpluses.
For cereals the "co-responsibility levy" on production — to help pay for storing and disposing of surpluses — was raised from 3 to 5 per cent(rather than 6 per cent as proposed by the Commission) except for farmers taking 15 per cent of their land out of production for a year.
For milk the 2 per cent quota cut remained as proposed.
For beef the Commission was still obliged to buy in surpluses but the regulations were tightened.
Ministers were also discussing a much more radical reform of the CAP which Agriculture Commissioner Ray MacSharry hoped would rectify the current situation where 80 per cent of agricultural support in the EC went to 20 per cent of its farmers.
Budgetary issues
On May 2 the Commission approved its draft budget for 1992 — the last under the five-year agreement concluded in February 1988 [see pp. 35913-14].
The budget kept within the overall expenditure limit set in 1988, and provided for an 11.3 per cent increase in expenditure to ECU65,200 million, as compared with a rise of 19 per cent budgeted for 1991.
The 1992 draft did not include the cost of moving the Commission from its Berlaymont headquarters building in Brussels.
On May 30 the Commission announced that the building would have to be demolished because of the high asbestos content of its building materials, temporary accommodation found for the Commission's 3,300 civil servants, and a new building erected, at a cost of at least ECU100,000,000.
Delors visit to Tokyo
A visit to Tokyo by Delors on May 22-25 — his first since 1986 [see p. 35385]— was intended to mark the start of a new political partnership between Japan and the EC.
During the visit he and Toshiki Kaifu, the Japanese Prime Minister, discussed a planned joint declaration pledging closer political and economic co-operation and marking acceptance of each other 's political and trading status.
[For similar declaration between the United States and EC made in November 1990 see p. 37838.]
Addressing the continuing differences between the two sides on trade issues, Delors identified "structural barriers" as currently the most important restriction on EC access to Japanese markets.
Also unresolved was the level of Japanese car exports to the EC once the single internal market was introduced after Dec. 31, 1992.
On his return Delors advised EC countries not to sign the planned declaration unless there were clear commitments on trade.
In the previous six months the EC's trade deficit with Japan had increased markedly after falling steadily since 1988.
EC-Gulf states meeting
Foreign ministers from the EC and the six member countries of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC — Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates) met in Luxembourg on May 11.
After the talks GCC ministers confirmed the GCC's readiness to be represented as an "observer" at the regional Middle East peace conference currently being negotiated [see p. 38210].
They also recognised the "useful role" which the EC could play in such a conference.
Ministers discussed the progress of negotiations under way since October 1990 on an EC-GCC free trade area.
According to Middle East International of May 17, the EC had come up with more generous terms in response to GCC criticism that "the EC was being too restrictive in offering trade concessions to Gulf exports of petrochemicals" .
[See p. 36714 for EC-GCC co-operation agreement signed in June 1988, which entered into force on Jan. 1, 1990.]
EUROPE
NORWAY
Revised budget — Tax reform
On May 10 the government of Gro Harlem Brundtland, which had come to power in November 1990 [see p. 37868], announced a three-year infrastructure spending package to revive economic growth and reduce unemployment.
The programme would inject nearly NKr10,000 million primarily into road and rail communications and would be financed by cuts in other areas.
(US$1.00=Nkr6.6945 as at May 13, 1991.)
The package formed part of a revised budget, which taking into account North Sea oil revenues would increase the budget deficit from NKr11,000 million to NKr19,200 million.
Most of this increase was accounted for by a planned NKr5,000 million fund to help the banking sector.
On April 12 the government had announced tax reforms described as "the most important fiscal reform since 1911" .
These would reduce the basic income tax rate to 28 per cent which with 7.8 per cent social security contributions would bring the basic overall contribution rate to 35.8 per cent as against 48.3 per cent currently.
The top rate of income tax would fall to 48.8 per cent instead of 57.8 per cent.
Corporation tax was to be reduced from 50.8 to 28 per cent, although the overall corporate tax burden would remain virtually unchanged because the range of deductible items would be reduced.
Investment tax would be lowered from 7 to 5 per cent.
EUROPE
FINLAND
Economic stabilization package
In early May the newly appointed centre-right government of Esko Aho announced an economic stabilization package designed to save FM4,000 million in the 1991/92 budget starting in October 1991 and to inject FM7,000 million into industry (US$1.00=FM4.0622 as at May 3, 1991).
The economy was undergoing its worst recession since 1945 and had been hit in particular by a fall of over 50 per cent in trade with the Soviet Union in the first three months of 1991, and by a low dollar and over-valued Finnish markka, which seriously affected the forest industry.
The savings included a proposed two-year wage freeze, an increase in value added tax (VAT) to 22 per cent, and savings in the health and social affairs budget.
The incentives to industry included reductions in employers' contributions to pensions and health insurance, the lifting of taxes on investment capital, and favourable export assistance.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Croat-Serb clashes — Army powers
The Collective State Presidency decided on May 9 to give the Yugoslav National Army (JNA) wider powers in Croatia but stopped short of imposing a state of emergency, following what were described as the bloodiest clashes between Croats and Serbs since the Second World War in the self-proclaimed "Serbian Autonomous Region of Krajina" , comprising municipalities in Croatia with a majority Serb population.
The incidents occurred after tensions had built up in these areas during April between the Croatian authorities and Serbian militants, exacerbated by the presence of the Serbian-dominated JNA which had entered Kijevo on April 29 [see p. 38163].
On May 1 a Croat was shot dead in the mainly Serbian village of Brsadin (near Vukovar), and on May 2 shooting began when a group of Croatian policemen entered Borovo Selo near Vukovar to look for three missing colleagues.
According to official figures at least 13 police and four civilians were killed and 29 people, many of them also police, were injured in several hours of fighting.
Television reports of higher casualties could not be confirmed, and some accounts said that the policemen had been tortured and mutilated.
The JNA moved in with tanks and sealed off Borovo Selo on May 3 and also occupied villages near Knin, the main town in the "Autonomous Region" .
Also on May 2 another Croatian policeman was killed in the mainly Croatian coastal village of Polaca when Serbian police tried to take over the Croatian-manned police station; and a helicopter carrying among others the Vice-President of the Croatian Federal Assembly, Vladimir Seks, was fired on and forced to make an emergency landing after it took off from Kijevo.
In a broadcast on May 3 Croatia's President Franjo Tudjman blamed Serbian nationalists and Chetniks (fascists) for trying to provoke military intervention, to destroy Croatian democracy and to set up a "Serboslavia" or Greater Serbia.
He warned that "open warfare" had begun against Croatia.
The eight-member Collective State Presidency met on May 4 -5 in special session and condemned the Borovo Selo incidents but at this stage ordered only a reinforcement of the role of the JNA.
The meeting was also attended by the Federal Prime Minister Ante Marcovic, the Federal Secretary for Internal Affairs Col.-Gen.
Petar Gracanin and the hardline Chief of Staff Gen. Blagoje Adzic (representing the Secretary for National Defence, who was in hospital).
Tudjman was invited but did not attend.
Tension was further heightened on May 6 when a young Macedonian soldier was killed by shots from the crowd (reportedly from a Croatian policeman) when tens of thousands of Croatians demonstrated outside naval headquarters in the coastal town of Split in protest at a continuing army blockade of Kijevo.
Tudjman, who had urged local leaders in Trogir (west of Split) on May 5 to demonstrate at the naval base to show the world their support for the battle being waged by the Croatian leadership, was accused by the Defence Secretariat of inflaming sentiments against the army.
In other incidents in early May, mainline railway traffic from Zagreb and Belgrade to the coast was halted on May 5-6 following bomb threats, lines around Knin (the main town in the "Autonomous Region" ) were damaged by explosions on May 5, and explosions in Sibenik on the coast damaged houses and water mains and cut off power.
A man was shot dead in Vinkovci on May 9.
With the National Defence Secretary Col.-Gen.
Veljko Kadijevic asserting that Yugoslavia was already in a state of civil war, the Defence Secretariat on May 6 placed the JNA in a full state of combat alert, ordered the Croatian government to stop its attacks against the army, and threatened to "settle accounts" with those who organized intra-national conflicts and set the people against the JNA.
Army reservists were called up in Belgrade on May 7 and soldiers were placed on May 8-9 on guard at three Danube bridges (hitherto controlled by Croatian police) amid fears that the tensions would spread to Bosnia-Hercegovinia, where the residents of villages near Listica were blocking the passage of a military convoy into Croatia.
At the request of the army the Collective State Presidency again held an extraordinary session on May 7 which was attended by Marcovic and the Kadijevic but not by Tudjman, who was in London for talks with United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd.
The meeting was deeply split between on the one hand Serbia and Montenegro, who were in favour of the imposition of a state of emergency, and on the other hand Slovenia, Croatia, Macedonia and Bosnia-Hercegovinia, who were against.
Slovenia threatened to declare immediate independence if the army's demands were granted.
The Presidency reconvened in emergency session on May 8-9 at the request of the army.
Marcovic on May 8 issued a statement to the Federal Executive Council asserting that conditions had to be created to allow the army to carry out its constitutional and legal function of defending frontiers and halting inter-ethnic clashes.
He called for the demobilization of police units in Croatia and the surrender of their weapons, and warned that attempts to change internal or external borders would not be tolerated.
Stane Brovet, the Deputy Defence Minister, also warned the defence committee of the Federal Assembly on May 8 that the JNA had exhausted existing ways of trying to avert ethnic conflict, and he accused republic leaders and the media of creating a fratricidal atmosphere.
The Orthodox Patriarch of Serbia and the Roman Catholic Primate of Croatia appealed for peace, while the Serbian opposition leader Vuk Draskovic called for an anti-war demonstration to be held in Belgrade.
In its statement finally agreed early on May 9 the Collective State Presidency (i) banned for one month the movement of armed formations and civilians other than army and federal police at "crisis flashpoints" in Croatia, and between mainly Serbian areas and other parts of Croatia;(ii) ordered the immediate demobilization of all police reservists in Croatia and the surrender of their weapons; and (iii) set up a commission including Croatian representatives as well as "legitimate representatives" of Serbs from Croatia to investigate the causes of the crisis including "the right of a nation to self-determination including secession" .
This committee was set up on May 18-19, consisting of Marcovic, Kadijevic and Gracanin as well as the two Vice-Presidents of the Federal Executive Council, Aleksandar Mitrovic and Zivko Pregl, the Justice and Administration Secretary Vlado Kambovski, and the Secretary-General of the government, Zoran Miskovic.
Paratroopers were dropped into Croatia, breaking the 10-day siege of Kijevo by Serbs and delivering food and medical supplies, and also into western areas of Bosnia-Herzegovinia, where they released the military convoy held up by Croatians.
Tudjman, whose representative had signed the statement, said that the disarming of police reservists was "out of the question" and that Croatia would not hold talks with "terrorists" .
Croatia's 12 main opposition parties asserted in a statement on May 10 that the plan threatened the sovereignty and integrity of Croatia, which was at war, and that citizens and the authorities must employ all means to defend the republic.
De facto assumption of Presidency by Mesic following abortive vote
Stipe Mesic, the Vice-President of Croatia, assumed the office of President of the Presidency on May 20, to which he said he was legally entitled, despite having failed to win an absolute majority of five votes.
Yugoslavia had been effectively without a President or a commander of the armed forces (a role held by the Collective Presidency) for several days as the term of his predecessor, Borisav Jovic (a Serb), had expired on May 15.
Under the system of rotating leadership Mesic was due to assume office on May 15 as the first non-communist president.
He warned that if his election was blocked Croatia would immediately begin moves to secede from Yugoslavia.
In the event Serbia and the two provinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina voted against him, while Montenegro (a close ally of Serbia) abstained because its representative, Branko Kostic, had not yet been formally confirmed in office as a member of the Presidency.
Closed door negotiations ensued between the Presidency and Markovic, but a second vote failed on May 17 when Serbia, Montenegro, Kosovo and Vojvodina voted against Mesic, leading to a walkout by Mesic and the Slovene and Macedonian representatives.
Meanwhile Slovenia, Croatia and Kosovo walked out of the Federal Assembly as members voted to confirm in office the Presidency delegates from Kosovo (a Serbian choice, to whom the three objected), Vojvodina and Serbia.
On May 19 the parallel Assembly of Kosovo issued a statement recognizing Mesic as the constitutional President, while on May 21 the Alliance of Reformist Forces for Montenegro and Serbia urged the Presidency to confirm Mesic in office.
Referendums in "Autonomous Region" and Croatia
A referendum was held on May 12 in the "Autonomous Region" of Krajina, as announced by its leadership on April 30.
Results showed that 95 per cent of the registered electorate of 193,800 went to the polls and that 90 per cent of these voted "to remain part of Yugoslavia with Serbia and Montenegro and others who want to preserve Yugoslavia" .
The Krajina Assembly, whose establishment had also been announced on April 30, confirmed on May 16 that "the territory of Krajina is a part of the state territory of Serbia, whose constitution and laws apply on this territory" .
Further institutional integration would depend on political circumstances, and the aim was for the Krajina Assembly's mandate to be endorsed by the Serbian Assembly.
In a referendum held on May 19 throughout Croatia, final results showed that 83.6 per cent of the registered electorate of 3,652,225 went to the polls and 93.2 per cent of these voted in favour of the proposal that Croatia, "as a sovereign and independent country which guarantees cultural autonomy and all civic rights to the Serbs and members of other nationalities in Croatia, may with other republics join a confederation of sovereign states" .
Only 4.2 per cent voted against this proposal and 1.9 per cent of papers were invalid.
In response to the second proposal, whether Croatia should remain in Yugoslavia as a federal state, 5.4 per cent voted in favour and 92.2 per cent against.
Afterwards Mesic asserted that there would be no rush to secede from Yugoslavia and that negotiations should begin on the shape of a new, looser confederation.
Vojvodina announced on May 8 that it would secede from Yugoslavia by June 26, conflict continued between the JNA and the republic's territorial defence force, which claimed that the JNA planned to occupy parts of Slovenia and hinder moves towards independence [see p. 37790].
Continuing conflict between JNA and Slovene defence force — Tabling of no-confidence vote in federal government by
In Slovenia, which had voted for independence in a referendum in December 1990 [see p. 37924]and which
The Slovene authorities cut off power and communications to JNA bases in the republic on May 24 after accusing the JNA of kidnapping a Slovene military officer.
The JNA itself claimed that Slovenes had kidnapped two of its soldiers on May 23, releasing them only when tanks and armoured vehicles arrived at the defence force headquarters near Maribor.
The Vojvodina delegation in the Chamber of Republics and Provinces of the Federal Assembly on May 16 tabled a vote of no confidence in the federal government for May 23.
Resignation of Minister
The Federal Secretary for Foreign Economic Relations, Franc Horvat, resigned on May 17.
Freezing of US aid — EC attitude
All United States economic aid to Yugoslavia for the fiscal year 1991 (amounting to about US$5,000,000), as well as US support for credits in international financial institutions, was frozen as of May 6.
Legislation approved by the US Congress in November 1990 required the freezing of aid within six months if "a pattern of systematic gross violations of human rights" was occurring.
The US Senate voted in April to confirm the measure in view of the "severe repression" of the Albanian minority in Kosovo by the Serbian authorities, and the "destabilization of the Presidency" .
The US ambassador in Belgrade asserted on May 21 that Secretary of State James Baker could still revoke the decision, especially if the presidency issue was resolved quickly.
The Secretariat for Foreign Affairs protested to the United States at the concept of "selective" aid to the republics after Baker told Congress on May 24 that future aid would be considered on a case by case basis.
European Community officials stated on May 20 that continuing aid would be conditional upon the country resolving ethnic conflicts and furthering economic and political reform, and that future close relations would depend on the country remaining united.
Sentencing of Croats for insurrection
A military court in Zagreb on May 20 sentenced five Croats to terms of between one and 3@1/2 years for preparing an armed insurrection against the JNA to kill officers and their families.
The Croatian Defence Minister, Martin Spegelj, was the sixth accused but Croatia had refused to hand him over to the JNA.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
New presidential advisers
The appointment of six well-known experts as presidential advisers was announced at a briefing on May 7 by presidential spokesman Vitaly Ignatienko.
They were the economist Leonid Abalkin (a USSR Deputy Premier until December 1990); legal expert Vladimir Kudryavtsev; physicist Yury Osipyan (previously a member of the now defunct Presidential Council); Vladilen Martynov, director of the Institute of World Economy and International Relations; economist Yury Yaremenko; and writer Boris Oleynik.
End of miners' strike — Anti-strike decree
Strike action by Soviet miners, under way since March, came to an end on May 10 when the last big group of strikers returned to work in the Kuzbass coalfield.
They had been persuaded to suspend their action by Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin, who toured the Kuzbass on April 29-May 1.
The key element in the suspension of the strike was an order signed by Yeltsin at a miners' rally in Novokuznetsk on May 1 to transfer all coal mines in the Russian Federation from central Soviet to Russian Federation government control.
Yeltsin assured the miners that the transfer had been part of the pact which he and eight other republican leaders had signed with USSR President Mikhail Gorbachev a week earlier [see p. 38129].
News of the transfer produced a steady drift back to work in the Kuzbass and Vorkuta coalfields in the first days of May, at the same time as the strike in the Ukraine's Donbass coalfield began to crumble.
Ratification of the transfer by the Soviet government on May 6 produced agreement on May 8 by almost all of the pits still on strike to a return to work.
By May 15 all the Kuzbass mines were reported to be working again.
Resumption of Byelorussian strike
Strike committees in Byelorussia decided to resume on May 22 the general strike which had gripped the republic in April [see pp. 38129-30], because a session of the republic's Supreme Soviet which had opened on the previous day was still refusing to put on its agenda demands for a coalition government.
However, reports on May 22 indicated that the strike was only patchily supported, with as few as 1,500 people gathering for a rally outside the Supreme Soviet building.
 "Special regime" decree
As part of the Soviet government's anti-crisis programme approved in April [see p. 38129], Gorbachev on May 13 issue a decree establishing a "special regime" to stabilize key economic sectors.
Affecting the coal, oil, gas, petrochemical and metallurgical industries and the railways, it featured a package of incentives including a 5 per cent pay rise for workers for each percentage point by which monthly output in their enterprise exceeded average output in January-April 1991, and the right of enterprises to sell for their own profit 10 per cent of their output on the domestic market.
It also featured a ban on strikes until the end of 1991, and provisions for the prosecution of anyone organizing work stoppages or otherwise disrupting production in any fashion.
A legislative amendment approved by the USSR Supreme Soviet on May 20 introduced tougher sanctions against "wildcat" and political strikes in any industry.
Organizers of a strike could face up to one year in prison or two years in a corrective labour camp, while participants would be liable to summary dismissal from their employment and a fine of up to Rbs3,000 (about US$5,000 at the official rate).
The amendment also gave the USSR and republican Presidents the right to order a postponement of any strike for two months.
Armenia border violence
A serious escalation in the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan at the end of April and in early May was accompanied by accusations from the Armenian leadership that the Soviet authorities were openly siding with the Azerbaijanis, as a reward for Azerbaijan's decision the week before to be party to the new Union Treaty, and as punishment for Armenia's independence drive.
On the evening of April 30 Azerbaijani Interior Ministry troops, supported by Soviet Interior Ministry and State Security troops, stormed the Armenian-populated villages of Getashen and Martunashen, inside Azerbaijan and just to the north of the disputed Nagorny Karabakh enclave.
The villages were apparently suspected of being bases for Armenian guerrilla raids against Azerbaijani communities, and the troops were officially acting to enforce Gorbachev's July 1990 decree on disarming paramilitary groups [see pp. 37618; 37664].
According to unofficial Armenian reports at least 17 Armenian villagers were killed and over a hundred wounded, and the Armenian authorities alleged that the troops were refusing to allow the wounded to be evacuated for medical treatment.
As news of the attack on the villages spread, inter-ethnic fighting flared at points all along the Armenia-Azerbaijan border.
Meeting in emergency session as soon as news of the attack reached Yerevan, the Armenian capital, the Armenian Supreme Soviet passed a resolution accusing Gorbachev of permitting Azerbaijan to commit "state terrorism" and of "drawing Armenia into war" .
After talks with Gorbachev in Moscow on May 3, Armenian President Levon Ter-Petrosyan announced that he had received assurances that the wounded would be evacuated and that the Soviet authorities would intervene to stop Armenians being deported from communities in border areas of Azerbaijan.
However, Ter-Petrosyan continued to accuse the Soviet leadership of colluding with the Azerbaijani leadership in order to punish Armenia's nationalist government and to bolster flagging support for Azerbaijan's communist regime led by President Ayaz Mutalibov.
In response, the USSR Interior and Defence Ministries issued a joint statement on May 4 saying that responsibility for the latest violence lay solely with the Armenian leadership because of its support for paramilitary groups, and threatening to take "all necessary steps" to stop it.
On May 7 the Azerbaijan Foreign Ministry claimed that Armenia had been waging an undeclared war on Azerbaijan, and that in over 300 cross-border attacks since the beginning of the year a total of 61 Azerbaijanis had been killed.
On the same day the USSR Supreme Soviet refused an Armenian request to convene an emergency session of the Congress of People's Deputies to discuss the crisis.
On the night of May 5-6 the village of Voskepar, in the north-east corner of Armenia close to the border with Azerbaijan, was razed by Azerbaijani and Soviet troops.
Armenian officials claimed that tanks, heavy artillery and helicopters had been deployed.
It was also claimed that up to 36 Armenians had been killed, and 40 others taken hostage.
In the next three days five other villages in north-east Armenia were attacked and at least 20 more hostages were taken, most of them Armenian policemen, but an attack on the village of Artzvashen was avoided when the 5,000 inhabitants complied with an ultimatum by troops surrounding the village to surrender weapons.
No further such attacks on Armenian territory were reported for the rest of May, but on May 11 it was reported by Armenian officials that Getashen and Martunashen had been razed, and their populations of several thousand people deported.
Train explosion
In an incident possibly connected to the Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict, 11 people were killed by an explosion on a train en route from Moscow to Baku, the Azerbaijani capital, on May 30.
Preliminary reports gave no indication as to whether a bomb had caused the blast, which occurred as the train was travelling through Daghestan, an autonomous republic of the Russian Federation immediately to the north of Azerbaijan.
Resignation of Armenian Communist Party leader
Stepan Pogosyan resigned as first secretary of the Armenian Communist Party (CP) and ex officio a member of the CPSU politburo on May 14, after less than six months in office.
The Moscow newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda suggested that one of the reasons why Pogosyan was resigning was that for several days he had been unable to secure an audience with Gorbachev to discuss developments in Armenia.
Aram Sarkisyan was elected to replace Pogosyan on June 1.
On April 17 the nationalist-dominated Armenian Supreme Soviet had adopted a resolution nationalizing Armenian CP property.
On April 23 Gorbachev declared the resolution to be in contravention of the USSR Constitution, and as USSR President he ordered it suspended.
Nevertheless, by late May the Armenian CP was reported to have been evicted from virtually all of its premises throughout the republic, and was operating out of three rooms in the Yerevan print works.
Developments in other republics
Lithuania: Attacks on border posts
President Vytautas Landsbergis of Lithuania warned on May 18, in an address to the Lithuanian Supreme Council, that the republic should brace itself for a renewed clampdown by Soviet armed forces in the light of "armed provocations" along the republic's borders.
Landsbergis was referring to a spate of attacks on improvised customs control points which the Lithuanian government had set up along its borders with the rest of the Soviet Union as a demonstration of Lithuania's determination to act as an independent state.
The attacks featured raids by groups of armed men identified by the Lithuanians as servicemen from the Soviet OMON special militia and from the Soviet army.
The raids had been going on for months, but had become increasingly violent: by mid-May they involved border posts being strafed with bullets or set on fire.
On May 18 a Byelorussian policeman was shot dead by Lithuanian personnel at a customs post on the Byelorussia-Lithuania border.
Reportedly, the victim's car had been stopped at the post as it was leaving Lithuania, and an exchange of shots had followed, although reports from Lithuania and Byelorussia offered conflicting versions of events.
Early on the following day a Lithuanian who had been on duty alone at a nearby post was found shot dead in what some reports suggested might have been revenge for the death of the Byelorussian.
On the night of May 22-23 seven Latvian as well as four Lithuanian customs posts were destroyed along the two republics' common border.
OMON personnel [see below]stationed in Latvia were blamed for the attacks, in which the posts were burned down and several customs officials were beaten up.
On May 25 four customs posts on Lithuania's border with Byelorussia were burned down.
Leaders of all three Baltic republics (i.e. Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia) met in Vilnius, Lithuania's capital, on May 30 to discuss the attacks.
Ukraine: Opening of Khmara trial
Stepan Khmara, a Ukrainian Supreme Soviet deputy from the Ukrainian Republican Party, went on trial on May 14 in Kiev, on charges of exceeding his authority, hooliganism, damaging personal and state property and organizing mass disturbances.
Five of his associates also went on trial.
The case had become the focus of considerable controversy and political agitation, with many people regarding it as an exercise by the communist administration to silence one of its most popular nationalist critics.
On May 16 the trial was suspended indefinitely because of demonstrations taking place outside the courthouse.
Khmara had been arrested inside the Supreme Soviet on Nov. 17, 1990, as a result of an incident during the October Revolution holiday on Nov. 7 when he and his co-defendants had been involved in a scuffle with an undercover KGB (State Security) officer in a pedestrian subway in Kiev.
According to the defendants' version of events, a women had approached Khmara for help, claiming that a man had attacked her; Khmara and his companions then tried to make a citizen's arrest on the man, unaware that he was a KGB officer.
The majority communists forced a vote through the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet on Nov. 14 to strip Khmara of his parliamentary immunity from prosecution, despite the fact that the lack of a quorum should have made the vote invalid.
The charge of organizing mass disturbances was added subsequently; it stemmed from Khmara's participation in a demonstration on Oct. 28 by members of the Uniate Church and the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church against the use of Kiev's Cathedral of St Sofia by Russian Orthodox Patriarch Aleksei II.
Apparently following a plea by the newly returned Uniate Cardinal Miroslav Lubachivsky [see p. 38104-05], Khmara had finally been released pending trial on April 5 after almost five months in investigative custody (the delay in bringing him to trial resulted from the original indictment having been withdrawn by the prosecution in early March for further investigations).
However, he had been rearrested on April 12, immediately after his arrival in Donetsk to attend a rally of striking miners [for miners' strike see above; pp. 38129-30], and had been re-released only on May 12.
During his detention there had been several protest demonstrations attracting crowds of up to 12,000 people, and Khmara had twice staged hunger strikes.
Russian Federation: Creation of republican KGB — Launch of independent television
It was agreed at a meeting on May 5 between Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin and Gen. Vladimir Kryuchkov, the head of the USSR State Security Committee (KGB), to create a separate Russian KGB.
Maj.-Gen.
Viktor Ivanenko was appointed acting head of the new service, which was portrayed by commentators as a further move by Yeltsin to set up sovereign state structures for his republic [see below for new USSR law regulating KGB].
The Soviet central government's monopoly on television broadcasting in the Russian Federation was broken by the launch on May 13 of the republic's own television service.
Sponsored by the Russian Federation government and staffed largely by defectors from Soviet central television, it had been given air time totalling just over six hours a day on Soviet television's second channel [for February 1991 curbs on Radio Russia see p. 38015].
Georgia: Direct presidential elections
As expected, Zviad Gamsakhurdia was re-elected as executive President of Georgia on May 26 in the republic's first ever direct presidential election.
[For his election in November 1990 by the Georgian Supreme Soviet see pp. 37863-64.]
Gamsakhurdia won 87 per cent of the vote to defeat five other candidates.
Voter turnout was put at around 80 per cent.
However, polling stations were not opened in parts of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
During the election campaign Gamsakhurdia's opponents had concentrated on attacking what they claimed were his dictatorial tendencies (a week before the election his ruling Round Table-Free Georgia coalition had sponsored legislation passed by the Georgian parliament making it a criminal offence, punishable by up to six years in prison, to insult the Georgian President).
They complained that, with the Georgian media in the hands of Round Table-Free Georgia, they had been maligned personally and their platforms ignored.
Gamsakhurdia for his part had denounced all of his opponents as agents of the Soviet government.
Moldavia: Vote of no confidence in Prime Minister — New formal name
Moldavian Prime Minister Mircea (Mircha) Druk was removed from office following an overwhelming vote of no confidence by the Moldavian Supreme Soviet on May 22.
He was replaced on May 28 by his deputy, Valery Muravsky.
In office for just under a year, Druk had grown increasingly unpopular with the nationalist Popular Front, which organized demonstrations outside the parliament to coincide with the no confidence vote.
Druk's position had looked precarious since President Mircea (Mircha) Snegur had complained in February that they were unable to work together [see p. 38015].
On May 23 the Moldavian Supreme Soviet passed a resolution dropping the adjectives Soviet and Socialist from the republic's formal name, now the Moldavian Republic.
The Supreme Soviet also officially renamed itself the Moldavian Parliament.
Laws regulating KGB and police activity
The USSR Supreme Soviet on May 16 passed what was described as the first unclassified legislation regulating the state security services.
It defined the activities of the USSR State Security Committee (KGB) and its subordinate bodies in matters such as intelligence and counterintelligence work, surveillance to combat terrorism and organized crime, and border control.
The USSR KGB was described as "directing, co-ordinating and controlling" the activities of republican bodies [for formation of Russian Federation KGB see above].
The legislation stipulated that in the performance of their duties KGB officials were "not bound by decisions of political parties and mass public movements pursuing political objectives" .
It also defined the judicial rights of citizens in respect of unjustified actions by state security bodies.
Legislation regulating the duties and rights of militia forces and their legal and organizational foundations was passed by the USSR Supreme Soviet on March 6.
Notably, this legalized republican police forces, but the central government retained control over the Interior Ministry troops used to put down serious unrest, and over the OMON ( "Special Purpose Militia Detachments" , also known as the "Black Berets" ), the urban riot police which had been set up in 1987 and had gained international notoriety as a result of January's armed clampdown in the Baltic republics [see p. 37944-45 and above].
A clause banning CPSU cells in the police was rejected prior to the bill's final approval.
Emigration law
The long-awaited law allowing free travel and emigration from the Soviet Union was given general approval by the USSR Supreme Soviet on May 20.
However, a resolution which had been attached to the bill stipulated that it should not enter into effect until the beginning of 1993 because of the financial problems involved in implementing it.
The lack of a free emigration law represented a violation of the 1975 Helsinki Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (the next CSCE summit, due in September 1991, was to be held in Moscow).
It had also hindered trade relations with the United States, where Congress's 1974 Jackson-Vanik amendment prohibited the US government from granting export credits to the Soviet Union until it allowed free emigration [for December 1990 special waiver of Jackson-Vanik amendment see p. 37921].
Reintroduction of the Law on entry to and exit from the USSR had been delayed for almost 18 months in committee since its first reading.
At that time opponents had voiced fears of a likely "brain drain" amid predictions that millions would emigrate.
However, by the time of the debate in the Supreme Soviet on May 13 these fears appeared to have faded: in the light of the introduction by most Western governments of tighter immigration procedures for Soviet citizens, Soviet officials estimated that the number seeking to emigrate would be around 500,000 annually, little more than the 454,000 who had been permitted to leave in 1990.
During the May 13 debate objections centred instead on the administrative cost of issuing and processing visas and staffing customs and immigration posts.
On May 13 the bill was approved by the Soviet of the Union, but failed to gain the necessary two-thirds majority in the Soviet of Nationalities.
The Supreme Soviet failed twice more to approve the bill before the successful vote on May 20.
However, this represented only outline approval, the Supreme Soviet moving to an article-by-article discussion which could still result in amendments.
As approved, the bill would give Soviet citizens the automatic right to obtain a passport within one month of application, unless the applicant was involved in criminal proceedings, was liable for military service, or had had access to state secrets in the previous five years.
People wishing to emigrate would no longer need to prove that they had close relatives in the destination country.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
The remains of Cardinal Jozsef Mindszenty, the Roman Catholic Primate who had been imprisoned in 1949-56 and exiled in 1971, were returned to Hungary from Mariazell in Austria and reinterred on May 4 at Esztergom, 16 years after his death.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Government reshuffle
Prime Minister Petre Roman on April 29 proposed an extensive government reshuffle which he portrayed as the introduction of dynamic personalities to maintain the pace of economic reform, and which was interpreted by commentators as an assault on bureaucratic opposition to reform being encountered in several ministries.
However, in an apparent backlash against radical reformers by the conservative wing of the ruling National Salvation Front (NSF), two of Roman's nominees were rejected by the National Assembly when the proposals were put to a vote on April 30.
The proposals featured the inclusion in the government of three members from outside the NSF.
However, their vaunted credentials as representatives of the opposition were questioned by commentators.
Mihnea Marmeliuc, who returned as Minister of Labour and Social Security (a post he had held in the NSF provisional government in January-June 1990), immediately after his nomination was disowned by his National Liberal Party (the second largest opposition party in parliament after the Hungarian Democratic Union); the NLP had called a week before the reshuffle for the creation of an all-party coalition government.
Dinu Patriciu, nominated as Minister of Public Works and Physical Planning, was a member of the NLP's youth wing, which following factional splits had severed its formal contact with the main party.
Valeriu Pescaru, nominated as a Cabinet-rank Secretary of State responsible for the privatization of agriculture, was a member of the small Democratic Agrarian Party, which was regarded as an NSF satellite.
Those rejected by the National Assembly were Patriciu and Radu Berceanu, nominated as Minister of Youth and Sports.
Both were described as outspoken reformists.
Romanian Council of Ministers
April 30, 1991 Petre Roman Prime Minister Anton Vatasescu Minister of State responsible for industry and commerce
*Dan Mircea Popescu Minister of State responsible for quality of life and social security
**Eugen Dijmarescu Minister of State; Minister of Economy and Finance Adrian Severin Deputy Premier; Minister for Reform and Relations with Parliament Adrian Nastase Foreign Affairs
*Gen.
Nicolae Constantin Spiroiu National Defence
*Florian Bercea Budget Doru Viorel Ursu Interior Victor Babiuc Justice
**Col. -Gen.
Victor Atanasie Stanculescu Industry Constantin Fota Trade and Tourism Ioan Tip Agriculture and Food Industry Andrei Chirica Communications
*Traian Vasescu Transport (vacant) Public Works and Physical Planning Stefan Gheorghe Education and Science Valeriu Eugen Pop Environment Andrei Gabriel Plesu Culture Bogdan Marinescu Health
*Mihnea Marmeliuc Labour and Social Security (vacant) Youth and Sports
*Valeriu Pescaru Secretary of State at the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry, responsible for privatization
**Ion Aurel Stoica Minister without Portfolio
*New appointment.
**Changed responsibilities.
Theodor Stolojan, the outgoing Finance Minister, was appointed by Roman on May 14 to head the government's privatization agency, with the rank of Secretary of State.
Sentencing of Securitate generals
The military section of the Supreme Court on May 10 sentenced 12 senior officers of the former Securitate secret police to prison terms of between 30 months and five years for "illegally detaining" and "abusively interrogating" protesters during the December 1989 revolution.
Former Securitate chief Iulian Vlad, who was already serving a 3@1/2-year sentence handed down in March for a similar offence [see p. 38108], received a four-year sentence (it was unclear whether the new sentence would run consecutively or concurrently).
Former Interior Minister Tudor Postelnicu, who was already serving a life sentence for "co-authorship of genocide" [see pp. 37252-53], received five years.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Land restitution
The Federal Assembly on May 21 finally approved controversial legislation covering restitution to former owners of land confiscated after the February 1948 communist takeover.
The first attempt to get the bill through the Assembly had failed unexpectedly on April 6 when it had been blocked in the Chamber of Nations.
This reflected concern about potential disruption to agricultural production, and disagreement about the future of co-operative farmers.
There was also the sensitive question of returning land to ethnic Germans and Hungarians, whose land had been expropriated immediately after the Second World War as punishment for their alleged collaboration with the Nazi occupiers.
Restoring their land fell within the purview of the bill because in 1948 the Slovak government had agreed that many Hungarians should get their land back, but the decision had never been implemented.
Following amendment, the legislation as approved on May 21 allowed for former owners to get back "fixed assets" , and a share ownership stake in co-operative farms established on their land.
The matter of returning farmland currently organized into co-operative farms was left unresolved pending new legislation which would regulate the break-up of co-operatives or their transformation into "landowners' associations" .
Germans and Hungarians would be eligible for restitution, under legislation to be worked out by the Czech and Slovak parliaments, provided that they had not been "transferred abroad" in 1945 and that they had proclaimed themselves Czechoslovak citizens.
EUROPE
POLAND
Rejection of anti-abortion bill
The Sejm (parliament) on May 16 voted to halt the passage of controversial legislation backed by the Roman Catholic Church which would have made abortion illegal almost without exception.
The vote had the effect of removing from the top of the political agenda, if only temporarily, an issue which for many months had caused divisive debate in the country at large, and had threatened to overshadow Pope John Paul II's visit to his homeland, due in June.
The draft anti-abortion bill, already passed by the Senate at the end of September 1990, and was designed to replace legislation dating from 1956 which had made abortion free and available on demand.
It would have outlawed abortions in all cases except where pregnancy threatened a woman's life, no exceptions being made for pregnancy resulting from rape or incest, and no account being taken of a woman's ill-health or poverty.
Doctors performing illegal abortions and their assistants would have faced up to two years in prison, although the woman undergoing an abortion would not have been punished unless she had performed it herself.
Shortage of reliable contraceptives in Poland made abortion a main means of birth control.
The number of abortions performed each year was estimated at between 300,000 and 600,000, compared with 550,000 live births.
The proposal to drop both the anti-abortion legislation and plans for a referendum on the issue was put forward by the Democratic Union, the liberal wing of the Solidarity parliamentary caucus.
Conceding that the widespread use of abortion under the existing legislation was a "social catastrophe" , the Democratic Union nevertheless regarded the draft legislation as draconian, and argued that abortion legislation should be reviewed in the context of overhauling social policy and of encouraging greater personal responsibility.
Its proposal, adopted by 208 votes to 145 with 14 abstentions, entrusted the task of replacing the 1956 legislation to a Sejm commission working on a new constitution and to the Justice Ministry, which was currently reforming the penal code.
It also instructed the government to improve standards of mother and child care.
Devaluation — Solidarity day of protest
The zloty was devalued on May 17 by 14.4 per cent against the US dollar to a rate of US$1.00=Zl11,100.
This was the first devaluation since the introduction of the "big bang" economic reforms in January 1990.
The government also announced on May 17 that, effective from May 20, the zloty exchange rate would no longer be fixed against the US dollar but against a basket of convertible currencies.
The Solidarity trade union staged a nationwide day of protests against government economic austerity policies on May 22.
Factories closed for two hours in Upper Silesia.
Although most enterprises limited their protests to putting up flags and posters, work stoppages ranging from 15 minutes to eight hours were reported from some districts.
A protest march planned in Warsaw attracted only around 4,000 workers, although some observers suggested that in part the low turnout could be blamed on a separate strike being staged since the previous day by Warsaw's public transport workers.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
New government
President Ramiz Alia on May 3 reappointed Fatos Nano as Prime Minister and mandated him to form a new government, one day after Nano had tendered the resignation of his provisional government formed in February.
Nano presented his proposals for the composition of his government to the People's Assembly on May 9, and this was approved, with amendments, in a vote of confidence on May 12.
Some posts were unchanged, the main changes being new ministers at Defence (Ndricim Karakaci), Public Order (Hajredin Shyti), Justice (Fatmir Zaloshnja), Finance, Industry, and Agriculture".
Albanian Council of Ministers
*Fatos Nano Chair (Prime Minister)
*Shkelqim Cani Deputy Chair
**Zydi Pepa Minister, Secretary-General of the Council of Ministers
*Muhamet Kapllani Foreign Affairs Ndricim Karakaci Defence Hajredin Shyti Public Order Fatmir Zaloshnja Justice
**Leontjev Cuci Economy Anastas Angjeli Finance
**Drini Mezini Mining and Energy Resources Vilson Ahmeti Industry
*Ylli Bufi Nutrition Nexhmedin Dumani Agriculture
*Shane Korbeci Foreign Economic Relations Gavrosh Pogace Domestic Trade and Tourism
*Leonard Nano Construction Kostandin Hoxha Transport Maqo Lakrori Education
***Mojkom Zeqo Culture, Youth and Sports
****Zabit Brokaj Health Theodhori Bej Chair of Committee for Labour and Social Protection Flamur Hoxha Chair of Committee for Public Economy and Protection of the Environment Bujar Kolaneci Chair of State Control Commission Petrit Skende Chair of Committee for Science and Technology
*Held same responsibilities in outgoing government.
**Retained from outgoing government, with new responsibilities.
***Held same responsibilities, January-February 1991.
****previously given as Sabit Broka
The reorganization of the former Interior Ministry into the new Public Order Ministry and a National Security Committee had been decided in the light of preliminary findings by a parliamentary commission.
The commission had blamed the security forces for the deaths of four people in post-election violence in the northern city of Shkodër at the beginning of April [see p. 38160].
On May 6 an attempt by opposition deputies in the People's Assembly to remove Gramoz Rucaj from the post of caretaker Interior Minister because of the Shkodër events had been defeated, but a majority had voted in favour of dismissing Procurator General Rrapo Mino and head of the Investigator-General's Office Qemal Lane.
In his original proposals for the government's composition, Fatos Nano had named Rucaj to the ministerial-rank post of Chair of the National Security Committee (described by Le Monde of May 14 as the Sigurimi (secret police) reorganized).
However, the People's Assembly on May 12 voted that the Committee should be a state rather than a government body.
On May 14 the People's Assembly elected the members of the Supreme Court, to be chaired as before by Kleanthi Koci.
Petrit Serjani was elected Attorney General.
Alia's resignation as PLA leader
A plenum of the ruling Party of Labour (PLA) on May 4 released Alia from the post of first secretary, and from his membership or the party politburo and central committee, in keeping with provisions of the new interim Constitution debarring the President of the Republic from holding party office.
A new party leader was to be elected at the 10th PLA congress, due in June.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Tension over foreign troops
With the appearance early in May of press comment hostile to the presence of foreign troops in Turkey, the Turkish authorities were reported by May 9 to have tightened up customs procedure for the movement of supplies through Turkey into northern Iraq by foreign military units.
A correspondent for the Independent, Robert Fisk, was expelled from Turkey on May 2 after describing (in a report published on April 30) looting of relief supplies by Turkish troops at the Yesilova camp for Iraqi Kurdish refugees in Hakkari province.
Also on May 2 a platoon of British Royal Marines left for northern Iraq after being ordered to leave Turkey.
They were said to have manhandled Hakkari province governor Erdogan Ulker as he tried to inspect the Yesilova camp on May 1, following Fisk's report.
At a press briefing on May 1 a Foreign Ministry spokesman said that while Iran and Turkey shared common goals in their handling of the refugee crisis, Turkey wanted the allied forces to remain longer in border areas, while Iran preferred UN supervision.
The Foreign Ministry reported on May 8 that there were just under 411,000 Iraqi refugees inside and along the Turkish border.
Killing of generals
The left-wing Dev Sol group was reported to have claimed responsibility for the fatal wounding in the southern city of Adana on May 23 of Brig. -Gen.
Temel Cingoz (who died four days later), and for the shooting dead of Maj.-Gen. (retd) Ismail Selen in Ankara on the same day.
Both generals had commanded units in Kurdish areas in south-east Turkey, and there was speculation that Dev Sol was working in co-operation with the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK).
Food agreement with Soviet Union
On May 18-19 the government signed an agreement to ship to the Soviet Union 1,700,000 tonnes of wheat, barley, flour and pasta, worth US$218,000,000, in stages over the following year.
The state-owned Export Credit Bank of Turkey (Türk Eximbank) had already agreed to release urgently US$18,000,000 in credit to the Soviet Union for the purchase of these foodstuffs, as part of a wider credit agreement signed on April 6.
EUROPE
CYPRUS
Parliamentary elections
Parliamentary elections were held in the southern (Greek-Cypriot) part of the island on May 19.
The results were interpreted as giving a continued endorsement to the efforts of the non-party President Georgios Vassiliou to pursue UN-backed talks with the Turkish Cypriots — something which had been the key issue of the electoral campaigns.
In voting for the 56 Greek-Cypriot delegates to the House of Representatives (the nominal allocation of 24 seats to Turkish-Cypriots continued unfilled), the conservative Democratic Rally (DISY) finished first with 35.8 per cent of the vote and 20 seats (one more than in the previous assembly).
Second was the Communist AKEL party with 18 seats and 30.6 per cent of the vote (up from 15 seats and 27.4 per cent in the December 1985 elections — see pp. 34112-13).
Both parties supported moves for reunification.
ADISOK (Democratic Socialist Renewal Movement — formed by five reformist AKEL deputies in 1990) polled only 2.4 per cent, winning no seats.
The centre-right Democratic Party (DIKO) of former President Spyros Kyprianou slipped to 19.5 per cent, winning 11 seats, and Kyprianou announced that he would not be taking up his parliamentary seat.
The Socialist Party (EDEK), with 10.9 per cent of the vote, won seven seats.
Deportation of Israelis
Four Israelis (two men and two women) were fined and deported after pleading guilty on May 9 to charges of illegal entry of the Iranian embassy in Nicosia.
They had been found attempting to place a phone tap in the embassy building on April 23.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
A referendum in Vienna on May 14-16 recorded 65 per cent against plans to hold a joint Vienna-Budapest World Fair (EXPO) in 1995, and 73 per cent in favour of the construction of a hydroelectricity plant at Freudenau on the Danube south-east of Vienna; the mayor, Helmut Zilk, said that the results of the non-binding referendum would be accepted.
EUROPE
CENTRAL EUROPE
Foreign Ministers of the five "Pentagonale" central European countries (Austria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Italy and Yugoslavia — see pp. 37661-62) met on May 18 in Bologna, Italy, and issued a joint statement in support of Yugoslavia's remaining a federal republic founded on democratic reform; the Polish Foreign Minister attended the meeting as an observer.
EUROPE
CHANNEL TUNNEL
French and British construction workers on May 22 linked the northbound rail tunnel of the Channel Tunnel, 50 metres under the seabed; the smaller service tunnel had been linked in December 1990, and the southbound rail tunnel was due to be linked on June 24, with the tunnel as a whole due to be completed by June 1993.
EUROPE
GREECE
From May 6 restrictions on the amount of money Greek travellers to EC countries might take with them were relaxed, as part of a Bank of Greece package of liberalization measures to meet EC guidelines; Greeks were also to be able to participate as individuals on EC member countries' stock markets.
EUROPE
LIECHTENSTEIN
On May 22 Liechtenstein became the seventh member of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) joining Austria, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland; hitherto Liechtenstein had had associate status through its customs union with Switzerland, but no vote.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Danny Morrison, 38, the former publicity director of Sinn Féin, was sentenced in Belfast on May 9 to eight years in prison for his part in the false imprisonment of a police informer, but was acquitted of conspiracy to murder Alexander "Sandy" Lynch, who had been held and interrogated by the IRA's security department for two days in January 1990; seven others were given prison sentences of up to 12 years for false imprisonment in connection with this and other cases.
EUROPE
PORTUGAL
Portugal's last state-owned daily newspaper, the Diário de Notícias (nationalized in 1975), was privatized on May 15.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
IMF loan — Paris Club debt relief
The May 17 announcement that Egypt had signed a letter of intent with the IMF, securing it a US$372 million standby credit over the next 18 months, paved the way for a major concession on Egypt's official debt; 17 creditor countries meeting as members of the "Paris Club" in Paris on May 20-24 announced that Egypt was to benefit from a two-stage debt-reduction plan modelled on that offered to Poland in March [see p. 38107].
It was hoped that the concession by Paris Club members would halve Egypt's US$20,200 million government-to-government debt by means of an immediate forgiveness of 15 per cent, followed by a further 15 per cent cut once an 18-month programme of IMF-supported economic reform had been carried out, and a further 20 per cent written off in July 1994.
The political and military support given by Egypt to the United States-led coalition in the Gulf war was regarded as an important factor in the Paris Club debt relief, which supplemented write-offs of Egyptian debt by the United States and the Gulf Co-operation Council countries in October 1990 [see p. 37795].
Steps already taken in response to IMF recommendations included the regulation of banks' capital-to-assets ratio (January 1991), the freeing of foreign exchange rates (Feb. 27), electricity and petrol price rises, and a sales tax levied at highest rates on luxury goods (May 4).
A social fund set up by the government with the World Bank would provide US$400 million for sectors of the population most vulnerable to the effects of economic reform and would help create employment for workers displaced by the Gulf War.
Cabinet changes
The Cabinet changes predicted for some weeks were announced on May 20.
Hamdi Ali Abdel-Wahab al-Banbi, hitherto chairman of the Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation (EGPC), took over as Petroleum and Mineral Resources Minister from the long-serving Abdul Hadi Mohammed Qandil, whose dismissal had been widely predicted following criticism from foreign companies that he paid too little attention to exploration and production.
Lt.-Gen.
Mohammed Hussein Tantawi Sulayman, who succeeded Youssef Sabry Abu Taleb as Defence Minister, had been head of military operations of the Egyptian contingent in the Gulf war, and his appointment was seen as a reward, as was that of Gen. Salah Halabi, commander of the Egyptian contingent, as Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces.
The new Foreign Affairs Minister was Amr Mohammed Moussa, hitherto permanent representative at the UN, replacing Ahmed Esmat Abdel Meguid, who had been elected Secretary-General of the Arab League [see p. 38215].
The veteran diplomat Boutros Boutros-Ghali, hitherto Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, was promoted to Deputy Prime Minister with the additional portfolios of Foreign Liaison and Minister of State for Emigration and Expatriate Egyptian Affairs.
Hussein Kamil Baha al-Din was appointed Education Minister, and Mahmud Sayyid Ahmed Sharif, hitherto governor of Cairo, was appointed Minister for Local Government, a new post.
Extension of emergency laws
Emergency laws giving wide-ranging powers of arrest and detention, first introduced in 1981 after the assassination of President Anwar el Sadat, were extended when the People's Assembly voted on May 8 that they should apply for the period June 1, 1991, to May 31, 1994.
Prime Minister Atef Sidqi told the Assembly's general committee that the laws continued to be justifiable following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the resultant inter-Arab divisions.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Middle East peace process
The assertion in early March by United States President Bush that the Gulf war had provided a "window of opportunity" for Israel and the Arab states to advance toward a comprehensive peace settlement appeared unduly optimistic in late May after the failure of three months of intensive diplomatic activity to achieve a breakthrough.
Four trips to the region between March and May by US Secretary of State James Baker confirmed only that the region's two main contenders, Israel and Syria, were reluctant to make any meaningful concessions.
The efforts of the Soviet Foreign Minister Aleksandr Bessmertnykh to assist Baker in arranging a peace conference also failed.
Chronology of post-Gulf war diplomacy March to May 1991
March 2 The UN Security Council passes Resolution 686 on a ceasefire in the Gulf war [see p. 38116].
March 6 In a joint address to the US Congress Bush says that he regards the settlement of the Arab-Israeli dispute as one of his administration's top priorities.
March 7 Baker arrives in Saudi Arabia at the start of his first post-Gulf war tour of the Middle East.
March 9 Baker visits Kuwait for talks with Crown Prince Shaikh Saad al Abdullah as Salim as Sabah.
March 10 Baker returns to Saudi Arabia and meets with the Foreign Ministers of the six GCC states, Egypt and Syria; agreement is reached on a US plan for collective security in the region.
March 11 Baker visits Egypt for talks with President Hosni Mubarak.
March 11-12 Baker makes his first trip to Israel since his appointment as Secretary of State.
He meets with Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir and a 10-member Palestinian delegation led by Faisal al-Husseini.
Baker proposes a gradual approach to regional peace and calls on Israelis and Arabs to initiate "confidence-building" measures.
March 13-14 Baker visits Syria for talks with President Hafez al-Assad.
March 25 Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) chair Yassir Arafat unveils a new peace initiative aimed at restoring the PLO's credibility in the West in the aftermath of the Gulf war [see p. 38117].
April 8-10 Baker visits Israel at the start of his second Middle East tour; discussions are centred on the concept of a "regional conference" , and he receives a tentative Israeli agreement to attend a "limited" conference [see p. 38167].
Baker again meets with a delegation of Palestinians led by Husseini.
On the day of Baker's arrival in Israel the Defence Ministry announces the release of as many as 1,300 Palestinians detained in connection with the intifada.
The value of this announcement as a "confidence-building" measure is severely undermined by statements issued during Baker's visit by hardline Housing Minister Ariel Sharon promising increased Jewish settlement in the occupied territories.
April 10 Baker visits Egypt for talks with Mubarak.
April 11 Talks take place in Cairo between Baker and the Saudi Arabian Foreign Minister Prince Saud al Faisal; they discuss possible Palestinian alternatives to PLO representation at a conference.
April 11-12 Baker visits Syria for talks with President Assad; Syria maintains its opposition to a "regional conference" and presses for a full international conference with a UN presence.
April 12 Baker meets with the Jordanian Foreign Minister Taher al-Masri in Geneva, the first high-level meeting between the two sides since the end of the Gulf war.
Masri says that Jordan would attend a conference based on UN Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338 [see pp. 25029; 26197].
April 17 European Community (EC) Foreign Ministers in Luxembourg after their April 15-16 meeting inform Baker that they want European participation in a Middle East peace conference.
April 18-19 Baker fails to persuade Shamir to alter his position on a peace conference during his third visit to Jerusalem in seven weeks.
April 21 Baker visits Saudi Arabia and is informed by Prince Saud al Faisal that the Saudis will not take part in a "regional conference" .
April 22 Baker visits Kuwait City.
April 23-24 Baker fails in his attempt to persuade Assad to moderate his position during talks in Damascus.
April 25 Baker meets with Bessmertnykh in the Soviet town of Kislovodsk; Bessmertnykh announces that the Soviet Union is willing to act as a co-sponsor with the US for a peace conference.
April 26 Baker returns to Jerusalem for talks with Israeli leaders, but is forced to cut short his visit because of the death of his mother; US State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler expresses Baker's discontent over Israel's refusal to compromise.
May 8-9 Bessmertnykh visits Syria for talks with Assad at the start of a regional tour aimed at promoting Middle East peace efforts.
May 9-10 Bessmertnykh visits Jordan where he meets with King Hussein and Foreign Minister Masri; speaking after his meeting with the King, Bessmertnykh says that he could not "foresee, conceive or accept" holding a peace conference while settlement-building continued in the Israeli occupied territories.
May 10 Bessmertnykh arrives in Israel, the highest ranking Soviet official to visit since the severing of diplomatic ties in 1967 [see p. 22105]; he holds talks with Shamir and Foreign Minister David Levy.
May 11 Bessmertnykh arrives in Egypt and holds talks with Mubarak.
May 11 In a statement issued in Luxembourg, the six GCC countries offer to send an observer to a regional peace conference, thereby partly satisfying Israeli demands that all Arab states play a role in the peace process (the observer status was devised to differentiate the Gulf states from the "front-line" Arab states bordering Israel, each of which would receive a full seat).
May 11-12 Baker begins another Middle East trip, his fourth since the end of the Gulf War, with talks in Syria where Assad reiterates his demands that the UN play a "significant" role in a peace conference and that the conference should re-convene periodically.
May 12 Baker and Bessmertnykh meet over a working dinner in Cairo in what the Financial Times describes as an "against-the-odds attempt to" kick start "the…peace process" .
May 13 Baker, Bessmertnykh and Mubarak hold talks in Cairo.
Interviewed by reporters after the talks Bessmertnykh says that the peace process had "reached a rather large plateau" , but adds that the possibilities for a conference "are growing" .
Baker points to "significant" outstanding differences between Syria and Israel, especially on the question of UN involvement in a conference, and reiterates his view that "nobody can impose peace upon the parties" .
May 13 Bessmertnykh visits Saudi Arabia and, for a second time, Syria.
May 14 Bessmertnykh travels to Geneva where he holds talks with Yassir Arafat.
According to the Soviet news agency Tass the two discuss "the problem of promoting mutual exchanges of views on the Palestinian issue" .
May 14 Baker holds talks with King Hussein in Jordan and then travels overland to East Jerusalem where he meets with a three-member Palestinian delegation headed by Husseini.
After the meeting Husseini says that he is not "more or less optimistic" .
May 15 After a five-day meeting in Tunis, Arafat's Fatah organization calls for a five-party meeting of Egypt, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon and the PLO to discuss current Middle East developments.
May 15-16 Baker holds talks with Shamir and other Israeli leaders in Jerusalem.
In a statement issued before leaving Israel, Baker confirms that two issues remain unresolved the role of the UN in the conference and whether it will hold more than one session.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
UN resolution on Compensation Fund
On May 20 the UN Security Council voted by 14 votes to none, with one abstention (Cuba), to approve Resolution 692 establishing a Compensation Fund to be financed by Iraq's oil exports to pay damages incurred by foreign governments and nationals during the Gulf war [see p. 37759].
The resolution, based on a report submitted by the UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar on May 2, was expected to give rise to claims of between US$50,000 million and US$100,000 million.
Although the resolution authorized a governing body established in Geneva, consisting of all 15 members of the Security Council, to decide how much would be paid into the Fund annually, the United States had reportedly pressed for between 40 per cent and 50 per cent of Iraqi oil revenues to be diverted each year.
Responding to the resolution on May 20, Iraq's permanent representative at the UN, Abdul Amir al-Anbari, requested a moratorium of five years on war reparations in order for his country to pay for essential supplies and reconstruction which, he said, would cost "many times [Iraq's]oil revenue" .
The request came amidst growing Iraqi appeals for an end to international sanctions [see pp. 37639; 37695; 38083; 38165].
On May 9 the UN sanctions committee had unanimously agreed to authorize the unfreezing of Iraqi assets, officially estimated at US$1,000 million, to pay for essential civilian items.
The decision came after an appeal by the government on May 2 calling upon the sanctions committee to end the ban on food and medicines paid for before Aug. 2.
A UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) team led by Ezio Gianni Murzi, whose findings were reported on May 12, concluded that although essential services and supplies, including medicines, were slowly being restored, assistance was still desperately needed [see pp. 37986-87; 38082-83; 38164].
Only 20 per cent of the US$178,000,000 urgently requested by the UN had so far been received.
On April 29 Turkey had lifted restrictions on food exports, while there were reports in May that Australia, Canada and Thailand had also agreed to sell food.
UN on-site inspection of weapons sites
A special UN and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) commission overseeing the destruction and removal of all non-conventional weapons stocks [see p. 38165]concluded the first part of its on-site inspection on May 23.
A spokesman for the IAEA said on May 23 that stocks of enriched uranium had survived the Gulf war virtually intact, but were still recoverable.
On May 23 the head of the commission, Rolf Ekeus (Sweden), said that he would recommend withholding certification of Iraqi compliance until some destruction of weapons had begun.
The commission was expected to recommend the on-site destruction of ballistic missiles.
Withdrawal of US troops from southern Iraq — Skirmishes in north
On May 8 the USA withdrew its remaining troops from southern Iraq, despite fresh reports that Iraqi Shias continued to face persecution [see pp. 38081-82].
On May 10 the head of the UN's Inter-Agency Humanitarian Programme for Iraq and Kuwait, Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, claimed that the West had ceased to pay attention to the continuing plight of Shia refugees.
The UN Secretary-General's special representative, Bernt Bernander, said in Baghdad on May 23 that UN armed guards would patrol the southern region in a "reassurance role" .
There were reports of renewed tension between allied and government forces in the north, prompted in part by speculation that the allies intended to extend the "safe haven" zone [see p. 38127-28].
Reports on May 5 said that US troops had come within 2 km of the town of Dahuk, south of the "safe havens" zone.
The Guardian of May 9 reported that Iraqi troops had fired on US aircraft near the towns of Mosul and Dahuk.
On May 13 UK Royal Marines were reported to have killed an Iraqi soldier and wounded two others during a series of military skirmishes near Sarsank, in the north of the country.
The reports were denied by a government spokesman.
Moves to establish a UN police force in the north to reduce the chances of confrontation were rejected by the Iraqi government on May 9.
However, on May 20 it agreed to allow a UN observer team, comprising 10 security guards, to enter Dahuk to ensure the safety of returning refugees.
The decision was followed by an accord between the government and allied forces on May 22 providing for the withdrawal of all Iraqi military personnel from Dahuk and the restoration of essential services by non-combat allied troops.
The commander of US forces in the north, Gen. John Shalikashvili, said afterwards that the accord did not signify the extension of the allies' "security zone" .
On May 29 a US military spokesman announced that the allies would begin withdrawing their troops on June 15.
Second round of talks on Kurdish autonomy
A second round of talks between government ministers and Kurdish leaders aimed at settling demands for greater Kurdish autonomy [see pp. 38126-27]resumed on May 7.
The Kurdish delegation was led by Masoud Barzani, leader of the Democratic Party of Kurdistan (DPK), who attended the talks for the first time.
On May 8 Sami Abdul-Rahman, a member of the delegation [see p. 38127], said that "the talks [were]going on in a positive spirit" , although questions relating to international guarantees for an accord and Kurdish control over the oil-producing town of Kirkuk remained unresolved.
Meanwhile, on May 8 President Saddam Hussein met Kurdish leaders for the first time since April 24.
Officials had indicated that he would not meet the delegation until after a final accord had been signed.
On May 18 Barzani claimed that the government had accepted Kurdish demands for democracy, including the separation of the ruling Ba'ath Party from the state, freedom of the press, and free elections.
On May 15 Talabani had hinted that the question of democracy remained a major issue in the way of an accord.
Meanwhile, representatives from the 17-party Joint Action Committee of the Iraqi Opposition (JACIO)[see p. 37987], meeting in Paris on May 6, called for the establishment of democratic government and the removal of Saddam Hussein.
Abolition of Revolutionary Court and Popular Army
The Iraqi News Agency (INA) reported on May 20 that the government had decided to abolish the Revolutionary Court established in 1969 [see p. 23231].
Commenting on the decision on May 23, the Justice Minister, Shabib Lazim al-Maliki, said that the Revolutionary Court was "unnatural" .
On April 26 the Revolution Command Council (RCC) had announced that it was disbanding the Popular Army.
In an interview with the Washington Post of May 7, the Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz disclosed that a democratic constitution would replace the "revolutionary legality" which had governed the country since 1958.
Approval of budget
On May 8 the government approved its budget for 1991 totalling ID13,935,000 million (approximately US$44,000 million) which placed special emphasis on reconstruction.
It also approved a 24.7 per cent reduction in state investment.
Meanwhile, it was announced that the lifting of the ban on foreign travel, effective from May 15, would not entitle citizens to take foreign currency out of the country.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
War trials — Arrest of opposition leaders — Reconstruction
Six people (five Iraqis and a Jordanian) were on May 19 sentenced by a martial law tribunal to prison terms of up to 15 years, having been convicted of collaboration with the Iraqi occupation forces in the first of a series of war trials [see p. 38166].
None of the defendants was granted the right of appeal.
A second trial of 24 people, accused of working for an allegedly pro-Iraqi newspaper, al-Nidaa, was adjourned on May 21 amid widespread international criticism centring on the conduct of the trials.
Lawyers acting on behalf of the defendants had claimed that neither evidence nor witnesses had been presented to support the prosecution.
On May 13 the acting Attorney General Hamad al-Othman said that 45 collaboration cases were ready to go to trial.
He added that 900 criminal cases were under investigation of which 200 related specifically to charges of collaboration.
In April the government had stated that more than 600 people suspected of collaboration were being detained [see p. 38166].
On May 15 the Interior Minister, Shaikh Ahmad Hamoud al Jabir as Sabah, said that the government would not hesitate to hang those convicted of collaboration.
He emphasized, however, that the trials would be fair and open and that "the accused will have lawyers to defend them" .
Responding to the conduct of the first trial, United States President Bush said on May 21 that "it would be in Kuwait's interest to extend a fair trial to everyone" .
A United Kingdom Foreign Office spokesman said that "the due process of law and human rights should be respected for detainees and accused" .
On May 20 the human rights organization Amnesty International had expressed concern at the lack of access of defence counsel and the "selection" process for the 200 detainees waiting to be tried.
On May 23 the Minister of State for Cabinet Affairs, Dhari Abdullah al Othman said that the trails "currently taking place in public were within the framework of the law" and described as "tendentious" reports which suggested otherwise.
Arrest of opposition leaders
The opposition fundamentalist party, the Islamic Constitutional Movement (ICM), said on May 14 that five of its members had been arrested.
The announcement came amid continuing reports of the abuse of human rights [see p. 38166].
On May 16, opposition parties including the ICM and the liberal Kuwait Democratic Forum [see p. 38166]issued a statement noting the "appearance and continuation of practices by official and unofficial parties…similar to those suffered under [Iraqi]occupation" .
The statement claimed that at least 300 people, including Palestinians, Jordanians, Iraqis and Asians, had disappeared.
On May 28 the Prime Minister, Shaikh Saad al Abdullah al Salem as Sabah, admitted that the torture and abduction of non-Kuwaitis continued in the emirate and promised to order a thorough investigation.
His statement came hours before the government announced the extension of martial law (first imposed in February — see pp. 37987-98) by one month.
No explanation was offered for the extension.
Progress on control of oil fires — Estimate of reconstruction costs
The Oil Minister Hamud Abdullah al Raqaba said on May 11 that 100 oilwell fires had been extinguished and the wells brought under control [see pp. 37988; 38119; 38166].
On May 13 the government agreed to sign an accord with Iran providing for the despatch of a 50-strong Iranian team to help put out oil fires in Burgan province.
It was reported on May 15 that the government had commissioned the UK oil company, the Kuwaiti British Fire Group, to put out 73 fires with an option on another 127 based on results in the Sabriya and Arrawdatayn oilfields.
A UN report published on May 2 estimated that the process of reconstruction would take at least 10 years [see pp. 37987; 38118; 38166], and that the Iraqi occupation had cost Kuwait US$8,500 million.
The report said that of 1,330 active oil wells, about 700 were on fire at the end of April, with between 2,000,000-6,000,000 barrels lost a day, and it estimated that bringing the fires under control "may take up to 18 months" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
BAHRAIN
Report on human rights
A report published by the human rights organization Amnesty International on May 9 urged the government to investigate allegations of the arbitrary arrest, detention, unfair trial and torture of hundreds of political dissidents.
Although dozens of political detainees had been released in August 1990 and in March 1991, the report said that more than 100 political prisoners continued to be held, some "for up to seven years without ever being charged or going to trial" .
Others still detained at the end of March had been held for almost 10 years.
Amnesty said that it had evidence of children being detained, either on suspicion of illegal political activities, or with their fathers, some of whom were serving heavy sentences for their alleged involvement in the attempted coup of 1981 [see pp. 31353-54; 31563].
The report recorded six cases of prisoners who had died apparently while under torture or as a result of neglect.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Visit to Turkey by Rafsanjani — Other foreign relations — Charges against Khalkhali
President Ali Akbar Rafsanjani visited Turkey on April 29-May 2 on the second leg of his first tour abroad as President [see also p. 38169].
It was the first official visit to Turkey by an Iranian head of state since 1975.
At a press conference on May 1 after talks with President Özal of Turkey, Rafsanjani said that "Iran and Turkey shared the view that there should not be a Kurdish state in northern Iraq" .
Rafsanjani also met the Turkish Prime Minister Yildirim Akbulut and concluded an agreement on the sale of Iranian oil and gas to Turkey.
The French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas and the German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher visited Iran on May 3-5 and May 6-8 respectively.
At a news conference on May 5, Dumas and the Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati said that their talks had been "very positive" and expressed the hope that discussions aimed at resolving the financial dispute between the two countries [see p. 37929]would end with "positive results" .
Dumas also announced that Rafsanjani had accepted an invitation from President Mitterrand to visit France.
The Voice of the Islamic Republic of Iran (VIRI) reported on May 7 that Genscher and Vellayati had discussed bilateral relations and had agreed on the need to maintain Iraq's territorial integrity.
At a news conference on May 8, Genscher said that Rafsanjani had accepted an invitation to visit Germany.
Vellayati left on May 14 for a visit to Malaysia, Australia and New Zealand, reporting on May 22 that agreement had been reached with Australia to co-operate on chemical disarmament.
Charges against Khalkhali — Re-election of Karrubi
It was reported on May 14 that a revolutionary court had issued a warrant for the arrest and trial of Ayatollah Sadeq Khalkhali, a former head of the Islamic revolutionary courts [see p. 37794], on charges of illegal executions, embezzlement of public funds and corruption.
The report came amidst speculation that radical factions supported by Khalkhali had intensified their attacks on the government for its policy of rapprochement with the West.
On May 27, Rafsanjani was quoted as saying that he would resist all attempts to "sabotage" his government.
Meanwhile, it was reported on May 30 that the majlis had re-elected as its Speaker Ayatollah Mehdi Karrubi, a vocal opponent of closer relations with the United States.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CO-OPERATION COUNCIL
Foreign Ministers' emergency meeting — Announcement of Egyptian withdrawal from Gulf
Foreign Ministers from the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) held an emergency meeting in Kuwait on May 5 to discuss regional security arrangements.
The meeting, the first of its kind to take place in the Kuwait since the end of the Gulf war [see pp. 37982-90], was prompted by Kuwait's concern to re-evaluate its links with Arab states based on their differing attitudes towards Iraq.
In an interview in the Middle East Economic Digest (MEED) of April 29, the Secretary-General of the GCC, Abdullah Yacoub Bishara (Kuwait), had stressed the GCC's emerging alliance with Egypt and Syria which he described as a new "six-plus-two grouping" .
[For meeting of GCC, Egyptian and Syrian Foreign Ministers in Damascus on March 5-6, and "Damascus declaration" on forming a regional Arab peacekeeping force dominated by Egyptian and Syrian troops, see pp. 38116-17.]
Addressing the May 5 meeting, Kuwait's Foreign Minister, Shaikh Salem as Sabah as Salim as Sabah, commended Egypt and Syria for their "brotherly and sincere commitment to Kuwait" and described the Damascus declaration as "an ideal formula for common Arab action" .
Announcement of Egyptian troop withdrawal
On May 8 Egypt's President Mubarak announced that all Egyptian troops in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, estimated to total 38,000, would be withdrawn within "three months at the most" .
The announcement, regarded by analysts as a reversal of Egypt's commitment to a regional defence pact, was reportedly due to Egypt's opposition to the involvement of non-Arab powers, including Iran and Turkey, in regional security arrangements.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
YEMEN
Constitutional referendum
A referendum on May 15-16 approved by a majority of 98.3 per cent the new constitution for Yemen, unified in May 1990 [see pp. 37470-71], according to an official statement issued by Radio Yemen on May 20.
Turnout was given as 1,364,788, or 72.2 per cent of all eligible voters, with 1,341,247 voting in favour, 20,409 voting against, and 3,132 votes declared invalid.
Islamic groups led by the League of the Sons of Yemen and the Yemen Reform Group [see p. 38075]had urged a boycott of the referendum, and staged a rally in San'aa, the capital, on May 12 in which an estimated 25,000-30,000 people participated.
The protesters demanded that Islamic law or sharia be made the sole source of legislation.
On April 22 a statement by the Presidential Council had stressed that the new constitution would ensure "the supremacy of Islamic sharia over all legislation" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Relations with Soviet Union — Settlements — Security
Visit by Soviet Foreign Minister
Aleksandr Bessmertnykh, the Soviet Foreign Minister, paid a brief visit to Israel on May 10 for talks with his Israeli counterpart, David Levi, and the Israeli Prime Minister, Itzhak Shamir [see p. 38168 for meeting between Shamir and Soviet Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov in London in mid-April].
The visit was the first to Israel by a Soviet Foreign Minister.
However, contrary to the expectations of some commentators, Bessmertnykh did not use his visit to announce the restoration of full diplomatic relations, broken off by the Soviet Union during the 1967 Six Day War.
His visit was part of a wider tour of the Middle East aimed at supporting US efforts to promote a regional peace conference [see p. 38210].
Controversial USA visit by Sharon
A visit to the United States by the hardline Housing and Construction Minister Ariel Sharon in late April and early May increased tension between Israel and the USA.
Sharon claimed that he been humiliated diplomatically on May 2 when the US Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Jack Kemp refused him an official meeting.
Kemp had acted at the urging of US Secretary of State James Baker, who had argued that Sharon's settlements policy [see p. 38168]was detrimental to US peace efforts in the Middle East.
Commenting on the incident, the New York Times of May 3 said that the US administration had employed "diplomatic symbolism" to show its irritation at Israel's intransigence in the current peace negotiations.
The Israeli government officially complained about the incident to the US ambassador in Tel Aviv on May 2.
New Golan settlement — US criticism of settlements policy
Sharon formally launched a new settlement, Kanaf, in the southern Golan Heights on May 21.
At the ceremony Sharon vowed to double the Jewish population of the Heights (currently some 12,400) to ensure that the territory never returned to Syria.
On May 22 Baker told the US House of Representatives appropriations subcommittee on foreign operations that Israel's practice of establishing Jewish settlements in the occupied territories was the biggest impediment to US efforts to achieve a Middle East peace settlement.
Baker's criticism of Israel's settlements policy was immediately dismissed by Israeli officials.
However, on May 23 US President Bush announced that he strongly supported Baker's statement.
 "I'm backing the man," he said.
"I'm stating the policy of the USA and so was the Secretary…
We would like to see those settlements stopped."
Deportations
Israel deported four "Fatah activists" from the Gaza Strip to Lebanon on May 18.
Curfews were immediately imposed on Jabaliyah and Bayt Lahiya to forestall riots.
The UN Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution on May 24 calling on Israel to refrain from further deportations and to "ensure the safe and immediate return of all those deported" .
According to the Middle East International of May 31, the US permanent representative at the UN, Thomas Pickering, had been personally instructed by Baker to vote against the Israeli action.
Killing of French tourist — Stabbings
Khaled Ahmad Asakra, an 18-year-old Palestinian, was arrested on May 1 after confessing to the killing of a French tourist, Anne Ley, in Bethlehem on April 30.
It was the first time that a foreign tourist had been killed since the start of the intifada in 1987.
A Palestinian who stabbed and wounded three Jews in Jerusalem on May 17 was quickly captured by the police.
Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility, saying that the attack was in protest against "American projects" .
Walesa visit
Lech Walesa became the first Polish President to visit Israel when he arrived for a four-day visit on May 20.
Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir, himself Polish-born, had once commented that "Poles suck in anti-Semitism with their mothers' milk" , and a main purpose of Walesa's visit was to ease the strains between the two countries centring on enduring Polish anti-Semitism; Walesa himself was still trying to live down the controversy caused by a statement during his 1990 presidential campaign that he was "clean" because his family had no Jewish blood.
Walesa on May 20 addressed a special session of the Knesset (parliament), an honour previously accorded only to Presidents Jimmy Carter of the United States, Anwar Sadat of Egypt, and François Mitterrand of France.
During his address, Walesa departed from his prepared text and asked Jews to forgive centuries of Polish anti-Semitism, especially the collaboration of some Poles in the annihilation by the Nazis of almost the whole of Poland's 3,000,000-strong Jewish population during the Second World War.
On the following day Walesa visited the Yad Veshem memorial to the victims of the holocaust.
Walesa's visit was also intended to boost bilateral trade and cultural exchanges.
He held meetings with President Chaim Herzog, with Shamir and with Defence Minister Moshe Arens, as well as with parliamentary and trade union leaders.
A significant outcome of the visit was the announcement on May 23 that Walesa, in support of the campaign by Israeli officials to overturn the 1975 UN resolution equating Zionism with racism [see pp. 27487-88], had asked UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar to work for its cancellation.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Signing of Lebanese-Syrian treaty
President Elias Hrawi of Lebanon and President Hafez al-Assad of Syria signed a historic "treaty of brotherhood, co-operation and co-ordination" in Damascus on May 22.
Details of the six-point treaty had been broadcast by Phalangist Voice of Lebanon radio on May 17.
Article One and Article Two affirmed that Lebanon and Syria would work to achieve co-operation and co-ordination in political, economic, security, cultural, scientific and other fields.
Article Three, the treaty's key article, stated that the "connection between the security of the two countries requires that Lebanon not become a source of threat to Syria's security and vice versa under any circumstances…therefore, Lebanon will not allow itself to become a transit point or base for any force, state or organization that seeks to undermine its security or that of Syria" .
This apparently reflected the Syrian conviction that Lebanon had in the past been used by Israel, Iraq and the PLO to attack Syrian interests.
Article Four stipulated that, in line with the provisions of the 1989 Taif Accord [see p. 36986], Syrian forces would be redeployed in the Bekaa valley and, if necessary, in other areas of Lebanon to be specified by a joint Lebanese-Syrian military committee.
The two governments would conclude an agreement specifying the size and duration of the Syrian forces' presence and the relationship of these forces with the Lebanese authorities.
Article Five set out a number of principles governing the two states' foreign policies.
Article Six provided details of the administrative structure formed to achieve the goals of the treaty.
The Supreme Council, consisting of the presidents of Lebanon and Syria, would meet at least once a year to chart the general policy for co-ordination and co-operation.
The Executive Council, consisting of the two premiers, would meet at least once every six months to co-ordinate the implementation of the Supreme Council's decisions.
Three specialized ministerial committees (foreign affairs, economic and social affairs, defence and security affairs) would meet every two months.
In addition, a General Secretariat was created.
Israeli response to treaty — Internal Lebanese criticism
The treaty was denounced by Israel, which claimed that it marked the virtual annexation of Lebanon by Syria.
However, Syrian officials contended that with the signing of the treaty Syria had for the first time formally acknowledged Lebanon as an independent state.
Israel stepped up military activity in southern Lebanon immediately prior to the signing of the treaty.
On May 21, Israeli tanks reportedly pushed north across their self-declared "security zone" in southern Lebanon.
Israeli forces had also been active in Lebanon during the earlier part of May.
On May 2 Israeli air force (IAF) planes had attacked a Fatah base near Rashidiyah, on the outskirts of Tyre, wounding three Palestinians.
On May 18 the IAF attacked an Amal command post north-east of Tyre.
According to an Amal statement two people died in this attack, including the group's local deputy commander, Mahmud Haydar.
Lebanese critics of the treaty included the Maronite Patriarch, Mgr Nasrullah Boutros Sfeir, and leading Paris-based Maronites such as Raymonde Edde and Amin Gemayel.
Roger Dib, the Cabinet representative of the Maronite militia, the Lebanese Forces (LF), denied reports that his organization had rejected the treaty.
However, Dib had reportedly voted against the treaty in a mid-May Cabinet meeting.
Progress of disarming of militia forces
The process of disarming the militia forces which had started in late April [see p. 38168]appeared to have been successfully completed by mid-May.
The government closed down the last two illegally militia-operated ports on May 15, thereby taking full control of seaborne trade for the first time in a decade.
The Lebanese Foreign and Expatriate Affairs Minister, Faris Buwayz, met with senior Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) leaders in Cairo on May 15-16 to discuss the disarming of militias.
The PLO had refused to comply with the demands of the Lebanese government to disarm its forces based in southern Lebanon, claiming that they constituted an army and not a militia [ibid.].
Amendment of election law
An important element of the 1989 Taif Accord [see p. 36986]was formally adopted by the government on May 9 when the National Assembly approved an amendment to the country's election law [see p. 38168 for Cabinet approval of the amendments].
Under the amended election law the president was provided with the power to appoint new deputies to replace those who had died or had left the Assembly since the last elections in 1972.
The amendment also increased Moslem and Druse representation in the Assembly, providing them with an equal share of seats after almost 50 years of Christian domination.
Of the 99 deputies elected in 1972, only 67 remained in the current Assembly, which was based on a 6:5 Christian:Moslem ratio (although Christians were in a minority within the population as a whole).
Under the new system, the Assembly would be increased to 108 deputies; of the nine new seats for Moslems, three were for Shias and two each for Sunnis, Alawis and Druses.
New Hezbollah secretary-general — New National Liberal Party leader
It was announced on May 22 that Sheikh Abbas Mousawi, a noted hardliner, had been elected as secretary-general of Hezbollah in place of Sheikh Sebhi Tofayli, who had held the post since 1989.
Dory Chamoun was unanimously elected as leader of the right-wing National Liberal Party on May 25, in succession to his brother, Dany Chamoun, who had been assassinated in October 1990 [see p. 37793].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
Arms deal with Czechoslovakia — New investment law
The Middle East Economic Digest of May 17 reported that Czechoslovakia had confirmed its intent to sell Syria 100 T-72 tanks at an estimated cost of US$200 million.
According to the report, Syria had made the arms deal a condition for repaying an estimated US$1,000 million in military debts to Czechoslovakia.
The deal was criticized by the United States and Israel.
However, the Czech government contended that it could not afford to stop selling arms until substitute industries were in place.
New investment law
On May 4 President Hafez al-Assad signed a new investment law aimed at encouraging private and foreign investment in Syria.
Under the new law a Higher Council for Investment (headed by Prime Minister Mahmoud Zubi) was established to oversee investments and provide licences for projects.
The law allowed a complete tax exemption for mixed-sector projects (i.e. those with a minimum of 25 per cent state ownership) for seven years from the start of production.
Investors were permitted to hold foreign exchange accounts with the Commercial Bank of Syria to finance hard-currency requirements, and would be free to repatriate foreign exchange capital from five years after the date of the investment.
Reported arrest of army officers
The official Iraqi news agency (INA) reported on May 16 that sources from Damascus had alleged that Syrian military intelligence had arrested over 20 high-ranking army officers in late April.
The officers had reportedly been accused of disloyalty to the Assad regime.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
French arms deal — Economy
Visit by French Defence Minister — Call for "re-examination" of 1988 arms deal
Pierre Joxe, the French Defence Minister, visited Jordan on May 11-13.
During his visit Jordanian officials asked Joxe to "re-examine" a 1988 contract for the purchase of up to 20 Mirage 2000 multi-role combat aircraft [see p. 36122].
Jordan was apparently concerned that it would be unable to meet the estimated cost of US$1,000 million.
However, some reports claimed that France was also eager to sever the deal in order to limit its risk in a country already in arrears on foreign debt repayments.
IMF consultations — Initialling of EC protocol
An IMF team visited Jordan in early May for its annual round of discussions on the state of the economy.
Jordanian sources denied that the talks had included discussion of a possible renegotiation of an economic adjustment programme signed in 1989 [see p. 36602].
However, the Middle East Economic Digest of May 24 stated that a new IMF agreement was necessary if the government was to reach a new set of debt rescheduling accords with creditor countries within the "Paris Club" and "London Club" frameworks.
According to the report, rescheduling agreements with both Clubs for 1989/90 [see p. 37752]were already "on hold" .
The fourth European Community (EC) co-operation protocol was initialled on May 8.
The protocol, covering a five-year period beginning November 1991, provided a total of ECU 126,000,000 in grants and loans.
Jordan had received ECU203,000,000 in grants and loans under the first three protocols covering the period 1977-91.
(ECU1=US$1.20796 as at May 17, 1991.)
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
FIS strike call
The fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) called an indefinite general strike from May 25 in protest against electoral laws introduced in April [see p. 38169].
In early May FIS representatives said that the party would participate in the general election subject to certain "guarantees" being given by the government.
The FIS was also demanding that presidential elections be held simultaneously with or follow shortly after the general election scheduled for June 27.
The government condemned the strike call as "adventurist" and undemocratic.
The early days of the strike — which Radio France International on May 25 said had been "virtually ignored" by the population — saw large FIS demonstrations; on May 29 and 30 tear gas was fired by police at FIS demonstrators in various areas of Algiers.
Changes to FLN list of electoral candidates
The ruling National Liberation Front (FLN) dropped more than 80 per cent of its current National Assembly deputies from its list of candidates for the June 27 general election, only around 70 of the 290 FLN deputies having been chosen to stand.
Observers noted that many conservatives opposed to the political and economic reforms of Prime Minister Mouloud Hamrouche had failed to be reselected.
Loan agreements with Italy
With the signing of two financial agreements with Algeria on May 2, Italy was confirmed as one of Algeria's main commercial partners — a policy said to provide endorsement for Hamrouche's reform programme and to contrast with the more cautious attitude of France, Algeria's most important trading partner.
According to the agreements, the Central Bank of Algeria would receive credits of US$2,500 million to help restructure debt repayments falling due in the period until January 1993.
A further US$4,500 million credit would be used to purchase Italian goods and services.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
Campus killings — Nahda arrests
The Interior Ministry announced on May 22 that increasing unrest was the preliminary stage of a military coup which the banned Islamic fundamentalist Nahda movement had been preparing since 1988.
Escalating tension in universities and secondary schools from late April had resulted in a number of deaths among students and the arrest of several hundred alleged Nahda activists.
On May 8 at least two students died in hospital after police reportedly opened fire on demonstrators.
Administrative offices and on-campus police posts were damaged by stones and petrol bombs in three Tunis University faculties.
The authorities linked the disturbances to the General Union of Tunisian Students (UGET), which had been banned on March 29 as part of a crackdown on Nahda and related organizations.
A statement from the six legal opposition parties on May 9 condemned the Nahda movement but also implicitly criticized police actions.
At a press conference on the same day exiled Nahda leader Rashid Ghannouchi said that 1,500 students had been detained.
His movement advocated the formation of a provisional government which would supervise the election of a constituent assembly to "establish the people's authority" .
President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali on May 14 announced that a commission to investigate the crisis would be headed by Mohammed Moada, secretary-general of the opposition Movement of Democratic Socialists (MDS).
Representatives of the UGET would also sit on the commission.
At the May 22 press conference Interior Minister Abdullah Kallal said that almost 300 people — about 100 of them members of the armed forces — had been arrested over recent weeks in connection with a coup plot directed by Ghannouchi.
Kalla produced evidence of detailed plans formulated since 1988 involving the incitement of student disturbances as a prelude to the takeover of key ministries and the imposition of a "theocratic state" .
Ghannouchi denied the charges from Paris, telling Radio France International on May 23 that his movement had supporters but not militants inside the army and was opposed to military coups.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ARAB LEAGUE
Appointment of Secretary-General
The Egyptian Foreign Affairs Minister and Deputy Prime Minister Ahmed Esmat Abdel Meguid, 68, was appointed for a five-year term as Secretary-General of the Arab League on May 14.
The post had been vacant since the resignation of Chedli Klibi (Tunisia) in September 1990, when inter-Arab divisions heightened by the Gulf war had contributed to controversy over the timing of the proposed relocation of the Arab League headquarters from Tunis back to Cairo [see p. 37726].
The League officially relocated to Cairo on Jan. 1, 1991, and the approval of Meguid by a unanimous vote of the Arab League Council was interpreted as a move towards reconciliation among the 21 member countries.
He resigned from his Egyptian government posts on May 15.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
It was reported on May 17 that the United States was prepared to accept as refugees 350 former Libyan soldiers captured in Chad in the late 1980s and then given training there, allegedly in preparation for US-backed efforts to destabilize the Libyan regime.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
President Zaid bin Sultan al-Nahayan (the ruler of Abu Dhabi) visited Oman on May 1-4 for talks with Oman's ruler Sultan Qaboos bin Said, during which they agreed to raise diplomatic representation between the two countries to ambassadorial level.
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
Defence Ministers' meeting
Defence Ministers from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) met in Brussels on May 28-29.
Endorsement of "rapid reaction" force
The meeting, which signalled some of the most radical changes in the alliance's history, endorsed the creation of a United Kingdom-led "rapid reaction" force as the core of a new defence structure based on mobile, multinational units [see p. 38170-71].
The new streamlined structure, it was argued, would be more adaptable to post-Cold War contingencies than NATO's current structure which was geared to a massive and sudden attack by the Soviet Union.
Although some reports suggested that the need for a smaller force had been dictated by plans to reduce NATO forces by up to 30 per cent by the mid-1990s, a communiqué issued at the end of the meeting said that defence spending in real terms "should not be expected to reduce substantially in the near term" .
At a press conference on May 29, the United States Defence Secretary Dick Cheney warned that the cost of converting national armies into mobile units could be high.
Details of the new force, which was expected to become operational by the end of 1994, revealed that it would consist of three elements: a Rapid Reaction Force consisting of a multinational corps under UK command; Main Defence Forces consisting of six multinational corps (two under German command, one each under US, Netherlands and Belgian command and another under rotating German and Danish command); and Augmentation Forces or reserves.
Ministers also agreed on the creation of an eighth exclusively German corps based in eastern Germany until the withdrawal of all Soviet forces in 1994.
A small Immediate Reaction Force based on the existing Allied Command Europe (ACE) Mobile Force, capable of being activated at short notice, would also be retained.
On May 29 NATO's Secretary-General Manfred Wörner said that the Rapid Reaction Force would only be used inside NATO territory unless otherwise agreed by all members of the alliance.
He added that it was "up to the Europeans" whether they wished to provide their own forces in circumstances where NATO would not or could not act.
On May 30 President Mitterrand of France said in Lille at the conclusion of a Franco-German summit [see p. 38198]that France, which was not a member of NATO's integrated military command, had "reservations" about the political strategy which lay behind the creation of the multinational corps.
He emphasized that "NATO is not the whole of the Atlantic alliance, and not all questions can be settled at that level" .
Differences on separate European defence identity
In their final communiqué the ministers stressed that they had agreed that NATO would remain "the essential forum for consultation among the allies…on policies bearing on the security and defence commitments of its members" .
On the question of a separate European "defence identity" , some NATO members reportedly pressed for a greater security role for the nine-country Western European Union (WEU)[see pp. 37212; 37931].
On May 28 UK Secretary of State for Defence Tom King dispelled speculation that the Rapid Reaction Force would be predominantly European by saying that it would include a US army division.
Later, German Defence Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg was quoted as saying that changes in NATO force structures were linked to the strengthening of Europe's role in the alliance.
Stating the US position on May 29, Cheney said that "whatever is done in the European context should be done in a way that strengthens the alliance" .
Meanwhile, Wörner, in a clear reference on May 29 to Norway, Turkey and Iceland, which were not members of the European Community (EC), warned that it would be "unacceptable" if new European defence arrangements excluded any European member of the NATO alliance.
On May 7 Wörner was quoted as saying that he strongly favoured a "European pillar" within NATO and that the WEU would be an appropriate institution to embody it.
The question of a separate European defence identity had also dominated meetings in Paris on May 27 between Cheney and senior French officials.
After Cheney's visit the French Prime Minister Edith Cresson said that France was concerned about a more active European military posture, although she stressed that "the Americans must not be concerned by [that]" .
Later, the French Defence Minister Pierre Joxe said that "France had no intention of undermining the Atlantic alliance" .
Review of military command structure
In their May 29 communiqué, ministers said that "we have agreed that a study of NATO command structures should be pursued as a matter of urgency with the aim of streamlining and adapting it to the new situation" .
This review was reportedly to determine whether a US general should continue to exercise overall control of NATO forces in Europe.
On May 29, Wörner said that it was "highly unlikely" that NATO would appoint a European supreme commander.
Afterwards Cheney was quoted as saying that it would be "appropriate" for a US general to continue to be supreme commander of NATO forces.
INTERNATIONAL
CSCE
Meeting of Centre for the Prevention of Conflict
A meeting of the consultative committee of the Centre for the Prevention of Conflict was held in Vienna on May 13 [for provision in November 1990 Charter of Paris for Centre's creation see p. 37838].
The Soviet official news agency Tass reported that the committee had discussed questions connected with the exchange of information on military forces and the deployment of weapons systems belonging to member countries of the Conference on Security and Co-Operation in Europe (CSCE).
The report added that participants had emphasised the significance of the exchange of military information, which had taken place for the first time in Vienna in mid-April, as "one of the key links in the development of a confidence-building and security system in Europe" .
According to Tass, issues pertaining to the centre's budget for 1991 were also discussed.
It reported that while members of CSCE had already agreed to allocate US$1,000,000, the centre had requested "50 per cent more without giving valid reasons" .
INTERNATIONAL
WARSAW PACT
Soviet troop withdrawal from Czechoslovakia — Revelations concerning nuclear weapons in Hungary
Moscow radio said on March 26 that the Soviet Union would complete the withdrawal of all Soviet forces by May 26, ahead of the planned schedule agreed in February 1990 [see p. 37258].
The report added that the withdrawal would also involve the removal of "all types of ammunition, including nuclear" from Czechoslovakia.
Revelations concerning nuclear weapons in Hungary
The former Prime Minister of Hungary Károly Grósz revealed on April 22 that the Soviet Union had secretly deployed nuclear weapons in Hungary until 1988.
Grósz said that he became aware of the deployment only after he became Prime Minister in 1987 [see p. 35593]and did "not inquire as to when and how they were brought here" .
He stressed, however, that he had immediately sought to have the weapons removed on the grounds that they were inconsistent with Hungary's policy of maintaining "balanced relations with both East and West" .
The Hungarian secretary of state at the Defence Ministry Lt.-Gen.
Antal Annus had denied on April 20 that the government had any official information concerning the deployment of Soviet nuclear weapons in Hungary.
Grósz's statement, contradicting official Soviet claims which limited the deployment of nuclear weapons to Czechoslovakia and the former East Germany, followed revelations on April 8 by the commander of Soviet forces in Poland Gen. Viktor Dubinin who claimed that unspecified nuclear weapons had been stored in Poland.
On April 24, a spokesman for the Soviet Defence Ministry said that "a negligible volume" of nuclear arms "had once been stored in Hungary under the auspices of the Warsaw Treaty" .
Details of the military arrangements, which ceased to be operational in February 1991 [see pp. 38026-27], were not released.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Destruction of Soviet SS-20 missiles — Continuing disagreement over conventional forces — US offer banning
chemical arms — Bush arms control plan
The Soviet Union destroyed on May 12 the last of its SS-20 intermediate range missiles at the Kapustin Yar test site, 90 km south-east of Volgograd, ending a three-year process initiated under the terms of the 1987 Intermediate Nuclear Forces (INF) treaty [see p. 35601-03].
On May 6 the United States had destroyed its remaining Pershing II missiles at the Longhorn ammunition plant in the state of Texas.
A Soviet team acting under the terms of the INF treaty undertook a final inspection of the UK Royal Air Force base at Greenham Common in Berkshire on May 28 following the removal of the last cruise missiles in March [see p. 38122].
Continuing disagreement over conventional forces
Talks between a Soviet military delegation led by the Soviet Chief of Staff Gen. Mikhail Moiseyev and senior US Defence and State Department officials held in Washington on May 20-22 failed to resolve continuing differences over the implementation of the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty signed in November 1990 [see pp. 37838-39; 38027; 38122].
During a series of meetings with US President Bush, the US Defence Secretary Dick Cheney and the US Secretary of State James Baker, Moiseyev was informed that the USA would refuse to accept the reclassification of three Soviet motorized divisions as naval coastal units so as to exempt them from the terms of the treaty [see p. 38027].
The decision to send a high-level Soviet military delegation to Washington, announced on May 7, had reportedly been prompted by suggestions that the USA had agreed to a compromise formula permitting the Soviet Union to redefine its motorized forces as naval coastal units, provided that the overall number of Soviet forces was reduced to treaty levels.
Moves to resolve differences on the CFE treaty were said also to have been encouraged by Soviet President Gorbachev who was reported to be keen to clear remaining obstacles in the way of a US-Soviet summit meeting [see pp. 37945; 37979].
Speaking on Soviet television on May 22, Moiseyev acknowledged that although "a certain amount of understanding was achieved" , problems remained "regarding the naval forces" .
On May 24 the head of the US delegation at the CFE negotiations in Vienna told allies in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) that US-Soviet talks in Washington had failed to resolve key issues pertaining to the CFE treaty.
US offer banning chemical weapons
In a statement regarded as a substantive advance over the superpower agreement on chemical weapons concluded in June 1990 [see pp. 37518-19], Bush offered on May 13 to destroy all existing stockpiles of US chemical weapons within 10 years and to impose a ban on the use of chemical weapons by the USA in any circumstances.
In his statement released on the eve of the resumption of the Geneva Conference on Disarmament [see p. 37979], Bush said that "we are formally forswearing the use of chemical weapons for any reason, including retaliation" and added that "the USA unconditionally commits itself to the destruction of all our stocks of chemical weapons within 10 years of [the convention's]entry into force" .
On May 23 the head of the Soviet delegation at the Disarmament Conference welcomed Bush's offer, saying that it opened the way for the Conference to reach agreement on a comprehensive chemical weapons ban before 1992.
Bush arms control plan
On May 29 Bush called for an end to the proliferation of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons in the Middle East and urged the world's leading arms suppliers, notably the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, to convene an international conference to devise guidelines to curb arms sales to the region.
Unveiling his plans during a speech to the US Air Force Academy in Colorado, Bush said that his initiative was intended "to slow and then reverse the build-up of unnecessary and destabilizing weapons" in the Middle East.
He emphasised, however, that effective arms control depended on "the co-operation of many states" .
A White House fact sheet outlining the details of the Bush plan said that the USA was seeking "a freeze on the acquisition, production and testing of surface-to-surface missiles" in the Middle East, leading to their "ultimate elimination" .
It said that the acquisition of conventional weapons would be based on the doctrine of "minimum deterrence" , defined as the capability which the states in the region "legitimately need to deter and defend against military aggression" .
On May 30 the Israeli Defence Minister Moshe Arens welcomed the Bush initiative, saying that "we are very strong supporters of arms control" .
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
Accession of El Salvador — Reorganization of secretariat
El Salvador was included as the 102nd contracting party to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in an official list released on May 24.
Reorganization of secretariat
On May 17 the Director-General, Arthur Dunkel, announced a number of organizational changes in the secretariat effective from June 1.
The changes, linked to the impending retirement of one of the two deputy directors-general, Madan G. Mathur, on July 31, were reported to be in anticipation of the resumption of the "Uruguay Round" of talks under way at the technical level in Geneva since Feb. 26 [see p. 38027].
Frank Wolter, 47, responsible for the organization's trade review publications, was appointed head of the Agriculture Division, and Jagdish Bhagwati of Columbia University in New York, an exponent of free trade policies, was appointed economic policy adviser to Dunkel.
ASIA — PACIFIC
REFUGEES
UN conference on Vietnamese boat people
Representatives from 29 countries, the European Communities (EC) and the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) met in Geneva on April 30-May 1 to discuss ways of encouraging Vietnamese "boat people" to return to Vietnam, and also agreed to establish a committee to consider "alternative and additional measures" to deal with those unwilling to return.
A communiqué issued by the UNHCR on May 1 deplored the "false hopes" raised among some refugees, and stressed "that those not recognized as refugees must understand that there is no other solution than to return to Vietnam with guarantees for their safety and dignity assured by the UNHCR" .
The EC announced that it was allocating US$12,000,000 towards creating employment opportunities in Vietnam to encourage the return of the boat people.
Delegates said later that the conference had been ambiguous about the message it had wished to convey.
A member of the United Kingdom delegation said that the situation of the "boat people" in Hong Kong had become "intolerable" and hinted that Hong Kong would take "other measures" in the absence of a firmer international stand on repatriation.
The United States and Vietnamese delegations, however, were reportedly particularly opposed to forcible repatriation [see also p. 37185], although one participant, quoted by Le Monde of May 4, warned that "the patience of countries of first asylum [Indonesia, Hong Kong, the Philippines and Thailand]was not unlimited" .
A report in the Guardian of May 21 said that Hong Kong was seeking to abandon its policy of screening introduced in June 1988 [see p. 36763]in favour of re-classifying all boat people as "economic migrants" , thereby making them subject, in theory, to mandatory repatriation.
As of May 20 a total of 6,700 Vietnamese boat people had arrived in Hong Kong since January (as compared with 6,600 for the whole of 1990), and the arrival of 387 on May 7 was the highest recorded daily influx since 1989.
Projected increase in refugee numbers
According to figures released by the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and published in Le Monde of May 2, the number of refugees worldwide was expected to exceed 15,000,000 during 1991.
Some estimates suggested that the total could be much higher.
In Africa there were an estimated 4,500,000 refugees.
In Mozambique alone, up to 1,000,000 people were reported to have been displaced within the country because of the civil war, while another 1,500,000 were known to have sought asylum elsewhere.
In Asia the number of refugees appeared to be relatively stable with Pakistan still housing an estimated 3,300,000 Afghan refugees.
In South America, the UNHCR recorded 1,200,000 people as refugees, while in Europe and North America the number of those seeking asylum rose from 22,320 in 1986 to 1,687,200 at the end of 1990.
INTERNATIONAL
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
44th World Health Assembly
Delegates representing 166 member states of the World Health Organization (WHO) met for the 44th World Health Assembly in Geneva on May 6-16.
Mongolia's Minister of Health Pagbajavyn Nyamdavaa was elected president of the Assembly, which admitted the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) as full members, raising total WHO membership to 168; the island of Tokelau was welcomed as an associate member.
In his opening address, the WHO Director-General Hiroshi Nakajima called for a "new paradigm for health" to achieve "the goal of health for all" in the face of rapid political, economic, social and environmental changes.
On May 14, Nakajima issued a joint appeal with James Grant, the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), urging delegates to improve the health of children and their mothers by implementing the resolutions of the 1990 World Summit for Children [see p. 37732].
The Assembly called on member states to respond to WHO's urgent appeal for US$3,000,000 to help cyclone victims in Bangladesh [see p. 38176]and urged more effective measures to combat the cholera epidemic in parts of South America [see p. 38142].
The WHO estimated that reported cases of cholera worldwide had risen about 30 per cent in 1990 to almost 70,000, even before the outbreak in South America.
Some of the highest recorded increases were in Africa, particularly in Zambia, Benin and Mozambique.
The Assembly resolved, for the first time, to eliminate leprosy as a public health problem by the year 2000 and called on the 93 countries where leprosy was endemic "to further increase or maintain their political commitment" to leprosy control.
It urged member states to develop national policies to maintain the balance between the urban population and infrastructure, and noted that from 1950 to 1990 the world's urban population had almost tripled, from 734,000,000 to 2,390 million.
Other resolutions adopted included action against tuberculosis, acute respiratory diseases and dracunculiasis (guinea-worm infestation, caused by contaminated water); the development of new children's vaccines; and resolutions on the health of the Arab population in the Israeli-occupied Territories as well as of refugees worldwide.
The Assembly approved a programme budget of US$734,936,000 for the biennium 1992-93.
INTERNATIONAL
UNFPA
State of the World Population
The State of the World Population Report for 1991 released by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) on May 13 warned that the world's population was growing faster than predicted.
Despite significant advances in family planning, the report said, birth control had become a matter of global survival.
Launching the report, UNFPA's Executive Director Nafis Sadik said in London that loss of life from famine, AIDS and natural disasters would have no lasting impact on the burgeoning populations of Africa and Asia.
According to the report, the world's population was growing at 250,000 a day.
It was expected to reach 5,400 million by mid-1991 and 6,400 million by 2001.
Earlier forecasts, suggesting that the world's population would stabilize at about 10,200 million by 2085, had been revised upwards with some experts predicting that that total could be reached as early as 2060.
The largest relative increases had occurred in the developing world, with Africa's population set to grow from 650,000,000 in 1991 to 900,000,000 by the end of the century.
Nigeria, with an estimated 108,000,000 people, was predicted to double its population by 2010.
The report showed that although China's population would grow to more than 1,500 million by 2025, the success of family planning programmes had slowed birth rates.
In the developed countries some of the slowest birth rates were recorded in Europe, where the United Kingdom's population was forecast to grow by a mere 2,000,000 by 2025 and that of France by 5,000,000.
Italy's population would drop by 4,000,000 in the same period.
The population of the USA, estimated at 250,000,000, would grow to almost 300,000,000 by 2025.
Although the report showed that the percentage of couples in developing countries using birth control had risen from less than 10 per cent in the 1960s to 51 per cent in 1991, it stressed that its target of lowering global fertility from 3.8 to 3.3 births per woman required the number of couples using contraception in the developing world to rise from 381 million in 1990 to 567 million by 2000.
INTERNATIONAL
UNDP
Human Development Report
In its Human Development Report 1991 released on May 22, the UN Development Programme (UNDP) called on developing countries to finance their human development needs by changing government spending patterns, and urged aid donors to base their allocations on progress in human development and human rights.
The report said that up to US$50,000 million could be released for human development in developing countries by recasting priorities in national budgets.
Cuts in military spending which absorbed as much as 5 per cent of the gross national product (GNP) of developing countries, would constitute the chief source of additional resources.
The report criticized existing priorities in the allocation of foreign aid, noting that only one-12th of official development assistance (ODA) was earmarked for human development needs.
Ranking 160 countries on its human development index (HDI)[see p. 37889], the report placed Japan in first place with Sierra Leone last.
For the first time the report also compiled a "human freedom index" (HFI) which placed Sweden in first place and Iraq last.
INTERNATIONAL
WHALING
Continuation of whaling ban
A decision to uphold the ban on commercial whaling for a further year, pending research on a system of establishing a sustainable quota system, was the main outcome of the annual meeting of the International Whaling Commission (IWC), held in Reykjavik, Iceland, on May 27-31.
The decision was denounced by Iceland and Norway.
Iceland's commissioner Gudmundur Eriksson stated that he would advise his government against continuing membership of the organization; the Norwegian position was to be kept under review.
The ban on commercial whaling, agreed by the IWC in 1982 with effect from 1985 [see pp. 31828; 34717-18], had been upheld at the 1990 IWC meeting in Noordwijk [see p. 37630].
The meeting took place against a background of disputes over (i) the extent to which whale populations had recovered to levels which permitted sustainable hunting;(ii) the system by which hunting quotas might be determined; and (iii) whether whale killing was inherently unethical.
A number of "anti-whaling" countries, notably Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom, argued that the present normal method of killing (by explosive harpoon) was morally unacceptable.
The meeting accepted by 18 votes to six a proposal by the IWC's scientific committee that commercial hunting could be resumed when stocks had reached 54 per cent of their estimated population prior to large-scale commercial exploitation.
However, the resolution also demanded further research into the proposal over the next year, during which the commercial ban would remain in force.
An alternative proposal, support for which was centred around the strongly "pro-whaling" members — Norway, Iceland and Japan — that commercial whaling be allowed to resume immediately on all stocks which had recovered to 30 per cent of estimated pre-hunting levels, was rejected by 19 votes to seven.
The meeting also rejected an Icelandic request for an "interim" commercial quota of 192 minke and 91 fin whales.
Aboriginal subsistence whaling was allowed to continue subject to a catch limit of 141 bowheads over the three years 1992-94 (with a maximum annual strike of 54) for Alaskan Eskimos, 169 gray whales per year for 1992-94 for Soviet Eskimos, and for Greenlanders 21 fin whales in 1992 and 315 minke whales over 1992-94 (maximum 115 per year) off west Greenland and a maximum of 12 minke whales per year for 1992-94 off east Greenland.
The Soviet Union was requested not to issue a permit for a proposed scientific catch of 90 minke whales (which had been scheduled for summer 1991), and Japan was invited to reconsider its research under special permit proposing an Antarctic catch of 300 minke whales (plus or minus 10 per cent, scheduled for the 1991-92 season).
The next IWC annual meeting was scheduled to be held in Glasgow, in the UK, in June 1992.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE
Soviet mission involving British cosmonaut — Failure of US shuttle
Helen Sharman, 27, became the first British cosmonaut on May 18.
She and two male Russian cosmonauts formed the crew of three on a TM-12 Soyuz capsule which travelled to the Soviet Mir space station.
Sharman returned to earth on May 26 with the Soviet cosmonauts Musa Manarov and Viktor Afanásiev, who had completed six months aboard the Mir space station.
Failure to attract commercial sponsorship for the eight-day Soviet-UK Juno mission had left the organizers, the Moscow Narodny Bank in London, with an estimated debt of £5,000,000.
Over 20 British scientific experiments due to be performed on the flight [see also pp. 37437; 37932]were cancelled for lack of funds.
The mission attracted further media coverage when the flight commander, Anatoly Artsebarsky, stated in a pre-launch interview that he believed Sharman's male back-up, Maj. Timothy Mace, was better qualified for the trip and that it was "not a woman's business to fly into space" .
The launching of the United States space shuttle Columbia, due on May 22, was postponed until June 1 at the earliest.
One of the flight computers had to be replaced along with nine fuel sensors and a critical electronic unit or "black box" .
A primary purpose of the nine-day flight was to have been gathering evidence on how the human body adapted to weightlessness.
INTERNATIONAL
VATICAN
Encyclical
A major Papal Encylical entitled Centesimus Annus issued on May 2 marked the 100th anniversary of the 1891 Encyclical Rerum Novarum.
Commentators noted that it echoed the earlier document in its advocacy of social justice linked with the free operation of the market.
The pronouncement by Pope John Paul II was said, in its indirect commentary on events in eastern Europe, to mark a slight shift to the right compared with papal statements of recent years.
Its carefully worded warnings that unbridled "capitalism" and creeping "materialism" should be circumscribed by moral constraints evoked a favourable response from various sectors of Catholic opinion.
Papal visit to Portugal
In his second visit to Portugal on May 10-14 [for his first visit, in May 1982, see p. 31604], John Paul II prayed before a shrine of Our Lady of Fatima, near Lisbon, in thanks for his survival of an assassination attempt exactly 10 years earlier.
Speaking from the basilica on the site where the Virgin was said to have appeared in 1917, he told a crowd of thousands that the Virgin was to be thanked for "leading nations towards liberty" — interpreted as a reference to the collapse of communist regimes in eastern Europe.
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
Crash of Austrian airliner
A total of 223 people were killed on May 26 when an Austrian Lauda Air Boeing 767-300, on its way from Bangkok to Vienna, crashed over Suphan Buri province in north-western Thailand.
Although preliminary speculation was that the crash might have been caused by a bomb, accident investigators revealed that the plane had nose-dived after the right engine suddenly went into reverse thrust; electronic safety systems designed to cope with this had apparently failed, and a warning light had either malfunctioned or had not been believed by the pilot.
A plane belonging to Indonesia's state-run Merpati Nusantara Airlines crashed in North Sulawesi on May 10, killing all 13 people on board.
INTERNATIONAL
IN BRIEF WAR CRIMES: in the United Kingdom the War Crimes Act, allowing for the prosecution of alleged Nazi war criminals, received the Royal Assent on May 9, despite having been defeated twice in the House of Lords.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Area: 9,970,610 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 26,400,000 (1990 est.).
Capital: Ottawa.
Languages:English and French.
Religion:Christianity (about 45% Roman Catholic).
Armed Forces: 90,000 (1990).
Currency: Canadian dollar (US$1.00=Can. $1.1517 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NATO; OECD; OAS.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Dominion of Canada is a member of the Commonwealth, with the British sovereign as head of state, represented by a Governor-General.
The Federal Parliament comprises a Senate of 104 members and a House of Commons of 295 members elected for a maximum of five years by universal adult suffrage under a simple majority system in single-member constituencies.
The Governor-General appoints the Prime Minister and, on the latter's recommendation, the members of the Cabinet.
Main government leaders
Governor-General: Ramon John Hnatyshyn.
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney.
Other principal ministers: Donald Mazankowski (Deputy Prime Minister, Finance); Joe Clark (Constitutional Affairs; President of Privy Council); John Crosbie (Fisheries and Oceans); Michael Wilson (Industry, Science and Technology; International Trade).
Cabinet changes in 1990
A Cabinet reshuffle took place on Feb. 23 [see pp. 37242-43], and Lucien Bouchard resigned as Environment Minister on May 21 [see p. 37519].
Ruling party
Progressive Conservative Party (PCP — Brian Mulroney fed.
l.; Bill Jarvis pres.), a broad-based right-wing party which encompasses North American, French and British traditions of conservatism.
The federal party has branches in each of the country's 10 provinces.
Other parties
The Liberal Party of Canada (Jean Chrétien fed.
l.), established in 1867, is the principal party of opposition.
The New Democratic Party (NDP — Audrey McLaughlin fed.
l.), established in 1961, is the most successful social democratic party in north America.
Le Parti Québecois (Jacques Parizeau l.), a social democratic party founded in 1968, is committed to the achievement of sovereignty for the predominantly French-speaking province of Quebec.
The Social Credit Party of British Columbia (Socred) is an autonomous provincial party which holds power in British Columbia.
Elections
The last federal general election was in November 1988, when the PCP won 170 of the 295 seats in the House of Commons [see pp. 36425-27].
Province Governing Party Date of last election Alberta PCP March 1989 British Columbia Social Credit October 1986 Manitoba PCP September 1990 New Brunswick Liberal October 1987 Newfoundland Liberal April 1989 Nova Scotia PCP September 1988 Ontario NDP September 1990 Prince Edward Island Liberal May 1989 Quebec Liberal September 1989 Saskatchewan PCP October 1986 
Political affiliation of provincial governments
1990 OVERVIEW
Politics
During 1990 the Meech Lake Accord, a package of constitutional reforms conceived by Mulroney, collapsed in acrimonious chaos.
The accord's most controversial element had been its attempt to induce Quebec to sign the 1982 federal Constitution in return for the recognition of the predominantly French-speaking province as a "distinct society" .
The accord had been passed by the federal House of Commons in 1988, but its failure to achieve ratification by all 10 provinces by June 23, 1990, meant that it collapsed [see pp. 37519-20].
The failure of the accord increased pressure — both within the Liberal provincial government and the opposition Parti Québecois — for the province's separation from Canada.
This was reflected at federal level by the defection of nine French-speaking PCP and Liberal MPs to form in mid-1990 the Bloc Québecois [see p. 37648].
These developments, together with a growing unwillingness by many of the English-speaking provinces to make special concessions to Quebec, caused serious doubt over the future of Canada's current federal structure.
After a "cooling-off period" of several months, Mulroney on Nov. 1 announced the establishment of a national commission to examine the future of the Canadian federation.
The 12-member Citizen's Forum on Canada's Future, which was drawn from a cross-section of the country but which excluded serving politicians, was due to report by July 1991.
It was expected to co-ordinate a process of consensus-building by holding meetings throughout the country involving maximum public participation.
The Quebec National Assembly established an alternative Commission on the Political and Constitutional Future of Quebec, however, which began hearing evidence on Nov. 7.
The aim of the Quebec commission — a 36-member panel of business, labour and community leaders in Quebec — was to recommend a new relationship between the 7,000,000-strong province and the federal government, a process which most observers believed would involve the holding of a referendum on the issue of secession similar to that which was defeated in 1980 [see also p. 38092].
In December the federal parliament set up a committee to examine ways of streamlining the process of constitutional reform, and in particular considering the unanimity among all 10 provinces currently required to achieve key constitutional changes.
On Jan. 30, 1991, the ruling Liberal Party in Quebec released a report which offered a "last chance" to Canada by demanding that the federal government accord a special status to Quebec whereby the province would have jurisdiction over almost all of its domestic affairs.
If such an agreement had not been reached within 18 months, the government of Quebec would hold a referendum on the issue of independence.
The report was adopted at a party convention in March.
In addition to the Meech Lake fiasco and its aftermath, Mulroney's government also lost popularity throughout 1990 through its determination to introduce a goods and services tax (GST).
This widely disliked 7 per cent value added tax was even unpopular within sections of the PCP.
It was resolutely opposed by the opposition parties even to the extent of provoking a new constitutional crisis by disrupting work within the Senate.
The impasse was eventually broken after the Prime Minister invoked an arcane constitutional device to create more PCP Senators [see p. 37705], and used a closure motion for the first time within Canada's upper chamber.
Although the new tax became operational from Jan. 1, 1991, most commentators agreed that the federal government had achieved only a pyhrric victory.
A further problem for Mulroney concerned Indian rights, a subject which had become highly political since 1982 when the new federal Constitution had "recognized and affirmed…the existing aboriginal and treaty rights" of the Indian, Inuit and Metis peoples.
The issue received considerable publicity during 1990 owing to the 10-week Mohawk uprising in Oka, west of Montreal [see pp. 37448; 37706].
Although they were defeated, the determination of the rebel Indians illustrated the depth of resentment over issues such as land rights and inadequate social resources.
Support for the rebels from among the 500,000 Canadians who were registered as Indians showed the growing militancy of the native Canadian lobby.
On Sept. 25 Mulroney promised urgent action on land claims and aboriginal rights but declined to reveal what steps he proposed to take.
On May 16 the largest Indian land claim in Canadian history was agreed in principle, giving some 17,000 Inuit ownership of 350,000 sq km of the eastern and central Arctic, together with Can.
$612,000,000 in compensation over the next 14 years.
If finalized, the agreement would be the last of four deals designed to end decades of wrangling over the issue of rights to the land above the 60th parallel and to the oil and gas contained therein.
By the end of the year the Prime Minister's personal approval rating, as measured by opinion polls, had fallen as low as 12 per cent, whilst that for the PCP federal government was little higher.
The Liberal Party also showed declining levels of popular support.
The beneficiaries of this increasing dissatisfaction with the two major parties were the New Democratic Party (which swept to power in Ontario in September 1990 — see p. 37705), the Bloc Québecois and the Reform Party of Canada — a regional grouping established in 1987 on a platform of greater influence for western Canada at the expense of Quebec and the Atlantic provinces.
Economy
The budget for the fiscal year ending on March 31, 1991, was presented to parliament on Feb. 20, 1990 [see p. 37415].
Overall expenditure was set at Can.
$147,800 million, with revenue estimated at Can.
$119,300 million.
The budget deficit target for the year was raised to Can.
$28,500 million (4.2 per cent of GDP), and for 1991/92 it was set at Can.
$26,500 million.
Although the Mulroney government had generally succeeded in maintaining a tight rein on federal spending, the country's budget deficit had remained stubbornly high at around Can.
$30,000 million per year.
The main reason was the trend of increasing interest rates — in 1990 they reached an eight-year high — together with the lower tax yields associated with slower economic growth.
Towards the end of 1990 it was officially acknowledged that the Canadian economy was in recession.
Figures released at the end of November showed that GNP had contracted at a compound rate of 1 per cent between July and September (measured in constant 1986 prices), following a 1.2 per cent decline in the previous quarter.
Business investment was also weak, falling by 3.2 per cent in real terms in the third quarter.
In addition to the recession, the Canadian economy had had to face painful structural adjustments arising from the United States-Canada free trade agreement which came into force in January 1989 [see below]and which forced Canadian business and labour into more direct competition with US companies.
In May 1990 the Canadian government unveiled a Can.
$584,000,000 package to support its beleaguered east-coast fishing industry.
The plan, which included conservation, diversification and financial assistance, was designed to combat the severe depletion of east-coast fish stocks, particularly off Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, which had caused the closure of several plants and the unemployment of several thousand fishermen and processing workers.
It was estimated that Canada's 1990 wheat crop was 28,600,000 tonnes, the second largest recorded, and 4,200,000 tonnes more than in 1989.
Saturated world markets, together with the international embargo against Iraq (which had been the fifth largest importer of Canadian wheat in 1989), meant, however, that the country's transport and storage facilities were placed under considerable strain.
Relations with USA
The free trade agreement between Canada and the USA (signed in 1988 and implemented from Jan. 1, 1989), which provided for the eventual abolition of all customs duties between the USA and Canada after one, five and 10 years, continued to produce disputes between the two countries over specific items during 1990.
It also remained a source of controversy among the Canadian electorate, its supporters maintaining that it was essential for competing with the world's other large trading blocs, while its opponents blamed it for Canada's current economic malaise.
Although the then International Trade Minister John Crosbie staunchly defended the pact, the Economic Council of Canada, an independent advisory body established by the Federal Parliament, decided not to attempt to assess its impact until it had been in operation for five years.
On April 1, 1990, pressure from US and Canadian companies led to the implementation a year sooner than originally scheduled of tariff cuts worth a total of about Can.
$6,000 million under the terms of the free-trade agreement.
The 400 items to which the accelerated cuts applied included telecommunications and photographic equipment, diesel locomotives, petrochemicals, printed circuits and aluminium products.
The items represented around 3 per cent of the total trade between the two countries.
Relations with Soviet Union
President Gorbachev of the Soviet Union made an official visit to Canada on May 29-31 en route for his Washington summit with US President Bush.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Area: 9,372,614 sq km.
Population: 249,632,692 (1990 census).
Capital: Washington DC.
Languages: English; Spanish-speaking minority.
Religion: Christianity (majority, strict separation of church and state); Armed forces: 2,117,900 (1990).
Currency: US dollar.
Major international affiliations: GATT; OECD; OAS; NATO; ANZUS.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The federal government of the United States of America embodies a separation of powers between the executive, headed by a President elected for four years, the legislative branch, Congress, which comprises the Senate (with 100 members who sit for six years, one-third being elected every two years) and the House of Representatives (with 435 members elected every two years), and the judicial branch, headed by the Supreme Court.
In addition to this basic tripartite division, federal regulatory agencies enjoy a semi-independent status and exercise a mix of executive, legislative and judicial powers.
The balance and distribution of power and responsibility between the branches of government is subject to constant dispute and evolution.
There is a Cabinet but this normally has little corporate significance.
The Supreme Court enjoys an effective if indirect and delayed veto over legislation and executive actions, and where its decisions are based on the Constitution they may only be overridden by constitutional amendment (involving the approval with two-thirds majorities, of the House and of the Senate, and of three-quarters of the states).
The sovereign powers of the individual states of the Union (now numbering 50) have declined continuously for at least 120 years and are severely circumscribed or non-existent in many of the major areas of public policy.
Main government leaders
President: George Herbert Walker Bush.
Vice-President: J. Danforth Quayle.
Other principal ministers: James Baker (Secretary of State); Nicholas Brady (Treasury Secretary); Richard (Dick) Cheney (Defence Secretary).
Other leading executive branch officials: John Sununu (White House Chief of Staff); Richard Darman (Director of Office of Management and Budget); Gen. Brent Scowcroft (Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs).
1990 personnel changes in executive branch
Resignations: Oct. 24 Elizabeth Dole (Labour Secretary — see pp. 37769); Nov. 7 William Bennett (Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy — see p. 37847); Dec. 12 Lauro Cavazos (Education Secretary — see p. 37911).
Replacement nominations: Lynn Martin, Bob Martinez and Lamar Alexander respectively [see pp. 37847; 37911].
Political parties
The USA has a two-party system in which it is not uncommon for the executive and legislative branches of government to be controlled by different parties.
Both of the two main parties are loose federal alliances of local, state and regional organizations.
Republican Party, est. 1854 (Clayton Yeutter chair of national committee — see p. 37854).
Democratic Party, est. 1800 (Ron Brown chair of national committee).
Elections
In presidential elections held on Nov. 8, 1988, the Republican Party candidate and then Vice-President, George Bush, defeated his Democratic Party rival Mike Dukakis; he duly took office as President on Jan. 20, 1989.
In simultaneous legislative elections the Democrats retained control over Congress [see pp. 36337-42].
After the mid-term elections of Nov. 6, 1990, the Democrats held 267 seats in the House of Representatives and 56 seats in the Senate [see pp. 37846-47].
1990 OVERVIEW
In the domestic sphere 1990 was dominated by the protracted dispute over the budget between Bush and the Democrat majority in Congress [see below]and by a series of financial and political scandals.
Savings and loans scandal
The single largest corruption case in 1990 concerned the savings and loans companies ( "thrifts" — see also p. 37412).
Throughout the year numerous former senior figures within failed thrifts were indicted.
Treasury Secretary Brady informed Congress on May 23 that the total cost of rescuing the country's stricken thrifts could reach $300,000 million over 10 years.
As the economy slipped into recession and the value of real estate declined, however, estimates of the bailout cost continued to rise throughout the year.
At the beginning of 1991 Brady suggested that the operation would cost $80,000 million in the next year alone, and he pressed Congress to provide immediate additional funds.
The political ramifications of the scandal centred mainly on the case of the "Keating Five" senators [see below; p. 37405].
Charles H. Keating, the former head of the Lincoln thrift in California, personified the thrifts scandal; the debts left by the collapse of the Lincoln — estimated to be around $2,000 million — were greater than those of any other thrift.
Keating was arrested on Sept. 18 after the Los Angeles district attorney issued a 42-count state indictment against him and three others.
There was also political interest in the involvement of Neil Bush, the President's son, a junior director of Silverado, a Colorado thrift which collapsed in 1988 with losses of around $1,000 million.
Although not accused of fraud, Bush was charged by federal regulators with having had a conflict of interest while serving as a director of Silverado.
On Dec. 18 a judge found that Bush had engaged in unsound business practices and recommended that a "cease and desist" order should be issued against him, restricting his future involvement in the banking sector.
Bush's lawyers announced that they would appeal if the judge's recommendation was accepted by the Office of Thrift Supervision.
Department of Housing and Urban Development scandal
The Housing and Urban Development (HUD) scandal, first revealed in 1989 [see p. 37405], continued to develop during 1990.
In testimony to a House subcommittee in late April and early May, DuBois L. Gilliam, a former HUD official currently serving a prison sentence for manipulating housing grants, alleged that former HUD Secretary Samuel R. Pierce had ordered him on several occasions to award HUD grants on political considerations.
He also claimed that staff aides to the then Vice-President Bush had intervened with HUD in 1985 in order to win a $500,000 grant for a Kansas City developer, Hector Barreto, a longtime supporter of Bush.
The grant was to fund a project which had been previously rejected as ineligible.
Marilyn L. Harrell, one of the key figures in the HUD scandal, was sentenced on June 22 to three years and 10 months in prison, and ordered to serve three years' probation and to pay $600,000 in restitution.
Harrell, who had come to personify the corruption and mismanagement at the centre of the HUD scandal, had pleaded guilty in January to one count of embezzlement and one of tax evasion.
It was alleged that she had embezzled at least $5,700,000 from housing foreclosure sales handled for HUD between 1985 and 1988.
Harrell claimed to have used much of the money to assist the poor, thereby acquiring the nickname "Robin HUD" [see also p. 37405].
Ethics and corruption issues involving legislators
The House Committee on Standards of Official Conduct, the Ethics Committee, announced on March 8 that it was dropping its inquiry into the financial affairs and conduct of minority leader Newt Gingrich (Rep., Georgia).
The Committee criticized Gingrich for abusing mailing privileges and for failing to report a real estate deal.
The charges, which had been brought by Bill Alexander (Dem., Arkansas), were alleged by Gingrich to have been motivated by the desire for revenge over Gingrich's leading role in forcing the 1989 resignation of House Speaker Jim Wright [see p. 37406].
On July 25 the full Senate followed the recommendation of its Ethics Committee by voting to denounce David Durenberger,(Rep., Minnesota), for violating congressional rules on outside income [see p. 37606].
The Senate Ethics Committee opened investigation in November into the conduct of five of its members involved with Keating, the head of a failed thrift [see above].
The committee concluded its investigation in February 1991, finding substantial evidence of improper conduct against only one of the five, Democrat Alan Cranston [see pp. 37848; 37998].
The House voted on July 26, 1990, to follow the recommendation of its Ethics Committee by reprimanding Barney Frank (Dem., Massachusetts) over his relationship with a male prostitute [see p. 37606].
The trial of Harold E. Ford,(Dem., Tennessee since 1974), on charges of conspiracy, bank and mail fraud, was declared a mistrial on April 27, and a retrial was ordered.
Another Democratic member of the House, Floyd H. Flake of New York, was indicted on Aug. 2 on 17 charges of conspiracy, fraud and tax evasion arising from the alleged embezzlement of funds from a federally subsidized housing project.
His wife was also indicted on related charges.
Many representatives of the black community argued that the prosecution of Flake was an example of the selective prosecution of black elected figures.
The case against the Flakes collapsed in court in April 1991, leading the prosecution to request that all charges against the couple be dropped.
Stock market corruption cases
Martin Siegel, a former takeover specialist at Kidder Peabody and Co., was sentenced to two months in prison and five years' probation on June 15.
He had pleaded guilty in 1987 to tax evasion and the violation of securities laws.
Trials arising from a two-year FBI probe of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the Chicago Board of Trade (CBT) began in 1990.
Of the 48 people eventually indicted [see p. 37406]many pleaded guilty and co-operated with the authorities, but some maintained their innocence and elected to face trial.
The first case — that of three traders in Swiss francs — ended on July 9 with one man being acquitted and the other two being convicted only on relatively minor charges.
On July 26 the two were ordered to be retried after a mistrial was declared.
The investigation was given fresh life with the conviction in January 1991 of 10 soyabean brokers and traders [see p. 37954].
Karsten Mahimann resigned as chairman of the CBT on Aug. 1 after the authorities laid fraud charges against the struggling Stotler Group Inc., a brokerage firm of which Mahimann was chairman.
The first CBT chairman to resign in 130 years, he was succeeded by CBT vice-chairman, William F. O'Connor.
The four-year investigation into former "junk-bond king" , Michael Milken ended in November 1990 when he was sentenced to 10 years in prison [see p. 37848].
Drexel Burnham Lambert, the investment bank for which Milken had worked, filed for bankruptcy in February 1990 [see pp. 37412-13].
Around 10,000 separate claims against the bank were filed before the Nov. 15 deadline.
The largest of these — some $6,800 million — came from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), which insured deposits with savings institutions, and the Resolution Trust Corporation (RTC), responsible for overseeing the thrift bailout.
The two agencies claimed that Drexel had "wilfully, deliberately and systematically plundered the thrifts" through bribery, manipulation and misrepresentations concerning the value and liquidity of junk bonds.
Congress on Oct. 1 approved legislation giving the Securities and Exchange Commission extensive new powers to regulate markets and combat fraud.
The legislation expanded the range of offences for which the SEC could impose civil penalties to include any breach of federal securities laws.
It also gave the agency powers to close the securities markets in time of emergency (although only with presidential permission); to inquire into the viability of brokers-dealers' holding-company parents; and to issue temporary cease-and-desist orders to combat fraudulent sales practices in the market for low-price securities.
Iran-contra scandal
Former National Security Adviser John Poindexter was convicted on April 7 on five felony counts arising from his part in the Iran-contra affair, and was sentenced to six months in prison [see pp. 37240-41; 37368-69; 37525].
A federal appeals court on July 20 overturned the three convictions against Poindexter's former college, Oliver North [see pp. 37241; 37605].
A prosecution appeal against the overturning of North's convictions was turned down by the Circuit Court of Appeals on Nov. 27.
[For other Iran-contra cases see p. 37911].
Defence
Until the August Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the ensuing Gulf crisis, the government had sought to reduce military expenditure in accordance with increasing congressional demands for an acknowledgement of the diminishing threat presented by the Soviet Union and east European countries [see pp. 37646-47].
Congress approved on Oct. 26 a defence budget for fiscal year 1991 of $288,300 million, $16,700 million less than had been authorized for the previous year [see p. 37409].
It included $2,890 million for the Strategic Defence Initiative (SDI) programme ($1,700 million less than originally requested by the Defence Department); $2,350 million for the B-2 Stealth bomber project; $688 million for the MX and Midgetman intercontinental ballistic missile programmes (although no funds were authorized for MX rail deployment); $1,840 million for the purchase of 52 Trident II submarine-launched ballistic missiles; and $964 million for the development of a new generation of fighter aircraft.
It also provided for a cut of 80,000 in troop numbers.
The Justice Department's so-called "Ill Wind" investigation of defence procurement fraud, which began in 1987, continued during 1990.
Although the investigation had resulted in the conviction of 34 individuals and four corporations and secured damages of nearly $32,000,000, it was increasingly criticized for its slow pace.
On May 24 the navy reopened its inquiry into the 1989 explosion on the battleship USS Iowa after new tests cast fresh doubt on its original finding that the disaster had been caused by a suicidal gunner [see pp. 36604; 37410].
The Iowa was formally decommissioned on Oct. 26, leaving the navy with three battleships.
Drugs
According to figures compiled by the National Institute of Drug Abuse in December 1990, the number of US citizens who used cocaine once a week or more fell by 23 per cent from 862,000 in 1988 to 662,000 in 1990.
Both the President and the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Louis Sullivan, welcomed the findings, although the methods of the survey were widely criticized by many independent experts.
By contrast, a report by the Senate judiciary committee estimated the number of hard-core cocaine and crack users at 2,400,000 and rising.
Supreme Court
The Supreme Court ruled on Feb. 20 by seven to two that parents suspected of child abuse could be imprisoned indefinitely for refusing to disclose the whereabouts of their children.
The Supreme Court ruled on April 18 that states could outlaw the possession or viewing of child pornography even in the privacy of an individual's home.
The ruling, by six to three, was the first occasion upon which the Court had authorized states to ban the private possession of pornographic material, a right previously protected by the First Amendment.
On June 11 the Supreme Court struck down a federal law prohibiting the desecration of the flag; a proposed constitutional amendment — supported by Bush — to prohibit such activities failed to generate sufficient support in Congress, although it obtained a simple majority in each chamber [see pp. 37241; 37525].
The Court ruled on June 21, by five to four, that federal agencies could not base their hiring, transfer or promotion decisions upon a person's party affiliation.
The decision, which dealt a heavy blow to political patronage, followed rulings by the Court in 1976 and 1980 which had ruled against patronage in the sphere of job dismissals.
In an eight to one decision on June 25 the Supreme Court ruled that a person had the right to refuse life-sustaining medical treatment, but that such treatment could only be withheld from a comatose person if there were convincing evidence that they would not have wished to continue their life in a debilitated state.
The decision arose from the case of Nancy Curzon, who was allowed to die on Dec. 26 after a Missouri court authorized the removal of her feeding tube [see p. 37911].
When the Supreme Court reconvened for its new session in October, its slim conservative majority had been made a little stronger by the retirement of liberal Justice William J. Brennan and his replacement by David H. Souter [see pp. 37604-05; 37703-04].
On Nov. 26 the Supreme Court let stand a ban on "begging and panhandling" in New York City's subway system.
Death sentences
The Supreme Court ruled by seven to two on April 24 that a condemned prisoner could be executed without any appeal having been undertaken.
The decision was reached in the case of a convicted Arkansas murderer, R. Gene Simmons, who had killed 16 relatives and acquaintances in 1987.
Simmons had refused to lodge an appeal against his sentence and the Supreme Court ruled that such an appeal could not be made on his behalf by a fellow inmate of death row.
The Chief Justice, William H. Rehnquist, was an outspoken advocate of changing the law to limit the number of appeals available to condemned prisoners.
Other legal cases
On Nov. 30 it was revealed that the protracted custody struggle over seven-year-old Hilary Foretich had ended with a New Zealand court granting custody of the child to her mother, Elizabeth Morgan.
Morgan, who alleged that her ex-husband Eric Foretich had sexually abused the child — an allegation not sustained by any court — had been imprisoned in 1987 for contempt of court after refusing to reveal the whereabouts of her daughter [see also p. 37407].
The Contemporary Arts Centre of Cincinnati was acquitted of obscenity on Oct. 5 for having displayed an exhibition of photographs by the late Robert Mapplethorpe.
In Florida on Oct. 20 two members of the rap music band "2 Live Crew" were acquitted on obscenity charges for having performed songs from their album As Nasty as They Wanna Be, although a retailer had been convicted of selling the record after it had been declared obscene by a federal district judge on June 6.
Crime
Following an alarming increase in 1989, murder rates continued to climb during 1990, a phenomenon generally attributed to the proliferation of disputes among drug dealers and the widespread availability of guns, particularly semi-automatic weapons.
Murder rates for 1990 increased in most cities.
Although a record 2,200 people were killed in New York City, Washington DC maintained its unofficial title of "murder capital of the USA" with 483 killings, the highest per capita rate in the country.
It was anticipated that the final 1990 homicide rate for the country as a whole would exceed the 1980 record of 23,040 murders.
In the final hours of its life on Oct. 27 the 101st Congress passed an omnibus anti-crime package, but only after consultation between House and Senate representatives had stripped it of its most innovative and controversial measures.
Removed from the bill were provisions to increase the number of crimes punishable by death; to restrict the appeal process for condemned prisoners; to ban some categories of semi-automatic weapons; and to allow appeals against the death sentence on the grounds of racial discrimination.
The remainder of the bill, including increased funds for local and federal law enforcement agencies, greater penalties for child pornography, fraud and drug offences, was signed by Bush on Nov. 28.
The Justice Department on Nov. 7 charged Walter Leroy Moody Jr with the murders of Judge Robert S. Vance and NAACP lawyer Robert E. Robinson, who had been killed in a mail-bomb campaign in December 1989 [see p. 37408].
Ku Klux Klan and other racist organizations
Members of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) marched through Gainesville, Georgia, on Sept. 2.
For the first time since 1951 the marchers were allowed to wear hoods in public, Georgia's anti-mask law having been struck down by the Supreme Court on May 25 as unconstitutional.Former grand wizard of the KKK, David Duke, a member of the Louisiana state legislature [see p. 37408], won 44 per cent of the vote on Oct. 6 in an open primary for a seat in the federal Senate.
He was defeated by incumbent Democrat J. Bennett Johnston who polled 54 per cent.
Although Duke had contested the election as a Republican, he had been disowned by most of the party's establishment, and the official Republican candidate had withdrawn from the contest in order to avoid splitting the anti-Duke vote.
The level of Duke's support — it was estimated that he polled 60 per cent of the white vote — surprised all political commentators.
It was reported on Oct. 30 that at least 14 people had been hurt and 40 arrested when protesters attempted to prevent 27 members of the KKK from marching in Washington DC.
In Oregon, on Oct. 22, a jury ordered white supremacist Tom Metzger to pay $5,000,000 as part of a $12,500,000 award to the family of an Ethiopian man beaten to death in November 1988.
The jury ruled that the perpetrators of the crime had been incited by the racist teachings of Metzger and his White Aryan Resistance movement.
Minorities
In a major victory for the concept of affirmative action or reverse discrimination, the Supreme Court ruled by five to four on June 27 that Congress had broad powers to mandate government policies which gave preference to racial or ethnic minorities.
The decision upheld the constitutionality of two programmes by the Federal Communications Commission.
The President signed legislation banning discrimination against the disabled on June 26.
The legislation, hailed as the strongest civil rights protection for the disabled anywhere in the world, prohibited discrimination in employment, public accommodation, transport or telecommunications.
Bush strongly backed the measure, passed by Congress on June 13, despite objections from some business groups that it would lead to numerous law suits.
The leaders of 28 Indian tribes from the USA and Canada met in Utah on March 24 to sign an Indigenous Nations Treaty which pledged mutual assistance in the event of an attack upon an individual tribe's traditions, culture or government.
The alliance followed an inter-state meeting in January which Indian leaders interpreted as further evidence of a nationwide attempt to erode the 300 existing treaties between Indian tribes and the federal government.
Peter MacDonald, leader of the largest Indian tribe, the Navajos, was convicted on Oct. 17 on 41 counts of bribery, corruption and conspiracy.
He was sentenced to six years in a tribal prison and fined $11,000.
[For opening of his trial in November 1989 see p. 37408.]
Immigration
Religion
A Christian Science couple in Boston were sentenced to 10 years' probation on July 6 after they had been found guilty of the manslaughter of their two-year-old son in 1986.
Following a central tenet of Christian Science the couple had eschewed modern medical methods and had attempted to cure their son's bowel obstruction through the power of prayer.
Although Massachusetts, like many states, had a statute which absolved parents who treated their children by spiritual healing from charges of abuse or neglect, the prosecution successfully argued that the statute did not apply in cases where death or serious injury resulted from such action.
Abortion
In the aftermath of the July 1989 Supreme Court decision undermining the 1973 landmark judgment Roe v. Wade (the foundation of legalized abortion), numerous bills were introduced in more than 40 state legislatures, the majority of which were designed to restrict the availability of abortion [see pp. 37310; 37406-07; 37605; 37999; 38138-39].
In the handful of states where such measures were successful in winning legislative approval, however, the bills were either vetoed by state governors or else beset with legal challenges [for Supreme Court ruling on parental notification see p. 37605].
1990 Census
At the end of 1990, after controversy over the census, the Census Bureau claimed that the total population of the USA was 249,632,692 — an increase of more than 23,000,000 (10.2 per cent) over the 1980 figure of 226,545,805.
The figure included almost 1,000,000 overseas federal workers, including military personnel and their dependents, who had been excluded from previous censuses.
The 1990 final figure fell 3,800,000 short of the earlier estimates of the Census Bureau, which, together with numerous complaints of inefficiency and a lack of resources, led many to suggest that the census had undercounted the population.
The census showed a continuing population drift to the west and south of the country, which, as the census was used as the basis for determining the relative representation of individual states within the House of Representatives, had important political implications.
If the census findings were not substantially revised by the Commerce Bureau (the parent agency of the Census Bureau), then 13 states (all but three of them in the north-east and mid-west) would lose seats in the House, while eight states including California, Florida and Texas would gain seats.
1991 budget
The protracted and divisive negotiations between Bush and the Democratic leaders of Congress over the budget for the fiscal year 1991 (beginning on Oct. 1, 1990) was an important domestic issue in 1990.
The budget was presented by Bush in January [see pp. 37177-79].
In an attempt to reconcile the demands of the administration with those of Congress, a budgetary summit representing the two sides convened in May [see p. 37447].
Despite months of discussion, however, the negotiations remained deadlocked [see p. 37646].
An agreement was finally reached, only hours before the beginning of the new fiscal year, but this was defeated in Congress on Oct. 5.
During the month-long crisis which followed, the government was maintained by a series of stop-gap funding measures.
A budget was finally passed on Oct. 28, which aimed to reduce the country's budget deficit by $41,400 million [see pp. 37704; 37768].
1992 budget
Bush presented to Congress on Feb. 4, 1991, a $1,445,900 million budget request for the fiscal year 1992 (beginning Oct. 1, 1991).
According to the administration's figures the budget deficit would reach a record $318,100 million in fiscal 1991, but would fall to $280,900 in fiscal 1992 [see pp. 37996-97].
Overall economic situation
By the end of 1990 it was generally accepted that the economy had entered a period of recession, although there remained significant differences over the depth and the likely duration of the downturn.
The output of goods and services declined sharply in the fourth quarter; preliminary estimates suggested that gross national product (GNP) in the quarter fell at an annual rate of 2.1 per cent(after adjustments for inflation and seasonal factors), the sharpest fall since the third quarter of 1982 when GNP fell at an annual rate of 3.2 per cent .
For 1990 as a whole, GNP rose by around 0.9 per cent, compared with 2.5 per cent in 1989.
During the last three months of the year some 500,000 jobs were lost, and by December overall unemployment had risen to 7,600,000, or 6.1 per cent of the labour force, the highest level for three years.
Industrial production fell by 1.4 per cent over the year as a whole, whilst inflation averaged 6.1 per cent, the highest level for nine years.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average and Share Index suffered its first annual fall since 1984 and its most serious since 1981, closing the year at 2,633.
The Federal Reserve Board on Dec. 18 cut its discount rate by half a percentage point in an effort to inject life into the sluggish economy.
A further cut was made on Feb. 1, 1991, to bring down the rate to 6 per cent[see p. 37997].
In April the trade deficit widened to $8,450 million from $6,100 in March, despite record exports of $33,280 million.
On April 27, however, only India was cited for unfair trading practices under the "Super 301" procedure of the 1988 Omnibus Trade Act.
By making concessions in March and April Japan, which had been named in 1989 together with India [see pp. 37377; 37352]and Brazil, escaped being cited.
The citation only of India, ranked 27th in US overseas markets and with a bilateral trade surplus of $850,000,000, accounting for only 1 per cent of the US deficit, was seen by most observers as evidence that the administration was anxious not to create ill feeling which might jeopardize the "Uruguay Round" of the multinational trade negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)[see p. 37930].
In June the deficit fell to $5,070 million, the best figure for more than seven years.
Although the figure rose in the latter half of the year as the Gulf crisis drove up oil prices, the growing recession in November and a fall in the volume of oil imports saw the deficit fall to $9,700 million, and to $6,300 million in December.
The deficit for 1990 as a whole was $100,900 million compared with $109,390 million for the whole of 1989.
The non-petroleum deficit was $46,300 million, almost 30 per cent lower than in 1989.
Foreign relations
The year began with US troops in occupation of Panama, and ended with a huge military force assembled in Saudi Arabia poised to invade Iraq and Iraqi-occupied Kuwait [for details of US role in Gulf crisis and subsequent war in early 1991 see pp. 37631-41; 37694-97; 37758-60; 37870-72; 37926-27; 37934-43; 37982-90; 38116-17].
AMERICAS
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
Area: 441.6 sq km.
Population: 79,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: St John's.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity (majority Anglican).
Armed forces: 700 (1989).
Currency: Eastern Caribbean dollar (US$1.00=EC$2.6976 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ACP; CARICOM; OAS; OECS.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The head of state of Antigua and Barbuda, an independent member of the Commonwealth since 1981, is the United Kingdom sovereign, represented by a Governor-General who is appointed on the advice of the Antiguan Prime Minister.
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral Parliament; the 17-member House of Representatives is popularly elected for up to five years, while the 17 members of the Senate are appointed by the Governor-General.
The Prime Minister and Cabinet are responsible to Parliament and are appointed to office by the Governor-General acting upon its advice.
Barbuda maintains a considerable degree of control over its internal affairs.
Main government leaders
Governor-General: Sir Wilfred Ebenezer Jacobs.
Prime Minister: Vere Bird Sr. 
Cabinet changes in 1990
Vere Bird Jr was removed from the Cabinet on a temporary basis in April; the removal was made permanent in November [see pp. 37449; 37849].
Ruling party
The Antigua Labour Party (ALP, social democratic, Vere Bird Sr, l.) has held power since 1976.
Other parties
There are two main opposition parties: the United National Democratic Party (UNDP, formed in 1986, Ivor Heath l); and the Antigua Caribbean Liberation Movement (ACLM, Tim Hector ch.).
Barbuda has two opposition parties of its own: the Barbuda National Party and the Barbuda People's Movement (Hilbourne Frank, l.).
Elections
The ALP won 15 of the 17 seats in the House of Representatives in the general election of 1989 [see p. 36847].
1990 OVERVIEW
The issue of corruption dominated political events in 1990, with the Prime Minister's son Vere Bird being implicated in a gun running scandal and removed from the Cabinet [see pp. 37449; 37849).
The controversy, like the 1986-87 international airport scandal [see p. 35766], pitted the Prime Minister's two sons, Lester and Vere Bird, against each other and became another aspect of the ongoing struggle to succeed their father as Prime Minister.
A budget for 1990 was presented on March 1, estimating recurrent expenditure at EC$272,000,000 [see p. 37819].
Antigua and Barbuda, along with the other Leeward Islands (Montserrat and St Kitts and Nevis), distanced itself in November 1990 from the proposed political union of the members of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, an idea which had been accepted in principle in 1987 [see also p. 37825].
Following the establishment of diplomatic relations with the Republic of China in September 1989, Zhou Wen Zhong, the newly appointed ambassador, presented his letter of credentials on Sept. 27, 1990.
AMERICAS
BAHAMAS
Area: 13,939 sq km.
Population: 248,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Nassau.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity (Anglican, Roman Catholic and Methodist).
Security forces: 2,750 (1990).
— Currency:Bahamian dollar (at par with US dollar).
Major international affiliations: ACP; CARICOM; NAM; OAS.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The head of state of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas, an independent member of the Commonwealth since July 1973, is the United Kingdom sovereign, represented by a Governor-General.
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral parliament consisting of a popularly elected 49-member House of Assembly and an appointed 16-member Senate.
Main government leaders
Governor-General: Sir Henry Taylor (acting).
Prime Minister: Sir Lynden Pindling, the longest serving leader in the Commonwealth, having held office since 1967.
Other principal minister: Sir Clement T. Maynard (Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Affairs).
Cabinet changes in 1990
Erwin Knowles resigned as Minister of Agriculture, Trade and Industry in March, and a Cabinet reshuffle was announced on Sept. 16 [see below; for full Cabinet list as of November 1990 see p. 37817].
Ruling party
The Progressive Liberal Party (PLP, Sir Lynden Pindling l.), founded in 1953 as a predominantly black organization, was a leading proponent of independence.
It has held power continuously since 1967.
Other parties
The Free National Movement (FNM, Herbert Ingraham l., after the death on May 9 of Sir Cecil Wallace-Whitfield) is the principal party of opposition.
Other opposition parties: the Social Democratic Party is an offshoot of the FNM, and the Vanguard Socialist Party (John McCartney l.) is a small left-wing group.
Elections
The PLP was returned to government for a fifth successive term at the general election of June 1987, winning 31 of the 49 seats in the House of Assembly, while the FNM won 16 seats [see p. 35372-73].
The next general election is due by mid-1992, the maximum life of a parliament being five years.
1990 OVERVIEW
The Pindling government was shaken in March by the resignation from the Cabinet of Agriculture, Trade and Industry Minister Knowles after the revelation of widespread corruption associated with the Bahamas Agricultural and Industrial Corporation [see p. 37817].
The Cabinet reshuffle on Sept. 16 — the first since January 1989 — was widely seen as paving the way for the next election, expected to be held ahead of the constitutional deadline of June 1992.
The reshuffle, which included the addition of two new Cabinet posts, was criticized for enlarging the Cabinet at a time of economic hardship.
The two new posts were those of Minister of Consumer Affairs (Vincent Peet) and of Minister of Local Government (Marvin Pinder).
As a reflection of the importance of tourism, the Prime Minister assumed the Tourism portfolio, while relinquishing the Finance Ministry to Paul Adderley.
The reshuffle was also felt to confirm widespread speculation that Maynard, the Deputy Prime Minister, who assumed responsibility for Foreign Affairs in the reshuffle, was likely to become the successor to the acting Governor-General, Sir Hanry Taylor, who was in poor health.
The FNM attacked the size and cost of the new Cabinet and called for the resignation of Maynard and of Philip Bethel, who had been criticized for his stewardship of the Transport Ministry and the troubles of the state airline Bahamasair.
After a budget deficit of US$70,000,000 in 1989, the 1990 budget, presented in December 1989, imposed a wide range of tax increases.
Taxes on fuel, tobacco, alcoholic drinks and tickets, and company registration fees, were all increased.
Recurrent expenditure for 1990 was put at US$583,000,000 and capital expenditure at US$120,900,000.
Tourism continued to do well in 1990 with the number of arrivals in the first nine months of 1990 5.5 per cent higher than in the corresponding period of 1989.
Slower growth was forecast for the tourism sector in 1991, however, as a result of the recession in the United States.
Concern over drug-related money laundering, and the consequent tarnishing of the government's image, stimulated a programme of new financial legislation designed to improve the competitiveness and international standing of the country's banking system.
New investor regulations had been introduced in 1988, and at the beginning of 1990 a new International Business Companies Act became operational.
The Act, which offered cheap annual fees and tax exemptions to off-shore companies, was modelled on legislation operative in the British Virgin Islands and the Cayman Islands.
The new legislation was one cause of the improved bilateral relations between the USA and the Bahamas, also helped by joint efforts during 1990 to improve the Bahamas Defence (coastguard) Force.
AMERICAS
BARBADOS
Area: 430 sq km.Population: 255,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Bridgetown.
Language: English.
Religion: Christianity (majority Anglican); small groups of Hindus, Moslems and Jews.
Armed forces: 154 (1989).
Currency: Barbados dollar (US$1.00=B$2.0094 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ACP; CARICOM; Geplacea; NAM; OAS; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The head of state of Barbados, a fully independent member of the Commonwealth since November 1966, is the United Kingdom sovereign, represented by a Governor-General.
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral Parliament consisting of a 28-seat House of Assembly popularly elected every five years, and a 21-seat appointed Senate.
The Prime Minister and Cabinet are appointed to office by the Governor-General on the advice of Parliament, to which they are responsible.
Main government leaders
Governor-General: Dame Nita Barrow.
Prime Minister: Erskine Sandiford, who is also Minister of Finance and Economic Affairs and of the Civil Service.
Other principal ministers: Philip Greaves (Deputy Prime Minister, International Transport, Telecommunications, Immigration, Public Works, Communications); Maurice King (Foreign Affairs, Legal Affairs, Attorney General).
Cabinet changes in 1990
Harcourt Lewis was transferred in January from the Prime Minister's Office to become Minister of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries [see p. 37821; for Cabinet reshuffle following general election on Jan. 22, 1991, see p. 38000].
Ruling party
The Democratic Labour Party (DLP, Erskine Sandiford l.), a social democratic party, in power from 1961 to 1976, was returned to office in May 1986 and re-elected in January 1991.
Other parties
Barbados Labour Party (BLP, former Foreign Minister Henry Forde l.) is the right-wing opposition; the National Democratic Party (NDP, Richie Haynes l.), a splinter group from the DLP formed in 1989, lost in the 1991 general election the four seats which it had hitherto held.
Elections
The DLP won the general election on Jan. 22, 1991 [see below; pp. 37955-56].
1990 OVERVIEW
The knowledge that a general election was imminent saw all political parties jockeying for position during 1990.
Support for the DLP had declined since its 1986 victory under the late Errol Barrow, and the forthcoming vote was seen as a key test of confidence in the leadership of Sandiford, Barrow's successor, whose stewardship of the DLP had been marked by factional fighting.
On Oct. 15, 1990, in the run-up to the general election, Senator Gertrude Eastmond resigned from the DLP and the Senate, claiming that the country was "heading for disaster" .
Despite such predictions the DLP was re-elected on Jan. 22, 1991, securing half of the vote and winning 18 of the 28 seats in the enlarged House of Assembly, the other 10 seats going to the BLP with 43 per cent of the votes.
The result was seen as crucial in that it provided Sandiford with a personal mandate to govern.
Sandiford on May 2, 1990, presented a budget for 1990/1991 which set recurrent expenditure at B$1,000 million and capital expenditure at B$243 million [see p. 37821].
The government on Oct. 10 announced increases in the prices of petrol, diesel and cooking gas.
In a broadcast on Oct. 12 Sandiford defended the price rises as being a result of the doubling of the price of crude oil in the wake of the Gulf crisis.
AMERICAS
BELIZE
Area: 22,965 sq km.
Population: 184,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Belmopan.
Languages: English (official), Spanish, Garifuna and Maya.
Religion: Christianity (60% Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 760 (1990).
Currency: Belizean dollar (US$1.00=Bel$1.9982 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ACP; CARICOM; NAM; OAS (acceded Jan. 8, 1991).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The head of state of Belize, an independent member of the Commonwealth since September 1981, is the United Kingdom sovereign, represented by a Governor-General who is appointed in consultation with the Prime Minster of Belize.
Legislative power is vested in the bicameral National Assembly, composed of a 28-member House of Representatives, popularly elected for five years, and an eight-member appointed Senate.
Main government leaders
Governor-General: Dame Minita Elvira Gordon.
Prime Minister: George Price, who was Premier from 1964 until independence in 1981, Prime Minister from 1981 until an electoral defeat in 1984, and elected again in September 1989.
He is also Minister of Finance, Defence and Home Affairs.
Other principal ministers: Florencio Marin (Deputy Prime Minister, Industry and Natural Resources); Said Musa (Foreign Affairs, Economic Development and Education).
Cabinet changes in 1990
None.
Ruling party
The People's United Party (PUP, George Price l.) held power from 1964 to 1984 and again from September 1989.
Other parties
The United Democratic Party (UDP, Manuel Esquivel l.).
Elections
In the September 1989 general election the PUP narrowly defeated the incumbent UDP.
In local elections to the Belize City Council in December 1989 the PUP won all the seats.
1990 OVERVIEW
On March 8 Price presented the 1990/91 budget.
Current expenditure was estimated at Bel$153,900,000 and total capital expenditure at Bel$107,000,000.
Agreements reached in July 1990 between Belize and Guatemala [see p. 37824]were, according to reports in January 1991, formalized in a draft document submitted by Belize.
The draft agreement would guarantee Guatemalan access to the Caribbean and could, if ratified by both sides and confirmed by public referendum, lead to the abandonment of Guatemala's historic claim to sovereignty over Belize.
The moves followed Belize's accession to the Organization of American States in January 1991, when Guatemala supported the application, signifying its acceptance of Belize's full sovereignty [see p. 37957].
A settlement of the longstanding dispute could lead to the United Kingdom reducing its military commitment to the country, although Price had asked the UK to remain as a guarantor against possible Guatemalan aggression.
AMERICAS
COSTA RICA
Area: 51,100 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 3,000,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: San José.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 7,800 (1990).
Currency: colón (US$1.00=C118.344 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: Geplacea; OAS; SELA; San José Group.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Costa Rica achieved independence from Spain in 1821.
Under the 1949 Constitution an executive President is directly elected for a four-year term, as is the 57-member unicameral Legislative Assembly.
The President appoints the Cabinet, and is assisted by two Vice-Presidents.
Main government leaders
President: Rafael Angel Calderón Fournier (since February 1990).
First Vice-President (responsible for social issues): Germán Ferrano Pinto.
Second Vice-President: Arnoldo López Echandi.
Other principal ministers: Bernd Niehaus Quesada (Foreign); Luis Fishman (Interior); Elizabeth Odio Benito (Justice); Victor Emilio Herrera Alfaro (Internal Security); Mario Lara Eduarte (Finance); Gonzalo Fajardo (Economy and Industry).
Cabinet changes in 1990
A new Cabinet was appointed on May 8, 1990, on the inauguration of President Calderón [see p. 37450].
On Oct. 30 Labour Minister Erick Thompson Piñeres resigned and was replaced by Carlos Monge Rodríguez [see p. 37770].
The Minister for State Reform, Johnny Meoño, resigned in April 1991 and his portfolio was transferred to the Presidency Minister, Rodolfo Méndez Mata.
Ruling party
Partido Unidad Social Cristiana (PUSC — Social Christian Unity Party, Rafael Angel Calderón Fournier l., Cristián Tattembach pres.).
Other political parties
Partido de Liberación Nacional (PLN — National Liberation Party, Rolando Araya Monge gen. -sec.).
Under the electoral law no other parties retained legal status because of their failure to win at least 1.5 per cent of the vote in elections held in February 1990.
Elections
Presidential and legislative elections were held in February 1990, when Caldéron was elected President with 51 per cent of the vote, and the PUSC won an absolute majority, gaining 29 of the 57 seats in the Legislative Assembly [see p. 37243].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The first stage began in June 1990 of the government's economic austerity programme, aimed at reducing the fiscal deficit from 5.4 per cent to 1.5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP).
Its endorsement by the International Monetary Fund (IMF)[see p. 37527]and the World Bank held out the prospect of new multilateral and bilateral loans, finally estimated at US$213,000,000.
The payment of this sum, however, was conditional on the Legislative Assembly approving new and unpopular tax laws which it had still failed to do by May 1991.
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) supported the plan with a loan of $27,000,000.
General strikes in the public and private sectors in protest at sharp increases in food and utilities prices, low wages and a decision to dismiss 7,000 public employees by the end of the year took place in April, July, October and December and continued into the new year.
The resignation of Labour Minister Erick Thompson Pineres in October [see p. 37770]was seen as evidence of a rift in the Cabinet over the severity of the austerity programme.
In April 1991 the Minister of State Reform Johnny Meoño likewise resigned.
Government attempts to form a social pact with the trade unions and business sector also failed as did its attempt to gain public acceptance for its plan against poverty.
A second IMF-approved emergency economic plan, announced in December, included a 3 per cent sales tax and a 10 per cent surcharge on all imports, raising fears that members of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trades (GATT), to which Costa Rica acceded as the 100th member on Nov. 20 [see p. 38259], might retaliate in kind.
Despite widespread protests, the government was about to launch its third structural adjustment programme in May 1991.
This had the conditional support of the World Bank which according to a leaked report demanded (i) further substantial cuts in public-sector employment,(ii) a major reform of the tax system, and (iii) the privatization of state banks and of state-dominated sectors such as insurance, the import and refining of oil, port administration and companies such as Fertica, a major fertilizer manufacturer.
These conditions were expected to meet stiff resistance in the Legislative Assembly.
The IMF on April 8, 1991, approved a financing package for Costa Rica, authorizing disbursements of up to SDR88,300,000 (about US$119 million) over the next 12 months to support the government's economic programme and to help meet increases in the cost of oil imports.
Of this total, SDR33,600,000 (about US$45 million) were available in instalments over the next 12 months under a standby arrangement.
In addition, a further SDR21,000,000 (about US$28,000,000) could be made available under the contingency window of the IMF's compensatory and contingency financing facility (CCFF), and SDR33,600,000 (about US$45,000,000) were being made available immediately from the CCFF.
Export figures for January-October 1990 were US$1,216 million, with import figures over the same period at $1,713 million, giving a trade deficit of $497 million.
An earthquake in April 1991 [see p. 38142]killed at least 50 people, injured hundreds more, and caused widespread devastation to homes, businesses and the infrastructure.
Banana exports of $6,500,000 had been lost by early May and the coffee trade had been seriously disrupted.
On Nov. 1 the bilateral Marco Accord was signed with the USA, committing both countries to reduce trade barriers.
This was the first such agreement signed by a Central American country with the USA.
Similar bilateral trade agreements were to be pursued with Mexico and Canada.
As reported in February 1991, the US government was witholding $10,000,000 in economic aid, allocated for fiscal year 1989, and scheduled for disbursement in December 1990, due to "lack of progress" by Costa Rica in deciding seven cases of expropriation of properties belonging to US citizens.
The USA had promised a further $40,000,000 in economic aid.
US aid for fiscal year 1991, set at $50,000,000, was $15,000,000 less than for 1990.
AMERICAS
CUBA
Area: 110,860 sq.km.
Population 10,495,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Havana.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 180,500 (1990).
Currency: Cuban peso (US$1.00=0.7957 pesos as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: COMECON (to be replaced in 1991 by OIEC); Geplacea; NAM; OAS (suspended in 1962); SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Cuba was ceded by Spain to the United States following the Spanish-American war of 1898.
Cuba gained independence in 1902, but the USA retained the right to have military bases on the island, and, until 1934, the right to intervene in Cuban affairs (exercised in 1906-09 and 1919-24).
The current President, Fidel Castro Ruz, has held office since the socialist revolution ousted Fulgencio Batista in January 1959.
Under the 1976 Constitution, legislative authority is held by the unicameral National Assembly of People's Power, whose 510 members are indirectly elected every five years, most recently in 1986, by popularly elected local assemblies.
The National Assembly elects from its members a 31-member Council of State to represent it between its twice-yearly ordinary sessions; the President of the Council of State is the head of state.
Executive and administrative authority is held by a Council of Ministers appointed by the National Assembly upon the recommendation of the President.
The majority of office holders are members of the Cuban Communist Party.
Main government leaders
President: Fidel Castro Ruz.
Other principal ministers: Gen. Raúl Castro Ruz (First Vice President of Council of State; Minister of Revolutionary Armed Forces); Carlos Rafael Rodríguez Rodríguez (Vice President of Council of State and Council of Ministers); Osmany Cienfuegos Gorriarán (Vice President of the Council of State and Council of Ministers; Secretary of the Council of Ministers).
Changes to Council of Ministers in 1990
Eddy Fernandez Boada replaced Antonio Esquivel Yedra in September as Minister of Light Industry, although Esquivel remained a Vice President of the Council of Ministers.
In November Roberto I. González Planas, a metallurgical engineer, was promoted to the post of Minister for the Steelworking Industry, and José Ignacio Gómez Gutiérrez, hitherto rector of the Central University of Las Villas, was appointed Minister of Education, replacing José Ramón Fernández Alvarez who was moved to oversee sports issues, particularly the 1991 Pan-American Games.
Fernández continued as a Vice President and member of the Council of Ministers.
Ruling Party
The Partido Comunista de Cuba (PCC, Fidel Castro Ruz l.) is the only authorized political party.
The PCC's highest authority is the party congress, which elects a central committee (225 members in 1986) to supervise the party's work.
The central committee elects a politburo (24 members in 1986) to direct policy [for February 1990 changes to politburo see p. 37813].
1990 OVERVIEW
Cuba's deteriorating economic position and increasing diplomatic isolation in the wake of changes in the Soviet Union and eastern Europe resulted in the declaration on Sept. 28, 1990, of a "special period in peacetime" , with the PCC taking steps to consolidate its position by curtailing bureaucracy and combating corruption.
The government remained reluctant to implement political reforms along the lines suggested by Soviet President Gorbachev, however, preferring to maintain its traditional Marxist-Leninist model of development.
The machinery of the governing party itself was one of the first targets of rationalization [for details of October staff cuts within the central committee departments and secretariat see p. 37770].
In an effort to minimize the social effects of the current crisis the government in October issued guarantees of basic pay for workers affected by the closure of industries as well as those displaced by bureaucratic staff cuts.
Those unemployed were to receive 100 per cent of their former wage during the first month of redundancy and 60 per cent thereafter.
The atmosphere of crisis was heightened in October and November 1990 when Interior Ministry forces began operations against "notorious criminals" in Havana and elsewhere.
It was announced on Nov. 27 that the crackdown had resulted in the detention of more than 500 individuals including police officers and government officials.
The cuts in the bureaucracy and the anti-corruption campaign were complemented by the announcement on Sept. 28 that 93 "people's councils" (consejos populares) were being formed in Havana to oversee the drive against corruption and the provision of local services.
The councils were composed of municipal and community representatives.
In addition to suffering the longstanding US economic blockade, Cuba has found itself in 1990 and 1991 coming to terms with new threats to its economic viability.
The Soviet Union, described by Castro as the former "pillar of our economic and social development" , was forced to reassess its relationship with Cuba in the light of its own economic priorities [for details of replacement of COMECON in January 1991 see p. 37979].
Changes in eastern Europe added to Cuba's problems with the loss of many established markets and suppliers.
In addition, sugar prices in 1990-91 fell to levels described by Castro as "rubbish dump prices" , while the crisis in the Gulf caused steep increases in the price of oil.
The combination of these factors produced an estimated 5 per cent contraction of the economy during 1990.
The deteriorating economy prompted an announcement in November that all foods would be rationed [for restrictions on consumption of fuel and electricity see pp. 37813-14].
In an effort to boost food production, office workers were reported to have been redeployed from Havana to farm jobs, and 20,000 Havana residents were said to be working shifts outside the city.
José Abrantes Fernández, Interior Minister until June 1989, who was sentenced in July 1989 to 20 years' imprisonment for negligence and misuse of government funds in connection with drug trafficking [see pp. 36731; 37069]died of a heart attack on Jan. 21, 1991.
FOREIGN RELATIONS
On Dec. 29 Cuba and the Soviet Union — with which Cuba conducted more than 70 per cent of its total trade — concluded a trade agreement for 1991 only, instead of for a five-year period as in the past.
The agreement was less favourable to Cuba than previous agreements, with the Soviet Union ending its commitment to preferential trade terms.
(It had been announced in July 1990 by the Soviet Union that from Jan. 1, 1991, trade between COMECON members was to be in freely convertible currency and at world market prices — see pp. 37630; 37979.
Cuba's balance of trade with the Soviet Union was also to be assessed in US dollars).
The agreement maintained a preferential price for Cuban sugar, lower than that of the previous five-year period, but higher than world prices.
The Soviet Union agreed to purchase US$730,000,000 worth of sugar, nickel, citrus, and pharmaceutical products including a newly developed Cuban vaccine against hepatitis B.
Although the Soviet Union ended fuel subsidies to Cuba from Jan. 1, 1991, it agreed to supply 10,500,000 tonnes of oil which represented a shortfall on promised supplies and was believed to be the bare minimum sufficient to meet Cuba's needs [for previous shortfalls in Soviet oil supplies see p. 37813].
The cuts in fuel deliveries eliminated one of Cuba's largest sources of foreign exchange: the re-export of Soviet crude which had earned Cuba US$621,000,000 in 1985.
On Nov. 16 Castro announced that Cuba was entering "the bicycle age" in response to the shortfalls, and it was reported that 750,000 bicycles had been ordered from China.
In addition to reducing trade subsidies, the Soviet Union in January 1991 withdrew from Cuba 2,000 technicians (two-thirds of the total stationed in Cuba a year before) and required that those remaining should be paid in US dollars.
The Gulf crisis illustrated the continuing implacable hostility between Cuba and the USA, as the former attempted to use its position on the UN Security Council to impede the US-led campaign against Iraq [see pp. 37695; 37870].
In January 1991, following a visit by a Mexican commercial delegation, Mexico and Cuba agreed on a formula to help Cuba repay its external debt, including US$350,000,000 owed to Mexico, through new collaborative trade initiatives in tourism, pharmaceutical and industrial ventures.
Cuban-Spanish relations in the wake of the July embassy crisis [see p. 37814]improved following talks on Oct. 11 in Madrid between Cuban Vice-President Rodríguez and Spanish Prime Minister Felipe González Márquez.
In January 1991 talks were held between Castro and a Mozambican delegation led by Mozambican Health Minister following rioting on Dec. 23 which led to the arrest of more than 700 Mozambican students and the death of one person.
The students, whose actions were condemned by the Mozambican government, were demanding that their bursaries be paid to them in US dollars.
AMERICAS
DOMINICA
Area: 748.8 sq km.
Population: 82,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Roseau.
Languages: English (official); French patois.
Religion: Christianity (80% Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: defence force disbanded in 1981; approximately 300 police.
Currency: East Caribbean dollar (US$1.00=EC$2.6976 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ACP; CARICOM; NAM; OAS; OECS.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Commonwealth of Dominica became a fully independent republic within the Commonwealth in November 1978.
Executive authority is nominally vested in the President who is elected by the legislature to no more than two five-year terms of office.
In practice he acts as a formal head of state.
The President appoints the Prime Minister and Cabinet from among the members of the unicameral House of Assembly, which is composed of 21 elected representatives and nine appointed senators, and has a five-year term.
Main government leaders
President: Sir Clarence Augustus Seignoret.
Prime Minister:(Mary) Eugenia Charles, 71, who is also Minister of Finance and Defence.
Other principal ministers: Charles Maynard (Trade; Industry; Tourism; Lands and Survey); Brian Alleyn (External Affairs).
Cabinet changes in 1990
A new Cabinet was appointed in June after the general election [see p. 37527; for August change see p. 37819].
Ruling party
The Dominica Freedom Party (DFP, conservative, Eugenia Charles I.).
Other parties
There are two main opposition parties; the Labour Party of Dominica (LDP, left-wing, Michael Douglas l.), and the Dominica United Workers' Party (DUWP, Edison James ch.).
Elections
The DFP was narrowly returned for a third term in May 1990, winning 11 of the elective seats [see pp. 37448; 37527].
1990 OVERVIEW
Although Charles succeeded in winning a third consecutive term in the election of May 1990, persistent charges of authoritarianism appeared to have eroded a considerable portion of her popular support.
With a majority of only one of the elected seats in the legislature, the government was more vulnerable than at any time in the past.
The 1990/91 budget, presented on July 16, 1990, for the financial year which started on July 1, estimated recurrent expenditure at EC$118,500,000, capital expenditure at EC$110,200,000, and a budget surplus of EC$12,300,000.
Dominica's foreign affairs were dominated by the plans for political union agreed in principle by the seven countries of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS).
Although the Leeward Islands (Antigua and Barbuda, St Kitts and Nevis and Montserrat) subsequently indicated their uncertainty, the four Windward Island states (Dominica, Grenada, St Lucia, and St Vincent and the Grenadines) decided to explore further the potential for political union [see p. 37825].
In November it was agreed that a Constituent Assembly should be created to draw up a schedule of meetings to be held on each of the four Windward Islands in 1991 and to decide on the form of the proposed referendum to be held in each state.
As agreed in 1989, the four countries of the Windward group on Jan. 1, 1990, removed all remaining trade restrictions between the islands.
AMERICAS
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Area: 48,072 sq km.
Population: 7,002,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Santo Domingo.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 20,800 (1990).
Currency: Dominican Republic peso (US$1=RD$12.9397 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ACP; CARICOM (observer); Geplacea; OAS; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Dominican Republic gained its independence from Spain in 1844, but was occupied by the United States from 1916 to 1924.
It comprises 26 provinces, each administered by an appointed governor, and a Distrito Nacional containing the capital.
Under the 1924 Constitution the Republic has an executive President and a National Congress consisting of a 120-member Chamber of Deputies and a 22-member Senate; President and Congress are each directly elected for a four-year term.
The Cabinet is appointed and presided over by the President.
Main government leaders
President: Joaquín Balaguer, 84, a political veteran currently in his sixth (non-consecutive) term of office.
Vice-President: Carlos Morales Troncoso.
Principal secretaries of state: Rafael Bello Andino (Presidency); Guillermo Caram (Finance); Manuel Estrada Medina (Defence; Interior and Police).
Cabinet changes in 1990
Ramón Martínez Moya became Secretary of State for Industry and Trade in August [see p. 37708].
Ruling party
Partido Revolucionario Social Cristiano (PRSC — Social Christian Reformist Party — for March 1991 resignation of Balaguer as party leader see p. 38092).
Other parties
Partido de la Liberación Dominicana (PLD — Dominican Liberation Party, left-wing — for March 1991 resignation of Juan Bosch Gaviño a close second in the May 1990 presidential elections, as leader and from the party see p. 38092); Partido Revolucionario Dominicano (PRD — Dominican Revolution Party, José Peña Gómez, third in the May 1990 presidential elections, l.);
Partido Revolucionario Independiente (PRI — Independent Revolutionary Party Jacobo Majluta Azar l.).
[For position of parties in the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate see p. 37816.]
Elections
Congressional elections were held in May 1990 [see p. 37816], and in the same month Balaguer, with some controversy and two recounts, was re-elected President [see p. 37448].
1990 OVERVIEW
During 1990 the country was subject to violent political instability following the controversial re-election of the government and the imposition of austerity measures on Aug. 8 [see pp. 37649; 37708; 37848].
In the latter half of the year, rumours of a coup grew so persistent that on Oct. 15, the country's senior military officers issued a communiqué affirming their loyalty to the government and to the "democratic system" .
The positive intervention by the military occurred after a meeting earlier in the month with United States Defence Department officials who warned the military against attempting to seek authoritarian solutions.
In an effort to defuse the political tension following the calling of the third general strike since his re-election, Balaguer promised fresh elections in May 1992, two years before his current mandate was due to expire.
The offer failed to calm the situation, however, and thousands were arrested during disturbances on Nov. 19-20 [see p. 37848].
The economic position continued to worsen against the background of a poorly managed transition from an excessively protectionist economy to one based on free market principles.
The country found itself during 1990 and in the early part of 1991 in a vicious circle of falling productivity and chronic shortages caused by the lack of foreign exchange to pay for imports.
Much of the manufacturing sector was on the verge of total collapse, with a catastrophic fall in the level of industrial production.
The fall in output was largely due to a shortage of electricity which by November could not be assured for more than two hours a day.
Consumers faced shortages of virtually all commodities including petrol, drinking water, food and even sugar.
The Dominican Republic was widely held to have undermined its own efforts to become a full member of CARICOM following the announcement in January 1990 of a plan to export up to 763 tonnes of bananas per week to Europe from April 1990.
The country had entered a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the CARICOM countries on Oct. 27, 1989 — in an effort to win their support for its accession to the Lomé Convention [see p. 37133]— to refrain from exporting bananas to the European Communities in competition with other African, Caribbean and Pacific producers.
Concern grew in 1990-91 over the numbers of illegal immigrants from the Dominican Republic arriving in Puerto Rico and the USA.
The economic collapse of the Republic resulted in an exodus as significant as that from Haiti in the early 1980s.
An estimated 90,000 people from the Dominican Republic were currently living in New York, where they constituted the fastest growing ethnic group.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Area: 21,393 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 5,300,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: San Salvador.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (80% Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 44,600 (1990).
Currency: Salvadorean colón (US$1.00=7.9886 colones as at April 29, 1991.
Major international affiliations: Geplacea; OAS; SELA; San José Group.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
El Salvador was ruled by Spain until 1821 and gained full independence in 1839.
Under the 1983 Constitution an executive President is elected for a five-year term, as is a unicameral Legislative Assembly, which was expanded from 60 to 84 members in March 1991.
Presidential and legislative elections may not be held simultaneously.
Main government leaders
President: Alfredo Felix Cristiani Burkard.
Vice President: José Francisco Merino Lopez.
Other principal ministers: Col. René Emilio Ponce (Defence and Public Security); José Manuel Pacas Castro (Foreign Affairs); René Hernández Valiente (Justice); Col. Juan Antonio Martínez Varela (Interior); Rafael Alvarado Cano (Finance); Arturo Zablah (Economy.
Cabinet changes
Ponce was appointed as Defence Minister in September 1990, replacing Gen. Rafael Humberto Larios Lopez, and Valiente was appointed Justice Minister in January 1991, replacing Oscar Alfredo Santamaría [see p. 37957].
Ruling party
Alianza Republicana Nacionalista (Arena — Nationalist Republican Alliance, Cristiani Burkard l.).
Other parties
Partido Demócrata Cristiano (PDC — Christian Democratic Party, Pablo Mauricio Alverguez l.);
Partido de Conciliación Nacional (PCN — National Conciliation Party, Rafael Moran Castaneda l.);
Convergencia Democrática (CD — Democratic Convergence); Frente Democrático Revolucionario (FDR — Revolutionary Democratic Front, the political wing of the FMLN — see below); Unión Demócrata Nacionalista (UDN — Nationalist Democratic Union; Movimiento Auténtico Cristiano (MAC — Authentic Christian Movement, Julio Adolfo Rey Prendes l.).
Guerrilla groups
Frente Farabundo Martí de Liberación Nacional (FMLN-Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front, Joaquín Villalobos leader of a five-member general command).
The FMLN is an umbrella grouping of the Ejército Revolucionario del Pueblo (ERP — People's Revolutionary Army, Villalobos l.);
Fuerzas Populares de Liberación (FPL — Popular Liberation Forces, Leonel González C.-in-C.);
Fuerzas Armadas de Resistencia Nacional (FARN — National Resistance Armed Forces, Fermán Cienfuegos l.);
Fuerzas Armadas de Liberación (FAL — Armed Forces of Liberation, the military wing of the Partido Communista Salvadoreño (PCS — Communist Party of El Salvador), Jorge Schafik Handal l.);
Partido Revolucionario de Trabajadores Centroamericanos (PRTC — Central American Workers' Revolutionary Party Roberto Roca l.).
Elections
Legislative and local elections were held in March 1991, when the ruling Arena lost its overall majority but remained the largest single party [see p. 38093].
Presidential elections were held on March 19, 1989, when Cristiani was elected with 53.8 per cent of the vote [see p. 36520].
1990/1991 Overview
UN-sponsored peace talks between the government and the FMLN dominated the political scene in 1990 but failed to produce a breakthrough to end the 11-year civil war, and the FMLN launched large-scale military offensives in May and November [see pp. 37449; 37850].
The latest round of talks, held in the Venezuelan capital Caracas in late May 1991 included representatives of the military but remained deadlocked.
Cristiani claimed that FMLN demands for a purge of the armed forces remained the main obstacle to a ceasefire [for 1990 peace talks see pp. 37372; 37449; 37707-08; 37770-71; 37850; 37957; 38000; 38093; 38187].
Failure to convict members of the armed forces involved in the murders of six Jesuits, their housekeeper and her daughter in November 1989 [see pp.37037-38; 37181]prompted the US Congress to freeze military aid in October 1990.
The fact that evidence and documents relating to the case had either disappeared or been tampered with and that witnesses had been threatened led members of a US Congressional investigative task force to conclude that the military high command had been controlling the investigation and limiting the number and rank of the officers to be held responsible for the crime.
The role of the US embassy was also heavily criticized for withholding the evidence of at least one US military advisor who claimed to have had prior knowledge of the plan to kill the priests.
The El Salvador Supreme Court eventually ruled in April 1991 that nine soldiers, including Col. Guillermo Alfredo Benavides, should stand trial for the murders.
US President Bush announced in January 1991 that the USA would release US$42,500,000 in military aid, half of the allocation projected for fiscal 1991, following the murder, allegedly by the FMLN, of three United States military advisers [see pp. 37956-57].
This was despite the fact that two state prosecutors in the Jesuit murder case had resigned and that the FMLN had recently ended a five-week military offensive in accordance with a further US congressional stipulation for the maintenance of the military aid ban.
This called for the halting of large-scale FMLN military offensives which could jeopardize the UN peace process.
The guerrillas declared a three-day truce in fighting during the March 1991 legislative and local elections, when the ruling Arena party lost its absolute majority in an enlarged Legislative Assembly [see p. 38093].
ECONOMY
A plan to privatize six banks and seven savings and loans institutions was due to begin in June 1991 as part of an economic reform programme.
A rising inflationary trend and a persistent fiscal deficit during 1990 were exacerbated by the continuing civil war and rising petrol prices.
Bad weather from October to December led to losses of an estimated 15-20 per cent in the coffee harvest, the principal export and a key area of the economy.
Public-sector unions threatened a general strike in March 1991 and held protests and demonstrations against police repression and in favour of increased wages and better social and labour conditions.
A new national labour organization, the National Union of State and Municipal Workers, was established in May 1991 to unite all trade unions and associations.
There was a trade deficit of US$545 million in 1990 with exports given as US$570 million, and imports as US$1,115 million.
AMERICAS
FRENCH ANTILLES
The French Antilles comprise the two overseas Departments of Guadeloupe and Martinique.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Guadeloupe and Martinique first became French possessions in 1635.
The islands achieved departmental status in 1946, each sending deputies to the French National Assembly (elected by universal suffrage for a five-year term) and representatives to the Senate.
Both are represented at the European Parliament in Strasbourg.
The French government is represented in each department by a prefect.
Both were granted regional status in 1974 and accordingly each elects a 41-member Regional Council (responsible for economic and social planning) for a maximum of six years.
Internally, executive power rests with a General Council elected for six years and consisting of 42 members in Guadeloupe, and 45 in Martinique.
GUADELOUPE
Area: 1,780 sq km.
Population: 340,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Basse-Terre.
Languages: French (official), Creole patois.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Currency: French franc (US$1.00=F5.9645 as at April 29, 1991).
Government leaders
Prefect: Jean-Paul Proust.
President of the General Council: Dominique Larifla (PS); President of the Regional Council: Flix Proto (PS).
Ruling party
Fédération guadeloupéenne du parti socialiste (PS, allied to the Socialist Party of metropolitan France, Dominique Larifla first sec.).
Other parties
The Fédération guadeloupéenne du rassemblement pour la république (RPR, a Gaullist party closely associated with the RPR of metropolitan France, Daniel Beaubrun pres.);
Fédération guadeloupéenne de l'union pour la démocratie française (UDF, centrist, a local version of the French UDF, Marcel Esdras pres.).
The UDF allied with the RPR to contest the 1988 legislative elections as the Union du rassemblement du centre (URC).
Guadeloupe also has a number of pro-independence parties, some of which advocate liberation through armed struggle, including the Alliance révolutionnaire caribe (ARC, an illegal group, Luc Reinette l.), and the Mouvement populaire pour une guadeloupe indépendante (MPGI, Simone Faisans-Renac s. -g.) which is closely associated with the ARC.
In June 1987 the Conseil national de la résistance guadeloupéenne (CNRG) was formed with the aim of creating an independent republic.
Elections
The last elections to the French National Assembly were held in June 1988.
MARTINIQUE
Area: 1,100 sq km.
Population: 336,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Fort-de-France.
Languages: French (official), Creole patois.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Currency: French franc (US$1.00=F5.9645 as at April 29, 1991).
Prefect: Jean-Claude Roure.
President of the General Council: Emile Maurice (RPR); President of the Regional Council: Camille Darsières (PPM).
Ruling party
The Fédération socialiste de la martinique (FSM, associated with the Socialist Party of metropolitan France, Michel Yoyo l.) in alliance with the Parti progressiste martiniquais (PPM, Camille Darsières s. -g.) and the Parti communiste martiniquais (PCM, Armand Nicolas l.).
Other parties
The Union du rassemblement du centre (URC), which fought the 1988 legislative elections and was composed of the Union pour la démocratie français (UDF Jean Maran l.) and the Rassemblement pour la république (RPR Stephen Bagoe l.).
Other opposition parties include the separatist Groupe révolution socialiste (GRS) and the Mouvement indépendantiste martiniquaise (MIM, Alfred Marie-Jeanne l.).
Elections
Last elections to French National Assembly were held in June 1988.
In elections for the Regional Council, held on Oct. 14, 1990, the separatists did unexpectedly well [see p. 37770].
The first round of municipal elections in two communes was held on June 24, when the communists lost control of one of their two remaining communes, Martinique Macouba.
The election in Martinique Saint-Luce went to a second round in July when the PPM defeated the UDF.
Both elections followed the invalidation of municipal elections held in March 1989 on the grounds of irregularities in the electoral register.
1990 OVERVIEW
Events in Martinique and Guadeloupe were dominated by the work of the Ripert Commission, appointed by the French Minister of Overseas Departments and Territories to examine the issue of social and economic equality within France's four overseas departments (the other two being French Guiana and Réunion).
In January 1990 the Commission recommended 58 proposals for the rectification of social and economic injustices.
The report, which called for the raising of the minimum wage in the overseas departments and examined the contentious issue of civil service pay, was not supported by the majority of deputies from Guadeloupe and Martinique in a debate held on June 12-13 in the French National Assembly.
The deputies were concerned about the inflationary effect of proposed increases in the minimum wage and the possibility of reforms being imposed by Paris.
The prefects of the overseas departments were instructed to negotiate the proposed reforms with local civil service unions and political parties.
Pressure grew in Guadeloupe for the convening of an "Estates-General" , a special assembly whose remit would be to discuss social and economic reform in the Antilles.
The calls came not from the opposition RPR-UDF coalitions, but from separatist groups.
On April 10, 1990, the Regional Council of Guadeloupe rejected on environmental grounds proposals from the Black Diamond petroleum company to build in Guadeloupe a refinery capable of processing 15,000 barrels per day (bpd).
AMERICAS
GRENADA
Area: 344.5 sq km.
Population: 94,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: St George's.
Languages: English (majority); French patois.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Currency: East Caribbean dollar (US$1.00=EC$2.6976 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ACP; CARICOM; NAM; OECS; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The head of state of Grenada, a fully independent member of the Commonwealth since February 1974, is the United Kingdom sovereign represented by a Governor-General.
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral parliament, with a term of up to five years, which consists of an elected House of Representatives (currently with 15 members) and a 13-member appointed Senate.
In March 1979 the then Prime Minister, Sir Eric Gairy, was overthrown by the socialist New Jewel Movement which established a People's Revolutionary Government under the leadership of Maurice Bishop.
Factional conflict within the new government, however, led to the murder of Bishop in October 1983 and the establishment of a Revolutionary Military Council.
In response to this development a military force from the United States and neighbouring Caribbean countries invaded the island and deposed the new government.
The Governor-General appointed an Advisory Council to act as an interim government until a general election was held in December 1984, when the New National Party (NNP — an amalgam of three centrist parties) led by Herbert Blaize, won 14 of the 15 seats in the House of Representatives.
Despite the disintegration of the NNP government, due to political disagreement within the NNP, Blaize remained in office until his death in December 1989.
Ben Jones was appointed interim Prime Minister and leader of the TNP until a general election in March 1990.
Main government leaders
Governor-General: Sir Paul Scoon.
Prime Minister: Nicholas Brathwaite, 65, who had also led an interim government for 13 months following the 1983 US-led invasion.
Other principal ministers: George Brizan (Finance, Trade and Industry); Francis Alexis (Attorney General, Legal Affairs and Local Government).
Cabinet changes in 1990
A new Cabinet was formed by Brathwaite following the March general election [see p. 37820; for January 1991 resignation of Jones see below].
Ruling party
National Democratic Congress (NDC, centrist, Nicholas Brathwaite l.) formed a government in March 1990 following an offer of support from Ben Jones, the leader of The National Party (TNP).
Other parties
Grenada United Labour Party (GULP, Sir Eric Gairy l.);
New National Party (NNP, Keith Mitchell l.).
Elections
In the March 1990 general election the NDC won seven of the 15 seats in the House of Representatives and formed a government with the support of the two members elected for the TNP [see p. 37314].
1990 OVERVIEW
The death in December 1989 of Prime Minister Herbert Blaize allowed for a reshaping of Grenadian politics during 1990.
Although the March general election failed to produce an outright winner, it ended the political chaos which had been associated with the final months of Blaize's administration.
By the second half of 1990, however, there were signs of renewed instability as rifts appeared between the NDC and its TNP ally.
The TNP withdrew its support from the government during the January 1991 budget debate, its chief executive, Bennet Andrews, complaining that the ruling party was run by a clique which governed without reference to the party's constitution.
Andrews went on to complain that the TNP's association with the NDC had brought no benefits apart from a Cabinet post (the Ministry of Agriculture) for Ben Jones.
Although Jones resigned from the Cabinet in the same month, the precise orientation of the TNP in January 1991 was far from clear.
Parliamentary Secretary for Health and Community Development, Alleyne Walker, remained on the government benches despite speculation that he would follow Jones into opposition.
During the latter part of 1990, divisions were also evident within the GULP.
Senator Gerald Arlin announced his resignation from both the Senate and the party in November 1990.
Gairy claimed that Arlin had resigned in an attempt to pre-empt his expulsion from the party after confessing his role in "taking up arms" against the GULP government during the 1979 coup.
The 1990/91 budget, for the financial year beginning May 1, 1990, was presented on April 19.
Recurrent expenditure was estimated at EC$160,800,000 and capital expenditure at EC$70,800,000 [see p. 37821].
After four weeks of debate, Parliament approved the 1991/92 budget on Jan. 25, 1991.
During the budget debate, Mitchell spoke for 10 hours and Jones for five, leading the Prime Minister to announce that time limits would be applied in future debates and the live broadcasting experiment would not be repeated because of opposition filibustering.
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Area: 108,889 sq km.
Population: 9,200,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: Guatemala City.
Languages: Spanish (official); more than 20 indigenous languages.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic, 25% Protestant).
Armed forces: 43,300 (1990).
Currency: quetzal (US$1.00=4.9862 quetzals as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: Geplacea; OAS, SELA, San José Group.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Guatemala gained its independence from the Federation of Central American States in 1838.
An executive President is elected every five years, as is a unicameral National Congress with 116 members, 87 of whom are directly elected; the remainder are elected on the basis of proportional representation.
Main government leaders
President: Jorge Serrano Elias (since Jan. 6, 1991).
Vice-President: Gustavo Espina.
(Interior); Richard Aitkenhead Castillo (Finance); Juan Luis Mirón (Economy); Gen. Luis Mendoza García (Defence).
Principal ministers as of end-May 1991: Alvaro Arzú Irigoyen (Foreign Affairs); Fernando Hurtado
Cabinet changes in 1990
Marciano García was appointed Finance Minister on Sept. 28, 1990, replacing Francisco Pinto Casarola.
At the same time José Blanco Gomez replaced Oscar Huniberto Pineda Robles as Economy Minister.
Ruling Coalition
The Movimiento para Acción y Solidaridad (MAS — Solidarity and Action Movement), led by Serrano formed a dominant minority coalition in January 1991 in the Congress.
The other parties in the coalition were the Frente Republicana Guatemalteca (FRG — Guatemalan Republican Front); the Partido por el Adelantamiento Nacional (PAN — National Advancement Party, Alvaro Arzú Irigoyen l.); and the Partido Socialista Democrático (PSD — Social Democratic Party, Mario Solórzano s. -g.).
Other parties
Unión del Centro Nacional (UCN — National Centre Union, Jorge Carpio Nicolle l.);
Partido Democracia Cristiana Guatemalteca (PDCG — Christian Democratic Party of Guatemala, Catalina Soberanis l.);
Partido Institucional Democrático (PID — Institutional Democratic Party); Partido Revolucionario (PR — Revolutionary Party, Jorge García Granados l.);
Frente de Avance Nacional (FAN — National Advancement Front); Movimiento de Liberación Nacional (MLN — National Liberation Movement); Alianza Popular 5 (AP5 — Rolando Pineda Lam s. -g.).
Guerrilla groups
Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG — Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity, Gaspar Illom l.), whose political wing was known as the Representación Unitaria de la Oposición Guatemalteca (RUOG — United Representation of the Guatemalan Opposition, Raúl Molina Mejía l.), represents the following left-wing guerrilla groups Ejército Guerrillero de los Pobres (EGP — Guerrilla Army of the Poor); Organización Revolucionaria del Pueblo en Armas (ORPA — Revolutionary Organization of the People at Arms); Fuerzas Armadas Rebeldes (FAR — Rebel Armed Forces); Partido Guatemalteco del Trabajo (PGT — Guatemalan Party of Labour).
Elections
Congressional and presidential elections were held on Nov. 11, 1990, with a second-round run-off on Jan. 6, 1991, for the presidency [see pp. 37850; 37956].
Final congressional election results gave the seat distribution as: UCN — 41 seats; PDCG — 28; MAS — 18; PAN-12; PID/FRG/FUN coalition — 11; MLN/FAN coalition — four; PR — one; AP5/PSD coalition — one.
1990/1991 OVERVIEW
The political scene in 1990 was dominated by the run-up to the November presidential elections [see pp. 37850-51], the continuous peace talks with the URNG, which failed to live up to the promise of the June agreement [for 1990 peace talks see pp. 37372; 37527; 37707], and the controversy with the US government over political assassinations by right-wing paramilitaries [see p. 37311 for March 1990 withdrawal of US ambassador and p. 37912 for December suspension of US military aid].
In his inaugural address on taking office in January 1991 President Serrano credited the previous President, Vincio Cerezo Arévalo, with promoting national peace talks to end 30 years of civil war [see pp. 37372; 37527; 37707]but also blamed his administration for the current economic crisis and social unrest and for the country's lack of international credibility due to widespread corruption and human rights violations.
Serrano's victory in the January 1991 run-off presidential elections, however, was not regarded as an expression of a national consensus for his proposed policies, since a record 55 per cent of those eligible abstained from voting [see pp. 37850-51; 37956].
This judgement was quickly born out by the refusal of union leaders to participate in "social pact" talks with the government and employers, viewing the talks as a device to avert the anticipated social protest over a economic austerity programme inherited from Cerezo.
Large-scale public-sector redundancies and sharp increases in the prices of basic commodities, especially food, were expected in view of the government's plan to reduce inflation from an estimated annualized 100 per cent to 15 per cent and to deregulate the economy.
It was also expected that government spending would be cut by 10 per cent, that state companies would be privatized and that sales taxes would be increased.
The government was credited with advancing the ongoing peace process with URNG guerrillas a step further with the signing of the "Mexico accord" in April 1991 [see p. 38141].
The fact that the army and guerrillas had agreed to meet directly for the first time was seen as a breakthrough and a indication that "professional" elements in the army leadership wished for a political solution.
Army "hardliners" , who believed in the supremacy of military over civilian institutions, had previously boycotted the peace process and demanded that the URNG lay down its arms before any agreement was reached.
In February 1991 Serrano refused a renewal of US military aid because it was dependent on the government investigating human rights abuses [for December 1990 suspension of US aid see p. 37912].
Juan José Arévalo Bermejo, who as President in 1945-1951 initiated a brief period of democracy and social reform, died in October aged 86.
There was a trade deficit of US$243 million for January-November 1990, with exports at US$901 million and imports at US$1,144 million.
Diplomatic relations were established with Hungary in October 1990 and restored with the Soviet Union in January 1991.
Relations at ambassadorial level were established with Poland in September 1990.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Area: 27,750 sq km.
Population: 6,500,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: Port-au-Prince.
Languages: French and Creole.
Religion: Christianity (80% Roman Catholic); Voodoo.
Armed Forces: 7,400 (1990).
Currency: gourde (US$1.00=5.00 gourdes as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ACP; CARICOM (observer); Geplacea; OAS; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Haiti, which achieved independence from France in 1804, was ruled between 1957 and 1971 by the President for Life, François Duvalier, and then by his son, Jean-Claude, who fled abroad in 1986 after a period of prolonged popular unrest.
An interim National Council of Government was established under Lt.-Gen.
Henri Namphy, formerly Duvalier's Chief of Staff.
A new Constitution, overwhelmingly approved in a referendum in February 1987, provided for presidential elections to be held in November 1987.
Campaigning was seriously hampered by increasing political violence, however, and the election was cancelled shortly after polling had commenced.
A fresh election was held on Jan 17, 1988, under the auspices of an army-appointed commission.
Despite widespread violence and corruption, Leslie Manigat was declared the winner and was inaugurated on Feb 7.
The government was overthrown on June 19 by an army coup led by Namphy, who suspended the Constitution and formed a military government.
Namphy's administration was itself overthrown on Sept. 18 in a further military coup led by Brig. -Gen.
Prosper Avril, Chief of the Presidential Guard.
After a period of popular unrest, Avril was forced to resign as President in March 1990 and was replaced in an interim capacity by Ertha Pascal-Trouillot, a Supreme Court justice, under a procedure laid down by the 1987 Constitution.
On Dec. 16 Fr Jean Bertrand Aristide was elected President with a landslide majority and was inaugurated on Feb. 7, 1991 [see p. 37999].
Main government leaders
President: Fr Jean Bertrand Aristide, a radical Roman Catholic priest and outspoken proponent of liberation theology, who was expelled from the Salesian order in 1988 because of his political activities, and elected President in December 1990.
Prime Minister: René Preval, also Minister of Interior and National Defence.
Other principal ministers: Marie-Michel Rey (Economy and Finance); Denise Jean-Louis (Foreign Affairs; Worship).
Ruling Party
The National Front for Democracy and Change, led by Aristide, is a loose coalition of peasants, trade unionists, intellectuals and anti-Duvalierists.
Other parties
Since 1986 numerous political parties have been established in Haiti spanning the entire political spectrum.
Elections
1990 OVERVIEW
Initial optimism concerning the overthrow of Avril's military regime in March 1990 proved unfounded, as the interim Pascal-Trouillot government appeared unwilling and unable to counter the prevailing climate of violence and corruption or to champion genuine political reform.
However, December 1990 saw genuinely democratic presidential elections.
In addition to the exceptional nature and size of his victory, it was considered a potential watershed in Haiti's history, a view given further credence by the failure of a coup attempt in January 1991 which had aimed at preventing Aristide's inauguration [see p. 37955].
Aristide's inauguration on Feb. 7 was preceded by the deaths several days earlier of four boys and one member of staff in an arson attack on the Family Is Life orphanage in Port-au-Prince, an institution founded by Aristide.
The installation of the Pascal-Trouillot administration in March 1990 had brought some relief to the economy with the restoration of United States and other foreign aid [see p. 37815].
The inauguration of Aristide, as further evidence of Haiti's commitment to democracy, led to many promises of aid and to the commencement of an immediate UN assistance programme worth US$100,000,000.
Nevertheless, at the end of 1990 Haiti's economy remained in a perilous state, with the country estimated to be the poorest in the Western hemisphere.
The legacy of the Duvalierist years included endemic corruption and vast ecological damage.
The presence of former United States President Jimmy Carter as an observer during the December 1990 elections and at Aristide's inauguration was an indication of Haiti's re-entry into world affairs; the Jamaican Prime Minister, Michael Manley, said that he hoped that the country might be incorporated into the Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM).
[For details of the deferment of a decision over Haiti's application for membership of CARICOM see p. 37648.]
AMERICAS
HONDURAS
Area: 112,088 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 5,100,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: Tegucigalpa.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (mainly Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 18,200 (1990).
Currency: lempira (US$1.00=5.5396 lempiras as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ALADI (observer) Geplaces; OAS; San José Group; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Honduras gained its independence from Spain in 1821.
Under the 1982 Constitution an executive President is directly elected for a four-year term, as is the 128-member National Assembly.
Main government leaders
President: Rafael Leonardo Callejas.
Principal ministers: Mario Carías Zapata (Foreign Affairs); Ramón Medina Luna (Economy); Benjamín Villanueva Tábora (Finance); Col. Francisco Zepeda Andino (Defence).
Cabinet changes
None since the appointment of the new government in January 1990 [see p. 37275].
Ruling party
Partido Nacional (PN — National Party, Rafael Leonardo Callejas l.).
Other parties
Partido Liberal de Honduras (PLH — Liberal Party of Honduras, Rafael Pineda Ponce pres.);
Partido Demócrata Cristiano (PDC — Christian Democratic Party, Hernán Corrales Padilla l.);
Partido de Innovación y Unidad (PINU — Innovation and Unity Party, Miguel Andonie Fernández l.).
Guerrilla groups
Movimiento Popular de Liberación-Cinchonero (MPLC — Cinchonero Popular Liberation Movement); Fuerzas Populares Revolucionarias Lorenzo Zelaya (FPR-LZ — Lorenzo Zelaya Popular Revolutionary Forces); Frente Morazanista para la Liberación de Honduras (FMLH — Morazanista Front for the Liberation of Honduras); Partido Revolucionario de los Trabajadores Centroamericano de Honduras (PRTCH — Central American Workers' Revolutionary Party); Partido Comunista de Honduras — Marxista-Leninista (PCH — ML — Communist Party of Honduras — Marxist-Leninist); Partido de Acción Socialista de Honduras (PASOH — Socialist Action Party of Honduras).
The guerrilla groups are represented by the umbrella organization, the Dirección Nacional Unificada — Movimiento Revolucionario Hondureño (DNU-MRH — Unified National Directorate — Honduran Revolutionary Movement).
Elections
Presidential and legislative elections were held in November 1989, when Callejas was elected with just over 50 per cent of the vote, and the PN won 71 of the 128 seats in the National Assembly [see pp. 37038-39; 37275].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The government's free market economic adjustment programme, approved by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), restored the country's international credit standing in June 1990 at the expense of provoking widespread social unrest [see p. 37526], which continued into 1991.
The military's claim that the escalating protests were due to the growing presence of "seditious" forces were denied by the Catholic Church and the trade unions, which claimed that this was part of a government strategy to weaken a popular opposition movement.
Despite government denials, the use of troops to end forcibly a 42-day banana workers' strike was taken as evidence of its strong anti-labour stance [see p. 37649].
Trade unions also accused state security forces of involvement in the assassination of prominent union leaders [see p. 37526].
The leading rural workers' unions refused to sign the government's "agrarian reconciliation" agreement in September on the grounds that it was an attempt to arrest agrarian reform, did not address the needs of the rural population — an estimated 170,000 families lacked sufficient land to maintain a subsistence living — and favoured private land tenure.
Nine peasant farmers were shot dead by armed men hired by landowners in land disputes in May 1991; the military were reported to be implicated.
In an attempt to improve its international reputation over human rights an amnesty law was passed in January 1991 which covered primarily 300 rural workers arrested for land occupations in 1989.
It was extended, however, to include exiled left-wing leaders, 40 of whom had agreed to renounce armed struggle in order to return to the country by May 1991.
Negotiations between the DNU-MRH and the government had been initiated at the Central America presidential summit held in Nicaragua in April 1990 [see p. 37372].
An announcement by the FPR-LZ in April 1991 that it was willing to demobilize was thought to be conditional on the government agreeing to electoral and legal reforms.
The Cinchoneros, FMLH, PCH-ML and the PRTCH had not followed suit, although individual members of each group, including four Cinchoneros leaders, had taken advantage of the opportunity to return from exile.
The military itself was subject to serious unrest in January 1991 following new appointments by Gen. Luis Alonso Discua, the new C.-in-C. of the armed forces, who was known to be more moderate than his predecessor Gen. Arnulfo Cantarero López, who resigned in December 1990.
On Jan. 26, after his removal from his post as head of the air force, Col. Roberto Mendoza occupied the air base in the capital, Tegucigalpa, in an unsuccessful attempt to persuade other transferred officers to stage a rebellion.
Disaffected Cantarero supporters were considered by observers to be a danger to future constitutional order.
ECONOMY
In the face of a severe crisis relating to international reserves the government devalued the currency twice, in February and in March, and allowed it to float in September.
By the end of October this had resulted in a 20 per cent devaluation of the lempira against the US dollar, to which it had been tied at a fixed exchange rate since October 1989.
An emergency bridging loan to the value of US$247,500,000, granted by the Japan, Mexico, Spain, Taiwan, Venezuela and the USA, in June, restored multilateral lines of credit cut off since November 1989, when the previous government had been declared ineligible for further assistance by the IMF [see p. 37039].
The IMF on July 27, 1990, approved a standby loan of 30,500,000 special drawing rights (US$41,000,000), and the World Bank a loan of $90,000,000.
In October an agreement was reached with the "Paris Club" of Western creditor countries on the rescheduling of $150,000,000 in arrears and of $950,000,000 in official debt.
In March 1991, the World Bank extended $20,000,000 in credits.
At the same time the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) granted $700,000,000 in credits to be disbursed between 1991 and 1994.
The new loans raised the foreign debt to $3,074 million.
In February 1991 the US ambassador Crescencio Arcos stated that US military and economic aid for the year would exceed $123,000,000.
In May 1991 the government announced that it was to rejoin the Union of Banana Exporting Countries (UPEB) which it had left four years before.
Export figures for 1990 were given as US$990 million, with imports at US$1,030 million and a resulting trade deficit of US$40,000,000.
FOREIGN
Diplomatic relations were established with the Soviet Union on May 7, 1991.
AMERICAS
JAMAICA
Area: 10,991 sq km.
Population: 2,396,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Kingston.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity (majority Anglican); Rastafarianism.
Armed forces: 3,350 (1990).
Currency: Jamaican Dollar (US$1.00=J$8.0933 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ACP; CARICOM; Geplacea; NAM; OAS; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM.
The head of state of Jamaica, a fully independent member of the Commonwealth since August 1962, is the United Kingdom sovereign, represented by a Governor-General.
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral Parliament, which consists of a 60-member House of Representatives, popularly elected for up to five years, and a 21-member appointed Senate.
The Prime Minister and Cabinet are responsible to Parliament and are appointed by the Governor-General acting upon its advice.
Main government leaders
Governor-General: Sir Florizel Glasspole.
Prime-Minister: Michael Manley, who is also Minister of Defence.
Since election in 1988 Manley has softened the socialist policies of earlier PNP administrations of the 1970s.
Other principal ministers: Percival Patterson (Deputy Prime Minister; Finance and Planning); David Coore (Foreign Affairs); Seymour Mullings (Agriculture); Carl Rattray (Justice and Attorney General).
Cabinet changes in 1990
Manley reshuffled his Cabinet on Nov. 15 in an effort to "streamline the machinery of Government" .
Patterson, the Deputy Prime-Minister, was moved from the Development, Planning and Production Ministry to take charge of a restructured Finance and Planning Ministry.
Seymour Mullings, hitherto Minister of Finance, became Minister of Agriculture, replacing Horace Clarke, who moved to the Ministry of Mining and Energy, hitherto held by Hugh Small, who was moved to the newly organized Ministry of Industry and Commerce.
Ruling party
The People's National Party (PNP, social democratic, Michael Manley l.)
Other parties
The Jamaican Labour Party (JLP, conservative, Edward Seaga l); The Marxist Workers' Party of Jamaica (WPJ, Trevor Munroe l.) was formed in 1978, but has not contested elections.
Elections
The PNP in a general election on Feb. 9, 1989, won 45 of the 60 seats in the House of Representatives, defeating the JLP, which had held office since 1980 [see p. 36461; for March 1990 municipal elections see p. 37816].
1990 OVERVIEW
During 1990 there was considerable speculation on the future of Manley, who was hospitalized by pneumonia and, later, for surgery.
During these periods Patterson exercised executive power, raising speculation that he might succeed Manley should he retire on health grounds.
Throughout 1990 the opposition JLP showed signs of serious internal dissension centred upon Seaga's allegedly "autocratic" style of leadership, but also symptomatic of the JLP's struggle to come to terms with its defeat in the 1989 general election and its poor performance in the March 1990 municipal elections.
On Oct. 9 it was reported that Seaga had revoked the appointments as party spokesmen in the House of Representatives of four of the "Gang of Five" senior party members.
The dismissal of the four — Pearnel Charles (agriculture), Errol Anderson (national security), Edmund Bartlett (housing) and Douglas Vaz (industry)— followed the dismissal of shadow spokesman Karl Samuda (public utilities and transport)— the fifth member of the "Gang" — in September 1990.
[For details of dissatisfaction expressed at JLP annual conference see p. 37816].
In addition to their dismissals the JLP's standing committee ruled that the five would not be allowed to stand as party candidates in any future election.
However, the five committed themselves to remaining within the party, Charles, a former deputy leader of the JLP and widely acknowledged to be the leader of the dissident group, in effect mounting a leadership challenge.
The 1990-91 budget, for the financial year beginning April 1, 1990, presented to the House of Representatives on May 10 [see p. 37817], estimated recurrent expenditure at J$7,049 million and capital expenditure at J$3,523 million.
As a response to Jamaica's high level of debt, the government began in the latter part of 1990 the implementation of a new economic strategy based upon deregulation of major areas of the economy.
The new measures, announced in September and October, included the floating of the currency and the lifting of price controls on some petroleum products.
Consumers faced fuel price rises at the end of 1990 averaging 30 per cent, caused by the Gulf war, increases in taxation and the new deregulation.
The floating of the currency followed a cumulative 21 per cent devaluation since the PNP government took office in 1989 [for details of devaluations during 1990 see p. 37817].
Under the standby arrangement first agreed in March 1990, the IMF executive board on Nov. 15 approved the drawing of SDR27,400,000 (US$35,500,000) leaving a balance of SDR40,900,000 to be drawn subject to achievement of the performance criteria originally set for March and June 1990 [for details of Jamaica's failure to meet these targets and resulting suspension of arrangement see p. 37817].
The government agreed to clear US$90,000,000 of official arrears on external payments by the end of March 1991, and to allow the island's commercial banks to clear a further US$157,000,000 in private-sector arrears over the next 30 months through a series of bond issues.
The government also undertook to meet a planned increase of US$97,000,000 in foreign reserves by the end of May 1991, when the standby arrangement would expire.
The agreement included cuts in capital expenditure of US$150,000,000 and envisaged further reductions in Jamaica's fiscal debt for 1990-91, to 3.5 per cent of GDP from 8 per cent in 1989-90.
In 1990 bauxite production, one of Jamaica's primary industries, reached 10,920,000 tonnes, 28 per cent more than in 1989 according to figures released in January 1991 by the Jamaica Bauxite Institute.
Alumina exports rose in 1990 to 2,880,000 tonnes, the highest export figures in the industry's history and a 34 per cent rise compared with 1989.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Area: 1,958,201 sq km.
Population: 88,600,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: Mexico City.
Languages: Spanish; indigenous languages.
Religion: Christianity (96% Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 148,500 (1990).
Currency: Mexican peso (US$1.00=2,989.27 pesos as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ALADI; CONTADORA; Geplacea; Group of Rio; G-8; OAS; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Mexico, which achieved independence from Spain in 1821, is made up of 31 states and a federal district around the capital.
Under the 1917 Constitution (as amended) an executive President is elected every six years.
The Congress comprises the Senate, which has 66 members elected every six years (two from each state and two from the Federal District), and the Federal Chamber of Deputies, whose 400 members are elected every three years, 300 by majority vote in single-member constituencies and 100 by proportional representation from minority parties' lists.
Each state has its own constitution, is administered by a governor, who is elected for a six-year term, and has a Chamber of Deputies elected for a three-year term.
All elections are by universal adult suffrage.
The governor of the Federal District is appointed by the President.
Main government leaders
President: Carlos Salinas de Gortari.
Other principal ministers: Fernando Gutiérrez Barrios (Foreign Relations); Gen. Antonio Riviello Bazán (Defence); Pedro Aspe Armella (Finance and Public Credit); Ernesto Cedillo Ponce de León (Planning and Federal Budget); Fernando Hiriart Balderrama (Energy, Mines and Public Industries); Manuel Camacho Solís (Governor of Federal District); Enrique Alvárez del Castillo (Attorney General).
Cabinet changes
There were no Cabinet changes in 1990.
Ruling party
Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PRI — Institutional Revolutionary Party, Luis Donaldo Colossio pres.; for September 1990 14th national assembly and party reforms see p. 37707).
Other parties
Partido Acción Nacional (PAN — National Action Party Luis H. Alvarez l.);
Partido de la Revolución Democrática (PRD — Party of the Democratic Revolution, Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas Solórzano l.);
Partido Demócrata Mexicano (PDM — Mexican Democratic Party, Gumersindo Magaña Negrete pres.);
Partido del Frente Cardenista de Reconstrucción Nacional (PFCRN — Cardenista National Reconstruction Party, Rafael Aguilar Talamantes l.).
Elections
Presidential and congressional elections were held on July 6, 1988 [see pp. 36367-69].
State and municipal elections were held in Mexico and Hidalgo states in Nov. 11, 1990 [see p. 37849].
1990 OVERVIEW
A shortfall of production capacity prevented the country from taking full advantage of the escalation in oil prices following Iraq's August invasion of Kuwait.
Production was increased, however, to a record 1,360,000 barrels per day, providing increased oil revenues, which were estimated to total US$2,000 million for the year.
Economic confidence was raised further by trade deregulation and liberalization, low interest rates and most notably by negotiations to establish a free trade agreement (FTA) with the United States and Canada [see p. 37849; for April 1991 talks see p. 38140].
The government's decision, approved by parliament in May 1990, to privatize state banks nationalized in 1982 [see pp. 32071; 37449]was part of a ambitious privatization programme expected to raise $10,000 million by the close of 1991 and attract increased foreign investment.
The finalization of a debt accord with commercial creditor banks, signed in February 1990 [see p. 37243], reduced the total foreign debt of $92,240 million by $7,280 million (for October debt-for-equity auction see p. 37770).
However sweeping tax reforms, which broadened the tax base and increased government revenues, did not alter a policy of strict control of public finances.
Critics claimed that economic success had done little to alleviate fundamental problems of poverty and the grossly unequal distribution of income.
A planned budget for 1991 estimated at $80,000 million contained provision for a 15.7 per cent rise for the social sector and one of 41.2 per cent for the controversial National Solidarity (Pronasol) anti-poverty programme [see below]which had a budget of $1,000 million in 1990.
The Pact for Economic Solidarity and Growth (PECE), established with effect from January 1989 to contain wage and price increases, was renewed by the government, employers and trade unions in November [see pp. 37078; 37274; 37849].
The pace of political change did not match that of the economic sector.
Despite the approval of electoral reforms by the Congress in July [see p. 37707], the opposition accused the ruling PRI of gross electoral malpractice in November's local elections, when the PRI won a majority of state deputy seats and municipal mayorships [see p. 37849].
The opposition also alleged that the PRI had used the Pronasol programme to retain the allegiance of disaffected voters in areas where it was unpopular, and that increased Pronasol spending was intended to boost the PRI's popularity by the time of the 1991 mid-term congressional elections.
Human rights
A National Commission of Human Rights was established by Salinas in June 1990 in response to widespread internal and foreign concern at the routine use of torture by federal judicial police and at the escalating number of illegal arrests, murders, rapes and looting claimed to have been carried out by them in the course of a US-backed campaign against drug trafficking.
Exports in 1990 were valued at US$26,700 million and imports at US$28,900 million, resulting in a trade deficit of US$2,200 million.
AMERICAS
NETHERLANDS DEPENDENCIES
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Netherlands Antilles (then including Aruba) acquired separate status with full internal self-government within the Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1954, when the Kingdom's Charter came into force.
Aruba was separated from the other islands in 1986, pending full independence in 1996.
Aruba and the Netherlands Antilles each has a Governor, who represents and is appointed by the Crown, and has executive power in external affairs.
Executive power in internal affairs in each case is vested in a Council of Ministers, responsible to the Staten (parliament), which is elected for a four-year term.
ARUBA
Area: 193 sq km.
Population: 62,365 (1989).
Capital: Oranjestad.
Languages: Dutch (official); Papiamento (majority), Spanish and English.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Currency: Aruban guilder (or florin)(US$1.00=AFl1.7883 as at April 29, 1991).
Main government leaders
Governor: Felipe B. Trompe.
Prime Minister: Nelson Oduber.
Cabinet changes in 1990
No changes [for full Cabinet list as of November 1990 see p. 37822].
Ruling party
The Movimento Electoral di Pueblo (MEP — People's Electoral Movement, pro-independence, Nelson Oduber l.) governs in coalition with the Partido Patriótico Arubano (PPA — Aruban Patriotic Party, Leo Chance l.) and the Acción Democrático Nacional (ADN — National Democratic Action, John Booi l.).
Other parties
The Arubanaase Volkspartij (AVP — Aruba People's Party, J. H. A. (Henny) Eman l.), hitherto the leading party of a four-party coalition government, was defeated in the January 1989 general election, largely because of its unwillingness to sanction full independence; the Partido Democratico Arubano (PDA — Democratic Party of Aruba, Léonard Berlinski l.), a member along with the PPA and the ADN of the governing coalition until January 1989, lost both parliamentary seats in the general election.
The Partido Patriótico Nobo (PPN — New Patriotic Party, split from PPA, Eddy Werleman l.), holds one parliamentary seat.
Elections
The last election to the 21-member Staten was in January 1989, when the MEP won 10 of the 21 seats [see p. 37075].
1990 OVERVIEW
During 1990 Aruba began to reconsider its commitment to full independence from the Netherlands in 1996 [for details and July 1990 visit of Netherlands Minister of Aruban and Antilles Affairs see pp. 37822-23].
The Aruban economy continued to expand rapidly, based on tourism and construction [see p. 37823].
Aruba played host in June to the first Caribbean regional conference called to discuss the problem of drug money laundering.
The conference agreed to a deadline of Dec. 31, 1990, for the adoption by the participating countries of its 21 recommendations, including (i) the criminalization of conspiracy to engage in money laundering;(ii) the adoption of Organization of American States extradition guidelines; and (iii) the confiscation of assets of those convicted of drug related offences.
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES
Area: 800 sq km.Population: 191,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Willemstad.
Languages: Leeward Islands: Dutch and Papiamento (official); Windward Islands: English (official); Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic in Leewards, Protestant in Windwards).
Armed forces: the Netherlands is responsible for the defence of the Netherlands Antilles.
Currency: Netherlands Antilles guilder (or florin)(US$1.00=NAFl1.7883 as at April 29, 1991).
Main government leaders
Governor: Jaime Saleh.
Prime Minister: Maria Liberia Peters.
Ruling party
The Nationale Volkspartij (NVP — National People's Party, also known as the Partido Nashonal di Pueblo, Maria Liberia Peters l.), leads a centre-right coalition which has held office since 1988.
The other coalition members are the Frente Obreroi Liberashon 30 di meis (FOL — 30 May Workers' Liberation Front); the Union Patriotico Bonairiano (UBP — Bonaire Patriotic Union, L. R. Ellis l.); the Windward Islands People's Movement (WIPM, Will Johnston l.); and the Democratic Party of St Eustatius (DP-SE, Kenneth van Putten l.).
Other parties
The Movimento Antijas Nobo (MAN — New Antilles Movement, social democratic, Dominico Martina l.); the Democratic Party of St Maarten (DP-SM, secessionist, Claude Wathey l.); the Patriotic Alliance.
Elections
In the March 1990 general election to the Staten the governing NVP-led coalition won a total of 15 of the 22 seats [see p. 37314].
1990 OVERVIEW
The 1990 election considerably strengthened the position of the NVP, allowing it to resist secessionist demands from St Maarten.
[For details of the visit of the Netherlands Minister of Aruban and Antilles Affairs, and the proposed new "commonwealth" structure, see pp. 37822-23].
The economy of the Netherlands Antilles, based upon oil refining, financial services and tourism, was boosted in the first quarter of 1990 by an increase of 6 per cent in the number of tourists compared with the same period of 1989, which had shown a similar increase over the previous year.
In addition the 1990 oil price increases caused by the Gulf crisis resulted in a windfall for the 225,000 bpd oil refinery plant based at Bullen Baai, Curaçao.
The plant, one of the largest in the world, was in need of substantial investment to reduce high operating costs.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Area: 120,254 sq km.
Population: 3,900,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: Managua.
Languages: Spanish; English spoken in Indian communities on Atlantic coast.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 63,500 (1990).
Currency: gold córdoba (US$1.00=4.9955 gold córdobas as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ALADI (observer); Geplacea; OAS; NAM; San José Group.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Nicaragua gained independence in 1838, but the country was subsequently subjected to US military intervention in 1912-25 and in 1927-33, after which the Somoza dynasty ruled the country until overthrown by the Frente Sandanista de Liberación National (FSLN, also known as the Sandinistas) revolution of 1979.
Under the 1987 Constitution an executive President is directly elected for a six-year term.
The unicameral National Assembly, each of whose 90 directly elected members has an alternate representative, is elected for a six-year term by a system of proportional representation; it also contains those unelected candidates who have received nationally in the presidential and vice-presidential elections votes equivalent at least to the average of the winning percentages in the National Assembly elections in each regional electoral district, currently bringing the total number of representatives to 92.
Main government leaders
President: Violeta Barrios de Chamorro.
Vice-President: Virgilio Godoy Reyes.
Antonio Lacayo Oyanguren (Presidency); Emilio Pereira Alegría (Finance).
Principal ministers: Enrique Dreyfus Morales (Foreign Affairs); Carlos Hurtado Cabrera (Interior);
Cabinet changes in 1990
A new Cabinet was appointed in April 1990 [see p. 37370].
Ruling coalition
Unión Nacional de Opositora (UNO — National Opposition Union, Barrios de Chamorro l., a 14-party alliance — see p. 37236).
Other parties
The main opposition is the Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional (FSLN — Sandinista National Liberation Front, Daniel Ortega Saavedra l.); the other parties represented in the National Assembly are the Movimiento de Unidad Revolucionaria (MUR — Revolutionary Unity Movement, Moisés Hassan l.) and the Partido Social Cristiano Nicaragüense (PSCN — Social Christian Party, Erick Ramírez pres.).
In August 1990 former members of the US-backed contra movement formed the Resistencia Nicaraguense de Organización Civica (RNOC — Nicaraguan Resistance for Civic Organization, Oscar Sovalbarro l., Israel Galeano s. -g.).
Elections
Presidential and legislative elections were held in February 1990 when Chamorro gained 55 per cent of the votes in the presidential elections, and the UNO gained 51 seats in the National Assembly [see pp. 37236-37].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Chamorro was inaugurated as President in April 1990 after her February election victory over Ortega.
Her government embarked on a policy of national reconciliation after a decade of revolution, war and political polarization.
A significant achievement was persuading an estimated 23,000 former contra rebels to demobilize [see pp. 37370-71; 37450]but Chamorro antagonized right-wing parties in the ruling UNO coalition by retaining the former Sandinista leader Gen. Humberto Ortega Saavedra as the C.-in-C. of a re-formed army [see pp. 37527; 37849-50].
Right-wing criticism increased when the government, in "national dialogue" talks in October with FSLN trade unions, agreed to temper an anti-inflation austerity programme and plans to privatize the economy and reverse Sandinista land expropriations.
In exchange the Sandinistas agreed to a six-month no-strike deal [see p. 37771].
This compromise agreement came in the wake of general strikes in May and July which had left at least six dead and over 100 wounded during violent disturbances between FSLN and UNO supporters [see pp. 37450; 37607].
Vice-President Godoy, the government's chief critic, who had been ostracized by the Cabinet, accused Chamorro of having capitulated to the Sandinistas.
A right-wing group, the Committee to Save Democracy, supported by one-quarter of the country's mayors and by armed former contras, blocked major roads with barricades in November to back demands for (i) a bigger role for Godoy in the government;(ii) the dismissal of Gen. Ortega;(iii) the withdrawal of troops from several regions; and (iv) the dismissals of Lacayo, Minister of the Presidency, and Hurtado, the Interior Minister, who were claimed to be the chief architects of government policy [see pp. 37849-50].
Additional discontent among former contras, who claimed that the government had reneged on promises to give them land, led to armed clashes and to promises from Chamorro to distribute a further 23,000 hectares of land in the south-eastern Boaco and Chontales provinces.
A January 1991 co-operation agreement signed by the government and former contra leaders, which among other things was to guarantee the personal security of former contras, was jeopardized by the murder of the former contra commander Col. Enrique Bermúdez in February [see p. 38000].
The FSLN denied responsibility for the murder which was followed by an assassination attempt on Chamorro, allegedly by right-wing elements.
In May army reinforcements were sent to the northern Jinotega region to deal with an estimated 200 armed contras still active in the area.
of $150 million [see p. 37850].
Economy
The 1991 budget, announced on Nov. 15, 1990, projected total spending equivalent to US$499 million, and a fiscal deficit
Foreign Minister Dreyfus stated in November that the survival of democracy depended on the "Paris Club" of Western creditor countries agreeing in March 1991 to reschedule Nicaragua's arrears of US$350,000,000 on its $10,000 million foreign debt.
Only then could new credits become available.
The only substantial aid received by the government so far had been $300,000,000 from the United States agreed by the US Congress in May 1990 [see p. 37450], which had been gradually disbursed, except for $50,000,000 which had been set aside for clearing debt arrears.
to 2,501,943 at the end of December, and finally reached 5,201,919 in March 1991 before being renamed the gold cordoba on March 4 and set at 5.0726 to the US dollar.
The devaluation fuelled inflation, which reached an estimated annualized rate of 13,000 per cent.
Large cuts in state spending and big increases in charges for fuels and utilities resulted.
Gross national product fell by 5.7 per cent, an estimated 40 per cent of the workforce was unemployed and average per capita income fell to below $300 a year.
A new economic adjustment plan was announced in March 1991 [see p. 38093]and the government claimed that inflation was down to 4.7 per cent for April.
The cordoba was at intervals during 1990 devalued against the US dollar, from 23,492 cordobas to the dollar in January
The 1990 trade balance was in deficit by $310,000,000; exports totalled $320,000,000, and imports $630,000,000.
Foreign
Chamorro paid a state visit to the USA in April 1991, the first by a Nicaraguan President for 52 years, but failed to receive a definite commitment on additional US aid.
AMERICAS
PANAMA
Area: 77,082 sq km.
Population: 2,400,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: Panama City.
Language: Spanish (official).
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Currency: balboa (at par with the US dollar).
Major international affiliations: ALADI, Andean Pact (associate); CONTADORA; Geplacea; NAM; OAS; San José Group; SELA.
Panama was expelled from the Group of Eight in March 1990 [see p. 37373].
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Panama seceded from Colombia in 1903 after a revolt encouraged and assisted by the United States.
Under the amended Constitution approved in 1983, an executive President is directly elected for a five-year term, as is a unicameral 67-member Legislative Assembly.
Main government leaders
President: Guillermo Endara Galimany.
First Vice-President: Ricardo Arias Calderón.
Second Vice-President: Guillermo Ford Boyd, also Minister of Planning and Economic Policy.
Other principal ministers: Mario Galindo (Economy and Finance); Juan B. Chevalier (Government (Interior) and Justice); Julio E. Linares (Foreign Affairs); Roberto Alfaro (Industry and Commerce) >.
Cabinet changes in 1990
No changes in 1990.
Ruling Coalition
Alianza Democrática de Oposición Civilista (ADOC — Democratic Civic Opposition Alliance), composed of the Partido Arnulfista (PA — Arnulfist Party, Endara Galimany l.); the Movimiento Liberal Republicano Nacionalista (Molirena — Nationalist Republican Liberal Movement, Guillermo Ford Boyd l.); and the Partido Liberal Auténtico (PLA — Authentic Liberal Party).
Other parties
Movimiento Pro-Democracia y Libertad (MPLD — Pro Democracy and Liberal Movement — see p. 38093); Partido Demócrata Cristiano (PDC — Christian Democrat Party, Ricardo Arias Calderón l.);
Coalición para la Liberación Nacional (Colina — National Liberation Coalition) composed of the Partido Revolucionario Democrático (PRD — Revolutionary Democratic Party, Gerardo González l.); the Partido Laborista Agrario (Pala — Labour Party); and the Partido Liberal (PL — Liberal Party).
Elections
The presidential and legislative elections of May 1989 [see p. 36644]were declared null and void on May 10, allegedly on grounds of fraud, but the results were confirmed in December after the US invasion [see p. 37112].
Partial legislative (to nine vacant seats) and local elections were held in January 1991 [see p. 37957].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The December 1989 US military invasion which overthrew Gen. Manuel Noriega Moreno [see pp. 37112-13]raised popular expectations of a restored democracy.
Such hopes were thwarted by rising unemployment, a crime wave and the slow arrival of promised US aid [see pp. 37311; 37706; 37311].
Compensation claims amounting to US$400,000,000 for property destroyed and looted during the invasion [see p. 37706]were outstanding against the US government; estimates of the number of civilians killed during the fighting varied from the official US figure of 220 civilian dead [see p. 37181]through that of 320 (with 3,000 wounded) given by a human rights group, Physicians for Human Rights, to one as high as 4,000 dead.
By May 1990 more than 3,000 evacuees from the destroyed EL Chorillo district of Panama City remained in temporary accommodation in two aircraft hangars, waiting to be rehoused.
Support for the US-installed Endara government fell sharply and its legitimacy was further undermined in December 1990 when US troops intervened to restore order after a police rebellion [see p. 37912].
The decision in December 1989 to transform Noriega's infamous Panamanian Defence Force (FDP) into a lightly armed Panamanian Public Force (FPP) under civilian control [see also p. 37181]had been heavily criticized for leaving the government open to such paramilitary attacks and making it more dependent on the USA than before.
In addition few people believed that FDP officers could easily relinquish their former role.
The government's unpopularity was demonstrated in the January 1991 partial legislative and local elections.
The left-wing Colina opposition, dominated by the PRD and previously discredited for its past support of Noriega, gained ground, winning five of the nine vacant seats in the National Assembly [see p. 37957].
A political crisis in April split the ruling coalition government, and five PDC ministers were dismissed [see p. 38141].
Economy
A US$145,00,000 surplus was achieved on the $2,070 million 1990 budget, but at a cost to foreign creditors who had not received payment on their loans since 1987.
Approximately 60 per cent of the government's $5,800 million foreign debt was in arrears, making future debt stabilization agreements vital for economic stability.
In November 1990 the "Paris Club" of Western creditor countries rescheduled $530,000,000 of bilateral debt over 10 years with an initial five-year grace period.
The agreement was dependent, however, on a total of $610,000,000 being paid to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) by June 1991 [see p. 37706].
An estimated $84,000,000 in further US aid was also delayed due to protracted negotiations with the US government on a "legal assistance accord" to lift Panama's strict banking secrecy regulations so that investigations could proceed into drug trafficking and "money laundering" .
Panamanian commercial lawyers said that such a treaty should be resisted if it contained clauses covering tax evasion, as this would destroy the country's off-shore banking sector [see p. 37771].
In 1990 the Colón free trade zone, second only to Hong Kong as a duty-free trading port, handled a record $5,800 million worth of business.
Reforms of the Secnaves shipping registry and leasing procedures led to official expectations that Panamanian "flags of convenience" would dominate world shipping in 1991.
Trade unions pledged themselves to resist government plans to rationalize the public sector, privatize state industries, and streamline the economy for export-orientated growth [see pp. 37706].
Exports in 1990 totalled $3,260 million and imports $4,220 million, giving a deficit of $960,000,000.
A budget for 1991 totalling $2,787 million was approved by the National Assembly on Dec. 26, 1990.
The revenue side was heavily dependent on increased international credit and financing.
Foreign
Full diplomatic relations with Paraguay, suspended in October 1989, were restored in March 1990 and relations with the Soviet Union were established at ambassadorial level in March 1991.
AMERICAS
ST CHRISTOPHER AND NEVIS
Area: 261 sq km.
Population: 41,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Basseterre.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity (majority Anglican).
Currency: East Caribbean dollar (US$1.00=EC$2.6976 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ACP; CARICOM; OAS; OECS.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The head of state of St Christopher and Nevis, a fully independent member of the Commonwealth since 1983, is the United Kingdom sovereign represented by a Governor-General.
Legislative power is vested in a unicameral National Assembly consisting of a Speaker, three Senators (appointed by the Governor-General on the advice of the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition) and 11 representatives who are popularly elected.
The Prime Minister and Cabinet are appointed to office by the Governor-General on the recommendation of the Assembly.
Nevis has its own legislature (consisting of five elected and three nominated members) and an executive which has exclusive responsibility for the island's internal administration and through which its population may exercise its right to secede from the union with St Christopher.
Main government leaders
Governor-General: Sir Clement Athelstone Arrindell.
Prime Minister: Kennedy Alphonse Simmonds, also Minister of External Affairs, Home Affairs and Finance.
Other principal ministers: Michael Oliver Powell (Deputy Prime Minister; Labour; Tourism); Hugh Heyliger (Agriculture; Lands; Housing and Development).
Cabinet changes in 1990
None [for full Cabinet list see p. 37818].
Ruling party
The People's Action Movement (PAM, Kennedy Alphonse Simmonds l.].
Other parties
The St Kitts-Nevis Labour Party (SKLP, Denzil Douglas l. — for resignation of previous leader, Lee Moore, see p. 37818); the Nevis Reformation Party (NRP, Simeon Daniel l.); the Concerned Citizens Movement (CCM, Vance Amory l.).
Elections
The PAM retained its six National Assembly seats in the March 1989 general election [see p. 37818].
1990 OVERVIEW
Presenting to parliament the budget for the fiscal year starting on Jan. 1, 1991, the Prime Minister stressed on Jan. 15 that the poor economic growth during 1990 was a result of damage caused by hurricane "Hugo" in September 1989 [see p. 36891].
He also announced that a World Bank loan for the sugar industry was in the final stages of negotiation.
The budget of EC$184,000,000 projected capital expenditure at EC$85,100,000 and recurrent expenditure at EC$98,800,000, while revenue was estimated at EC$103,00,000.
In an effort to raise an extra EC$7,000,000 in revenue, increases in electricity rates and land and property taxes were announced.
AMERICAS
ST LUCIA
Area: 616 sq km.
Population: 147,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Castries. — Languages: English (official); French patois.
— Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
— Currency: East Caribbean dollar (US$1.00=EC$2.6976 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ACP; CARICOM; NAM; OAS; OECS.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The head of state of St Lucia, an independent member of the Commonwealth since 1979, is the United Kingdom sovereign represented by a Governor-General.
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral Parliament consisting of an appointed Senate and a 17-member House of Assembly which is popularly elected for a five-year term.
The Prime Minister and Cabinet are responsible to Parliament and are appointed by the Governor-General acting upon its advice.
Main government leaders
Governor-General: Stanislaus A. James (acting).
Prime Minister: John Compton, also Minister of Finance, Home Affairs, and Planning and Development.
Other principal ministers: George Mallet (Deputy Prime Minister; Trade, Industry and Tourism); Neville Cenac (Foreign Affairs).
Cabinet changes in 1990
Desmond Fostin resigned on Feb. 9 as Minster of Communications, Works and Transport and was replaced by Gregory Avril [see p. 37822].
Ruling party
The United Workers' Party (UWP, John Compton l.)
Other parties
St Lucia Labour Party (SLP, Julian Hunte l.).
Elections
The UWP, in power since 1982, won nine of the 17 parliamentary seats in the general election of April 6, 1987; fresh elections on April 30 produced the same result, and the subsequent defection of an SLP member increased the UWP's majority to three seats [see pp. 35187-8].
1990 OVERVIEW
The 1990/91 budget for the financial year starting April 1, 1990, presented on April 11, estimated recurrent expenditure at EC$236,700,000 and capital expenditure at EC$152,500,000.
The trade deficit at the end of the second quarter of 1990 was EC$193,300,000, compared with EC$183,100,000 for the same period of 1989.
Imports increased from EC$341,300,000 to EC$348,100,000 while export declined from EC$158,100,000 to EC$154,700,000.
The completed first phase of the west coast road, which would eventually connect Castries and Soufrière, was formally opened to traffic in December 1990.
AMERICAS
ST VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES.
Area: 389 sq km.
Population: 114,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Kingstown.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity (Anglican, Methodist, Roman Catholic).
Currency: East Caribbean dollar (US$1.00=EC$2.6976 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ACP; CARICOM; OAS; OECS.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The head of state of St Vincent and the Grenadines, a fully independent member of the Commonwealth since October 1979, is the United Kingdom sovereign, represented by a Governor-General.
Legislative power is vested in a unicameral National Assembly which sits for a five-year term and consists of six appointed senators and 15 popularly elected representatives.
The Prime Minister and Cabinet are responsible to the Assembly and are appointed to office by the Governor-General acting upon its advice.
Main government leaders
Governor-General: David Jack.
Prime Minister: James F. Mitchell, also Minister of Foreign Affairs and Finance.
Other principal ministers: Allan Cruickshank (Agriculture, Industry and Labour); Parnell Campbell (Information; Legal Affairs; Attorney General).
Cabinet changes in 1990
None [for full Cabinet list see p. 37822].
Ruling party
The New Democratic Party (NDP, James Mitchell l.).
Other political Parties
The three main opposition parties are the St Vincent Labour Party (SVLP, Vincent Beache, l.); the United People's Movement (UPM, Oscar Allen l.); and the Movement for National Unity (MNU, Ralph Gonsalves l.).
In November 1990 it was reported that discussions were taking place among opposition parties about the formation of a united front to challenge the NDP.
Elections
The NDP, which had won the 1984 general election, was returned to power in May 1989, winning all of the 15 elected seats.
1990 OVERVIEW
The 1991 budget presented by Mitchell on Dec. 18, 1990, imposed no new tax measures.
The budget, which projected expenditure of EC$246,900,000, featured a 7 per cent pay increase for public employees at an estimated cost of EC$5,500,000, in the first stage of a three-year programme of pay rises.
Mitchell noted that banana exports in the first nine months of 1990 had totalled EC$78,000,000, a 14 per cent increase on the corresponding period of 1989.
The total for 1990 was expected to be close to a record EC$100,000,000.
(In 1989 bananas accounted for 45 per cent of all exports.)
Mitchell also announced the release of 7,000 acres of state-owned land to form 1,500 smallholdings as part of the government's land distribution programme.
AMERICAS
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO.
Area: 5,128 sq km.
Population: 1,261,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Port of Spain.
Languages: English (official); French, Spanish, Hindi and Chinese.
Religion: Christianity (60%), Hinduism (25%), Islam (6%).
Armed forces: 2,650 (1990).
Currency: Trinidad and Tobago dollar (US$1.00=TT$4.2462 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ACP; CARICOM; Geplacea; NAM; OAS; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Trinidad and Tobago was declared a republic in 1976, the country having been an independent Commonwealth member since 1962.
The head of state is a President elected by a parliamentary electoral college.
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral Parliament composed of a House of Representatives, popularly elected for five years, and a Senate appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister and of the Leader of the Opposition.
Tobago, the smaller of the country's two main constituent islands, achieved full internal self-government in early 1987.
Main government leaders
President: Noor Mohammed Hassanali, elected March 1987.
Prime Minister: Arthur Napoleon Raymond Robinson.
The Prime Minister resumed official duties on Sept. 10, 1990, after recovering from gunshot wounds received in the August 1990 coup attempt [see p. 37606-07].
Other principal ministers: Selby Wilson (Finance); Selwyn Richardson (Health); Joseph Toney (Justice, National Security).
Cabinet changes in 1990
The Cabinet was reshuffled on Sept. 21, 1990.
Two junior ministers, Joseph Toney and Senator Hochoy Charles, were assigned to the Security Ministry following the July coup attempt.
The resignation of Richardson, then Minister of Justice and National Security, tendered on Sept. 18 for failing to prevent the attempted coup and the ensuing looting, was not accepted at the time by the Prime Minister, with whom Richardson had been held hostage during the crisis.
Ruling party
The National Alliance for Reconstruction (NAR, Arthur Robinson l.)
Other parties
The United National Congress (UNC, Basdeo Panday l.; formed in April 1989 by five senior members of the NAR, the party has six seats in the House of Representatives — see p. 37820); the People's National Movement (PNM, Patrick Manning, l.); the Movement for Social Transformation (Motion, launched in September 1989, David Abdulah, l.)
Elections
In the general election of December 1986 the NAR won 33 of the 36 seats in the lower house and ousted the incumbent PNM (which won the remaining three seats), ending 30 years of continuous PNM government [see pp. 35194-95].
A by-election on 17 December 1990, made necessary by the death of an NAR MP during the July attempted coup, was won by the PNM, who now have four seats in the House of Representatives.
Elections to Trinidad and Tobago's seven county councils and four municipal councils, constitutionally due in mid-September, were postponed owing to the confusion created by the coup attempt and the resulting curfew, which remained in place until Aug. 21.
An amendment extending the life of the councils for a maximum of one year was attached to a bill providing for the abolition of the county councils in favour of 13 new regional corporations which was approved by the Senate on Sept. 5.
1990 OVERVIEW
After the attempted coup in July-August [see pp. 37606-07], concerns over security were paramount in the latter part of 1990.
In a speech to the country on Aug. 31, Robinson announced that security would be the top priority of government as a "necessary component" of economic progress.
The government launched a review of national security arrangements with a view to "rectifying any existing deficiencies" .
Measures taken included the assignment of two junior ministers to the Security Ministry and the extension in August 1990 of the state of emergency for three months.
The trial began on Sept. 25 of Imam Yasin Abu Bakr, the leader of the coup attempt.
The charges against Abu Bakr and 113 of his followers included murder, kidnapping and the illegal possession of arms and ammunition.
The leader of the UNC, Basdeo Panday, who condemned the support given by the PNM for the government's extension of the state of emergency was on Sept. 10 confirmed by President Noor Hassanali as the official Leader of the Opposition, a post he had held between 1976 and 1986, as leader of the United Labour Front (ULF), the then leading opposition party.
Panday immediately exercised his right to nominate six Senators to replace those nominated by the PNM.
(Six of the 21 senators were designated by the President, nine by the government and six by the Leader of the Opposition).
A budget for 1990, presented to Parliament on Dec. 22, 1989, set recurrent expenditure at TT$5,484 million; capital expenditure at TT$794,200,000; debt servicing at $791,300,000; and total revenues at TT$5,498 million.
A budget for 1991, described as cautious and realistic, was presented in Parliament on Dec. 7, 1990.
Expenditure was to rise compared with 1990, with significant increases in health, education, public works and national security spending.
Old age pensions were increased and cuts imposed in 1989 on public-sector salaries were restored together with some cost of living allowance arrears.
Public-sector investment was fixed at TT$1,418 million, with priority being given to infrastructure projects.
Total expenditure was expected to be TT$7,611,000 million.
The current-account surplus was projected at TT$296.7 million, with an overall deficit of TT$547.5 million, to be financed by local borrowing.
The government announced that from Jan. 1, 1991, foreign exchange regulations were to be liberalized and tariffs levied in line with the introduction (on Jan. 1) of the CARICOM common external tariff (CET).
The country's economy, like the political sphere, was dominated by the aftermath of the coup attempt.
The physical damage inflicted by the associated rioting — mainly to retail outlets in the central business district of Port of Spain — was estimated to be in the region of US$100,000,000.
The Industry Minister suggested that TT$2,000 million would be needed to rebuild the commercial heart of the city.
The problem was compounded when, on Sept. 19, the Insurance Companies' Association said that losses due to the insurrection were not covered by existing insurance policies.
Many businesses affected by this ruling started legal action against their insurers.
A fund of TT$50,000,000 was established in August 1990 to provide loans to small and medium-sized businesses which had suffered losses during the rioting and looting.
This setback to the economy occurred after seven years of contracting production and rising unemployment.
Between 1982 and 1989 real GDP had virtually halved, causing per capita income to fall from US$7,300 in 1982 to US$3,200 in 1989.
The economic problems of Trinidad and Tobago were, however, temporarily relieved by the Gulf crisis which boosted the petroleum sector which accounted for some 80 per cent of foreign exchange earnings.
Another cause for optimism was that the coup attempt appeared not to have caused permanent damage to foreign investment or the tourist industry.
A Japanese plan to invest TT$37,000,000 in a bagasse processing plant was successfully completed after the coup, and cruise ships once again began arriving after order had been restored.
The 1991 budget [see above], with its emphasis on public sector expenditure, clearly showed that the government was trying to ease the social problems caused by the demands of the IMF and World Bank aid packages [see p. 37820].
In the long run, however, ministers doubted whether the country could meet its present commitments to these organizations in the light of the events of July-August.
Trinidad and Tobago received a great deal of international support in its efforts to deal with the July coup attempt.
The CARICOM heads of government meeting held at the same time issued an "unequivocal condemnation" of the events in Port of Spain and 300 troops from CARICOM states were flown to the island on Aug. 3 as a "precautionary move" to protect oil installations [see p. 37648].
AMERICAS
UNITED KINGDOM DEPENDENT TERRITORIES
ANGUILLA
Area: 96 sq km.Population: 7,500 (1990 estimate).
Capital: The Valley.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity (majority Anglican or Methodist).
Armed Forces: defence is the responsibility of the United Kingdom government.
Currency: East Caribbean dollar ((US$1.00=EC$2.6976 as at April 29, 1991).
Political system
Anguilla, a British colony from 1650 to 1967, and then part of the Associated State of St Kits-Nevis-Anguilla, became a United Kingdom Dependent Territory in 1980.
A new Constitution was introduced in 1982 which provided for a Governor, an Executive Council and a House of Assembly with seven elected, two ex-officio and two appointed members.
Main government leaders
Governor: Brian Canty.
Chief Minister: Emile Gumbs, also Minister of Home Affairs, Tourism, and Economic Development.
Other principal ministers: Osborne Fleming (Finance, Education and Community Development); Eric Reid (Land, Agriculture, Fisheries and Health).
Ruling party
Anguilla National Alliance (ANA, Emile Gumbs l.).
Other parties
Anguilla United Party (AUP, Ronald Webster l.);
Anguilla Democratic Party (ADP, VictorBanks).
Elections
The last election to the House of Assembly was in February 1989, when Gumbs' ANA won three of the seven elected seats and the support of an independent member [see p. 36457].
1990 overview
Following a report published in early 1990 by accountants Coopers and Lybrand into the activities of offshore financial businesses in the UK's Caribbean territories, it was agreed in May in talks held in London between the UK government and Gumbs to amend the Constitution in order to allow the Governor to assume greater control of the offshore financial sector [see p. 37824].
BERMUDA
Area: 53 sq km.Population: 56,000 (1988).
Capital: Hamilton.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity.
Armed forces: 750 (1989).
Currency: Bermuda dollar (at par with US dollar).
Political system
A United Kingdom colony, Bermuda, settled by the British since 1609, has enjoyed internal self-government since 1968.
The Governor, representing the sovereign, is responsible for external affairs, defence and internal security.
There is an 11-member nominated Senate and a 40-member elected House of Assembly.
The Governor appoints the Premier, who appoints the executive Cabinet.
Main government leaders
Governor: Sir Desmond Langley.
Premier: Sir John Swan (since 1968).
Cabinet changes in 1990
There were Cabinet changes in January 1990 [see p. 37824].
Ruling party
United Bermuda Party (UBP, John Swan l.), first elected in 1968 and returned to office in every subsequent election.
Other parties
The Progressive Labour Party (PLP, Frederick Wade l.) supports total independence from the UK. won 15 seats.
Elections
The UBP won 23 of the 40 seats in the House of Assembly in a general elections on Feb. 9, 1989 [see p. 36462].
The PLP
1990 overview
The 1990 budget, presented on Feb. 22, 1990, estimated expenditure at US$370,000,000 [see p. 37824].
Bermuda's balance of payments improved considerably during 1990, due to increased tourism and business earnings, reduced imports and the effect of tighter credit controls.
The current account showed a surplus of US$6,000,000 for the third quarter of 1990, compared with a deficit of US$49,000,000 for the same period in 1989.
Fourth quarter results, however, were expected to reflect increased oil import prices and a drop in tourist numbers.
The reduction mainly reflected the 14 per cent fall in cruise ship visitors, as a result of government decisions to limit the number of visiting cruise liners.
In November the Prime Minister announced the resignation, with effect from Jan. 31, 1991, of Attorney General Saul Froomkin for "personal reasons" .
BRITISH VIRGIN ISLANDS
Area: 153 sq km.Population: 12,197 (1987).
Capital: Road Town.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity (majority Methodist).
Armed forces: Defence is the responsibility of the UK government.
Currency: United States dollar.
Political system
The 60 or so islands comprising the British Virgin Islands are a Crown Colony with an appointed Governor representing the United Kingdom sovereign.
The territory has a large measure of self-government, with the Governor presiding over an Executive Council composed of the Chief Minister, the Attorney General and three other ministers drawn from the Legislative Council, which comprises nine elected members, the Speaker and the Attorney General.
Major international affiliations: CARICOM (associate member).
Main government leaders
Governor: John Mark Ambrose Herdman.
Chief Minister: H. Lavity Stoutt, also Minister of Finance.
Ruling Party
The Virgin Islands Party (VIP, H. Lavity Stoutt l.)
Other parties
The United Party (UP, Conrad Maduro l.).
Elections
Stoutt's VIP won a third (but not consecutive) term in a general election held in September 1986, winning five of the nine elected seats [see p. 34856].
1990 overview
Stoutt presented a budget on Feb. 20, 1990, which estimated recurrent expenditure at US$37,900,000.
The CARICOM heads of government meeting held at Kingston, Jamaica, on July 31-Aug. 2 granted associate CARICOM membership to the British Virgin Islands [see p. 37648].
CAYMAN ISLANDS
Area: 259 sq km.Population: 25,355 (1989 census).
Capital: George Town.
Language: English (official).
Religion: Christianity.
Armed forces: Defence is the responsibility of the United Kingdom government.
Currency: Cayman Islands dollar (US$1.00=CI$0.8292 as at April 29, 1991).
Political system
The Cayman Islands, which came under British rule in 1670, were a dependency of Jamaica until 1959, and governed by the Governor of Jamaica until they became a United Kingdom Dependent Territory on Jamaican independence in 1962.
Under the Constitution as revised in 1972 there is a Legislative Assembly with 12 elected and three official members, while the Governor and Executive Council (comprising three official members and four elected by and from the Legislative Assembly) are responsible for internal administration.
Main government leaders
Governor: Alan Scott.
First Elected Member (of the Executive Council): W. Norman Bodden.
Political parties
There are no official political parties.
Elections
The last elections to the Assembly were held on Nov. 16, 1988 [see p. 37145].
1990 overview
Constitutional issues were the main concern during 1990.
In October the UK government agreed to a July request from the Legislative Assembly for a review of the 1972 Constitution.
In February 1991 two UK commissioners, Sir Frederick Smith and Walter Wallace, concluded four weeks of public consultations concerning the proposed changes.
Proposals considered by the commission included removal of the post of Governor from the political arena, the creation of the post of Chief Minister and the inclusion of a bill of rights in the Constitution.
The commissioners were to report to the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office, after which any recommended changes in the constitution would be voted upon in the Cayman Islands Legislative Assembly.
Constitutional changes enacted in 1990 included the separation of the administrative and professional functions of the office of Attorney General, and the subsequent appointment in September of the territory's first Solicitor General, Anthony Smellie, a Jamaican born barrister.
MONTSERRAT
Area: 102 sq km.Population: 11,900 (1987).
Capital: Plymouth.
Language: English
(official).
Religion: Christianity.
Armed forces: defence is the responsibility of the UK Government.
Currency: East Caribbean dollar ((US$1.00=EC$2.6976 as at April 29, 1991).
Political system
Montserrat, part of the British colony of the Leeward Islands from 1871 to 1956, when it became a separate United Kingdom Dependent Territory, is governed by a Governor, who presides over an Executive Council and a Legislative Council with seven elected, two official and two nominated members.
Following an investigation of its offshore financial sector, amendments to the 1960 Constitution were agreed in December 1989 and implemented in February 1990 [see p. 37824].
In return for accepting the Governor's supervision of the financial sector, a provision was included recognizing Montserrat's right to self-determination.
Main government leaders
Governor: David G. P. Taylor.
Chief Minister: John A. Osborne, also Minister of Finance and Economic Development.
Ruling party
The People's Liberation Movement (PLM, centre-right, John Osborne l.).
Other parties
The National Development Party (NDP, centrist, Bertrand B. Osborne l.); the Progressive Democratic Party (PDP, centrist, Eustace Dyers l.).
Elections
At the last general election in August 1987 the PLM was re-elected to office with four seats, the NDP won two and the PDP one [see p. 35373].
1990 overview
In the aftermath of the offshore banking investigation [see pp. 37145; 37824]the politics of Montserrat continued to concentrate on the territory's relationship with the UK.
The appointment of a new Governor in May 1990 improved relations, as, by the end of 1989, the relationship between Osborne and the then Governor Christopher Turner had become severely strained.
In late October it was reported that there was disagreement between Osborne and his deputy, Benjamin Chalmers, over the former's support for independence from the UK.
It was also reported that Osborne had considered requesting the dissolution of the Legislative Council halfway through the current term because of his dissatisfaction with the performance of his ministers.
The government on Nov. 7, 1990, defeated a no confidence motion tabled by the opposition in an attempt to exploit divisions within the ruling party.
TURKS AND CAICOS ISLANDS
Area: 430 sq km.Population: 13,000 (official estimate 1989).
Capital: Cockburn Town.
Language: English (official), Creole.
Religion: Christianity (majority Baptist).
Armed forces: Defence is the responsibility of the United Kingdom government.
Currency: US dollar.
Political system
The Turks and Caicos Islands were a Jamaican dependency from 1859 to 1959, and became a separate United Kingdom Dependent Territory in 1962 after Jamaican independence.
The islands are ruled by a Governor, representing the UK sovereign, who is responsible for external affairs, defence and internal security, and presides over an eight-member Executive Council, appointed from the Legislative Council, which has seven appointed and 13 elected members.
Main government leaders
Governor: Michael Bradley.
Chief Minister: Oswald O. Skippings, who is also Minister of Tourism and Home Affairs.
Ruling Party
People's Democratic Movement (PDM, Oswald Skippings l.).
Other parties
The Progressive National Party (PNP, Dan Malcolm l.); the National Democratic Alliance (NDA, Ariel Misick l.); the Turks and Caicos United Party (TCUP, Glenn Evans-Clarke l.).
Elections
The last election to the Legislative Council was held on March 3, 1988, when the PDM won 11 of the 13 elected seats [see p. 36098].
1990 overview
The 1990 budget, presented on March 13, estimated recurrent expenditure at US$26,000,000.
The Turks and Caicos Islands were granted associate CARICOM membership at the CARICOM heads of government meeting on July 31-Aug 2, 1990 [see p. 37648].
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES EXTERNAL TERRITORIES
PUERTO RICO
Area: 8,959 sq km.
Population: 3,500,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: San Juan.
Languages: Spanish, English.
Religion: Christianity (85% Roman Catholic).
Currency: US dollar.
Major international affiliations: CARICOM (observer).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico was ceded by Spain to the United States in 1898, and has, since 1952, been a state in "free association" with the USA.
It has a Resident Commissioner, elected for a four-year term, who is a non-voting member of the US House of Representatives.
Executive power is exercised by an elected Governor assisted by an appointed Cabinet.
Legislative power is vested in the bicameral Legislative Assembly, comprising a 27-member Senate and a 53-member House of Representatives; both chambers are directly elected for four-year terms.
Main government leaders
Governor: Raphael Hernández Colón.
Principal secretaries: Sila María Calderón (Secretary of State); Ramón García Santiago (Treasury.
Ruling Party
The Partido Popular Democratico (PPD — Popular Democratic Party, Hernández Colón l.) favours continued commonwealth status.
Other parties
The main opposition party is the Partido Nuevo Progresista (PNP — New Progressive Party, Baltasar Corrado del Rio l.), which favours full statehood within the USA.
The Partido Independentista Puertoriqueño (PIP — Independence Party, Ruben Berríos Martínez l.) favours complete independence from the USA.
Elections
Gubernatorial and legislative elections were held on Nov. 8, 1988 [see p. 37079], when the PPD won 18 seats in the Senate and 36 seats in the House of Representatives.
1990 OVERVIEW
Politics in Puerto Rico continued to be dominated in 1990 by the issue of constitutional status and the proposed referendum, scheduled for mid-1991, to determine the territory's future relationship with the USA.
Despite Bush's support for Puerto Rican statehood (declared in 1989), the referendum plan was killed on Feb. 27, 1991, when the US Senate energy and natural resources committee (which had responsibility for the legislation) failed to secure a majority to bring the bill authorizing the referendum before the Senate.
US VIRGIN ISLANDS
Area: 354.8 sq km.
Population:106,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Charlotte Amalie.
Language: English.
Religion: Christianity.
Currency: US dollar.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The United States Virgin Islands were purchased from Denmark in 1917.
The group is an unincorporated territory under the US Department of the Interior and sends a non-voting delegate to the US House of Representatives.
Power is exercised by a Governor, elected for a four-year term, and by a 15-member Senate elected every two years.
Main government leaders
Governor: Alexander Farrelly.
Lieutenant-Governor: Derek M. Hodge.
Ruling party
Democratic Party of the Virgin Islands (Marylyn Stapleton ch.), affiliated to the US Democratic Party.
Other parties
Republican Party:(Charlotte Poole ch.), affiliated to the US Republican Party; Independent Citizens' Movement (Virdin Brown ch.).
Elections
Gubernatorial and Senate elections were held in November 1990.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Area 2,766,889 sq km.
Population: 32,300,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: Buenos Aires.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (90% Roman Catholic, 2% Protestant).
Armed forces: 75,000 (1990).
Currency: austral (US$1.00=9728.72 australs as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ALADI; Group of Rio; G-8; Geplacea; Lima Group; Mercosur; NAM; OAS; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Federal Republic of Argentina gained full independence from Spain in 1816.
It comprises a Federal District, 23 provinces and the National Territory of Tierra del Fuego.
Legislative power is exercised by a Chamber of Deputies with 254 members elected directly for four-year terms (with half the seats renewable every two years) and a Senate with 46 members nominated by the legislatures of the 23 provinces for nine-year terms (with one-third of the members nominated every three years).
An executive President is elected every six years.
Each province has its own elected governor and legislature, nominally concerned with all matters not delegated to the federal government.
Main government leaders
President: Carlos Saúl Menem.
Vice-President: Eduardo Duhalde.
Principal ministers as at end-January 1991: Guido di Tella (Foreign Affairs); Domingo Cavallo (Economy); Antonio Ermán González (Defence); Julio Mera Figueroa (Interior).
Cabinet changes in 1990
In late 1990 Eduardo Bauzá (then Minister of Public Health and Social Action) exchanged positions with Alberto Kohan (Secretary General of the Presidency).
Ruling party
Partido Justicialista (Justicialist Party, the official name for the Peronists, of which Menem was elected chairman in August 1990 [see p. 37651]; Eduardo Menem vice-ch.).
Other parties
Unión Cívica Radical (UCR — Radical Civic Union, Raúl Alfonsín Foulkes l.);
Unión del Centro Democrático (UCeDé — Union of the Democratic Centre, Federico Clerici pres.).
In October, the left-of-centre Partido Intransigente (PI — Intransigent Party, Oscar Alende and Lisandro Viale ls.) and the Partido Demócrata Cristiano (PDC — Christian Democrat Party, Elio Silveira l.) withdrew from the Frente Justicialista de Unidad Popular (FREJUPO — United Popular Justicialist Front), the electoral coalition formed by the Peronists to contest the May 1989 presidential elections [see p. 36651], over criticisms of the government's economic policies.
Elections
In presidential and legislative elections held in May 1989 [see pp. 36651-52]Menem defeated Eduardo César Angeloz of the UCR, and the Peronists became the largest party in the Chamber of Deputies, although they still lacked an absolute majority.
1990 OVERVIEW
Menem's plan radically to restructure the economy provoked widespread looting of supermarkets in February and March 1990 [see pp. 37244; 37501; for March, August and September austerity measures see pp. 37500; 37710].
His plan to promote national reconciliation was set back further by his pardoning on Dec. 29 by presidential decree of the military leaders of the "dirty war" of the 1970s.
This provoked a public outcry [see p. 37913]and was widely seen as evidence of his autocratic style of government, already reflected in his combining the presidency with the chairmanship of the ruling Peronist party [see p. 37651].
The military pardons dissipated the public support which the government had gained by its suppression of a military coup on Dec. 3 [ibid.].
Allegations by the US ambassador in January 1991 of official corruption led to a further erosion of public confidence in Menem who was forced to reorganize his Cabinet [see p. 37959].
This, coupled with a return to high monthly inflation, precipitated fears of growing economic and political instability and led to a run on the austral and the resignation on Jan. 28 of the Economy Minister [see p. 37959].
ECONOMY
A second phase of privatization, announced in October 1990 [see p. 37773], was intended to cover 150 state-owned companies and included the electricity, water and gas sectors.
Concession to operate coal mines, oil fields, federal highways and three railway lines were also to be auctioned.
In the first round, 60 per cent of the state-owned telecommunications company Entel was sold off in June 1990 [see p. 37529]and the army was used to suppress a subsequent strike of 40,000 telecommunication workers [see p. 37710].
A government appeal in July to the Supreme Court, increased in size by presidential decree in April 1990, allowed the privatization of the state airline Aeorolíneas Argentinas to proceed, although by March 1991 the sale was on the verge of collapse [see pp. 37529; 37608; 37773; 38096].
Critics of the privatization plan claimed that it was improvised, lacked clear conditions and had suffered from poor regulation.
A new emergency tax plan announced in February 1991 provoked an angry response from public-sector workers in particular[see p. 38003].
At the beginning of December the IMF released the third tranche, worth US$240 million, of a $1,400 million standby loan agreed in November 1989 [see pp. 37040; 37244; 37451].
A record trade surplus of US$7,890 million was recorded for 1990, an increase of 46.9 per cent over 1989 [when the trade surplus was $5,000 million, not $5,000,000 as given on p. 37499].
Increased exports (at US$11,900 million) were primarily based on the improved performance of the agricultural sector which benefited from an increase in acreage cultivated and good harvests due to good weather.
The surplus was despite the sharp appreciation of the austral in the second half of the year making the exchange rate less favourable and causing heavy financial losses for exporters [see p. 37959 for January 1991 sharp depreciation of austral]; in addition US and European Community (EC) farm subsidies had depressed world farm prices.
Imports had fallen to US$4,010 million in 1990 as a result of contraction in internal demand caused by the recession.
Investment was sharply down and was estimated to represent only 9 per cent of gross domestic product.
Production in the industrial sector fell by 3.1 per cent, worst hit being the car industry where output fell by 23.4 per cent .
Principal foreign relations events 1990
February: full restoration of diplomatic relations with United Kingdom [see p.37245]; July: letter of intent signed with Brazil to form common market [see p. 37608]; October: attendance of Group of Rio meeting p. 37774; visit of Menem to Soviet Union and United States [see p. 37773]; November: talks with UK over Falklands Islands fisheries [see p. 37853]; December: visit of US President George Bush [see p. 37914]; nuclear non-proliferation agreement with Brazil (signed Nov. 28), bilateral co-operation with UK [see p. 37913]; involvement in Gulf crisis September:, October:, December:[see pp. 37694, 37773; 37914].
Trade and co-operation agreements were signed with Chile in August, with China and Romania in November and with Paraguay in December.
In September a framework trade agreement was signed with Venezuela and in November Japan promised to extend aid, especially technical co-operation, and Germany rescheduled DM880,000,000 (US$590,000,000) in debt.
The Mercosur treaty to form a South American Common market with, initially, Brazil, Uruguay and Paraguay was signed in March 1991 [see p. 38096].
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
Area: 1,098,581 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 7,300,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: La Paz (administrative capital); Sucre (legal capital).
Languages: Spanish, Quechua and Aymará.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 28,000 (1990).
Currency: boliviano (US$1.00=3.5218 bolivianos as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ALADI; Amazon Pact; Andean Pact; Geplacea; Group of Rio; NAM; OAS; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Bolivia gained independence from Spain in 1825.
An executive President is elected every four years, as is a bicameral Congress comprising a 27-member Senate and a 130-member Chamber of Deputies.
The country is divided into nine departments, each of which is governed by a prefect appointed by the President.
Main government leaders
President: Jaime Paz Zamora
Vice-President: Luis Ossio Sanjinés
Principal ministers: Carlos Iturralde Ballivián (Foreign Affairs; Worship); Carlos Armando Saavedra Bruno (Interior; Justice; Migration;); Héctor Hormaechea Peñaranda (National Defence); David Blanco Zabala (Finance).
Cabinet changes
Interior Minister Guillermo Capobianco Ribera resigned on March 13, 1991 [see below; pp. 38094-95; for full coalition Cabinet (appointed August 1989) see p. 37487].
Ruling coalition
The Acuerdo Patriótica (AP — Patriotic Accord), an alliance of the left-wing Movimiento de la Izquierda Revolucionaria (MIR — Movement of the Revolutionary Left, Oscar Eid Franco s. -g.), the right-wing Alianza Democrática Nacionalista (ADN — Democratic Nationalist Alliance, Hugo Banzer Suárez l.), assumed power in August 1989 following the failure of any one candidate to win an outright majority in the presidential election on May 7, 1989 [see pp. 36652; 36845].
Vice-President Ossio is a member of the Partido Demócrata Cristiano (PDC — Christian Democrat Party, Jorge Agreda Valderrama l.).
Main opposition parties
Movimiento Nacionalista Revolucionario (MNR — National Revolutionary Party, Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada l.);
Conciencia de Patria (CONDEPA — Conscience of the Fatherland Party, Carlos Palenque Avilés l.);
Movimiento Bolivia Libre (MBL — Free Bolivia Movement, Antoni Aranibar Quiroga l.);
Unión Cívica Solidaridad (UCS — Civic Solidarity Union); Izquierda Unida (IU — United Left).
Elections
Presidential and congressional elections were held in May 1989 [see p. 36652]; municipal elections were held in December 1989 [see p. 37487].
Presidential and congressional elections were next due in 1993.
1990 OVERVIEW
Early in the year, on Feb. 14, the state of siege imposed following industrial action by teachers and trade unionists in November 1989 [see pp. 37039-40]was formally ended.
On Sept. 23 Paz Zamora signed what was considered some of the most important legislation in Bolivia's history, decrees conferring land rights on Indians in Beni and the central Chimanes forest area.
Talks between the ruling AP and the opposition MNR, CONDEPA and MBL, which had been convoked to resolve a political crisis which had arisen in November over the political role played by the Supreme court, many of whose members were linked with the MNR [see pp. 37851-52], broke down in March 1991.
Discussion concentrated on electoral reform, the decentralization of state power and the need for an independent judiciary.
Opposition parties feared that the AP's decision to impeach eight of the Court's judges was part of a strategy to create a compliant judiciary in order to facilitate its electoral victory in the 1993 presidential elections.
The Central Obrera Boliviana (COB — Bolivian Workers' Centre, the main union confederation), had received opposition support for its campaign against the government's austerity programme, its plans to initiate a programme of privatization of state-owned companies, and moves to militarize the fight against drug trafficking [see p. 38143].
The COB accused Paz Zamora of giving in to United States pressure and reneging on an election promise that crop substitution measures would remain the central strategy to eradicate the growing of coca crops by 60,000 peasant farmers, many of whom were former tin miners made redundant as a result of the collapse of the international price of tin.
Paz Zamora's announcement in March 1991 of promises of US$200,00,000 from the European Communities (EC) and US$66,000,000 from the USA to assist crop substitution programmes was thought to have swayed COB leaders into agreeing to a non-strike agreement with the government [see p. 38143].
In February 1991 the US government (supporting a claim made by the US Congress in August, 1990, that there was endemic corruption within the armed forces in the fight against drugs) had threatened to withhold $100,000,000 in economic development aid.
The threat led to the resignation on March 4 of the head of the Special Force for the Fight against Drug Traffickers (FELCN), Col. Faustino Rico Toro (who had been appointed as recently as Feb. 26), and was followed by that of the Interior Minister, Capobianco Ribera, after accusations in the US press of his association with drug trafficking [see p. 38094-95].
The 1991 budget, set at the equivalent of US$2,900 million, was approved by the Congress on Feb. 7, 1991.
It estimated GDP growth at 3.5 per cent and set an annualized inflation target of 15 per cent.
Export figures for 1990 were given as US$806,000,000, with imports at US$680,000,000 and a resulting trade surplus of US$126,000,000
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Area: 8,511,965 sq km.
Population: 150,400,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: Brasília.
Language: Portuguese.
Religion: Christianity (90% Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 324,200 (1990).
Currency: cruzeiro (US$1.00=258.855 cruzeiros as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ALADI; Amazon Pact; Geplacea; Group of Rio; G-8; Lima Group; Mercosur; OAS; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Brazil achieved independence from Portugal in 1822 and became a federal republic in 1889.
It has 23 states (each of which has a directly elected governor and legislature), three territories and the federal district of Brasília.
National legislative authority rests with a bicameral National Congress consisting of a Chamber of Deputies of variable size (487 in 1990) elected every four years by a system of proportional representation and a Federal Senate with 72 members elected for eight-year terms and with elections at four-year intervals for, alternately, one-third and two-thirds of the seats.
Congressional elections are by universal and compulsory adult suffrage.
An executive President is elected for a five-year term.
Main government leaders
President: Fernando Collor de Mello.
Vice-President: Itamar Franco.
Principal ministers: Marálio Marques Moreira (Economy); Francisco Rezek (Foreign Affairs); Jarbas Passarinho (Justice); Adml.
Mario César Flores (Navy); Gen. Carlos Tinoco Ribeiro Gomes (Army); Brig.
Sócrates Monteiro da Costa (Air Force).
Cabinet changes in 1990
A new Cabinet took office in March [see p. 37312].
In October Bernardo Cabral resigned as Justice Minister and was replaced by Jarbas Passarinho [see p. 37773].
Ruling party
Partido de Reconstruçao Nacional (PRN — National Reconstruction Party, Collor de Mello l.)
Other parties
Partido Democrático Trabalhista (PDT — Democratic Labour Party, Leonel da Moura Brizola l.);
Partido Trabalhista Brasileiro (PTB — Brazilian Labour Party, Celso Pecanha, l.);
Partido dos Trabalhadores (PT — Workers' Party, Luís Inácio da Silva, known as "Lula" , pres.);
Partido Comunista do Brasil (PCdoB — Communist Party of Brazil, Joao Amazonas s. -g.);
Partido Comunista Brasileiro (PCB — Brazilian Communist Party, Giaconda Dias s. -g.);
Partido do Movimento Democrático Brasileiro (PMDB — Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement, Ulysses Guimaraes pres.);
Partido da Frente Liberal (PFL — Liberal Front Party, Saulo Garcia Queiroz s. -g.);
Partido Democrático Social (PDS — Social Democratic Party, Amaral Peixoto pres.);
Partido da Social Democracia Brasileira (PSDB — Social Democratic Party of Brazil, Euclides Scalco l.).
[For details of other parties see p. 37852.]
Elections
Collor de Mello was elected President on Dec. 17, 1989 [see pp. 37040; 37117-18].
State and congressional elections were held in October and November 1990 [see pp. 37773-74; 37852].
1990 OVERVIEW
The government lost credibility and became increasingly unpopular as it became evident that it had failed to meet the targets which it had set itself in the March 1990 radical economic austerity plan [see pp. 37312-13; 37371].
Voters elected opposition candidates to governorships in the majority the 16 states in state elections held on Nov. 25 [see p. 37852].
Chief among these measures had been the control of inflation which was reduced to 3 per cent per month in April but was back into double figures by the end of the year, rising to 20 per cent per month in January 1991.
The much vaunted privatization of state companies, scheduled to begin in July, was repeatedly postponed due to legal and technical difficulties, and the promised cut of 360,000 civil service posts failed to materialize due to the constitutional safeguards protecting their employment.
An autocratic style of government, reliant on presidential decree, alienated the Congress, the business sector and trade unions.
Only with the evidence of spiralling inflation did the government attempt to negotiate a "social pact" with employers and trade unions, but it then succeeded in uniting both of them against itself.
The Congress repeatedly defeated government attempts to end monthly indexation of wages to price rises (officially suspended by decree in June — see p. 37651), forcing the government in February 1991 to introduce by decree a wage and price freeze as part of an austerity package to control inflation [see p. 38002].
The country earned Western criticism for failing to participate actively in the allied campaign in the Gulf.
The crisis resulted in an overall increase of US$1,200 million in the price of imported oil, and to a serious loss in exports to Iraq, a major trading partner.
In addition slow progress was made on renegotiating terms with commercial creditor banks despite the government's December announcement that it would recommence interest payment on its US$60,000 million commercial debt.
Lack of agreement meant the delay of further loans from multilateral agencies, in particular the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
The government was credited with introducing measures which would have impact in the long term.
These included moves to protect the Amazon rainforest [see pp. 37202; 37528], although the activities of gold miners threatening the existence of the Yanomani Indians, whose lands they had invaded, continued to be largely uncurbed [see p. 37292; 37495].
The government disclosed and repudiated a project of the previous military regime to build a nuclear bomb and signed with Argentina a treaty of nuclear non-proliferation [see p. 37914].
It also opened up the economy to foreign imports in order to increase competition and break up entrenched monopolies [see pp. 37528; 38002].
At the end of 1990 the annual inflation rate stood at 1,800 per cent, the highest ever recorded.
The depth of the recession was shown by a fall of 4.6 per cent during 1990 in gross domestic product (GDP).
Slumping domestic sales and high interest rates meant that key industrial activity fell by 11 per cent in 1990, with over 1,000,000 people being made unemployed.
Harvests decreased by 21.22 per cent and stock markets registered a annual fall in value of 68 per cent.
The trade surplus in 1990 of US$11,000 million (with exports at US$31,400 and imports at US$20,400 million) was 31.6 per cent lower than 1989.
Principal foreign relations events of 1990
July: statement of intent on common market with Argentina and Uruguay [see p. 37608]; October: participation in Group of Rio summit [see p. 37774]; December: visit of United States President Bush [see p. 37914].
An economic and technological trade agreement was signed with China in May during the visit of Chinese President Yang Shangkun, an energy, environmental and trade agreement with Bolivia was signed in August; and an agricultural agreement with Uruguay was signed in September.
Agreement was reached with the Soviet Union in October on the establishment and functions of a Soviet consulate-general.
AMERICAS
CHILE
BASIC DATA
Area: 756,626 sq km.
Population: 13,200,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: Santiago.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Armed Forces: 95,800 (1990).
Currency: Chilean peso (US$1.00=342.934 pesos as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations ALADI; Group of Rio; OAS; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Formerly a Spanish colony, Chile won its independence in 1818.
After 16 years of dictatorship from 1973 to 1989 an executive President is, under the 1980 Constitution (drawn up under the previous military regime and amended in 1989) elected for a four-year term.
Legislative authority is held by a National Congress, comprising a 47-member Senate serving an eight-year term (of whom 38 are elected and nine are directly appointed by the outgoing government and the Supreme Court — see pp. 37117; 37488) and a 120-member Chamber of Deputies elected for a four-year term.
Main government leaders
President: Patricio Aylwin Azócar.
Principal ministers: Enrique Krauss Rusque (Interior); Enrique Silva Cimma (Foreign Affairs); Alejandro Foxley Rioseco (Finance); Carlos Ominami Pascual (Economy); Francisco Cumplido Cereceda (Justice); Patricio Rojas Saavedra (Defence).
Cabinet changes in 1990
After winning the presidential elections in December 1989, President-elect Aylwin in January 1990 named the Cabinet which would take office in March [see p. 37183].
Ruling party
The Partido Demócrata Cristiano (PDC — Christian Democratic Party, Andrés Zaldívar pres.) dominates the ruling Concertación de los Partidos de la Democracia (CPD — Coalition for Democracy — see pp. 36345; 36460).
Other members of the coalition are the Partido Radical (PR — Radical Party, Enrique Silva Cimma pres.); the Partido Socialista de Chile (PSdeC — Socialist Party of Chile, Clodomiro Almeyda Medina pres.); the Partido por la Democracia (PPD — Party for Democracy, Eric Schnake pres.); and the Partido Alianza de Centro (PAC — Centre Alliance Party, Germán Riesco l.).
Other main parties
Unión Demócrata Independiente (UDI — Independent Democratic Union, Jaime Guzmá Errazuriz l.);
Renovación Nacional (RN — National Renewal, Andrés Allamand s. -g.);
Partido Nacional de Democracia Centrista (PNDC — National Centrist Democracy Party, Julio Durán pres.);
Partido Comunista de Chile (PCCh — Communist Party of Chile, Volodia Teitelboim s. -g.);
Moviemiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria (MIR — Movement of the Revolutionary Left, Andrés Pascal Allende l.).
Guerrilla groups
Left-wing: Frente Patriótico Manuel Rodríguez (FPMR — Manuel Rodríguez Patriotic Front, Cmdr. Daniel Huerta l.);
Lautaro Popular Rebel Forces (FRPL — sometimes referred to as the Lautaro Youth Movement (MJL).
Right-wing: Nationalist Combat Front (FNC).
Elections
Presidential and congressional elections were held on Dec. 14, 1989, when Aylwin was elected President with 55 per cent of the vote, and the PDC won 13 seats in the Senate and 38 seats in the Chamber of Deputies, becoming the largest single party in each house [see p. 37117].
POLITICAL OVERVIEW
By setting up the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (CVR) in April 1990 to investigate human rights abuses under the previous military regime [see p. 37528], the new government of President Aylwin attempted to establish its authority over the armed forces and, in particular, the C.-in-C. of the army and former President, Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte.
In doing this, it chose a moderate course avoiding outright confrontation in the hope that a public desire for truth, political stability and peace would outweigh a desire for retribution.
Future prosecution for gross human rights violations was left to the judiciary despite widespread opinion that it was irredeemably tainted by past association with the military.
Protected from prosecution by an amnesty law of 1978, the military opposed any such investigation but their claim that they had been fighting a war against left-wing subversion became increasingly untenable with the discovery of mass graves containing the bodies of their political opponents and the disclosure of how they had indulged in corrupt financial practices while in power, including the payment of US$3,000,000 to Pinochet's son [see pp. 37528-29; 37852-53; 37958].
Pressure mounted on Pinochet to resign as he continued to use his position to oppose army reforms and to make statements on internal and foreign policy.
An anonymous group of army officers supported these resignation calls in November, leading Pinochet in December to recall the army to barracks, a move interpreted as a show of force as the number of corruption charges increased him and the date approached for the release of the Rettig report by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (CVR), which was finally made public on March 4, 1991 [see p. 38095].
Speculation continued, however, that Pinochet would agree to resign in return for a quiet settlement of scandals involving his regime.
Other issues at the forefront of government policy during 1990 were the need to reinstate the country in the international community and the necessity of dealing with mounting internal pressure for social justice from the majority of the people, who had been excluded from the "economic miracle" which took place under Pinochet's rule.
Economy
According to preliminary figures released by the Central Bank the economy grew by 1.6 per cent in 1990, the lowest rate since the recovery from the steep recession in 1982-83.
Manufacturing stagnated and construction, mining and fishing slackened notably.
Investment grew, however, with a record foreign component of US$1,037 million recorded for the period January to October.
Monthly inflation for December was 0.5 per cent, giving an annualized rate of 27.3 per cent , the highest figure for 10 years.
Exports totalled $8,445 million in 1990, while imports totalled $7,050 million, giving a trade surplus of $1,395 million.
An agreement rescheduling debt totalling $4,870 million was signed on Dec. 12 with commercial creditor banks, headed by the US bank Manufacturers Hanover.
The combined external debt was estimated to be $16,865 million in February 1991 and the debt-service burden as a percentage of exports was estimated at 17.9 per cent.
Principal foreign relations events 1990
October: election to membership of Group of Rio [see p. 37774]; December: visit of US President Bush, participation in Group of Rio Rome summit [see pp. 37914-15].
Agreements were reached with Colombia in June for closer co-operation to combat drug trafficking; with Brazil in July (i) to begin bilateral discussions on economic complementation within the juridical structure of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI);(ii) for scientific, technical and technological co-operation over three years; and (iii) to combat drug trafficking; with Argentina in August for the peaceful use of nuclear energy; with Spain in October for a $2,000 million economic co-operation package; with Mexico establishing a framework for a free trade pact to ensure common tariffs on imports by June 1991 and to create a bilateral common market by 1995; with the USA in November lifting export restrictions on goods from small and medium-sized Chilean firms under the US generalized system of preferences (GSP); and with Czechoslovakia on future co-operation.
The sale of cluster bombs to Ethiopia by the arms manufacturer Cardoen, authorized by Pinochet's military regime, was suspended by the government in October.
Bolivia had condemned Cardoen's testing in October of two fuel air explosive bombs, each allegedly as powerful as a tactical nuclear weapon.
Diplomatic relations at ambassadorial level were re-established with the Soviet Union and Mongolia in June and with Algeria in August.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Area: 1,141,748 sq km.
Population: 33,000,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: Bogotá.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (95% Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 115,000 (1990).
Currency: peso (US$1.00=600.924 pesos as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ALADI; Amazon Pact; Andean Pact; CONTADORA; Geplacea; Group of Rio; G-8; NAM; OAS; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Colombia gained independence from Spain in 1819.
An executive President is directly elected for a four-year term, as is the Congress, consisting of a 114-member Senate and a 199-member House of Representatives.
The Cabinet is appointed by the President, while the Primer Designado is elected by Congress.
A new National Constituent Assembly was established in December to revise the Constitution.
Main government leaders
President: César Gaviria Trujillo.
Primer Designado: Luis Fernando Jaramillo Correa (PL), also Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Other principal ministers: Julio César Sánchez (PL — Interior); Rudolf Hommes Rodríguez (PL — Finance and Public Credit; Jaime Giraldo Angel (PSC — Justice); Gen. Oscar Botero Restrepo (indep. — Defence); Ernesto Samper Pizano (PL — Economic Development).
Cabinet changes in 1990
A new Cabinet of "national unity" was appointed in advance of the Gaviria's inauguration on Aug. 7 [see p. 37650].
Camilo Gonzalez Pozo was appointed Health Minister in October to replace Antonio Navarro Wolff [see p. 37772].
Ruling party
Partido Liberal (PL — Liberal Party Alfonso López Michelsen l.).
Other parties
Partido Social Conservador (PSC — Social Conservative Party, Misael Pastrana l.);
Unión Patriótica (UP — Patriotic Union, Ernán Pastrana l.);
Movimiento de Salvación Nacional (MSN — National Salvation Movement, Alvaro Gómez l.);
Movimiento 19 de Abril (M-19 — April 19 Movement, Antonio Navarro Wolff l.).
The M-19 heads the Alizanza Democrática M-19 (AD M-19 — Democratic Alliance) block in the Constituent Assembly.
Guerrilla groups
Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN — National Liberation Army, Manuel Pérez l.);
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionaria de Colombia (FARC — Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, Manuel Marulanga l.);
Comando Quintín Lamé (Quintín Lamé Commando, thought to be on the verge of demobilizing — see below for current guerrilla demobilizations).
Elections
Presidential elections were held in May 1990 [see pp. 37450-51]; congressional and municipal elections were held in March [see pp. 37311-12]; elections to the new National Constituent Assembly were held in December [see p. 37914].
1990 OVERVIEW
A rigid political system dominated by the PL and PSC began to fragment with the success of other parties in the May presidential elections [for killings of presidential candidates and campaign see pp. 36844; 37312; 37371-72; 37450-51]and the establishment of a new 73-member National Constituent Assembly, elected in December and inaugurated in March 1991 [see pp. 37450; 37914; 38001].
The Supreme Court conferred powers on the Assembly to draw up constitutional reforms to give the country modern democratic institutions which would encourage greater voter participation.
These included the reform of the Congress and the electoral system in order to eliminate political patronage and corruption; stricter limits on the government's state of siege powers; and reform of the judicial system.
A major confrontation was expected between a majority of Assembly delegates who wanted the PL-dominated Congress (elected in March 1990 — see pp. 37311-12) to be dissolved and fresh elections held in order to defeat hardline PL politicians opposed to radical reforms.
A less controversial proposal was a constitutional ban on the extradition of drug traffickers to stand trial in the United States; Gaviria denied that this would mean traffickers would be treated more leniently [see p. 38001].
The government, reversing the uncompromising stand of the previous government of President Virgilio Barco [see pp. 36844; 36889-90; 37119], had already offered to reduce sentences and promised not to extradite traffickers who surrendered and confessed, in the hope that this would halt a cycle of drug-related violence and killings.
As a result, three prominent members of the Medellín drug cartel gave themselves up [see pp. 37914; 37957].
The cartel's leader Pablo Escobar Gaviria remained at large, however, and several journalists were taken hostage, some of whom were murdered, to reinforce the traffickers demands that they be treated as a group and given political status like former guerrillas, who were given an absolute pardon on surrendering [see pp. 37851; 37914; 37957-58].
Main guerrilla groups such as the FARC and the ELN, however, continued campaigns of economic sabotage and showed little interest in the government's offer of peace talks or of following the example of the Maoist Popular Liberation Army (EPL) and Revolutionary Workers' Party (PRT) which had demobilized and taken up seats in the National Constituent Assembly [see p. 37958).
A loan of US$2,500 million from the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) for the period 1990-1993 was intended to support the government's October decision to lift controls on imports, ending the country's traditional policy of protectionism.
Increased exports were boosted by higher oil prices, which encouraged domestic investment, particularly in coal mining.
Inflation remained low at 2.5 per cent in December, but the annual rate for 1990 stood at 34 per cent.
The overall foreign debt stood at US$17,200 million.
Debt service payments to commercial creditor banks, suspended in November, were scheduled for resumption at the end of February 1991.
Export figures for 1990 were given as US$6,363 million, with imports at US$5,726 million, giving a trade surplus of $637 million.
AMERICAS
ECUADOR
Area: 270,670 sq km.
Population:10,781,000 (1991).
Capital: Quito.
Languages: Spanish (official), Quechua and other indigenous languages.
Religion: Christianity (90% Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 57,800 (1990).
Currency: sucre (US$1.00=S1,042.64 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ALADI; Amazon Pact; Andean Pact; Geplacea; Group of Rio; NAM; OAS; OPEC; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Ecuador gained independence from Spain in 1830.
Under the 1979 Constitution, an executive President is elected for a single four-year term.
Legislative power is vested in the 72-member unicameral National Congress, 12 of whose members are elected for a four-year term on a national basis and the remainder, whose seats are renewable after two years, on a provincial basis.
The country comprises 20 provinces (one of which is the Galapagos Islands), each administered by a governor appointed by the President, who also appoints the Cabinet.
Main government leaders
President: Rodrigo Borja Cevallos.
Vice-President: Luis Parodi.
Principal ministers: César Verduga (Government, Justice, Interior); Gen. (retd) Jorge Félix (Defence); Diego Córdovez (Foreign); Juan Falconi (Finance and Public Credit); Pablo Better (Industry, Commerce, Integration).
Cabinet changes
In the late summer César Verduga (hitherto Minister of Labour and Human Resources) replaced Andrés Vallejo as Minister of Government, Justice and the Interior.
On Oct. 2 the Minister of Public Works and Communications, Juan Neira, was impeached by Congress and replaced by Raúl Carrasco Zamora [see pp. 37771-72].
In January 1991 Jacinto Jouvin and Jorge Gallardo, resigned as Minister of Industry, Commerce and Integration and of Finance and Public Credit respectively, to be replaced by Pablo Better and Juan Falconi [see pp. 37958]; on March 12 Diego Tamariz was dismissed as Minister of Energy and Mines, and replaced by Donald Castillo [see pp. 38093-94].
Ruling party
Izquierda Democrática (ID — Democratic Left, Rodrigo Borja Cevallos l.)
Other parties
Partido Social Cristiano (PSC — Social Christian Party, León Febres Cordero l.);
Democracia Popular (DP — People's Democracy Jamil Mahuad Witt l.);
Partido Roldosista Ecuatoriana (PRE — Roldosist Party of Ecuador, Abdalá Bucaram Ortiz director); Partido Socialista Ecuatoriana (PSE — Socialist Party, Héctor Soria s. -g.);
Concentración de Fuerzas Populares (CFP — Concentration of Popular Forces, Galo Vayas l., Averroes Bucaram Saxida director); Partido Liberal Radical (PLR — Radical Liberal Party, Carlos Julio Plaza l.);
Partido Conservador (PC — Conservative Party, José Terán Varea director); Frente Amplio de la Izquierda (FADI — Broad Left Front, René Maugé Mosquera director); Movimiento Popular Democrático (MPD — Popular Democratic Movement Jaime Hurtado González l.);
Frente Radical Alfarista (FRA — Alfaroist Radical Front Ivan Castro Patiño l.);
Alianza Popular Revolucionaria Ecuatoriana (APRE).
Elections
Congressional elections to the 60 provincially elected seats were held on June 17, 1990 [see p. 37529].
Elections for the 12 seats on national lists, and for the presidency, were held in January and May 1988 [see pp. 36097; 36343].
1990 OVERVIEW
Increased oil revenues as a result of the Gulf crisis were not sustained.
A fall off in world prices dampened the expectations of international creditor banks, which had hoped for a higher level of interest payments on Ecuador's foreign debt (estimated to be over US$12,000 million), as well as domestic hopes for increased social spending.
The government's policy of gradual economic reform, which also emphasized increased foreign trade and investment, was modest in comparison with "shock" austerity programmes elsewhere in Latin America, but still lost it public support in the June 1990 congressional elections [see p. 37529].
Serious political divisions within the Congress, whose proceedings were brought to a standstill in October over the impeachment of the Minister of Public Works and Communications and the subsequent dismissal of the Congress president [see pp. 37771-72], threatened prolonged instability as did continued labour protests against anti-inflationary measures, culminating in a 24-hour general strike on Feb. 6, 1991 [see p. 38001].
The government's efforts to increase oil drilling in its Amazonian regions in conjunction with international oil firms provoked international protest because of the threat posed to Indian tribes such as the Waoranini.
An estimated 20,000 indigenous Indians from 300 communities in the Andean province of Chimborazo had taken part in widespread demonstrations in June, primarily over land rights.
Export figures for 1990 were given as US$2,722 million with imports at US$1,864 million, leaving a trade surplus of $860 million.
AMERICAS
FALKLAND (MALVINAS) ISLANDS
Area: East Falkland and adjacent islands 6,760 sq km; West Falkland and adjacent islands 5,413 sq km .
Population: 1,915 (1989).
Capital: Stanley (on East Falkland).
Armed forces: Falkland Islands Defence Force composed of Falkland Islanders; 1,600 British troops (1989).
Currency: Falkland Islands pound (at par with pound sterling — US $£0.5963 as at April 29, 1991).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Falkland Islands is a United Kingdom dependent territory administered by an appointed Governor who is the personal representative of the UK sovereign.
The governor is assisted by an Executive Council of two ex officio members and three members elected by the Legislative Council, which in turn is composed of two ex officio members and eight elected members.
Main government leaders
Governor: William H. Fullerton.
Chief Executive of the Falklands Islands Government: Ronald Sampson.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Representatives of the United Kingdom and Argentine governments were joined for the first time by a Falklands official in talks on fishing controls held in the Argentinian capital, Buenos Aires, in May 1991.
John Barton, the Islands' Director of Fisheries, agreed to participate provided that negotiations were limited to technical matters (such as the conservation of squid stocks) and did not touch on areas of sovereignty over the Falklands or the resumption of direct links with the Argentinian mainland.
Both sides agreed to share information and undertook the support of joint research and the more effective policing of the fishing zone.
A UK agreement with Argentina in November 1990 [see p. 37913]had increased the Falklands Interim Conservation and Management Zone (FICZ) by 50 miles to 200 miles.
Fishing under licence was to continue within the original 150-mile zone, but no fishing was to be allowed in the new zone, to be regarded as an area of Anglo-Argentine co-operation, the eastern half of which was to be patrolled by the Falklands and the western half by Argentina since it overlapped with part of its 200-mile territorial waters.
Falkland Islands leaders were lukewarm in their response to the restoration of full UK diplomatic relations with Argentina in February 1990 [see p. 37245].
They had consistently opposed relatives' visits (which the UK government had finally permitted in March 1991 — see p. 38096) to the graves of Argentinian soldiers killed in the 1982 Falklands War.
AMERICAS
GUYANA
Area: 214,969 sq km.
Population: 800,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: Georgetown.
Languages: English (official); Hindi, Urdu, and Amerindian dialects.
Religion: Christianity (about 50%), Hinduism (about 33%), Islam (less than 10%).
Armed forces: 1,950 (1990).
Currency: Guyana dollar (US$1.00=G$115.147 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ACP; Amazon Pact; CARICOM; Geplacea; NAM; OAS (full membership January 1991); SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
A member of the Commonwealth, Guyana gained independence from the United Kingdom in 1966 and became a republic in 1970.
Under the 1980 Constitution an executive President is elected every five years with the 65-member unicameral National Assembly (of which 53 members are directly elected by proportional representation and 12 are regional representatives).
The Cabinet may include non-elected members appointed by the President.
Main government leaders
President: Hugh Desmond Hoyte (also acting Minister for Foreign Affairs), took office in August 1985 on the death of the President Forbes Burnham [see p. 33977].
First Vice-President and Prime Minister: Hamilton Green (also Minister for Youth and Sports, Housing and Health).
Other principal ministers: Viola Burnham (Vice-President and Deputy Prime Minister; Culture and Social Development); Robert Corbin (Deputy Prime Minister; Public Utilities); Keith Massiah (Attorney General; Justice); Carl Greenidge (Finance); Seeram Prashad (Planning and Development).
Cabinet changes in 1990
In November Rashleigh Jackson resigned as Foreign Minister [see p. 37851].
Ruling party
People's National Congress (PNC, Hugh Desmond Hoyte l.)
Other parties
People's Progressive Party (PPP, Cheddi Jagan gen. sec.);
Working People's Alliance (WPA, Eusi Kwayana, Rupert Roopnarine ls.);
Democratic Labour Movement (DLM, Jainarayan Singh gen. sec.);
The People's Democratic Movement (PDM, Llewellyn John l.);
United Republican Party (URP, Leslie Ramsammy l.);
National Republican Party (NRP, Robert Gangadeen l.);
Guyanese Action for Reform and Democracy (Guard, which claims to be a civic and non-political grouping, led by Leslie Ramsammy of the URP).
The PPP, WPA, DLM and PDM are part of a four party Patriotic Coalition for Democracy (PCD).
Elections
The PNC won 42 of the 53 directly elected seats in the National Assembly in the December 1985 general election after the withdrawal of the PCD [see pp. 34162-63]; the PCD also boycotted the November 1989 municipal elections [see pp. 37492-93].
1990-1991 OVERVIEW
An April 1991 decision by the opposition parties to accept new electoral procedures averted a major political crisis [see p. 38142]and ended months of uncertainty about their participation in presidential and general elections now scheduled for later in the year.
Serious doubts about the integrity of the electoral system had also been expressed by the Guyana Human Rights Association (GHRA) and the United States Congress, which in October had voted to withhold US$600,000 in economic aid pending evidence of electoral reform.
An assurance that the army would not be involved in the election and would respect an opposition victory was given on Oct. 22 by Brig.
Joe Singh, acting commander of the Guyana Defence Force.
Although the issue of free and fair elections dominated the political agenda, the government's Economic Recovery Programme (ERP), launched in April 1989, continued to be widely unpopular.
Government ministries and public agencies were instructed in November to control spending strictly in order to stay within the confines of an IMF standby arrangement and enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF) announced on July 13 and totalling 131 million special drawing rights (about US$176 million).
Of this, SDR49,500,000 would be available over the next 12 months under a standby arrangement and SDR81,500,000 would be available over a three-year period under an ESAF arrangement.
A total of SDR76,900,000 would be available immediately, SDR39,700,000 under the standby arrangement and SDR37,200,000 under the ESAF arrangement.
A February 1991 decision to devalue the Guyanan dollar by 56 per cent(from G$45 to G$101.75 to the US dollar) led to sharp increases in food, fuel and transport costs.
The official exchange rate, was henceforth to be adjusted weekly in line with the prevailing market rate.
In October a public utilities commission was established to provide a legal framework for a programme of privatization, and to oversee the services provided by state enterprises targeted for sale to the private sector.
The Guyana Telecommunications Corporation was the first state company to be sold, 80 per cent of its shares being bought in January 1991 for US$16,500,000 by the Atlantic Telephone Network, a company based in the US Virgin Islands.
Negotiations for the sale of the Guyana Electricity Corporation were proceeding with the US Leucadia company.
The 1991 budget was presented in March despite the opposition boycott of the National Assembly on the issue of the elections [see above].
Against a background of a 3.9 per cent decline in GDP during 1990, total expenditure was projected at G$17,600 million.
Income tax thresholds were raised from G$10,000 to G$48,000 with lower tax rates planned to offset the withdrawal of personal allowances.
A 1 per cent export duty was abolished, but the airport departure tax was increased from G$165 to G$1,000.
Interest rates were increased from 30 to 32.5 per cent.
Sugar production fell to a record low of 129,920 tonnes in 1990 and bauxite production was 15 per cent below target.
The World Bank announced a US$81,000,000 concessionary loan package on July 17, 1990; in the same month the Caribbean Development Bank granted a loan of US$42,000,000 and a technical assistance loan of US$2,000,000 to support the ERP, and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) granted a US$27,000,000 loan to finance agricultural rehabilitation.
In March 1991 a rescheduling agreement was signed covering US$22,000,000 of the US$127,800,000 owed to the US government.
AMERICAS
PARAGUAY
Area: 406,752 sq km.
Population: 4,300,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: Asunción.
Languages: Spanish (official); majority speak Guaraní, an indigenous Indian language.
Religion: Christianity (90% Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 16,000 (1990).
Currency: guaraní (US$1.00=1,322.45 guaranís as at April 22, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ALADI; Group of Rio; Mercosur; OAS, SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Paraguay achieved independence from Spain in 1811.
Under the 1968 Constitution (a new constitution is in preparation) an executive President is directly elected for a five-year term.
Legislative power is held by a bicameral National Congress comprising a 30-member Senate and a 72-member Chamber of Deputies, both directly elected for five-year terms (subject to dissolution by the President).
The party receiving the largest number of votes is allotted two-thirds of the seats in both houses, with the remaining seats being divided among other parties according to their electoral strength.
Main government leaders
President: Gen. Andrés Rodríguez.
Principal ministers: Gen. Orlando Machuca Vargas (Interior); Alexis Frutos Vaesken (Foreign Affairs); Juan José Díaz Pérez (Finance); Gen. Angel Juan Souto Hernández (Defence); Hugo Estigarribia Elizache (Justice and Labour).
Cabinet changes in 1990
Following the dismissal in late July of Luis Maria Argaña as Foreign Minister a Cabinet reshuffle took place in August [see p. 37651].
Ruling party
Associación Nacional Republicana-Partido Colorado (ANR-PC — National Republican Association-Colorado Party, Luis María Argaña acting pres.)
Other parties
Partido Liberal Radical Auténtico (PLRA — Authentic Radical Liberal Party, Domingo Laíno l.);
Partido Revolucionario Febrerista (PRF — Revolutionary Febrerista Party, Euclides Acevedo pres.);
Partido Liberal Radical (PLR — Radical Liberal Party, Enzo Doldán l.);
Partido Demócrata Cristiano (PDC — Christian Democrat Party, Jerónimo Irala Burgos pres.);
Partido Liberal (PL — Liberal Party, Hugo Fulvio Celauro l.);
Partido Liberal Radical Unificado (PLRU — United Radical Liberal Party,); Partido Humanista (PH — Humanist Party); Partido Comunista Paraguayano (PCP — Paraguayan Communist Party, Antonio Maidana s. -g. — for his return from exile in December 1989 see p. 37497].
Elections
Rodríguez, who overthrew the former military dictator Gen. Alfredo Stroessner in Feb. 1989 [see p. 35887], was elected President on May 1, 1989, with 74 per cent of the vote; on the same day in congressional elections the Colorado Party received 73 per cent of votes [see p. 36652].
1990 OVERVIEW
The slow pace of political and economic change led opposition critics to claim that the overthrow of the Stroessner military regime had been an exchange of power among the ruling elite rather than marking the beginning of a genuine transition to democracy.
The dismissal of the Foreign Minister Argaña in July for publicly stating that the ruling Colorado Party would never give up power [see p. 37651]did not dispel fears that the government's undertaking to hold free elections in 1993 would be broken by his "stronista" (Stroessnorist) wing of the Colorado Party.
On issues of central political concern, Rodríguez was accused of breaking his election promise of land reform by vetoing laws passed by the Congress which would have introduced land dispute courts and expropriated a large estate.
He also vetoed a Congressional investigation into corruption under the previous regime.
A new electoral code and a new constitution, which would need to address the critical question of the future role of the armed forces, were both expected.
Coupled with a new limited freedom of the press and evidence of growing confidence within the trade unions and political opposition, these led to optimistic forecasts that civilian rule was attainable.
A drop in the rate of growth from 5.9 per cent in 1989 to 3 per cent in 1990 was the result of limited growth in the dominant agricultural sector due to adverse weather.
The lucrative trade in duty-free goods with buyers from Argentina and Brazil, centred especially on the eastern border town of Ciudad del Este (formerly Puerto Stroessner) on the Rio Paraná, was buoyant in the second half of 1990, but was threatened by the March 1991 decision of Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay to create a common market [see p. 38096].
Exports totalled US$1,275 million in 1990, while imports totalled $1,050 million, giving a positive trade balance of $225 million.
The external debt was reduced from $2,080 million to $1,690 million.
Foreign
In March Paraguay resumed normal diplomatic relations with Panama, suspended since October 1989.
In June Rodríguez was the first Paraguayan President to make an official visit to the United States.
The country's suspension from the US system of generalized special preferences (GSP)(which allowed underdeveloped countries to export products to the US duty free or with low tariffs) was to continue until Paraguay improved its record on labour rights and provided more assistance with US anti-drug efforts.
In July the National Congress recommended that diplomatic relations be established with the Soviet Union.
In October Paraguay was elected to the Group of Rio [see p. 37774].
In November Brazil refused a request for the extradition of Gustavo Adolfo Stroessner, son of the former dictator.
AMERICAS
PERU
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,285,216 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 21,600,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: Lima.
Languages: Spanish, Quechua, Ayamara.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 120,000 (1990).
Currency: new sol (US$1.00=0.6857 as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ALADI; Amazon Pact; Geplacea; Group of Rio; G-8; Lima Group; NAM; OAS; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Peru achieved independence from Spain in 1826.
Under the Constitution which came into effect in 1980, an executive President is directly elected for a five-year term, and appoints the Council of Ministers.
Legislative authority is held by a bicameral Congress made up of a 180-member Chamber of Deputies and a 60-member Senate, both of which are elected for five-year terms, the Senate on a regional basis and the Chamber of Deputies by constituencies under a system of proportional representation.
Main government leaders
President: Alberto Fujimori Keinya.
Vice-Presidents: Máximo San Román Cáceres (first Vice-President); Carlos García García (second Vice-President).
Prime Minister: Carlos Torres y Torres Lara, also Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Other principal ministers: Gen. E. P. Víctor Malca (Interior); Carlos Boloña Bohr (Economy and Finance); Augusto Antoniolli Vásquez (Justice); Gen. (retd) Jorge Torres Aciego (Defence).
Cabinet changes 1n 1990
Fujimori appointed a new Cabinet on his inauguration on July 28, 1990 [see p. 37608]; the Minister of Agriculture, Carlos Amat y Léon, resigned in October and was replaced by Enrique Ross Link [see p. 37773].
Ruling party
Cambio 90 (Change 90, Fujimori l., a group of independents formed to fight the 1990 elections).
Other main parties
Alianza Popular Revolucionaria Americana (APRA — American Popular Revolutionary Alliance, Luis Alve Castro gen. sec.);
Izquierda Unida (IU — United Left, Henry Pease l.);
Izquierda Socialista (IS — Socialist Left, Alfonso Barrantes Lingán l.);
Frente Democratico (Fredemo — Democratic Front); Acción Popular (AP — Popular Action, Fernando Belaúnde Terry l.);
Izquierda Nacionalista (IN — Nationalist Left, Reynaldo Cáceres Velásquez l.).
Guerrilla groups
Left-wing: Movimiento Revolucionario Tupac Amarú (MRTA — Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement); Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path, Abimael Guzmán Renoso l.).
Right-wing: Comandos Rodrigo Franco.
Elections
Fujimori was elected on a second round of voting in June 1990 [see p. 37528].
Legislative elections were held simultaneously with the first round of the presidential elections on April 8, 1990, when no party gained an overall majority [see p. 37371].
1990 OVERVIEW
Lacking both a solid social base and the support of a unified party in a fragmented Congress, Fujimori forged close ties with the army to sustain his administration at the expense of increasingly alienating the other armed services and the national military police force.
He also launched a bitter attack on the judiciary, accusing it of corruption.
Gen. Adolfo Alvarado Fournier, who was appointed Minister of the Interior in July, was given a free hand to combat the Sendero Luminoso and MRTA guerrilla groups, but the problem of internal subversion remained critical.
Alvarado was replaced by Gen. Malca in February 1991.
United States government accusations that the army did not wish to fight the cocaine trade and often colluded with traffickers threatened bilateral relations and future US aid.
Fujimori had rejected US$35,900,000 in US military anti-drug aid in September [see p. 37708], insisting that a successful programme to suppress the growing of coca, which involved over 200,000 peasant farmers, depended on the development of alternative crops with guaranteed foreign markets and not on outright eradication measures.
A stern economic austerity programme, imposed in August, was based on anti-inflationary monetary and fiscal policies which Fujimori had denounced during his election campaign [see pp. 37650-51].
Such a programme received the support of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and this, along with the government's decision to begin repayments on its foreign debt [see pp. 37772-73], restored the country's standing in international financial circles.
Additional economic corrective measures, announced on Nov. 4, to reverse serious economic decline included (i) a new tariff structure to open up the protected domestic markets to cheaper imports in order to boost domestic consumer demand;(ii) a promise to reform inefficient ports and customs services;(iii) an anti-monopoly decree;(iv) the privatization of selected state companies;(v) the freeing of the exchange rate; and (vi) a sweeping reform of the tax structure [see p. 37851].
The controversial 1987 law nationalizing the private banking system [see p. 35708]was repealed in December.
The implications of such reforms caused growing social unrest and there were strikes in the public sector, which was threatened with mass redundancies.
A $600,000,000 spending programme to alleviate social hardship among the poorest sectors was judged inadequate by critics, but the government's family planning campaign and provision of free contraception won popular support despite vehement opposition from the hierarchy of the Roman Catholic Church.
Health workers, ignoring government threats of dismissal, went on strike for higher pay, thereby complicating the fight against a cholera epidemic which by the end of April 1991 had claimed over 1,200 victims [see p. 38002].
Exports in 1990 totalled $3,250 million, while imports totalled $2,970 million, giving a positive trade balance of $280 million.
Principal foreign affairs developments in 1990
January: severe strain in relations with Panama [see p. 37271]; May: attendance at Andean Pact meeting [see p. 37541]; September: rejection of United States military aid [see pp. 37708-09]; October: congressional veto of Fujimori's attendance at Group of Rio summit [see p. 37774]; November: de facto recognition of Taiwan [see p. 37850].
In June 1990 a political co-ordination and economic integration agreement was signed with Argentina; Fujimori visited Japan in July 1990 and again in April 1991 to attend the annual conference of the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) in Nagoya [see p. 38144]; Fujimori also visited China in April 1991.
AMERICAS
SURINAM
Area: 163,265 sq km.
Population: 436,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Paramaribo.
Languages:Dutch (official); Hindustani (32%) and Javanese (15%); the majority can speak the native language Sranang Tongo (taki-taki).
Religion: Christianity, Hinduism, Islam.
Armed forces: 3,000 (1990).
Currency: Surinam gulden (guilder)(US$1.00=1.7834 guilders as at April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM; OAS; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Surinam gained independence from the Netherlands in 1975.
Under the 1987 Constitution an executive President was elected by the 51-member National Assembly which itself was directly elected for a five-year term.
This system was disrupted by the military coup of December 1990 [see pp. 37912-13]and although new elections were held on May 25, 1991, the constitutional implications remained uncertain [see p. 38188].
Main government leaders
President: Johan Kraag (elected by the National Assembly on December 30, 1990).
Vice-President: Jules Wijdenbosch, also Prime Minister and Minister for Finance (elected by the National Assembly on December 30, 1990).
Other principal ministers: Maj. Rupert Christopher (Defence); Ronnie Ramlakhan (Foreign Affairs); Hans Breeveld (Internal Affairs; Regional Development); Humbert Eersel (Economic Affairs); Paul Sjak Sjie (Justice; Police).
Cabinet changes
An interim Cabinet was appointed in January 1991 following the December military coup [see p. 37958].
Ruling party
The National Assembly is effectively controlled by the army-backed National Democratic Party (NDP, Orlando van Amson ch.).
Kraag is a member of the Nationale Partij Suriname (NPS — Surinam National Party, Henck Arron l.).
Other parties
The Vooruitstrevende Hervormings Partij (VHP — Progressive Reform Party, Jaggernath Lachmon l.); the Kerukanan Tulodo Pranatan Ingil (KTPI — Party for Unity and Harmony, Willy Soemita l.);(the NPS, VHP, and KTPI formed an opposition coalition for the 1987 election named the New Front for Democracy and Development); the Surinam Labour Party (SPA, Fred Darby l.). the Alternative Front (Gerard Brunings l.);
Hernieuwde Progressieve Partij (HPP — Renewed Progressive Party); Pendawalima; the Brotherhood and Unity in Politics.
Guerrilla groups
Surinamese Liberation Army (SLA — commonly known as the Jungle Commando, Ronnie Brunswijk l.);
Angula ( "Defiance" , Carlos Maassi l.);
Mandela Bush Negro Liberation Front, which has close contacts with the Tucayana Amazonica (Commander Thomas l.);
Union for Liberation and Democracy (UBD, Kofi Ajongpong l.).
Elections
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The military coup which deposed President Ramsewak Shankar in December was the culmination of months of friction between army officers and the government.
The officers led by Army C.-in-C.
Col. Desi Bouterse, accused the government of pursuing a deliberate policy of weakening the armed forces in their anti-insurgency struggle with the SLA.
The SLA leader Ronnie Brunswijk had been briefly arrested by the army in March 1990 after his forces intercepted a large cocaine shipment in transit from Colombia.
(Army involvement in the drugs trade had long been suspected.)
Brunswijk's release after 48 hours on March 28 reflected the government's greater emphasis on securing a successful negotiated solution.
In November 1990 the government removed the power of arrest from the military police following the August murder of a senior police chief who was investigating army officers thought to be involved in criminal activities.
The coup postponed the implementation of a long-term economic reform plan commissioned by the European Communities (EC); the Netherlands government had suspended its development aid immediately after the coup [see p. 37913].
The appointment in January 1991 of an interim government loyal to the military [see p. 37958]raised doubts as to whether free and fair elections would be held as promised, and whether the peace process to end the five-year guerrilla war with the SLA would continue.
However, a de facto peace accord was signed by Brunswijk and Bouterse in March 1991 [see p. 38093], and elections were held in May [see pp. 38188].
Venezuela broke off diplomatic relations in December 1990 in response to the military coup.
AMERICAS
URUGUAY
Area: 176,215 sq km.
Population: 3,100,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: Montevideo.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christian (Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 25,200 (1990).
Currency: New Uruguayan peso (US$1.00=1,042.38 pesos as at April 22, 1991).
International affiliations: ALADI; Geplacea; Group of Rio; G-8; Lima Group; Mercosur; OAS; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The independence of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay from Spain was finally recognized in 1828 by Argentina and Brazil, both of which had claimed the territory.
The 1966 Constitution was suspended in 1973 and replaced by a military dictatorship.
A return to civilian rule took place in 1985.
An executive President and a National Congress, consisting of a 99-member Chamber of Deputies and a 30-member Senate, are elected every five years.
Main government leaders
President: Luis Alberto Lacalle Herrera since March 1990 [see pp. 37039; 37313].
Vice-President: Gonzala Aguirre Ramírez.
Principal ministers: Juan Andrés Ramírez (Interior); Enrique Braga (Economy and Finance); Mariano Brito Defence.
Government changes in 1990
Lacalle appointed a new coalition Cabinet on taking office on March 1, 1990 [see p. 37313].
Ruling party
Partido Nacional (PN — National Party or Blancos, Carlos Julio Pereira ch.).
The main opposition Partido Colorado (PC — Colorados, Américo Ricaldoni l.) holds four seats in a coalition Cabinet.
Other parties
Frente Amplio (FA — Broad Front, Gen. Líber Sereni Mosquera l.)— a left-wing grouping including the Partido Comunista del Uruguay (PCU — Communist Party of Uruguay, Jaime Pérez s. -g.) and the Movimiento de Liberación Nacional (MLN — National Liberation Movement or Tupamaros, formerly a guerrilla group and recognised as a political party in May 1989; José Mújica s. -g.); the Partido por el Gobierno del Pueblo (PGP — Party for the government of the People, Hugo Batalla l.) and the Partido Demócrata Cristiano (PDC — Christian Democratic Party, Juan Guillermo Young s. -g.), members of the moderate left-wing Nuevo Espacio; the Partido Verde Etoecologista (PVE — Green Party, Rodolfo Tálice l.); the Alianza Libertadora Nacionalista (ALN — National Liberator Alliance, extreme right-wing, Osvaldo Martínez Jaume l.).
1990 OVERVIEW
The government made slow progress in its attempt to build a political consensus for economic reform.
A faction of the ruling Blanco Party remained opposed to the privatization of state companies and the opening up of the economy, as did the increasingly powerful left-wing FA and the trade unions belonging to the Plenario Intersindical de Trabajadores-Convenció Nacional de Trabajadores (PIT-CNT) which called a total of seven general strikes in 1990.
The presence of more moderate members of the main opposition Colorado party in the Cabinet also served to restrict the introduction of economic policies.
A divided Congress approved only one of the government's economic reform bills.
Rising inflation, a weakening economy and a growing budget deficit further lowered the government's credibility; its austerity programme fuelled added protests and forced it to concede the indexation of wages to inflation.
The disbursement of an IMF standby arrangement, agreed in principle in July [see p. 37607]was dependent on achieving increased growth and sharply reduced inflation.
The standby arrangement, finally approved on Dec. 12 by the IMF, authorized drawings up to 94,800,000 special drawing rights over the next 15 months.
In February 1991 US$632,000,000 of debt to commercial creditor banks was bought back at 56 per cent of its face value as part of the United States "Brady Plan" for debt restructuring [see pp. 36541-42; 37016-17].
A further $89,500,000 was received from banks which opted to extend new loans.
The overall external debt was US$6,900 million.
Export figures for 1990 were given as US$1,693 million, with imports at US$1,343 million and a resulting trade surplus of US$350 million.
Principal foreign relations events 1990
February: Lacalle's visit to USA [see p. 37498].
March: recognition of Panamanian government [see p. 37498]; July: response to Argentinian and Brazilian common market proposal [see p. 37608]; October, December: participation in Group of Rio Summits [see pp. 37774; 37915]; December: visit of US President Bush [see p. 37914].
An economic, technical and financial co-operation agreement was signed with Egypt in June; bilateral co-operation agreements were signed with Mexico in October and an agreement on co-operation in the wool sector with China in November.
Discussions were held with the government of Iran in May on the strengthening of bilateral ties.
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Area: 912,050 sq km.
Population: 19,700,000 (1990 UNFPA estimate).
Capital: Caracas.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 71,000 (1990).
Currency: bolívar (US$1.00=54.6511 bolívares April 29, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ALADI; Amazon Pact; Andean Pact; CARICOM (observer); Contadora; Geplacea; Group of Rio; Group of Eight (G-8); OAS; OPEC; SELA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Venezuela achieved independence from Spain in 1830.
Under the 1961 Constitution an executive President is directly elected for a five-year term, as are the 49-member Senate and 196-member Chamber of Deputies which together make up the National Congress.
The country is divided into 20 states, two federal territories, a federal district around the capital and 72 federal dependencies.
The states are autonomous, each with their own executive governor, appointed by the President, and an elected legislature, but they must comply with the laws and Constitution of the Republic.
Main government leaders
President: Carlos Andres Pérez.
Other principal ministers: Alejandro Izaguirre Angeli (Interior); Armando Durán (Foreign Affairs); Gen. Héctor Jurado Tora (Defence); Roberto Pocaterra (Finance); Miguel Contreras Laguado (Governor of the Federal District); Jesús Moreno Guacaran (Justice); Celestino Armas (Energy and Mines).
Cabinet changes in 1990
A Cabinet reshuffle was announced on July 27, 1990, when, among other changes, Gen. Jurado replaced Gen. Filmo Lopez Uzcategui as Defence Minister [see p. 37607].
Ruling party
Acción Democrática (AD — Democratic Action, Pérez l., Manuel Penalver s. -g.).
Other parties
Partido Social-Cristiano (Comité de Organización Política Electoral Independiente)(COPEI — Social-Christian Party (Independent Electoral Political Organizing Committee), Eduardo Fernández s. -g.);
Movimiento al Socialismo (MAS — Movement Towards Socialism, Teodoro Petkoff Maleo l.);
Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria (MIR — Movement of the Revolutionary Left, Moisés Moleiro l.);
Nueva Generación Democrática (NGD — New Democratic Generation); La Causa R. (LCR — The Radical Cause).
Elections
President and congressional elections were held in December 1988, when Pérez was elected President with 53 per cent of the vote; the AD lost its overall majority but remained the largest party in both the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate [see p. 36423].
1990 OVERVIEW
The government confirmed in October 1990 that it would continue with its economic austerity programme even though oil export revenues had increased by US$2,000 million in 1990 as a result of the Gulf crisis.
The raising of fuel prices by 36 per cent in June had led to widespread unrest.
Government plans (i) to privatize state companies (beginning with the projected sale of the state airline, Viasa, and the state telephone company, CANTV);(ii) to cut subsides to the state sector; and (iii) to open up the economy to foreign investment by a sharp reduction in tariffs, were also deeply unpopular and strongly opposed by trade unions.
The Federation of Venezuelan Workers (CTV) had demanded a halt to large-scale redundancies in the public sector, and by February 1991 was predicting mass demonstrations and strikes if the government rejected its claim for a 45 per cent wage increase and for a minimum wage equivalent to $188 per month.
A subsequent weakening of international oil prices, however, caused the government to order spending reductions of up to 10 per cent in the 1991 budget [see below].
Pérez also proposed a meeting of oil producing and consuming countries in order to stabilize world oil prices and to ward off a possible domestic fiscal crisis.
The Congress approved the 1991 budget in late December 1990.
It called for government expenditure of $14,330 million, a rise of 24 per cent over the estimated $11,500 million spending in the previous year.
The largest allocation was $3,760 million to the Finance Ministry, much of which would be used to service internal and external government debts (the total foreign debt stood at $31,800 million); the Education Ministry received $2,500 million; and the Interior Ministry $2,300 million (including spending on the police and security, and on revenue sharing with state governments).
A separate $4,000 million budget for the state-owned oil company, Petróleos de Venezuela SA (PDVSA), and other petrochemical companies for 1991 did not figure in central government spending.
The PDVSA had announced in early December 1990 that it planned to invest $25,000 million between 1991 and 1996 in what would be its biggest development programme in order to raise oil production from just over 2,000,000 barrels per day (bpd) to 3,500,000 bpd by 1995.
Oil wells which the PDVSA considered to be "marginal" would be offered to international oil companies to develop.
The PDVSA had also reached agreements to explore new oilfields in Honduras and in Guatemala, and was in discussion with the Peruvian government over involvement in attempting to reverse the decline of Peru's oil industry.
As a result of increasing production during the Gulf war, Venezuela had, by April 1991, become the second-largest supplier of oil (after Saudi Arabia) to the United States, providing 1,400,000 bpd or 12 per cent of all US oil imports.
Exports in 1990 totalled $17,587 million, while imports totalled $6,765 million, providing a positive trade balance of $10,822 million.
AMERICAS
AMERICAS REGIONAL
REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
Acuerdo de Cartagena (Andean Pact): Founded: 1969, to accelerate the harmonious development of the members through economic and social integration.
Members: Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Venezuela.
Chile withdrew in 1976. 1990 meetings were held on May 22-23 in Cuzco, Peru [see pp. 37451]and on Nov. 29 in La Paz (Bolivia)[see p. 37915].
For August Andean declaration see pp. 37651-52; for May 1991 fifth Andean presidential conference see p. 38188].
Asociación Latinamericano de Integración (ALADI — Latin American Association Integration Association): Founded: August 1990 to replace the Latin American Free Trade Association.
Members: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela.
Secretary-General: Jorge Luis Ordóñez (Colombia).
A meeting of ALADI was held on May 1-2, 1990, in Mexico City [see p. 37502; see also pp. 37373; 37774].
Amazon Pact: Founded: 1978, by signature of Amazon Co-operation Treaty, to promote the harmonious development of the Amazonian territories of the signatory countries.
Members: Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru, Surinam, Venezuela.
The members met in Quito, Ecuador, in March 1989 [see p. 36521].
Caribbean Community (CARICOM): Founded: 1973, as a movement towards unity in the Caribbean, replacing the Caribbean Free Trade Association.
Members: Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Montserrat, St Christopher and Nevis, St Lucia, St Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago.
Associate members: British Virgin Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands.
Observers: Dominican Republic, Haiti, Mexico, Puerto Rico, Surinam, Venezuela.
Secretary-General: Roderick Rainford (Jamaica)[reference article p. 37825; for CARICOM conference in February-March 1991 see p. 38092].
The 11th meeting of the CARICOM heads of government on July 31-Aug. 2, 1990, discussed the deployment of CARICOM troops in Trinidad and Tobago, granted associate membership to the Turks and Caicos Island and the British Virgin Islands and observer status to Mexico and Venezuela, but deferred decisions on membership applications from Haiti and the Dominican Republic [see p. 37648].
The heads of government also agreed to implement a common external tariff (CET) on imports from third countries with effect from Jan. 1, 1991.
In recognition of the varying economic strengths of the countries involved the introduction would be delayed for some countries, in the case of Montserrat until Jan. 1, 1994.
The introduction of the CET was in preparation for the removal of all barriers to intra-regional trade scheduled for July 1991, and the establishment of a single CARICOM market by 1993.
The summit also established a committee to review regional security arrangements in the light of the Trinidad and Tobago coup attempt in July-August 1990 [see pp. 37606-07].
Monetary union was also discussed, with governors of central banks being instructed to work towards union by 1995.
Contadora Group: Founded: 1983, to press for multilateral negotiations for peaceful settlements in Central America.
Members: Colombia, Mexico, Panama, Venezuela.
Executive Secretary: José Antonio Cerro.
Group of Latin American and Caribbean Sugar Exporting Countries (Geplacea): Founded: 1974, to serve as a forum of consultation on the production and sale of sugar.
Members: Argentina, Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Trinidad and Tobago, Uraguay, Venezuela.
Group of Rio: Founded: 1987, from the Contadora group as a "permanent mechanism for joint political action" .
Members: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela.
Panama's membership was suspended in 1988. 1990 meetings were held on March 30-31 in Mexico City and on April 12 in Budapest (Hungary)[see pp. 37372-73]; on Oct. 11-12 in Caracas (Venezuela)[see p. 37774]; and on Dec. 20 in Rome (Italy)[see p. 37915]; 1991 meetings were held in Bogotá (Colombia) on April 13 and in Luxembourg on April 24 [see p. 38144-45].
Group of Eight (G-8 debtor countries): Founded: 1987, to present a joint response on debt to international creditors.
Members: Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela.
Panama was suspended in 1988 [see pp. 36645; 36973]and expelled from the group at the March 30-31, 1990, meeting of the Group of Rio in Mexico City [see p. 37373].
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB): Founded: 1959, to promote the individual and collective development of regional developing member countries through the financing of economic and social development projects and the provision of technical assistance.
Members: 44 states; membership was increased in 1976 and 1977 to include countries outside the region.
President: Enrique V. Iglesias (Uruguay).
Lima Group: Founded: March 1985, in support of the Contadora Group, by four of the 20 signatories of the Declaration of Lima.
Members: Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay.
Mercosur: Founded: March 1991, aimed at creating a common market in the region.
Members: Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay.
An accord was signed in Asunción, the Paraguayan capital, on March 26, 1991 [see p. 38096].
Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS): Founded: 1981, by the seven states formerly belonging to the West Indies Associated States; a CARICOM associate institution.
Members: Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, St Christopher and Nevis, St Lucia, St Vincent and the Grenadines;(associate) British Virgin Islands.
Director-General: Vaughan A. Lewis.
Organization of American States (OAS): Founded: 1948, to foster peace, security mutual understanding and co-operation among the nations of the western hemisphere.
Members: 35 countries from northern, central and southern America and the Caribbean; Canada formally joined the organization in January 1990; Belize and Guyana were admitted in January 1991; Cuba had been suspended in 1962.
San José Group: Members: Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama.
Meetings were held with European Community Foreign Ministers on April 9-10, 1990, in Dublin (Ireland)[see p. 37372]and on March 18-19, 1991, in Managua (Nicaragua)[see p. 38092].
Sistema Económico Latinamericano (SELA — Latin American Economic System): Founded: 1975, to accelerate the economic and social development of its members through intraregional co-operation.
Members: Argentina, Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Spain, Surinam, Trinidad and Tobago, Uraguay, Venezuela.
President: Carlos Alzamora.
On June 22, 1990, SELA members agreed a plan for the reduction of their foreign debts [see p. 37893].
1990/91 REGIONAL ISSUES OVERVIEW
Latin American economic issues — Integration initiatives — Drugs — Debt
The Enterprise for the Americas Initiative, launched by United States President Bush in June [see pp. 37526; 37914]was welcomed by all governments as evidence that the US government wished to create a new and more equal relationship with the region by fostering strong investment and trade ties, beginning with talks on a free-trade agreement with Mexico [see pp. 37849; 38140].
This came at a time when all Latin American countries had adopted policies of export-orientated growth, economic liberalization, financial deregulation and the dismantling of investment restrictions and trade barriers.
A generalized acceptance of privatization as a means of reducing the role of the state as well as of stimulating investment and reducing debt was also significant, although in practice there were varying levels of success [for privatization in Brazil see pp. 38095; in Argentina see pp. 37529; 37608; 37773; 38096; in Mexico see p. 37449].
Only Cuba stood out as still committed to a state-led economy although private capital was involved in the development of such areas as tourism [see p. 38141].
Such homogeneity of policy encouraged greater integration, culminating in the March 1991 Mercosur agreement between Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay to form a common market by December 1994, although the political importance of such co-operation was expected to outweigh the potential economic benefits [see pp. 37608; 38096; for common market talks between Colombia, Ecuador, Venezuela, Bolivia and Peru see pp. 37651-52].
Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua had also agreed to develop their own economic integration plan [see pp. 37372; 37649].
A US$29,000 million trade surplus for the region in 1990 reflected increased oil sales as a result of the Gulf crisis, the continued strength of traditional commodities such as copper and coffee [for Brazil's resumption of coffee exports see p. 38144]and the improved performance of alternative agricultural products and non-traditional exports.
The vast illegal drugs trade continued to have a major economic impact, and government programmes in Peru and Bolivia designed to reduce significantly the growing of coca caused great internal controversy.
The programmes were viewed by critics as complying with a US policy which emphasised drug eradication over the development of viable alternative crops, without which the livelihoods of thousands of peasant farmers were seriously threatened [see pp. 37243-44; 37451; 37708; 38094-95; 38143].
A non-confrontational policy designed to persuade drug cartel leaders to surrender in exchange for the banning of their extradition to stand trial in the USA had some success in Colombia [see pp. 37772; 37851; 37957-58; 38345].
A $425,000 million foreign debt remained the region's biggest burden, although increased export surpluses reduced the debt service ratio from 41 to 26 per cent by the end of 1990.
However, unpaid arrears owed to international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) remained a serious problem, total arrears increasing from $11,000 million to $30,000 million in 1990, of which nearly one-quarter was accounted for by Brazil, the region's largest foreign debtor [for April 1991 renegotiation of Brazil's foreign debt see p. 38143].
High inflation compounded debt difficulties and prompted economic adjustment plans in Argentina [see pp 37710; 37853; 38003; 38095-96]; Brazil [see pp. 37312-13; 38002-03; 38095]; Peru [see pp. 37650-51; 37851]; Ecuador [see p. 38001]; Costa Rica [see p. 37527]; Nicaragua [see p. 37771]; Honduras [see p. 37526]; and Panama [see p. 37706].
Debt-reduction agreements with commercial bank creditors within the formula developed by the US Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady were achieved by Mexico [see p. 37243], Costa Rica [see p. 37450], Venezuela [see p. 37313]and Uruguay [see p. 38249; other debt agreements: Argentina — see pp. 37040; 37244; 37451; 37959; Mexico — see p. 37770; Brazil — see p. 37709; Peru — see pp. 37772-73; Venezuela — see p. 37650].
Central American UN-sponsored peace talks
Expectations of an end to the 30-year civil war in Guatemala were raised by the signing of the "Mexican Accord" in April 1991 [see p. 38141; for 1990 peace talks see pp. 37372; 37527; 37707].
A breakthrough to end the 11-year civil war in El Salvador seemed unlikely, as representatives of the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) guerrillas and the government failed to agree on a common plan covering reform of the US-backed armed forces, arrangements for a ceasefire, and constitutional changes to enable the FMLN to disarm and participate in democratic politics [see p. 38231; for 1990 peace talks see pp. 37372; 37449; 37770-71; 37850].
Cholera epidemic
A cholera epidemic broke out in Peru in January 1991 [see pp. 38002; 38094].
The World Health Organization (WHO) feared that foreign debt burdens, a lack of medical facilities and poor sanitary conditions would hinder the fight against the disease and assist its spread throughout the region [see p. 38142].
INTERNATIONAL
AIDS
1990 OVERVIEW
March: resignation of WHO-AIDS Programme director [see p. 37335].
June: sixth international AIDS conference [see p. 37551].
According to information issued by the World Health Organization (WHO) in May 1991, over 345,000 cases of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) had been reported from 162 countries and territories as of April 1991.
It was estimated that in addition more than 500,000 paediatric AIDS cases resulting from perinatal transmission (spread of AIDS from an infected mother to her foetus or new-born baby), had occurred, with over 90 per cent of this total in sub-Saharan Africa.
Moreover, taking into account under-diagnosis and under-reporting, the WHO estimated that the cumulative global total of AIDS cases was more than 1,500,000, while at least 8,000,000-10,000,000 adults and 1,000,000 children had probably contracted the AIDS virus (HIV).
An estimated 1,500,000 adults in Australasia, North America and Western Europe were infected with HIV, while an estimated 250,000 or more had developed AIDS.
The cumulative total of adult HIV infections in Latin America and the Caribbean as of early 1991 was estimated to be close to 1,000,000, and the total number of adult AIDS cases slightly over 100,000.
Although data for South and South-East Asia was still relatively scant, the WHO estimated that HIV infections in the region were approximately 500,000, the majority being in India and Thailand.
The WHO estimated that, again as of early 1991, there had been around 6,000,000 HIV infections and 800,000 AIDS cases in adults in sub-Saharan Africa.
In addition 900,000 HIV infections and almost 500,000 AIDS cases were estimated to have affected the child and infant population.
The WHO predicted that infant and child deaths from AIDS could increase child mortality rates by as much as 50 per cent in much of sub-Saharan Africa during the 1990s.
The WHO estimated that by 2000 about 40,000,000 people could be infected with the HIV virus (as compared with the estimate of 25,000,000-30,000,000 infections by 2000 made by the WHO in 1988), while the total number of adult AIDS cases could reach 10,000,000, of which almost 90 per cent would be in the developing countries.
World AIDS Day 1990, marked on Dec. 1, focused on women and AIDS.
On Nov. 27 James Chin, head of WHO's AIDS forecasting unit, had warned that AIDS would be the main cause of death among young women in western Europe within a few years.
INTERNATIONAL
ANTARCTICA
ANTARCTIC TREATY
Date of signature: Dec. 1, 1959 (due for re-negotiation in 1991).
Objective: Promotion of peaceful international scientific co-operation in Antarctica which is administered under the terms of the treaty [see pp. 17159-61].
Parties to Antarctic Treaty: original signatories: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, France, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, Soviet Union, United Kingdom, United States; additional acceding states: 26, including 10 consultative members.
Territorial claimants to Antarctica: Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, New Zealand, Norway and United Kingdom.
1990 OVERVIEW
June: French-Australian talks [see p. 37878].
December: Antarctic Treaty meeting in Chile [see p. 37931].
In January the United States National Science Foundation (NSF), which managed US research in Antarctica, said that the United States would allocate US$30,000,000 to finance a plan to remove hazardous wastes from Antarctica and ship them back to the USA for treatment.
France announced on Feb. 15 that it would build "the continent's third largest permanent station" , to be known as Dome C, at a cost of F35,000,000 (US$6,100,000).
No agreement was reached during 1990 on the ratification of the 1988 Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resources Activities (CRAMRA), which would allow mining in Antarctica [see pp. 36062; 37018-19].
A Franco-Australian proposal [see p. 37878]to ban mineral exploitation and designate the continent a "world park" , met with resistance from Japan, the United Kingdom and the USA at a meeting in Viva del Mar, Chile, in December of states party to the 1959 Antarctic Treaty [see p. 37931].
Reports in May said that the UK had invested £19,000,000 to build an airstrip at the Rothera scientific station, 1,900 km south of the Falkland islands.
The Antarctic Committee of Wildlife Link, an environmental umbrella organization, expressed fears that the use of the airstrip would encourage tourism and precipitate mineral exploitation [see also p. 37019].
In June the UK Labour Party expressed support for plans to preserve Antarctica as a "world park" .
On Aug. 17, the Australian Foreign Affairs Minister, Gareth Evans announced that his government would introduce legislation at the end of 1990 banning mining in the Australian zone, totalling about 42 per cent of Antarctica.
Pressure on the UK government not to ratify the CRAMRA increased further in October following a campaign by the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) and the environmental organization Greenpeace, led by the French underwater explorer, Jacques-Yves Cousteau.
The US Congress passed in October two resolutions calling for the preservation of Antarctica as a "global ecological commons" .
The preparation of a draft bill to protect Antarctica and to ban commercial mining and drilling was also reported to be in progress.
Reports in the Washington Post of Dec. 22 suggested, however, that the US State Department had been reluctant to endorse a permanent ban on all mining activities.
On Dec. 12 the UN General Assembly adopted two resolutions (45/78 A and B) on the establishment of a UN sponsored station in Antarctica and reviewing the state of the environment on the continent.
The Assembly also expressed concern that no concrete measures had been taken in accordance with the 1989 General Assembly resolution appealing to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to exclude South Africa from participation in their meetings [see also p. 37434].
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
Developments in Lockerbie air disaster investigations
May: Report by United States Presidential Commission [see p. 37475].
September: Report by United Kingdom Air Accident Investigation Branch and opening of judicial inquiry [see p. 37732]November: Malta lead in investigation [see pp. 37897-98].
Reports emerged in October 1990 of Libyan involvement in the Lockerbie air disaster of December 1988 [see pp. 36409-10].
The reports, first published in the New York Times, revealed that US investigators now believed that Ahmed Jabril, leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC), had paid Libyan agents to carry out the bombing of the Pan American World Airways (Pan Am) Boeing 747 flight PA 103.
Investigators had found that fragments of a detonator recovered from a field close to Lockerbie were identical to those in a radio cassette bomb seized from two Libyan agents arrested in Dakar, Senegal, in February 1988.
The allegations, which coincided with the opening in October of a fatal accident inquiry into the Lockerbie air disaster [see p. 37732], raised questions for the first time about the widely held view that the bombing had been the work of a German-based cell of the PFLP-GC [see pp. 37897-98].
Reports in mid-October suggested, however, that US and United Kingdom investigators still believed that the new evidence did not rule out the original assumption that the attack had been ordered by Iran and Syria in revenge for the accidental shooting down in July 1988 in the Gulf of an Iranian airbus by the USS Vincennes, when 290 people were killed [see pp. 36169-70; 37898].
Some reports also hinted that the Libyan connection had been leaked to coincide with efforts to tie Iran and Syria into the emerging US-led anti-Iraq alliance in the Gulf crisis.
Officials from the US Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) confirmed on Oct. 31 that the DEA was investigating claims that one of its undercover agents, Khalid Jaafar, engaged in anti-drugs operations, had unwittingly been used to smuggle aboard the bomb that destroyed PA 103.
Some reports suggested, however, that the claims had been deliberately highlighted by Pan Am officials concerned about the company's liability in a series of multi-million dollar suits [see p. 37898].
On Dec. 4 the US Justice Department announced that the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) had found no evidence to substantiate "recent allegations" of a connection between the bombing and the operations of the DEA.
Other air crashes, hijackings and reports
According to a survey by the aviation journal Flight International a total of 815 people were killed worldwide in 37 accidents in 1990.
The most common single cause was aircrew error.
January: A twin-engine plane crashed on Jan. 16 into mountains near San José, Costa Rica, killing 23 people.
A Colombian airliner crashed in New York on Jan. 25 [see p. 37182].
February: An Indian Airlines airbus crashed at Bangalore airport on Feb 14 [see p. 37268].
An inquiry into the crash concluded in December that pilot error had been responsible for the accident [see also p. 37898].
May: Mexican airliner crash on May 10 [see p. 37475].
September: Allegations of suppression of report on September 1989 UTA crash [see pp. 36910; 37732].
October: A hijacked Chinese Boeing 737, on an internal flight, exploded on Oct. 2 after colliding with two parked jets at Canton's Baiyun airport; 179 people were reported killed.
A Cuban airliner crashed on Oct. 24 near the city of Santiago de Cuba, killing 10 people.
A report on the Kegworth air disaster of December 1988 [see pp. 36410; 37732]published on Oct. 18 concluded that the accident had been caused by pilot error and recommended substantial changes to cabin safety procedures.
November: On Nov. 14 all 46 people on board an Alitalia DC9 died when it hit high ground while approaching Zurich airport in Switzerland.
A Thai airliner belonging to Bangkok Airways crashed on Nov. 21 in the island resort of Koh-Sumai, Thailand, killing all 37 passengers on board.
December: Eight people were killed on Dec. 3 after two US North-West Airlines aircraft collided in heavy fog at Detroit Metropolitan Airport.
On Dec. 6 a military aircraft crashed into the building of a secondary school near the Italian city of Bologna, killing 12 people.
IATA report — ICAO session and appointment of Secretary-General
In its 1990 annual report published on Oct. 29, the International Air Transport Association (IATA) confirmed that the Gulf crisis had put pressure on international airline costs and hastened the trend in declining profitability [see p. 37898].
The report predicted that higher fuel prices and sharp rises in aircraft hull insurance in the Middle East would also have a severe impact on airline profitability.
The report showed a 76 per cent fall in the collective net profits of the organization's 200 member airlines in 1989 compared with 1988.
While total revenues rose from US$125,100 million in 1988 to US$144,500 million in 1989, operating expenses increased more sharply from US$118,900 million in 1988 to US$140,200 million in 1989.
Scheduled international traffic showed a 7 per cent growth in 1989 and was expected to rise by 8 per cent in 1990, although the forecasts were made before the impact of the Gulf crisis on the airline industry became clear [see also p. 38123].
The 28th session of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) met in Montreal on Oct. 22-26.
The meeting, which was attended by 114 of its 161 members and by 14 observer delegations, unanimously adopted a resolution calling for a more co-ordinated international approach to the problem of aircraft noise.
In March 1991, the ICAO Council appointed Phillippe H. P. Rochat (Switzerland) as Secretary-General of the organization for a three-year term beginning Aug. 1, 1991, succeeding Shivindor Singh Sidhu.
INTERNATIONAL
COCOM
Full title: Co-ordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls.
: Date of foundation: 1958.
Objective: Prevention of export of Western technology with strategic applications to communist countries.
Member countries: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom and United States.
1990 OVERVIEW
June: Relaxation of restrictions [see p. 37552].
There was evidence of a steady trend towards trade liberalization, brought on partly by the recognition of political changes in eastern Europe [see p. 37552]— most notably the prospect of German unification — and partly by reports of a growing number of violations of COCOM rules [see p. 37896].
The lack of co-ordination between COCOM and other Western bloc organizations such as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) meant, however, that trade liberalization did not always progress smoothly.
A report in the Guardian of Nov. 7 said that a ban by NATO countries (which dominated COCOM) on exporting "secret" high technology to communist countries had cost the UK telecommunications company British Telecom a £4,200,000 (US$7,100,000) order to supply optical fibre equipment for a new telephone link in Vietnam.
The contract was eventually granted to a company from Australia, which, although a member of COCOM, was not a member of NATO.
Replying to a protest by the UK Labour Party, which described the ban on Vietnam as "a ridiculous embargo" , a UK Foreign Office spokesman said that only one former communist country — the German Democratic Republic (GDR)— had been taken off the banned list, after unification with the Federal Republic of Germany (FDR) on Oct. 3 [see pp. 37761-63].
INTERNATIONAL
COMECON
Full title: Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON or CMEA).
Date of foundation: Jan. 25, 1949.
Member states: nine (since the withdrawal of East Germany on unification with West Germany)— Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, Soviet Union and Vietnam.
1990 OVERVIEW
January: Agreement on currency convertibility [see p. 37897].
January-May: COMECON-EC relations [see p. 37897].
March: Cancellation by Czechoslovakia of multilateral agreements and agreement to reduce COMECON functions [see pp. 37326; 37334].
July: Cut in Soviet oil deliveries to eastern Europe [see p. 37630].
August: Contracts disputes with East Germany [see p. 37669].
Dramatic political changes in the Soviet Union and some eastern European member states hastened the momentum towards a market economy.
However, significant falls in output continued to be recorded.
According to figures released by the Commission of the European Communities (EC) and published in Le Monde of Nov. 8, gross national product (GNP) in the first six months of 1990 fell by 9 per cent in Bulgaria; 2 per cent in Hungary; 10 per cent in Poland; 3 per cent in Romania and 6 per cent in Yugoslavia.
The disintegration of the Warsaw Pact also encouraged demands for the dissolution of COMECON and the creation of an economic organization more explicitly oriented to free market principles.
Working groups from all member countries met in Prague on Oct. 23-25 to discuss the transformation of COMECON in keeping with "market reactions" .
On Oct. 30 a Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman said that "an organization of international economic co-operation will be set up in place of the CMEA" .
Member states continued to experience high oil prices following the Soviet decision to cut oil supplies [see p. 37630]and the outbreak of the Gulf crisis.
It was reported on Nov. 27 that the Soviet Union had offered Hungary only 1,000,000 tonnes of oil for 1991, against a scheduled total between 4,000,000 and 4,500,000 tonnes.
Although Hungary's trade surplus with the Soviet Union was expected to total more than US$1,000 million by the end of 1990, it was estimated that the introduction of world market prices for Soviet oil exports would contribute to a US$1,500 million deterioration in Hungary's current account in 1991.
On Oct. 29 the Soviet Union agreed to speed up oil deliveries to Yugoslavia, expected to total about 6,000,000 tonnes in 1990.
On Oct. 30 the Czechoslovak Prime Minister, Marian Calfa, said that the Soviet Union had also agreed to supply 13,000,000 tonnes of oil to Czechoslovakia in 1991 after a series of "long and difficult talks" with Soviet officials in Moscow.
Preparations continued on the introduction of hard-currency trading scheduled for Jan. 1, 1991 [see pp. 37202; 37326; 37334; 37897].
On Nov. 13 Poland and the Soviet Union reached agreement on settling accounts in convertible currencies at world prices.
Negotiations between Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union which ended on Nov. 16 were unsuccessful, reportedly because of disagreements on a rate for turning Czechoslovakia's trade surplus with the Soviet Union into convertible currency.
Talks on currency convertibility also took place between Bulgaria and the Soviet Union during November and December.
Some reports suggested that severe shortages of essential commodities in Bulgaria could force both countries to agree to exchange goods on a barter system, albeit with prices fixed in dollars and set on world market levels.
INTERNATIONAL
COMMODITIES
1990 OVERVIEW
March: extension of 1986 International Cocoa Agreement [see p. 37335].
August: dissolution of International Tin Council [see p. 37669].
May 1989-October 1990: international non-fuel commodity developments [see pp. 37894-95].
Fears of gathering recession caused commodity prices to fall steadily, many ending the year below January levels.
Except for a rise in gold prices immediately following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August, it was bleak year for precious metals.
Among non-ferrous metals, only nickel closed the year at levels higher than in January.
Hopes of a revival for "soft" commodities including sugar, cocoa and coffee, also failed to materialize.
Non-ferrous metals, including tin, aluminium, copper, zinc and nickel.
After an initial rise prompted by expectations of a cut in Brazilian production, tin prices fell, closing at £5,547.50 (US$10,707) a tonne at the end of December.
The low prices were expected to force a fall in refined tin supply from an estimated 193,000 tonnes in 1990 to 185,000 tonnes in 1991.
The plunge in aluminium prices in January was contained by forecasts of a tight supply situation which pushed prices up to a 15-month high of $2,227.50 a tonne in September.
Rising prices were prompted also by the August invasion of Kuwait which was regarded as bullish for aluminium.
By early November, however, prices had tumbled to $1,603.50 a tonne (for immediate delivery), and fell steadily as stocks rose to a record 315,600 tonnes in December.
Copper prices remained unstable.
A rise in April prompted by uncertainty of African production, strikes in Peru and supply disruptions resulting from US labour contract negotiations, failed to gain ground.
A surge in stocks to a five-year high of 197,500 tonnes in mid-October, caused prices to fall to £1,244 ($2,400) a tonne in early December.
The collapse in zinc prices in January eased in the spring following production problems in Canada and Peru.
By early December, however, even a 2,875 tonne fall in stocks failed to boost prices which stood at around $1,236 a tonne.
Declining prices were attributed to a slackening in manufacturing demand.
After a record rise in the spring, the price reaching £800 ($1,300) a tonne for the first time, lead prices fell in early December to around £340 ($660) a tonne as stocks built up in the face of sluggish demand from battery manufacturers.
An upward trend in nickel prices continued, the price reaching $11,375 a tonne at the end of August.
However, the arrival of Soviet stocks, held up due to production problems, caused prices to fall in September to $8,000 a tonne.
Precious metals — gold, silver and platinum
After a year marked by sharp fluctuations in the price of gold, a floor at approximately $365 a troy ounce appeared to have been established by late December.
Since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, gold had rallied twice to more than $400 — in August to between $413 and $415, and in September to $406.
Prospects for silver were bleak as the year's downward trend looked set to continue.
Fears of recession which heightened the perception of silver as an industrial metal and heavy over-supply over an extended period, caused prices to plummet to below $4.00 a troy ounce in mid-December for the first time in fifteen years.
Except for a brief period in September and October when prices threatened to fall to below $400, platinum remained close to $500 an ounce for much of the year.
Prospects of recession heightened fears that prices could fall again if demand declined in Japan, the world's largest consumer, where the metal was used widely for jewellery and car catalytic converters.
 "Beverages" , rubber and sugar
The year marked the lowest sterling price for coffee in 14@1/2 years.
After an almost uninterrupted decline to £548 ($998) a tonne in July, prices finally settled at around £600 ($1,160) a tonne in December.
The main reason for falling prices continued to be Brazil's refusal to revive the price support operations of the International Coffee Agreement (ICA)[see pp. 36836; 37335; 37895].
Huge over-supply, estimated by the US Department of Agriculture in early November to be 91,000 tonnes for 1990-91, kept cocoa prices at around £700 a tonne.
In spite of unrest in the Ivory Coast in September, prices remained at around £700 a tonne, where they struggled to remain until December.
Except for a brief period in August, rubber prices were in decline despite falling stocks and low output in Malaysia.
In early November, the average price moved close to the International Natural Rubber Organization (INRO) 's "may buy" level of 176 Malaysia/Singapore cents a kilogram [see p. 37895].
Sugar prices, which reached $400 a tonne in March and April, fell to $222 in early January 1991 — the lowest price since May 1988.
COMMONWEALTH
Membership: 50 states; Nauru and Tuvalu are special members; they have the right to participate in functional activities but are not represented at Meetings of Heads of Government.
Secretary-General: Chief E. Chukwuemeka (Emeka) Anyaoku (Nigeria).
Meetings of heads of government are held every two years in different capitals in the Commonwealth.
INTERNATIONAL
DEBT
1990 OVERVIEW
February: meeting urging debt reduction for LDCs [see pp. 37267-68].
April-May: UN special session on Third-World debt [see p. 37476].
July: G-7 support for easing debt crisis [see p. 37629].
September: World Bank Annual Report, UNCTAD conference on LDCs [see pp. 37730-31].
There were indications during 1990 that the global debt situation, which had been steadily worsening since the early 1980s, might be starting to ease, as lenders from the developed countries resumed their credits to the developing world and as the return of confidence in the global economy prompted a resumption of foreign investment.
The World Bank in its annual report stated that total developing-country debt now amounted to approximately US$1,341,000 million, or 6.3 per cent more than the $1,260,000 million recorded in 1989.
The decline in world interest rates, the slight improvement in commodity prices and the relative weakness of the dollar (the unit in which nearly all debts were denominated) meant that the total burden of interest and capital payments now represented about 26 per cent of total export revenues for the 20 most severely indebted middle-income countries which between them accounted for 44 per cent of world debt; this compared with a debt service ratio of nearly 50 per cent in 1983.
The World Bank's World Debt Tables, published on Dec. 19, estimated that by the end of the year lenders would in 1990 have committed some $9,000 million in net new lending to borrowers — the amount by which total lending and investment aid exceeded the total paid to lenders in capital repayments, interest and profits.
It noted, however, that the increase in new lending was confined to a relatively small group of countries, and that for many others, notably in Africa, there had been no improvement.
The last time a net surplus in global lending had been recorded was in 1983, when rising levels of bank interest and a strong dollar had left many commodity-dependent countries unable to service their existing obligations.
Major debt defaults in Mexico and Brazil had prompted a worldwide retreat from international bank lending and the virtual collapse of the syndicated loan market; since then, unofficial observers estimated that some $45,000 million of net development capital aid had flowed back from the borrowing countries and towards the lenders.
The proportion of new development aid being granted by commercial banks, rather than by multilateral organizations and governments (so-called "official debts" ), had shrunk from 62 per cent of the total to about 48 per cent as banks had lost interest and capital [see p. 37731].
The World Bank report added, however, that the poorest countries, and particularly those in Africa, would be less likely than other regions to climb out of the so-called "debt trap" .
Although their relative debt levels were still comparatively low, with a typical debt service ratio of 23 per cent, and although their export revenues were increasing strongly, their scheduled interest payments were rising even more rapidly.
The report concluded that there had consequently been a major increase in defaults and arrears during 1990, with some $85,000 million of interest and capital repayment outstanding at the end of the year, about three times the level recorded in 1985.
Much of the success in restoring aid flows was attributed to the debt-reduction scheme proposed in March 1989 by the US Treasury Secretary, James Brady [see pp. 36541-42; 37016-17].
By providing money for so-called buy-back operations, in which countries either bought their own commercial debts back from the banks at deeply discounted levels or, alternatively, simply used the money as collateral when negotiating low-interest bond deals, a number of countries had been able to reschedule their own external obligations on easier repayment terms than had been agreed at the time when they were made.
Mexico had agreed in February 1990 a debt reduction deal on some $90,000 million of commercial debts, with a probable saving of around $5,000 million on what it would otherwise have had to pay [see p. 37243].
Costa Rica achieved a 64 per cent reduction of its $1,500 million external debt in a deal reached on May 6 [see p. 37450], while Venezuela negotiated a debt reduction deal worth some $20,000 million in March 1990 [see p. 37313], with an eventual saving estimated at some $2,000 million.
The Philippines, Chile, Uruguay and Morocco (which had already negotiated new rescheduling agreements in 1988 — see p. 37220) were all holding negotiations at the end of 1990 with a view to debt reduction deals.
As the Brady plan restored confidence in these borrowers, there was a tangible improvement in the secondary market values of these debts (the prices at which they were sold by their original lenders to other lenders).
Mexican debt was being sold at the end of the year for 46.6 cents on the dollar, some 30 per cent more than in January, while Argentinian debt had improved by around 70 per cent to an admittedly still poor 20 cents on the dollar.
The report concluded, however, that the impending Gulf conflict, which was to follow Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, could wreck the economies of poor borrower countries by reducing their export volumes while raising fuel import prices and destabilizing lenders.
Nor had the problems begun only at that time: the Bank for International Settlements had already warned that net bank lending had fallen steeply in the second quarter of the year, from $90,000 million to $65,000 million, while the amount raised in the world securities markets had shrunk from $44,000 million to $25,000 million.
According to the OECD's 1990 report Development Co-operation, net financial flows to the developing world increased by 3 per cent to US$110,000 million in 1989, though in real terms they were still little more than half the level at the start of the 1980s.
The increase in net flows to developing countries occurred despite a small drop (from US48,100 million in 1988 to US$46,700 million in 1989) in official development assistance by members of the OECD's development assistance committee (which included all OECD countries except Iceland, Luxembourg, Portugal and Spain).
The 1988 figure had been artificially inflated by a bunching of large contributions to multilateral organizations such as the World Bank.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
1990 OVERVIEW
START
January: resumption of START talks [see p. 37267].
April: problems in START negotiations [see p. 37393].
May: resolution of START issues [see pp. 37473-74].
June: superpower agreement on elements of START treaty [see p. 37518].
August: Baker-Shevardnadze talks on START [see p. 37669].
September-October: ratifications of 1974 and 1976 bilateral US-Soviet test ban treaties [see pp. 37796].
The 13th round of US-Soviet Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START), otherwise known as Nuclear and Space Talks (NST), resumed in Geneva in January with an agreement on a "trial measure" involving the inspection of each other 's nuclear warheads.
Reports in April suggested, however, that the negotiations had failed to resolve outstanding issues, including provisions relating to air- and sea-launched long-range missiles.
Meanwhile, a US proposal to commence a new round of START talks (known as START II), aimed exclusively at the elimination of land-based nuclear weapons carrying multiple warheads (MIRVs), was formally rejected by the Soviet Union.
Differences were partially resolved in May after talks between the US Secretary of State, James Baker, and the then Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, resulted in major concessions by both sides.
At a summit meeting in June US President Bush and Soviet President Gorbachev formally confirmed that a START treaty, which they expected to be completed by the end of 1990, would be based on a 30 per cent overall cut in long-range nuclear missiles over a seven-year period.
In August the Soviet Union announced that it would cease producing rail-mounted strategic nuclear missiles from the beginning of 1991.
Further talks at ministerial level between the USA and the Soviet Union in December led to speculation that only "very technical" details remained to be resolved, including the installation of US special perimeter monitoring facilities outside Soviet factories producing SS-24 and SS-25 missiles.
It was confirmed that there had been broad agreement on establishing a ceiling of 6,000 on the overall combined number of nuclear warheads.
Subsequent reports suggested that the Soviet side had also agreed that the US-made Trident missile, scheduled to replace Polaris as part of the United Kingdom's nuclear arsenal, would be excluded from the terms of a START treaty.
ALLEGED VIOLATIONS OF INF AND ABM TREATIES
It was alleged in March that the Soviet Union had attempted to circumvent the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty.
Reports quoting US officials claimed that the Soviet Union had shipped a total of about 100 medium-range missiles to East Germany, Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia, in apparent violation of the INF treaty.
The revelations came amid unconfirmed reports that Soviet guards at a missile arsenal in Votkinsk had fired on a team of US technicians who had attempted to inspect missiles under the terms of the treaty.
In May a former deputy director of the US Arms Control and Disarmament Agency said that the USA would be violating the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty if it deployed a newly-tested missile tracking device as part of its "Star Wars" defence system.
The USA and the Soviet Union in September and October respectively ratified the 1974 Threshold Test Ban Treaty and the 1976 Peaceful Nuclear Explosions Treaty, containing provisions for the installation of on-site monitoring equipment in each other 's territory.
On Oct. 10 the official Soviet news agency Tass quoted a Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman as saying: "As of last September, a total of 2,050 nuclear explosions had taken place in the world, more than half of them (1,080) in the USA.
The Soviet Union was responsible for 714 nuclear explosions, France for 180, Britain for 42 and China for 34".
CHEMICAL WEAPONS
In February the USA and the Soviet Union reached a preliminary agreement to phase out chemical weapons over a 10-year period [see p. 37267].
Negotiators from the two countries agreed in Geneva, at the end of the 15th round of bilateral talks which closed on April 26, to cut their chemical weapons stocks to 5,000 tonnes each, and in June a summit accord between them formally endorsed a ban on the production of chemical weapons [see p. 37518].
On July 26 the USA began a month-long operation to remove an estimated 100,000 chemical weapons from a storage depot in Clausen, West Germany.
The weapons, whose removal had been agreed during a meeting in 1986 between the West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and the then US President Ronald Reagan, were expected to be shipped for incineration to Johnston Atoll in the Pacific [see pp. 37658-59].
It was reported on Nov. 11 that France had refused permission to members of the environmental group Greenpeace to conduct its own investigations on the Pacific nuclear testing site of Mururoa Atoll [see p. 37886].
Greater East-West co-operation on restricting the use of chemical weapons was shown by the participation on Dec. 10 and Dec. 29 of Soviet and East European delegations at an international conference in London convened to discuss export controls on chemical weapons and technology.
CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS TALKS
January: CSCE seminar on military doctrine and "Open Skies" flight over Hungary [see p. 37201].
February: Superpower agreements on troop reductions in Europe and acceptance in principle of "Open Skies" [see p. 37267].
March: Sixth round of CFE talks [see p. 37335].
June: Soviet announcement of tactical nuclear weapons cuts in Europe and eighth round of CFE talks [see pp. 37550-51; 37552].
October: Superpower agreement on CFE [see pp. 37796].
November: Signing of CFE treaty [see p. 37838].
The 20-month series of negotiations, known as the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) talks, culminated in November with the signing in Paris of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE)[see p. 37838].
The most important feature of the treaty, which involved the member states of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and of the Warsaw Pact, was the imposition of equal ceilings on non-nuclear weapons located between the Atlantic Ocean and the Ural mountains.
An agreement in February between the USA and the Soviet Union to reduce the number of their troops in central Europe to 195,000 each had been followed in September by a suggestion that the USA was considering deeper cuts in the wake of a Soviet decision to withdraw all Soviet forces from East Germany by 1994.
The CFE treaty, which also permitted "site inspections" , had been preceded by a number of preliminary military inspections between member states of the two blocs.
On Sept. 13 groups from the UK and Norway carried out inspections of military activity in the Byelorussian and Leningrad military districts respectively.
On Sept. 17, Polish inspectors in the Netherlands carried out the first inspection of a NATO member state by a unit from a Warsaw Pact country.
In December the Soviet Union proposed immediate talks with the USA on cutting short-range nuclear forces in Europe.
A similar proposal to reduce forces in the Asia-Pacific region had been mooted by Soviet officials in November.
Suspension of "Open Skies" negotiations
The second phase of talks between NATO and Warsaw Pact delegates aimed at mutual aerial surveillance (also known as the "Open Skies" plan), which resumed in Budapest on April 23, was suspended on May 10.
Reports suggested that differences between the two sides had centred on the number of flights conducted, the type of surveillance equipment used and the areas open to surveillance.
The talks, initiated in February [see p. 37267], had been expected to result in an accord by May 12.
CONFERENCE ON NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY
The fourth review conference of the 141-member Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), due to expire in 1995, was held in Geneva from Aug. 20 to Sept. 14.
It was attended for the first time by observers from China and France, neither of which was a signatory of the treaty.
Although a consensus on the final declaration was blocked after a dispute between Mexico and the USA over nuclear testing, signatories agreed to support compulsory international inspection in countries suspected of secretly manufacturing nuclear weapons.
Nuclear weapons proliferation in developing countries
Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands announced in May that they had joined the 1987 Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) which committed industrialized countries to restricting missile proliferation in the developing world.
A report published in April by the New York-based Carnegie Endowment for Peace claimed that Argentina, Brazil, India, Iraq and Pakistan had been able to circumvent international regulations and build or expand nuclear weapons capabilities.
According to the 1990 yearbook of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), 26 developing countries had acquired ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear, biological or chemical weapons.
It also revealed that Third-World countries spent about US$16,000 million on acquiring new arms in 1989 — less than in any year since 1976.
Total military spending in 1989 amounted to US$950,000 million — a drop of 2 per cent from the previous year.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
GLOBAL WARMING
During 1990 average global temperatures were the highest since records began in the late 19th century, according to analyses by the Meteorological Office in the United Kingdom and by scientists from the United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).
Of the seven warmest years in the 20th century (which were, in order, 1990, 1988, 1983, 1987, 1944, 1989 and 1981) six had occurred in the last decade.
Whether this temperature rise was mainly due to the "greenhouse effect" was a moot point, although the fact that 1990 was one of the coldest years in the stratosphere tended to reinforce the likelihood of this being the case, since cooling of the stratosphere was seen as a consequence of the greenhouse effect.
A senior researcher at the Meteorological Office said in January 1991 that "we cannot prove that the rise was caused by the greenhouse effect, but it is likely" .
Similar views were expressed by NASA scientists.
In late 1990 the failure first of the rains and then of the grain harvest across the Sahel in Africa [see pp. 37845; 37907-08; 37945-46; 38090]prompted renewed questions as to whether this drought was linked to global warming.
In October the US Climate Analysis Centre announced that in the western Sahel rainfall was three-quarters of the norm, but that in eastern Sudan and northern Ethiopia it was less than half the average.
Report on greenhouse gas emissions
A report published by the private, Washington-based World Resources Institute on July 3, 1990, listed countries' emissions of greenhouse gases contributing to global warming.
According to the report the largest contributions were made by the USA (18 per cent), the Soviet Union (12 per cent ), Brazil (11 per cent ), China (7 per cent ), and India (4 per cent ).
International climate conference in Sweden
At an international climate conference in Sundsvall, northern Sweden, on Aug. 27-30, 1990, 300 scientists from 60 countries predicted a climatic catastrophe unless drastic measures were taken to reduce harmful emissions.
A paper published for the conference included evidence that the earth's temperature had risen by 0.5o C in the last 100 years and that sea level had risen by 20 centimetres, and predicted the flooding of 360,000 sq km of coastal land.
The conference was preparatory to the second world climate conference in November 1990 [see p. 37874].
New EC vehicle emission standards
On Dec. 21, 1990, European Community (EC) Environment Ministers agreed on new, stricter, car exhaust emission standards which would bring EC regulations up to the levels applied in the USA since 1983.
The new standards could currently be met only by using three-way catalytic converters and would apply from mid-1992 for new petrol-driven cars and from Jan. 1, 1993, for all new cars.
On March 18, 1991, EC Environment Ministers agreed to set new, stricter, anti-pollution standards for emissions from diesel-driven lorries and buses, aiming to halve emissions of carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, gaseous hydrocarbons and particulates.
Overall, they were intended to bring emission standards for heavy vehicles into line with those for cars.
They would be introduced from July 1992 for new models; existing models would have to be adapted by October 1993.
The EC Commission claimed that the new measures surpassed US emission standards and were compatible with those set by Austria and Switzerland.
Tax incentives would encourage manufacturers to implement the standards ahead of schedule.
[For July 1989 EC agreement on catalytic converters for small cars see p. 37209].
DESTRUCTION OF OZONE LAYER
In mid-1990 researchers from the National Science Foundation in the USA said that they had found evidence that ultraviolet light penetrating the seasonally thinner ozone layer protecting the earth from the sun's harmful ultraviolet rays was damaging marine life in the oceans around Antarctica.
Preliminary findings indicated that ultraviolet light could alter the genes of phytoplankton — single-celled organisms sustaining a food chain including whales, seals, fish and sea birds.
As a result of high-altitude measurements made in the winter of 1989/90 by Airborne Arctic Stratospheric Expedition, scientists at Colorado University published findings in September 1990 indicating that the ozone layer above the Arctic was seriously depleted "although there is as yet no ozone hole in the Arctic" .
The loss of ozone during the Arctic winter was shown to be up to 35 per cent rather than 10-25 per cent as previously thought.
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology described the ozone losses shown by these measurements as "not very much less that in the Antarctic spring" although "the effects were less dramatic because the polar ozone was being resupplied about as fast as it was being destroyed" .
Ozone depletion over the Arctic was believed to appear less severe than in the Antarctic because air currents in the northern hemisphere brought fresh supplies of ozone-rich air into the region, restoring ozone levels.
CFC production
On May 30, 1990, the West German Cabinet approved legislation banning the production or use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs — one of the chemicals suspected of destroying the ozone layer and also a greenhouse gas) from Jan. 1, 1995.
The ban was accepted in principle by Hoechst AG and Kali-chemical AG, the two companies manufacturing CFCs in Germany; the chemical industry association pledged to recycle or dispose of all CFCs in the interim.
In October the government announced that CFC production in West Germany during the first half of 1990 had been reduced to 42,820 tonnes (as compared with 112,000 tonnes during the whole of 1986).
The EC Council of (Environment) Ministers agreed on Dec. 21, 1990, to ban the use of CFCs by June 1997, three years ahead of the deadline agreed at the June 1990 London conference on the Montreal protocol on the protection of the ozone layer [see p. 37552].
Production of CFCs in EC countries was to be cut by 85 per cent by 1995.
ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION
Report on European forest damage
On Aug. 29, 1990, the UN Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) published the results of its fourth survey on air pollution and forest damage in Europe covering the year 1989 [for 1988 report see p. 37292].
Several countries, especially in eastern Europe, reported further increases in forest damage during 1989 but in others the rate of defoliation appeared to have stabilized or actually decreased.
For the first time the survey, which covered 1,160,000 sq km(i.e. two-thirds of the entire forest area in Europe) included data on forest damage in the western part of the Soviet Union (i.e. Byelorussia, the Kaliningrad region and Ukraine) in addition to Estonia and Lithuania which had been included in earlier years.
Spruce, fir and oak were the species most heavily affected by defoliation.
In most countries, damage to spruce remained stable or decreased slightly, although a notable deterioration was recorded in Czechoslovakia, Lithuania and Poland.
While the condition of pine remained generally unchanged, Bulgaria, East Germany, Hungary, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Switzerland showed a deteriorating trend for older trees.
The situation for silver fir remained critical.
Oak defoliation became significantly more serious, except in Greece, the Netherlands and the UK, where recoveries were reported.
Surface water acidification report
On March 19, 1990, a five-year study on surface water acidification in Sweden, Norway and the UK was published by 30 research groups funded by British Coal and the UK Central Electricity Generating Board.
The study confirmed that acid rain was caused mainly by emissions from coal-fired power stations and stated that the huge reserves of sulphur built up in the soil meant that many Scottish and Scandinavian lakes would suffer the effects of acid rain for decades even if sulphur dioxide emissions were cut radically.
Although some Scottish lakes had begun to show signs of recovery, this was due to the decline of energy-intensive industries such as iron and steel and not to environmental protection policies.
Speaking on March 22, 1990, to scientists who had worked on the project, the then UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher promised that her government would "meet the commitments which it has solemnly accepted" to reduce emissions from power stations [see pp. 36791-92].
However, she appeared to acknowledge that the government was scaling back a £2,000 million (US$3,200 million) plan to fit flue gas desulphurization (FGD) equipment to coal-fired power stations.
Announced in 1988, the programme had originally envisaged that FGD technology would be fitted to six power stations.
As of February 1991 it was only being fitted to the 4,000 MW Drax station in Yorkshire, although applications to fit FGD equipment to two other stations had been presented by PowerGen.
US government report on air pollution
A 10-year study by the US National Acid Precipitation Assessment Programme published in mid-January 1991 concluded that acid rain had done far less damage to the nation's lake and forests than had previously been thought.
[For November 1990 approval of Clean Air Act amendments see p. 37847.]
Soviet agreement on reducing sulphur emissions
The Soviet official news agency Tass reported on Nov. 21, 1990, that the Soviet government had, in response to Finnish protestations, agreed to cut sulphur emissions from two major mining and metalwork complexes at Nikel and Monchegorsk on the Kola peninsula.
Current emissions of 500,000 tonnes a year would be cut to 73,000 tonnes once a modernization programme costing US$900,000,000, funded in part by Finland, Norway and Sweden, had been carried out.
TROPICAL RAINFORESTS
During 1990 a number of reports indicated that the extent of destruction of the world's tropical rainforests was greater than previously predicted.
According to a World Resources Institute survey presented on June 7, 1990, between 160,000 and 200,000 sq km of tropical rainforest were being destroyed annually.
The study was based on satellite photographs and official government data from 1987.
According to the report 11 countries (Brazil, Colombia, Côte d'Ivoire, India, Indonesia, Laos, Myanma, Nigeria, the Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam) were responsible for 82 per cent of the world's forest felling.
According to figures released on Aug. 16, 1990, by the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), tropical rainforests were being destroyed at a rate of 168,000 sq km annually as compared with a rate of 94,000 sq km in 1980.
According to FAO Director-General Edouard Saouma the rate of destruction had been underestimated in 1980.
The worst affected areas were the Amazon basin, Central America and the islands of Asia.
In Latin America 73,000 sq km was destroyed each year, increasing the deforested area by 0.9 per cent; in Africa a smaller area of 47,000 sq km was being destroyed but this increased the deforested area by 1.7 per cent annually; in Asia the deforested area increased annually by 1.4 per cent .
A report published in November 1989, commissioned by the environmental pressure group Friends of the Earth, stressed that between 300,000,000 and 500,000,000 forestland farmers, who were forced by economic and social factors to seek a livelihood on the margins of the rainforests, accounted "for well over half of all deforestation" .
The report warned: "Unless there is reduction of population growth together with a resolution of the landless peasant phenomenon, it is difficult to see that much forest will remain in just a few decades time" .
International Tropical Timber Council
At a meeting in Bali, Indonesia, in May 1990 the International Tropical Timber Council (ITTC — the executive body of the International Tropical Timber Organization — ITTO — see p. 34123) agreed a "plan of action" .
This committed tropical timber producing and consuming countries to ensuring that by 2000 all exports of tropical timber products should come from sustainably managed sources.
The cost of implementing such a strategy had not been estimated, but studies by the Asian Development Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank estimated that US$270,000 million would have to be invested worldwide to introduce sustainable tropical timber management.
During 1990 the role of the ITTO was increasingly questioned, since its function was to protect both the rainforests and the interests of 47 nations involved in the timber trade.
Environmental groups criticized a decision made at an ITTC meeting in Yokohama, Japan, in November 1990 to approve the continued logging of important forests in Malaysia and the Amazon basin [for November 1989 meeting see p. 37054].
Reform of Tropical Forestry Action Plan
An FAO forestry conference in Rome in October 1990 agreed to reform the 1985 Tropical Forest Action Plan (TFAP — see pp. 36249; 37292; 37890).
The plan had been criticized for being geared towards extracting the optimum "harvest" from remaining forests, of lacking consideration towards forest peoples and of being slow to meet requests for assistance from developing countries.
Only six out of over 75 interested countries had had forestry plans inaugurated under the plan.
The renamed Tropical Forestry Action Programme would have the reformed objective of "conservation and sustainable development of forestry resources in the interests of the country concerned and the global community" .
The co-ordinating body within the FAO was to be strengthened, with greater emphasis on quick response to requests for assistance.
Rainforests in the Americas
During 1990 Brazil sought to improve its reputation over the destruction of the rainforest.
On March 12, shortly before stepping down as President, José Sarney created three Amazon reserves for use by rubber tappers, in response to demands from the National Council of Rubber Tappers.
The reserves were in Acre (9,706 sq km), Amapa (4,817 sq km ) and Rondonia (2,046 sq km ).
A reforestation project was started in eastern Amazonia in mid-July 1990 when President Collor de Mello signed an agreement providing for the replanting of over 10,000 sq km of former forest.
The project was to be organized by the state-controlled transport concern Companhia Vale de Rio Doce, and the first phase would cost US$1,200 million.
On July 20 during a visit to Brazil the then West German Economic Co-operation Minister Jürgen Warnke promised DM250,000,000 (about US$150,000,000) to protect the environment and rainforests.
In June 1990 the Brazilian Satellite Research Institute (INPE) revised upwards its estimate of the extent of deforestation in the Amazon basin.
New data indicated that altogether 404,000 sq km had been deforested.
This represented 8 per cent of the total as against an earlier estimate of 5.6 per cent.
Independent experts from the Brazil Institute for Amazonian Studies, however, asserted that the "real figure of original forest wiped out is between 11 and 12 per cent" .
In March 1991 INPE reckoned that the rate of destruction of the Amazon rainforest fell by 27 per cent in 1990, largely because of tax increases and reduced subsidies for the farming of Amazonia.
Burning in some areas such as Rondonia and Amapa was, however, still increasing.
In Ecuador the Ecuadorean environment agency DIGEMA and the international environmental organization Friends of the Earth announced on Aug. 9, 1990, that oil exploration and extraction was severely disrupting the exceptionally diverse flora and fauna of the Oriente region and threatening the livelihood of 65,000 indigenous people living there.
A major road and pipeline already crossed the region and had led to oil spills and the release of contaminated water containing hydrocarbons, heavy metals and bactericides and other chemicals into the soil and water.
In Bolivia 11,500 indigenous Indians from the Chimanes forest marched in August 1990 to the capital, La Paz, in protest at a 1987 debt-for-nature swap [see pp. 35763; 36249], which they said had led to plundering of the area by logging companies.
Under the agreement half of the Chimanes forest was designated a "permanent production zone" i.e. available for "sustainable forestry" , while the remainder was to be a research area.
The Indians said that the loggers were using the area indiscriminately, driving off wildlife and polluting water courses.
Rainforests in Asia
In October 1990 the Executive Secretary of the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) warned that the rate of destruction of Asia's rainforests had reached 50,000 sq km annually as against 20,000 sq km as reckoned during the 1980s.
Deforestation was the chief cause of floods and landslides which killed several hundred people each year; 15,000 million tonnes of earth were being washed into Asian rivers each year and villages were lacking clean drinking water.
In 1989 Indonesia and Malaysia accounted for almost three-quarters of world sales of tropical hardwood which were worth a total of US$7,000 million.
According to the Economist of May 26, 1990, Indonesia had about 1,100,000 sq km designated as "permanent forest" , of which the World Bank estimated that 10,000 sq km were lost each year.
In Malaysia, Sabah and Sarawak were expected to have almost no virgin forest left by the end of the century, as was already the case in Thailand and the Philippines.
In Vietnam the government reckoned that the total forested area had fallen from 43 per cent of the country's area in 1943 to 29 per cent, although the Resources and Environmental Research Centre in Hanoi put the true figure possibly as low as 20 per cent .
In addition to the destruction wrought by bombing and herbicides during the Vietnam war population growth was putting increasing pressure on the rest of the forests.
In 1989 the government banned exports of unprocessed timber, as Indonesia had done in 1985 [see p. 36794], a move designed not only to slow logging but also to encourage the development of the Vietnamese wood processing industry.
The government also planned to distribute areas of forest to families among the Thai and Hmong hill tribespeople in order to encourage them to farm one area of land continuously rather than using traditional "slash and burn" methods.
The EC and tropical rainforests
The European of Sept. 10, 1990, reported on a European Parliament paper which found that EC aid to developing countries was being spent on projects which directly destroyed the forests of Asia, Africa and South America.
The EC had, among other things,(i) financed the construction of a road through one of Zaïre's forests so as to increase production at a meat processing plant;(ii) financed timber extraction projects in Equatorial Guinea designed to quadruple timber production over the next four years; and (iii) financed the Carajás iron ore project in the state of Pará, Brazil, which had destroyed much of the Amazon rainforest, had led to the deaths of 1,000 Indians after the opening up of their habitat 10 years earlier and had consumed 4,000,000 tonnes of charcoal each year to smelt the iron ore into pig iron.
On Oct. 25, 1990, the European Parliament called for an immediate EC moratorium on tropical hardwood imports from Malaysia as result of the "catastrophic" deforestation in Sarawak, and also for the introduction of quotas for hardwood imports from other countries.
In December the joint forestry committee of Indonesia and Malaysia called for retaliatory action and said that it was "unfair" for Western environmentalists to blame Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries for global problems, and said that Indonesia and Malaysia had both taken steps "to sustain forest resources" .
TOXIC WASTE
A February 1991 report by the environmental pressure group Greenpeace found that despite the March 1989 signing of a convention on the international transport and disposal of hazardous waste [see p. 36541]industrialized countries continued to export their toxic waste.
After the 1988 scandals about exports of hazardous and toxic waste to Africa [see pp. 36250-52; 36788-89]member states of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) had in January 1991 adopted a convention banning the import of hazardous and nuclear waste [see p. 37978], South Africa being the only African country still importing waste systematically.
The December 1989 EC Fourth Lomé Convention had also banned the movement of hazardous and radioactive waste between the EC and signatory developing countries [see p. 37211].
Greenpeace reported that as a result exports were going to east European countries and Latin America.
Since 1986 163,000,000 tonnes of waste had been exported from industrialized countries, including approximately 10,000,000 tonnes of toxic waste, of which 5,200,000 tonnes went to developing countries and eastern Europe.
A Greenpeace report in October 1990 said that 46,000 tonnes of waste were known to have been imported by Poland from the West (especially West Germany) since 1984.
The country lacked the technology to store the waste safely and it was threatening water supplies.
Although the Polish government had imposed a ban on waste imports since July 1989, the effectiveness of this legislation was questioned because of the ease with which waste could be illegally imported.
In western Europe France and the UK were the largest waste importers.
Greenpeace alleged in September 1990 that illegal toxic waste imports to the UK were three times larger than the legal trade.
While the then UK Environment Secretary Chris Patten claimed that importing toxic waste prevented it being dumped in less industrialized countries which lacked the appropriate waste disposal technology, Greenpeace said that 80 per cent of the waste came from highly developed countries such as Switzerland, Belgium and the Netherlands.
Once in the UK less than 25 per cent of the legally imported waste was incinerated and the remainder was dumped in landfill sites.
The government planned to increase the UK's annual capacity for dealing with toxic waste from 83,000 tonnes to 500,000 tonnes.
Nuclear waste
On June 27, 1990, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in the USA published revised guidelines allowing the disposal of certain kinds of low-level radioactive waste as ordinary waste.
Previously all radioactive waste had to be disposed of in one of three licensed landfills in the USA.
Under the new regulations workers' clothing, research laboratory carcasses and packaging from reactor replacement parts could in future be classed as "below regulatory concern" .
Experts estimated that the change might allow the disposal under these regulations of about 30 per cent of US low-level waste, which would, however, contain under 1 per cent of total radioactivity.
London Dumping Convention agreement on decommissioning nuclear submarines
The annual consultative meeting of the 1972 London Dumping Convention (LDC) in London on Oct. 30-Nov. 2, 1989, attended by 35 of the 63 states party to the convention, unanimously agreed to prohibit the disposal at sea of decommissioned nuclear submarines.
The agreement was based on the judgment that nuclear submarines were covered within the terms of the LDC's 1983 moratorium on the dumping of nuclear wastes at sea [see pp. 34524-25].
It was widely reported that the UK Ministry of Defence had reserved the right to dispose of its decommissioned nuclear submarines at sea, although the UK finally voted for the proposal.
A special report presented to the LDC meeting claimed that signatory countries had failed to "generate a public image of the LDC treaties as a positive mechanism for the preservation of environmental health" and called on the LDC to "take more aggressive actions to address marine pollution issues of a global nature" .
WATER POLLUTION
Ramsar Wetlands Convention conference
The 58 signatories to the 1971 Ramsar Convention on Wetlands, which governed the conservation of around 500 designated sites throughout the world, met in June 1990 in Montreux, Switzerland.
A report to the conference made by the World Wide Fund for Nature singled out sites in West Germany, Greece, Jordan, Pakistan, South Africa, the Soviet Union, Spain and Uruguay as particularly threatened by pollution, dams, silting and drainage.
Soviet scientists admitted that many Soviet lakes and rivers faced ecological disaster, including the Kirov Bays and Volga Delta on the Caspian Sea, the Dnieper and Dniester areas, the Volga basins, Lake Sevan, Lake Issyk-Kul, Lake Balkhash, Lake Ladoga, the Black Sea, the Sea of Azov, and the Caspian and Baltic seas.
Damage to the Aral Sea was out of control [see also below], while the basins around Lake Baikal and of the rivers Ob and Amur were under threat.
In Greece all 11 Ramsar sites had been damaged and in Spain the Cota Donana reserve was threatened by tourism and irrigation schemes.
Further studies were delaying by two years measures to save Lake Ichkeul in Tunisia, which was in danger of being reduced to a salty lagoon after the damming in the 1970s of the six rivers feeding it.
After much discussion the conference eventually agreed to establish a fund for wetlands conservation in developing countries, despite opposition from Australia, Canada, Ireland and the UK.
It would, however, have a budget of only SFr20,000 (US$14,000).
Action on seas
In a report to the UK Royal Geographical Society in October 1990 three British scientists described the devastation resulting from the shrinking of the Aral Sea [see also p. 36791]as the worst "ecological disaster" in the world.
Irrigation and agricultural policies — especially for the Soviet cotton industry — meant that the water level in the Aral Sea had fallen by over 14 metres over the last 30 years.
Pesticides and defoliant residues on a swathe round the coast tens of kilometres wide of exposed seabed resulted in greatly increased heart disease, cancer, and deaths from chronic gastritis, kidney disease and tuberculosis, with over 10 per cent of children dying in their first year.
At an EC-organized conference in Nicosia, Cyprus, in April 1990 ministers from 16 countries adopted a "Nicosia charter" to combat pollution and clean up the Mediterranean by 2025.
The anti-pollution measures agreed at the conference were to be supported by ECU1,200 million in EC aid.
They included the construction of sewage purification plants in 100 coastal cities and the establishment of at least 25 supervised toxic waste depots.
Countries attending were Albania, Algeria, Cyprus, Egypt, France, Greece, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Lebanon, Malta, Morocco, Spain, Syria, Tunisia and Yugoslavia.
[See p. 37731 for September 1990 agreement on pollution in Mediterranean.]
During 1990 states bordering on the Baltic Sea sought to reduce its pollution.
At a conference on June 6-8, 1990, in Karlskrona, Sweden, 100 scientists agreed that the amount of industrial effluent flowing into the Baltic had to be drastically reduced.
In early September north European government officials meeting in Ronneby, Sweden, agreed to implement an emergency programme to clean up the Baltic and to halve the inflow of harmful substances by 1995.
The Swedish Environmental Protection Agency estimated that the programme would require US$4,640 million annually, although where this money should come from had not yet been finalized.
Ministers and governors from Alaska, Canada, China, Japan, Scandinavia and the Soviet Union agreed at a conference in Anchorage on Sept. 17-20, 1990, on a pact for joint environmental protection and scientific research in the Arctic.
Under the agreement states would monitor air pollution, share technical information, raise funds for environmental protection and conduct joint research on forestry, wildlife management and gas and oil drilling in the Arctic Ocean.
The conference was the third of its kind and would in future meet every two years.
The UN Environment Programme (UNEP) reported in early 1990 that drought and desertification had reduced the Lake Chad basin to 10,000 sq km as compared with 28,000 sq km 30 years previously.
The volume of water had been reduced by 60 per cent as result of 15 years of drought.
A Lake Chad Basin commission with representatives of Chad, Cameroon, Nigeria and Niger (which all bordered on the lake) had been established in 1964 but had made little progress.
Rivers
Plans for the so-called "three gorges dam" on the Yangtze river were reportedly resurrected in August 1990 over a year after they had been shelved by the Chinese government [see also p. 37003].
Some Chinese leaders maintained that the project, which would include a 185-metre high dam, a 600-km long reservoir and the world's largest hydroelectric power station, was essential for the development of the Yangtze as a "prosperous economic corridor" .
A report by Chinese scientists in the Chinese People's Political Consultative Committee claimed, however, that flooding would not be effectively controlled, that silt would regularly incapacitate turbines and that 1,000,000 people would have to be moved.
In mid-January 1991 the Indian government announced a programme to clean up the 800-km long Yamuna River which flowed through Delhi before joining the Ganges at Allahabad, and was polluted by (among other sources) untreated chemicals from a major oil refinery at Mathura and several tanneries in Agra.
The project would begin by building sanitary installations in six cities and planting trees on the riverbank.
A project to clean up the Ganges which had started in 1985 had so far cost US$115 million and was due to be completed by the end of 1991.
The International Herald Tribune of Nov. 24-25, 1990, reported that the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) had vetoed the planned "two forks dam" project which would have dammed the South Platte River in Colorado to provide Denver suburbs with water.
The EPA said that the dam, which had first been proposed 10 years before, would have had "unacceptable adverse effects" on the environment and have damaged fisheries and recreational sites.
OIL SPILLS
The Financial Times of Dec. 12, 1990, reported that 90 countries had under the auspices of the International Maritime Organization agreed to set up an emergency response system to deal with oil spillages.
Anti-pollution equipment would be based at strategic locations around the world; mutual assistance was promised to cope with an accident; masters of vessels would have to report all major pollutant leakages; and ship owners would have to meet clean-up costs.
The agreement followed a spate of oil spills since the March 1989 Exxon Valdez disaster [see p. 36541]which included three large oil spills in US waters in June 1989:(i) on June 23, 650,000 gallons of fuel oil were spilt into Narragansett Bay off Rhode Island by a Liberian-registered tanker, World Prodigy, after it struck a reef;(ii) on June 24 a Uruguayan tanker, Presidente Rivera, spilled 800,000 gallons of industrial heating oil after hitting a rock in the Delaware River, Delaware; and (iii) also on June 24 a tow-barge spilled 250,000 gallons of light crude oil in Galveston Bay, Texas, after a collision with a Panamanian cargo ship.
[For December 1989 spill near Atlantic coast of Morocco, January 1990 spill off Madeiras and Exxon tanker spill in New York harbour see p. 37202.]
On Feb. 7, 1990, some 300,000 gallons of heavy Alaskan crude oil were spilt off the southern California coast when a tanker, American Trader, leased by the British Petroleum Oil Company, USA, was holed while mooring at an offshore pipeline terminal.
In late April or early May rocket fuel leaked into the White Sea in the Soviet Arctic, killing 100,000 seals and millions of other marine animals in what the Soviet newspaper Izvestya called "an ecological tragedy of huge proportions" .
On June 8 after an explosion on board the Norwegian supertanker, Mega Borg, 3,000,000 gallons of light crude oil spilled into the Gulf of Mexico 90 km south-east of Galveston, Texas, but was largely burnt off in a fire which was not extinguished until June 15.
On July 28 two barges collided with a Greek tanker, Shinoussa, in Galveston Bay, spilling 500,000 gallons of heavy crude oil, although the slick later appeared either to have evaporated or sunk.
THREATENED SPECIES
Ivory
The two-year moratorium on ivory trading agreed in October 1989 by signatories to the 1975 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES)[see pp. 36988-89]came into effect on Jan. 18, 1990.
Five exporting countries (Botswana, Malawi, South Africa, Zambia and Zimbabwe) had exempted themselves from the ban.
Of the importing countries the UK government applied for a six-month exemption for Hong Kong, where 3,000 carvers and other workers depended on ivory for their livelihood, to dispose of its stockpile.
When this exemption ended in July China became the sole importer, and in September 1990 the Chinese government announced that it would join the ban from January 1991.
In mid-June 1990 the World Wide Fund for Nature announced that the world ivory trade was collapsing because of an "astounding" fall in consumer demand.
Driftnet fishing ban
In July 1990 Japan agreed to suspend driftnet fishing in the South Pacific for the 1990/91 season.
Japanese owners operated 500 of the 1,300 Asian drift vessels in the Pacific, where there was increasing international pressure to cease driftnet fishing — a practice whereby fine nylon nets were stretched across as much as 60 km of the ocean to a depth of 15 metres, resulting in the unintended death of an estimated 1,000,000 sea birds and 200,000 mammals each year.
On Dec. 22, 1989, the UN General Assembly had voted to ban driftnet fishing in the South Pacific from July 1, 1991, and to introduce a moratorium on driftnet fishing on the high seas by June 30, 1992, until effective conservation and management measures could be agreed by the international community.
In mid-1990 the three largest US companies selling canned tuna fish, accounting for 70 per cent of the US market, had announced that they would no longer buy tuna caught in nets which also caught dolphins.
Between 80,000 and 100,000 dolphins were reckoned to be killed annually by tuna fishers in the eastern Pacific.
MEETING OF EAST AND WEST EUROPEAN ENVIRONMENT MINISTERS
Environment Ministers from every east European state, with the exception of Albania and Romania, met their EC counterparts in Dublin on June 16, 1990.
They agreed that east European governments would participate in the new European Environment Agency [see below]with a view to standardizing environmental practice and regulations throughout Europe.
At the meeting Czechoslovak Environment Minister Josef Vavrousek claimed that life expectancy in his country averaged seven years less than the EC norm, principally due to industrial pollution, notably from sulphur dioxide emissions from the combustion of lignite (brown coal).
The then Polish Environment Minister, Bronislaw Kaminski, asserted that one-third of Poland's rivers were grossly polluted, and claimed that the industrial belt of Silesia was "the most polluted part of Europe" .
European Environment Agency
On March 22, 1990, the EC Council of (Environment) Ministers approved the establishment of a European Environment Agency as envisaged at the December 1989 EC Strasbourg summit [see pp. 37132; 37209].
However, by May 1991 the Council of (Foreign) Ministers had still not agreed on the location of the Agency's headquarters and it had not been able to start work.
The Agency was initially intended primarily to collect detailed information on environmental issues within the EC; its areas of competence would be reviewed after two years.
International environmental protection Treaties and Conventions (Developments since mid-1989 — see pp. 36782-97)
October 1989: agreement on moratorium on ivory trade 1989 [see p. 36988].
May 1990: Bergen conference commitment to stabilizing carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions by 2000 [see p. 37444].
June 1990: agreement strengthening Montreal protocol on protection of ozone layer [see p. 37552].
January 1991: signature of African convention on hazardous and nuclear waste signed [see p. 37978].
February 1991: coming into effect of November 1988 Sofia protocol on the reduction of nitrogen oxides (NOx) emissions to 1987 levels by 1994 signed [see p. 38027].
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
Full title: General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Date of foundation: 1948.
Status: multilateral trade agreement and an autonomous agency within the UN system.
Objective: to liberalize world trade and by doing so to raise standards of living, to ensure full employment, to expand the production and exchange of goods, and to promote economic development.
Membership: 100 contracting parties (as at end-1990).
Director-General: Arthur Dunkel (Switzerland).
1990 OVERVIEW
May: observer status for the Soviet Union [see p. 37474].
June: G-15 concern over Uruguay Round [see p. 37551].
July: G-7 concern over Uruguay Round [see p. 37629].
August: Andean Declaration on Uruguay Round [see p. 37652].
September: accession by Venezuela [see p. 37710].
October: US-EC controversy on agricultural subsidies and other developments in Uruguay Round [see p. 37796].
December: suspension of Uruguay Round [see p. 37930].
Membership
Accessions during 1990: Tunisia on Aug. 19; Venezuela on Aug. 31 [not on Sept. 8 as given on p. 37710]; Bolivia on Sept. 8 and Costa Rica on Nov. 20.
On Jan. 11, 1991, Macao acceded to GATT as its 101st member [see p. 37979].
Guatemala signed the protocol of accession on April 16, 1991, with formal accession to follow 30 days after ratification by that country's legislative assembly.
El Salvador, which had signed the protocol of accession on Dec. 13, 1990, was listed as a contracting party in May 1991 [see p. 38217].
During 1990, a further six countries, Algeria, Bulgaria, China, Honduras, Nepal and Paraguay, were negotiating membership.
On May 16 the Soviet Union was granted observer status [see pp. 37227; 37474].
Uruguay Round
The Uruguay Round of talks, under way since 1986 [see pp. 35024-28; 36508-09; 36605-06; 37227-29; 37476; 37796], was dominated by disputes on agricultural subsidies.
A United States proposal, backed by the "Cairns Group" of 14 agricultural exporting nations, led by Australia, to cut internal farm support by 75 per cent and reduce export subsidies by 90 per cent, was resisted by European Community (EC) members which offered to cut farm subsidies by no more than 30 per cent .
Fears grew that the failure to resolve the agricultural dispute would threaten agreement in other areas and possibly jeopardize the talks as a whole.
These fears were compounded by US officials who emphasized that there could be no extension of the December deadline for the conclusion of the Uruguay Round if congressional approval on the "fast track" procedure [see p. 37930]was to be secured.
A compromise Swedish scheme, incorporating elements of both the EC and the US- "Cairns Group" proposals, failed to win support from the EC, Japan and South Korea [see p. 37930].
Disagreements were also reported on the liberalization of the US trade in textiles (estimated to be worth an annual US$180,000 million).
It was understood that developing countries had indicated that they were unlikely to accept liberalization in the 14 other areas under negotiation [see pp. 37227-28], without an accord on the elimination of the Multi-Fibre Agreement (MFA — due to expire on July 1, 1991 — see pp. 35024-25) which had governed the textile trade for 30 years.
A draft agreement containing proposals for 10 per cent of the total volume of a country's textile imports effected under bilaterally negotiated MFA quotas in 1990, to be brought under GATT rules as of 1992, was still under discussion when the Uruguay Round was suspended in December [see p. 37930].
Reports of continuing disagreement suggested that while the EC was pressing for a period of 15 years for the transition from the MFA-governed quota system to GATT rules, developing countries were seeking a period of 6@1/2 years.
Some important areas in which agreement was reached included financial services, tariffs, public procurement and an anti-dumping code [see p. 37930].
Uruguay Round negotiations at the technical level resumed on Feb. 26, 1991 [see p. 38027].
Annual trade report
GATT's annual trade report submitted to the Council by the Director-General on April 23, 1991, showed that world merchandise trade growth, in volume terms, fell from 7 per cent per annum in 1989 to 5 per cent in 1990, while world output growth slipped from 4 per cent per annum to 3 per cent.
In spite of the slowdown in volume growth in 1990, the value of merchandise trade rose in terms of US dollars by 13 per cent to US$3,500,000 million, boosted by the 7 per cent depreciation in the average value of the dollar.
The report estimated that trade in commercial services in 1990 had increased by 12 per cent to about US$770,000 million.
Although the report acknowledged that the Gulf crisis had adversely affected the economies of individual countries, most notably those of Jordan, Turkey, Romania, India and Yugoslavia, its effects on world trade were expected to be relatively small.
Looking ahead to 1991, the report concluded that a world recession was unlikely, adding, however, that "there is, as yet, no evidence that the slowdown in economic growth in the major industrial countries — including a fall in output in France, the United Kingdom and the USA in the last quarter of [1990]— has run its course" .
INTERNATIONAL
IAEA
Full title: International Atomic Energy Agency.
Date of foundation: 1957.
Status: Autonomous intergovernmental organization within the UN system.
Objective: Promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Number of member states: 113.
Director-General: Hans Blix (Sweden).
1990 OVERVIEW
May: IAEA report on OPEC share of energy market [see p. 37475].
September: proceedings of 34th general conference [see p. 37897].
According to an IAEA report in January 1990, the total number of operating nuclear electricity plants worldwide stood at 435, accounting for nearly 17 per cent of the world's total electricity production.
An Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) report in June showed that nuclear power had provided 22 per cent of total electricity generation in OECD countries in 1989.
On April 23-27 an international advisory committee composed of international experts and officials of the IAEA, approved a plan of action to assess the radiological consequences of the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear power station accident in the Soviet Union [see pp. 34460; 34749; 34841; 35401; 36471].
More than 150 nuclear safety experts from 36 countries met in Vienna on May 14-18 to exchange information on operating experience at nuclear plants and to analyse new dimensions in nuclear safety.
On Sept. 18 the US Deputy Secretary of Energy, W. Henson Moore, and the Soviet Minister of Nuclear Power Industry, Vitaly Konovalov, signed a memorandum of co-operation committing their countries to developing common policies and practices on environmental restoration and waste management.
The IAEA's 34th session [see p. 37897]unanimously adopted a code of practice on the transboundary movement of radioactive waste, reaffirming the right of every state to prohibit the movement of radioactive waste from or through its territory.
On Oct. 23, the UN General Assembly unanimously adopted a resolution (45/7) calling for international co-operation in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in the application of measures to strengthen the safety of nuclear installations.
The IAEA estimated that the annual rate of growth of nuclear energy production would increase from an average of 2.8 per cent in 1989 to 3.9 per cent a year worldwide by 2005.
ICO
Full title: Islamic Conference Organization.
Year of foundation: 1971.
Member states: 44; Mozambique and Nigeria have observer status.
Secretary-General: Hamid Algabid (Niger).
The Organization's aims, as set out in the Charter adopted in 1972 are:(i) to promote Islamic solidarity among member states;(ii) to consolidate co-operation among member states in the economic, social, cultural, scientific and other vital fields, and to arrange consultations among member states belonging to international organizations;(iii) to endeavour to eliminate racial segregation and discrimination and to eradicate colonialism in all its forms;(iv) to take necessary measures to support international peace and security founded on justice;(v) to co-ordinate all efforts for the safeguard of the Holy Places and support of the struggle of the people of Palestine, and help them to regain their rights and liberate their land;(vi) to strengthen the struggle of all Muslim people with a view to safegarding their dignity, independence and national rights; and (vii) to create a suitable atmosphere for the promotion of co-operation and understanding among member states and other countries.
INTERNATIONAL
ILO
Full title: International Labour Organization.
Date of foundation: 1919.
Status: specialized agency within the UN system.
Objective: to pursue social justice as a foundation for world peace by encouraging satisfactory living standards, conditions of work and pay, and employment opportunities.
Members: 148 (since the unification of both Germany and Yemen).
Governing Body: executive council, with 28 government, 14 employer and 14 worker members.
Director-General: Michel Hansenne (Belgium).
1990 OVERVIEW
The 77th ILO conference held in June approved a new convention on night work, lifting the ban on night-work for all except pregnant women [see p. 37552].
The executive council meeting in November agreed to draft new international standards on the prevention of industrial accidents, noting with concern the frequency and severity of industrial disasters in recent years.
The executive council also expressed concern at the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, and asked the Director-General to send a mission of inquiry and to report on the conditions of workers and employers and their associations in that country.
The Director-General also issued an appeal for international assistance for countries affected by the return of migrant workers from the Gulf as a result of the Gulf crisis, adding that this massive return was posing enormous problems to a number of countries.
He said that the ILO needed special contributions in order to help these countries and thanked those member states, notably Canada, which were making funds available for this purpose.
IMF
Full title: Internatioal Monetary Fund.
Year of foundation: 1945, at the same time as the World Bank.
Status: UN specialized agency.
Objectives: to promote international monetary co-operation, to facilitate the expansion and balanced growth of international trade and to promote stability in foreign exchange.
Member states: 154.
Managing Director: Michel Camdessus (France).
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SITUATION
1990 OVERVIEW
Growth in the world economy slowed very markedly during late 1990 and the early part of 1991, as mounting fears about a war in the Middle East compounded the problems already arising from a significant tightening of world credit markets and a generally falling level of industrial productivity.
By April 1991, despite the ending of the armed conflict which drove Iraq out of Kuwait [for ceasefire resolution see p. 38116], the depressed mood was still in evidence, and it was unofficially reported in mid-April that the International Monetary Fund (IMF) had reduced its forecasts of economic growth among the world's largest industrialized nations from 2.3 per cent in 1990 to only 1.4 per cent in 1991.
As recently as September 1990 it had been expecting a 2.4 per cent growth for 1991.
Overall, the money markets saw an ebbing of confidence in the United States dollar and a slight improvement in prospects for the German mark, while sterling ended the year close to where it had started.
The fair performance of the German currency appeared to discount the difficulties which many traders envisaged in the wake of German unification and, more specifically, of the controversial decision to unite the East and West German marks at par value, a move which was to weaken confidence in the mark in early 1991.
Central bankers were also concerned in the spring of 1991 that the German government might attempt to stave off the pressure on the mark by raising interest rates, a move which they felt would further depress the prospects for world economic growth; by April, however, it appeared that global interest rates were at last starting to come down, with particularly strong declines in the United Kingdom, the United States and France.
The stability of sterling improved significantly following its entry to the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the European monetary system in October 1990 [see p. 37782], but sterling experienced a period of doubt shortly before the resignation of Margaret Thatcher as Prime Minister in November [see pp. 37839-40], recovering strongly toward the end of January 1991.
The French and Italian currencies, on the other hand, came under considerable pressure, while the Spanish peseta, the Austrian schilling and the Portuguese escudo were among the strongest of European currencies.
Sentiment in the world equity markets was severely depressed in the third and fourth quarters of 1990, following the August invasion of Kuwait by Iraq which put an end to a fairly strong second-quarter recovery.
The general fears of high oil prices, debt defaults and possible massive disruption of communications links through terrorist activities resulted in relatively few stock markets making any overall gain by the end of the year on their January 1990 positions.
The London stockbrokers County Natwest Wood Mackenzie reported on Dec. 21 their calculation that the only major stock market in which a sterling investor would have realized an average gain during 1990 would have been Mexico, where booming market conditions would have produced a 53.2 per cent profit; the UK, by comparison, would have produced a 7.7 per cent average loss, the West German market would have brought a 21.4 per cent loss, and the USA a 17.1 per cent loss.
The relatively stable performance of the US dollar meant, on the other hand, that any investor operating in dollars would have realized only a 3.0 per cent loss on a US share portfolio, and a gain of 8.1 per cent in the UK market or of 79.3 per cent in Mexico.
The Japanese stock market performed particularly badly during 1990, as high bank interest rates continued to damage the inflated property market on which the equity boom of the late 1980s had been based.
The Nikkei average index, the main measure of performance in Tokyo, fell by 40 per cent during the year, or approximately US$1,500,000 million, and it was estimated that even dollar-denominated investments there would have lost some 35.4 per cent of their value.
The West German stock market, which had been boosted at the start of the year by the prospect of German unification, had stalled as the year progressed and as the costs of funding unification led to fears of high interest rates and possible tax increases.
For most of the year, the relative stability of the US stock market contrasted with the general mood of depression about the prospects for the economy as a whole.
Dealers appeared to shrug off reports of falling industrial productivity, declining orders at both wholesale and retail level, and rising inflation and unemployment; they were, however, troubled by the US administration's failure to secure an early resolution of the banking crisis [see p. 37953], and in the early months of 1991 their confidence was to sink still further, as the dollar declined to levels of around $1.00=£0.50.
The IMF said in its April 1991 forecast that it expected the US economy to shrink by 0.1 per cent in 1991, before making a full recovery to 2.8 per cent growth in 1992.
Japan and Germany, it predicted, would also achieve more than 3 per cent growth.
The IMF announced on Oct. 9 that it was to realign the currency weightings which were used to calculate the value of the special drawing right (SDR — the unit in which its internal dealings and most of its loans were denominated; for the last five-yearly review see p. 34140).
With effect from Jan. 1, 1991, the weightings were to be as shown in the table.
January 1991 January 1986 US dollar 40 42 German mark 21 19 Japanese yen 17 15 French franc 11 12 Pound sterling 11 12
Calculating value of special drawing right, percentage weightings
In its Economic Outlook published in December 1990 the Organization for Economic Co-ordination and Development (OECD) projected 2 per cent real growth in 1991 and 2.5 per cent in 1992 for the 24 industrialized countries of the OECD.
Overall inflation was expected to accelerate to an annual rate of 5.2 per cent in the first half of 1991, from around 4.5 per cent in December.
Unemployment was expected to rise to 6.9 per cent of the industrial world's working population by the end of 1992, from around 6.3 in late 1990.
INTERNATIONAL
IWC
Full title: International Whaling Commission.
Year of foundation: 1946.
Status: Intergovernmental voluntary association.
Objective: Management and conservation of whale stocks.
Member states: 36.
Chair: S. Irberger (Sweden).
Secretary: Ray Gambell.
1990 OVERVIEW
July: IWC annual congress [see p. 37630].
In May the then Norwegian Minister of Fisheries, Svein Munkejord, hinted that Norway might withdraw its membership of the IWC after the annual congress to be held in Nordwijk (Netherlands) on July 2-6.
Following the IWC's decision at that congress to uphold the whaling ban [see p. 37630], it was reported that Iceland was also reviewing its membership.
A report in the European in August said that Iceland would seek, still within the framework of the IWC, to resume the hunting of fin and minke whales despite the ban.
The report quoted the Icelandic Fisheries Minister, Halldór Asgrímsson Ashtal, as saying: "It [the IWC]has become a commission for whale protection, not for controlling whaling…
I believe that we should establish a different international organization that is up to the task of managing whaling."
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
Full title: North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Date of foundation: April 4, 1949.
Status: Regional alliance for collective defence.
Member countries: 16: Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States.
Secretary-General: Manfred Wörner (West Germany).
1990 OVERVIEW
May: Defence Ministers' meeting [see p. 37473].
July: London summit and Foreign Ministers' meeting [see pp. 37599-600].
November: Revelations concerning anti-communist network [see p. 37875].
December Defence and Foreign Ministers' meeting [see p. 37931].
Review of defence role and strategy
The question of Germany's role in NATO and the organization's future as a European security bloc in the post-Cold War era continued through much of 1990.
There was broad consensus that a united Germany should be part of NATO, albeit with some regard for Soviet security interests.
After a meeting with US President Bush, NATO's Secretary-General, Manfred Wörner, said on Feb. 11 that a united Germany could be part of the Western alliance without extending NATO's military reach over East German territory.
However, Wörner categorically ruled out the possibility of a neutral Germany.
In a subsequent interview reported on March 3, Wörner stressed that while a neutral Germany was not acceptable to the Western alliance, "the interests of the Soviet Union must be guaranteed" .
Wörner's statement failed, however, to prevent a public controversy following a statement in mid-February by the West German Defence Minister, Gerhard Stoltenberg, who hinted that West German troops might be stationed in eastern Germany after unification.
Meanwhile, the UK Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, in a speech to the House of Commons on Feb. 22, said that reforms in eastern Europe and the Soviet Union were likely to transform NATO into a political rather than a military alliance.
An invitation in July to the Soviet Union by NATO leaders to establish regular diplomatic liaison resulted on Oct. 25 in a historic visit by the Soviet Chief of General Staff, Gen. Mikhail Moiseyev, to NATO headquarters in Brussels, Belgium.
The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August renewed debate about NATO's defence role extending beyond alliance borders.
At a meeting of European centre-right political leaders in Helsinki on Aug. 30, the then UK Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, called on NATO to assume military responsibilities beyond European borders.
In an interview with the Financial Times published on Sept. 10, the Supreme Allied Commander in Europe, Gen. John Galvin, suggested that NATO should review its treaty to enable it to respond to emergencies such as the Gulf crisis.
A North Atlantic Council (NAC — the highest authority of NATO) statement on the Gulf crisis in December noted that NATO would counter any attack against a member state, a reference to a possible Iraqi threat against Turkey [see p. 37931].
Troop reductions and "burden sharing" 
Political pressure to introduce deeper cuts in military programmes intensified in a number of NATO countries.
On Jan. 25 Belgium announced that it was likely to withdraw its 25,000 troops based in West Germany and underlined its opposition to any further increase in NATO's defence budget.
On Jan. 26 the Netherlands also announced its intention to withdraw its troops from West Germany and demanded immediate NATO defence budget cuts.
At a meeting in Brussels on May 22-23, NATO Defence Ministers agreed to abandon the regularly established 3 per cent annual increase in national defence budgets on the grounds that the Warsaw Pact was no longer a threat.
The decision came in the wake of an announcement by Bush on May 3 cancelling plans to modernize short-range Lance missiles and nuclear artillery in readiness for a "triple-zero" agreement with the Soviet Union to reduce or eliminate all short-range land-based nuclear missiles in Europe.
Debate continued on greater "burden sharing" among NATO allies.
Prompted in part by a US-Soviet agreement to reduce forces in central Europe to 195,000 each [see p. 37267], senior NATO officials (with the exception of the UK Defence Secretary, Tom King), attending the annual Wehrkunde conference in Munich on Feb.1-2, called for a more closely integrated western European defence organization within an evolving Atlantic alliance.
In April a US Defence Department study on "burden sharing" claimed that the USA had spent a larger share of its national income on the military budget in 1988 than virtually all its NATO allies, and cited Japan and Canada for what it called "below par" contributions to Western defence.
However, a report prepared over five years by the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), released in August, concluded that the USA did not bear a disproportionate share of the NATO burden.
It estimated that 90 per cent of the manpower, 85 per cent of the tanks, 95 per cent of the artillery and 85 per cent of the combat airpower were provided by NATO's European members.
NATO Defence Ministers meeting in December in Brussels, agreed that members, possibly including France, would pool military resources in the event of further US troop reductions [see p. 37931].
Reports also suggested that there was growing consensus in favour of transforming the Western European Union (WEU) into a genuine European security and defence policy.
Low-level flying accidents
On Feb. 6, the US Air Force suspended all UK-based training flights after two crashes on Feb. 5 involving low-flying military jets, resulted in the deaths of three crew members.
[For April 1990 collision over Germany see p. 37677.]
It was reported on March 14 that all military exercises were soon to be scaled down in response to the diminishing threat from the Warsaw Pact.
OECD
Full title: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Year of foundation: 1961, replacing the Organization for European Economic Co-operation (OEEC) which had been set up in 1948 in connection with the Marshall Plan.
Status: a forum where representatives of the governments of the industrialized democracies discuss and attempt to co-ordinate their economic and social policies.
Member states: 24; Yugoslavia participates in the work of OECD with a special status.
The Commission of the European Communities also takes part in the Organization's work.
Secretary-General: Jean-Claude Paye (France).
INTERNATIONAL
OPEC
Full title: Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries.
Date of Formation: 1960.
Status: Intergovernmental organization of 13 major oil producers.
Objectives: To co-ordinate and unify petroleum policies among member countries in order to secure fair and stable prices for petroleum producers; an efficient, economic and regular supply of petroleum to consuming countries; and a fair return on capital to those investing in the industry.
Member countries: Algeria, Ecuador, Gabon, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Venezuela.
Secretary-General Subroto (Indonesia).
President Saddek Boussena (Algeria).
1990 OVERVIEW
March: 87th meeting [see p. 37335].
May: emergency meeting on price slump [see p. 37475].
July: tension between member states and agreement to raise reference price [see pp. 37631; 37632].
August: effect of Gulf crisis on oil prices and output levels [see p. 37641].
December: 88th meeting [see p. 37930].
The year was dominated until August by problems of over-production and falling prices.
The ceiling of 22,086,000 barrels per day (bpd) agreed upon for 1990 [see pp. 37053; 37335], was substantially exceeded, and estimates suggested that the total output in the first quarter of 1990 was actually around 23,700,000 bpd.
Attempts in mid-March to limit output failed after some member states, notably Kuwait and the UAE, refused to cut production.
Meanwhile, world petroleum prices continued to be well below OPEC's reference or target price of US$18 per barrel; at the end of April the average price of a basket of seven "crudes" monitored by OPEC stood at $15.37 per barrel.
The slump in oil prices led to an agreement by OPEC Oil Ministers meeting in May in Geneva, Switzerland, to cut production to 22,000,000 bpd [see p. 37475].
On July 26-27 OPEC Oil Ministers meeting again in Geneva agreed, amid persistent Iraqi claims that Kuwaiti over-production had precipitated the fall in world oil prices, to raise the reference price of "crude" to $21 per barrel and to limit total output to just under 22,500,000 bpd.
Kuwait and the UAE also agreed to cut production to 1,500,000 bpd each (the UAE's quota being raised to this level — the same as Kuwait's quota — from the 1,095,000 bpd set in November 1989, see p. 37632).
Iraq's Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait caused a dramatic increase in oil prices; the "marker" price of North Sea Brent crude, which had fallen to $16.60 per barrel on June 5, rose to $24 per barrel on Aug. 3 and passed $30 per barrel on Aug. 22.
A cut of between 4,000,000 and 4,300,000 bpd a day in Kuwaiti and Iraqi output fuelled expectations of further price rises.
On Aug. 27-29 ministers from all OPEC member states except Iraq and Libya agreed in talks held in Vienna, the Austrian capital, to suspend production ceilings and to permit Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Venezuela to increase output by a total of 3,000,000 bpd.
High levels of production, estimated at between 400,000 and 800,000 bpd above the ceiling set in July, continued throughout December amid increasing prospects of a Gulf war.
In late December, Brent crude was reported as being traded at around $26.50 a barrel.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Both the Soviet Union and the United States space programmes were subject to reappraisal and tight financial constraints as of early 1991, the year of the 30th anniversary of the first space flight by Yuri Gagarin on April 12, 1961 [see p. 18033].
In the Soviet Union popular support for the manned space programme was dwindling at a time of great economic hardship and political uncertainty for the majority of the population.
The aggressive marketing of seats to foreign cosmonauts on short duration Soyuz flights to the Mir space station in order to recoup some of the costs [see pp. 37437; 37932; 38219]was also unpopular among many officials involved in the space programme; they felt that it devalued the space programme at a time when the Zenit and Energia super boosters remained grounded with technical problems [see p. 37797]and the first manned mission of the Soviet Buran shuttle had been postponed, at least to 1993.
The Soviet Union's clear lead over the USA in manned, especially long duration, space flights on the Mir space station, the ninth of which began on May 18, 1991, was increasingly being set against the scientific value of cheaper unmanned space probes, even though these were also subject to financial cutbacks.
The Mir space station had several problems during 1990, one of which necessitated in July a dangerous space walk to repair thermal insulation.
After an increase in solar activity which increased atmospheric density an older style Soviet space station, the 40-tonne Salyut 7 launched in April 1982 [see pp. 31596; 37195], re-entered the earth's atmosphere in early February 1991.
Large fragments of the spacecraft fell in northern Argentina but no injuries were reported.
The 84-tonne US Skylab had crashed to earth in 1979 [for decision to abandon attempts to rescue Skylab see p. 29448].
The United States space programme suffered a serious setback in May 1991 when a congressional committee voted to reduce to $100,000,000 in the current fiscal year the projected $2,000 million budget for the Freedom space station, the construction of which was crucial to further manned missions to the moon and one to Mars, which President George Bush stated should be achieved by 2019, the 50th anniversary of the first Apollo moon landing.
This followed criticism of the size of the budget of the National Aeronautic and Space Administration (NASA)[see p. 37178]while health and education projects, among others, lacked funds.
NASA's continued problems with its space shuttle programme had reduced hopes that the shuttle would be an airliner for space which could reduce costs and revolutionize space exploration [for details of problems and flights see pp. 37551; 37797; 37875; 37932; 38171].
Supporters of an expanded manned space programme cited the recent example of astronauts achieving the successful deployment of the gamma ray observatory (GRO) in April 1991 [see p. 38171]and argued that they were needed to correct the optical problems of the Hubble Space Telescope [see pp. 37394; 37551].
A return to use of Titan booster rockets, however, was evidence of an urgent need to reduce costs and guarantee the increased launch efficiency of commercial, scientific and military payloads.
In August 1990 Charles Bigot was named as chairman and chief executive of Arianespace, the European consortium which manufactured the Ariane satellite launcher.
After the February 1990 failure of the 36th launch of the Ariane 4 rocket, when two Japanese satellites were destroyed, Arianespace had launched 10 commercial satellites by February 1991 and in May won a US$35,000,000 contract to launch the Arabsat IC for the Arab League.
The contract had originally gone to China, who along with Japan and the Soviet Union, was keen to enter the Western launch market.
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
Year of foundation: 1945.
Objective: To uphold world peace and security and to develop economic, social, cultural and humanitarian co-operation on an international basis.
Membership 159 countries (as at end-October 1990).
Secretary-General: Javier Pérez de Cuéllar (Peru).
Security Council
Permanent members: China, France, Soviet Union, United Kingdom, United States.
Non-permanent members: 1989/90 Canada, Colombia, Ethiopia, Malaysia, Finland; 1990/91 Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Romania, Yemen, Zaïre; 1991/92 Austria, Belgium, Ecuador, India, Zimbabwe.
Proceedings of 45th regular session of UN General Assembly
The 45th session of the UN General Assembly opened in New York on Sept.18 under the presidency of Maltese Foreign Minister Guido De Marco [see pp. 37731-32].
Resolution 45/1 of Sept. 18, adopted without a vote, admitted Liechtenstein as the 160th member of the United Nations [see p. 37731; for May 23 accession of unified Yemen see p. 37470; for April admission of Namibia see p. 37563].
A united Germany acceded on Oct. 3, reducing the membership again to 159 countries.
Under Resolution 45/3 of Oct. 15 the Assembly unanimously endorsed the Security Council's peace plan for Cambodia and the creation of a Supreme National Council (SNC)[see pp. 37654; 37712; 37777].
On Oct. 16 Resolution 45/6, adopted without a vote, granted observer status to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
On Dec. 21 the Assembly unanimously adopted Resolution 45/193 welcoming the unification of North and South Yemen [see pp. 37470-71]and calling for the support of the international community for Yemen's economic and social infrastructure.
Middle East
On Dec. 6 the General Assembly adopted by 144 votes to two (Israel and the USA) Resolution 45/68 renewing its call for an international peace conference on the Middle East involving all parties, including the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)[see also p. 37434].
On Dec. 6 the General Assembly also adopted, by 141 votes to two (Israel and the USA) with three abstentions, Resolution 45/69 condemning Israel's role in the Temple Mount killings in October 1990 [see pp. 37759-60].
Under Resolution 45/74 of Dec. 11, the Assembly condemned Israel's policies in the Occupied Territories.
Israel voted against all seven parts of the resolution; the USA voted against parts A (with 42 other members), D and G.
Resolution 45/170 of Dec. 18, adopted by 144 votes, condemning Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and the violations of human rights in Kuwait under Iraqi occupation [see p. 37927], was opposed only by Iraq.
Afghanistan
Recalling Resolutions 43/20 of Nov. 3, 1988, and 44/15 of Nov. 1, 1989 [see p. 37434], the Assembly unanimously adopted Resolution 45/12 on Nov. 7, renewing its call for a comprehensive political settlement in Afghanistan, and adding that a settlement would "provide an impetus for the resolution of other acute regional problems" .
Under Resolution 45/174 of Dec. 18, the Assembly also unanimously adopted a report by the Commission of Human Rights, noting "allegations of atrocities committed [by the Afghan authorities]against Afghan soldiers, civil servants and civilians" .
Sub-Saharan Africa
Under Resolution 45/178 parts A, B and C of Dec. 19, adopted without a vote, the Assembly took note of the critical economic situation in Africa and decided to establish an ad hoc committee to reappraise the implementation of the UN Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-90 [see p. 34466].
On Dec. 21 the Assembly called for special assistance for Chad (Resolution 45/223); the front-line states (Resolution 45/224); Mozambique (Resolution 45/227); Djibouti (Resolution 45/228); Benin, the Central African Republic and Madagascar (Resolution 45/230); Angola (Resolution 45/233); and emergency assistance for Liberia (Resolution 45/232) and Somalia (Resolution 45/229).
Under Resolution 45/226, adopted unanimously on the same day, the Assembly also called for emergency relief for Sudan, noting "the continuing negative impact of persistent natural disasters and armed conflict" in the country.
Namibia was included in the list of least developed countries (LDCs) through the unanimous adoption of Resolution 45/198 on Dec. 21, bringing the number back to 42.
The Assembly urged humanitarian assistance for refugees in Somalia (Resolution 45/154); Chad (Resolution 45/156); Djibouti (Resolution 45/157); Malawi (Resolution 45/159); Sudan (Resolution 45/160); and Ethiopia (Resolution 45/161) and emergency humanitarian aid for Liberia (Resolution 45/139).
South Africa
On Dec. 19 the Assembly unanimously adopted Resolution 45/176, parts A and H, noting the South African government's commitment to abolish apartheid, and welcoming the release of Nelson Mandela and the unbanning of the African National Congress (ANC)[see pp. 37232-34].
The Assembly also voted to adopt Resolution 45/176, parts B-G, which expressed concern at the lack of co-ordination in applying sanctions, including an oil embargo, against South Africa.
The resolution condemned continued violations of the arms embargo and expressed particular concern at growing military collaboration between Israel and South Africa.
The UK voted against all but parts E and G of the resolution; the USA voted against all but part E. 
Central and Latin America
Recalling Resolution 44/10 of its previous session [see p. 37434], the Assembly unanimously adopted on Nov. 20 Resolution 45/15, which stated that the electoral process in Nicaragua [see pp. 37236-37]had been "orderly, free and fair" .
The resolution also called on the governments of Guatemala and El Salvador to support the process of national reconciliation in their countries, and appealed to the international community "to facilitate the process of peace and democratization" in Central America.
Resolution 45/172, adopted without a vote on Dec. 18, noted "the persistence of politically motivated violations of human rights" in El Salvador.
On Dec. 21 the Assembly unanimously adopted Resolution 45/231 urging increased technical assistance "to provide the Central American countries with adequate additional financial resources on favourable and concessional terms" .
Western Sahara
Resolution 45/21 of Nov. 21, adopted unanimously, noted progress on a "speedy settlement of the question of Western Sahara" [see pp. 37435; 37628-29; 38063].
Environmental resolutions
On Dec. 14 the Assembly unanimously adopted Resolution 45/94 which stressed the right of individuals to a healthy environment and noted that "as the main sources of pollution, the developed countries have the main responsibility for taking appropriate measures urgently" .
Recalling Resolution 44/207 on climate change [see p. 37434], the Assembly on Dec. 21 adopted without a vote Resolution 45/212, welcoming measures taken by several countries to stabilize or reduce "environmentally harmful emissions of greenhouse gases" and seeking "to ensure that developing countries, in particular the least developed among them" , participated "fully and effectively" in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [for which see p. 37444].
On Dec. 21 the Assembly also adopted without a vote Resolution 45/211 which stressed the need to maintain "the balance between the environmental and developmental dimensions" during all stages of the preparatory process leading up to the UN Conference on Environment and Development"scheduled for 1992 [see p. 37433].
Recalling its Resolution 44/124 A and B of Dec. 18, 1989 [see p. 37434], the Assembly adopted Resolution 45/78 on Dec. 12.
Part A welcomed "the initiative taken by some Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties in promoting Antarctica as a nature reserve or world park" and urged all states to support efforts "to ban prospecting and mining in and around Antarctica" .
Part B noted "with regret" the participation of South Africa in meetings of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.
All major Antarctic Treaty members refrained from participating in the vote.
[For April 1991 agreement on mining ban see p. 38171.]
Debt crisis
Recalling Resolution 44/205 of Dec. 22, 1989, the Assembly on Dec. 21 adopted without a vote Resolution 45/214 which noted "with appreciation" the recent developments in evolving debt strategy and "steps taken to forgive or reduce the official development assistance debt" especially for some African countries.
However, the resolution stressed concern at the "decline in the flow of financial resources to developing countries" and "the large net transfer of resources from many of these countries" .
It also urged the successful completion of the "Uruguay Round" of multilateral trade negotiations [see pp. 38260]and called on multilateral institutions and donor countries to assist countries adversely affected by the situation in Kuwait and Iraq.
Global action against drugs
Welcoming the Programme of Action adopted by the General Assembly in February 1990 [see p. 37268]and the Declaration of the Ministerial Meeting to Reduce Demand for Drugs, held in London in April 1990 [see p. 37394], Resolution 45/146 of Dec. 18, adopted without a vote, renewed its call to all states to ratify the 1988 UN Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances [see p. 36379; 37434]which came into force on Nov. 11, 1990.
Under Resolution 45/149 of Dec. 18 the Assembly unanimously condemned the involvement of children in the use, production and distribution of illicit drugs and drew attention to the lack of financial resources to combat drug abuse worldwide.
Part I of the resolution also urged greater assistance to governments engaged in crop substitution programmes.
Part II requested the Secretary-General to report to the next (46th) session on the recommendations addressed to him by the Intergovernmental Expert Group to Study the Economic and Social Consequences of Illicit Traffic in Drugs convened under Resolution 44/142 of Dec. 15, 1989 [see p. 37434].
On Dec. 21 the Assembly unanimously adopted Resolution 45/179 instructing the Secretary-General to create a single UN International Drugs Control Programme, to be based in Vienna, to integrate the structures and functions of all other UN sponsored drug control agencies.
Disarmament resolutions
On Dec. 4 the Assembly adopted several resolutions on disarmament.
Resolution 45/49 for the cessation of all nuclear test explosions, adopted by 127 votes, was opposed by France, the UK and the USA, with all other NATO countries except Denmark and Norway abstaining.
Both parts A and B of Resolution 45/55 on the prevention of an arms race in outer space were adopted by 149 votes with one abstention (the USA).
Resolution 45/51 on a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty, adopted by 140 votes, was opposed by the USA and France, with Israel, the UK and four others abstaining.
All three parts of Resolution 45/57 on the prohibition of chemical and bacteriological weapons were adopted without a vote.
The resolution welcomed in particular the decision by the Soviet Union and the USA "to cease the production of chemical weapons and to begin destroying their chemical weapons stockpiles" [see pp. 37518; 37473; 38217].
The Assembly also adopted the 13-part Resolution 45/58 on general and complete disarmament.
Part B, adopted by 131 votes with none against, welcomed "positive developments" in bilateral nuclear arms negotiations between the Soviet Union and the USA.
Part H, adopted by 99 votes with none against, also welcomed the "prospect of an agreement on the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms [START]in the near future" .
Part A of Resolution 45/62, adopted without a vote, declared the 1990s the third Disarmament Decade.
Resolution 45/63 expressed concern at Israel's continuing nuclear build-up and urged all states "not to co-operate with or give assistance to Israel that could enhance its nuclear weapons capability" .
It was adopted by 98 votes and was opposed by Israel and the USA.
On Dec. 12 the Assembly unanimously adopted Resolution 45/79 welcoming the progress achieved within the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe [see p. 37838-39]and noting support for a Conference on Security and Co-operation in the Mediterranean [see p. 37731].
UN budget approval
Under Resolution 45/255 of Dec. 21 the Assembly unanimously approved the Secretary-General's preliminary budget estimate of US$2,006 million for the 1992-93 biennium.
Resolution 45/236, unanimously adopted on Dec. 21, noted "the improvement in the level of the short-term deficit of the organization, which it is estimated will be reduced to $260,000,000 as at Dec. 31, 1990" .
However, the resolution renewed its appeal to all members to meet their financial obligations promptly [see also p. 37435].
According to the London-based UN Information Centre news-letter of Jan. 17, 1991, member states of the UN owed over $402,000,000 in outstanding contributions, of which $300,000,000 was owed by the USA.
An estimated $346,000,000 was owed in peacekeeping assessments.
UN appointments
Under Resolution 45/306 of Nov. 1 Austria, Belgium, Ecuador, India and Zimbabwe were elected non-permanent members of the Security Council for a two-year term beginning Jan. 1, 1991.
Under Resolution 45/307 of Nov. 15 the Assembly elected five judges to the 15-member International Court of Justice (ICJ) for a nine-year term beginning Feb. 6, 1991.
Those re-elected were Gilbert Guillaume (France) and Sir Robert Jennings (UK),(elected President by the ICJ on Feb. 7, 1991, for a three-year term); those elected to their first terms were Andres Aguilar Mawdsley (Venezuela); Raymond Ranjeeva (Madagascar) and Christopher Gregory Weeramantry (Sri Lanka).
Under Resolution 45/308 of Nov. 16 and 21, the Assembly elected (*re-elected) the following 18 countries to the 54-member UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC): those elected were Argentina, Austria, Botswana, Chile, *France,
*Germany, *Guinea, *Japan, Malaysia, Morocco, Peru, Somalia, Spain, Syria, Togo, *Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey and
*Yugoslavia.
Under Resolution 45/319 of Dec. 21 the Assembly elected Sadako Ogata of Japan to replace Thorvald Stoltenberg as UN High Commissioner for Refugees [see pp. 36989; 37436; 37868; 37931].
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS ORGANIZATIONS
UNESCO
Full title: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Date of foundation: 1946.
Status: UN specialized agency.
Objective: promotion of international collaboration in education, science and culture.
Members: 156 countries (not including the UK or the USA — see below).
Director-General: Federico Mayor Zaragoza (Spain).
1990 overview
March: criticism of Director-General's staffing proposals [see p. 37335].
May: abandonment of Director-General's proposals [see pp. 37888].
UNESCO experienced a major crisis in March when 800 employees stopped work for two hours in protest against a series of organizational changes ordered by the Director-General, Federico Mayor Zaragoza [see p. 37335].
In May these reforms were abandoned following weeks of persistent criticism from delegates and employees [see p. 37888]
Efforts to persuade the United Kingdom and the United States to rejoin UNESCO (which they had left in 1985 and 1984 respectively — see pp. 33499-501) produced no positive results.
In April the UK government announced its decision not to renew its membership following formal talks in February between the Director-General and a UK Under-Secretary of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office [see p. 37335].
In April a report issued by the US State Department made it clear that the USA also did not intend to rejoin the organization, citing as one of its reasons the organization's lack of budgetary restraint [see p. 37888]
UNESCO was given responsibility for organizing international sponsored Literacy Year (1990) and sponsored with UNICEF, the UNDP and the World Bank, the World Conference on Education for All in Jomtien, Thailand, on March 5-9 [see also p. 37335].
It was announced in Paris on Oct. 11 that the annual UNESCO human rights prize (worth US$4,000) had been awarded to President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia.
On Sept. 17 UNESCO sponsored an "eminent persons" meeting in Paris, initiated by the UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar.
Delegates discussed ways of compensating 50 Third-World countries most seriously affected by the Gulf crisis and criticized the international community for failing to respond adequately to the consequences of the economic blockade of Iraq.
UNICEF
Full title: United Nations Children's Fund.
Date of foundation: 1946.
Status: semi-autonomous UN agency, financed entirely by voluntary contributions.
Objective: to improve the situation of children, particularly in developing countries.
Governing body: 41-member Executive Board, elected by UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).
Executive Director: James P. Grant (USA).
1990 overview
The first World Summit on Children sponsored by UNICEF in September adopted a 10-point programme for children's rights [see p. 37732]based on a series of recommendations contained in the State of the World's Children 1988 report.
UNICEF's State of the World's Children 1991 report, published on Dec. 20, said that an extra US$20,000 million would be needed to fulfil the summit's promise to improve conditions for children by 2000.
Although it emphasized that the sum required was not only insignificant compared with military spending world-wide, but only half as much as Germany was expected to spend on the process of unification, the report also acknowledged that more efficient use could be made of the money already being spent.
The Executive Director, James Grant, added that "aid for primary health care, including family planning, primary education, and rural water supply and sanitation, totals only just over 3 per cent of the industrialized world's aid" .
The report said that its estimated cost of meeting the summit's undertakings would reduce deaths among children under five by one-third, and would halve maternal mortality.
It added that on present trends, the number of children being born each year was likely to peak in about the year 2000.
Another UNICEF report, Child Poverty and Deprivation in the United Kingdom, showed that the number of children living in poverty in the UK had doubled in the last decade.
UNHCR
Full title: Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Date of foundation: 1951.
Status: agency of the UN secretariat, but mainly financed from voluntary contributions.
Objective: emergency relief, long-term aid and resettlement of refugees.
Number of accessions to 1951 Convention and 1967 Protocol on Status of Refugees: 107.
Governing body: 43-member Executive Committee.
High Commissioner: Sadako Ogata (Japan, appointed December 1990).
1990 overview
January: Appointment of Stoltenberg as new High Commissioner [see below; p. 37436].
March: UNHCR plan for Vietnamese "boat people" [see p. 37319].
April: UNHCR accord with Surinam government [see p. 37494].
September: UNHCR agreement with Hong Kong on repatriation of Vietnamese "boat people" [see p. 37714].
October: Exoneration of Hocké [see p. 37888].
November: Resignation of Stoltenberg [see below p. 37868].
December: Appointment of Ogata as new High Commissioner [see p. 37931].
During 1990 the UNHCR failed to resolve its grave financial problems and suffered a major organizational crisis centred on the appointment of a new High Commissioner for Refugees.
At a regular session of the UNHCR Executive Committee held in Geneva on Oct. 1-5 [see p. 37888], it emerged that of US$550,000,000 budgeted for 1990 (which included $378,885,900 approved for general programmes), only $400,000,000 had so far been received.
It was feared that the proposed budget for general programmes, set at $345,500,000 for 1991, was very likely to prove inadequate if the UNHCR assumed new responsibilities in areas which had witnessed a substantial displacement of refugees, including Liberia, Cambodia and the Western Sahara.
In November, UN sources confirmed that contributions totalling $140,830,531 had so far been promised for the UNHCR's 1991 programmes.
The UNHCR put the total number of refugees worldwide in 1990 at 15,000,000.
The severe budget deficit caused the UNHCR to close 19 of its approximately 100 regional offices and to freeze up to 300 posts.
The year also witnessed the suspension of some special programmes, most notably infant and adult education among refugee populations.
On Nov. 20, 1989, the UN General Assembly approved the appointment of Thorvald Stoltenberg as High Commissioner for Refugees effective Jan. 1, 1990,[see p. 37436]; his resignation in November 1990 following his appointment as Norway's Foreign Minister [see p. 37868]sparked a major controversy within the organization after allegations that the UN Secretary General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, had attempted to impose his (Indian) chef de cabinet, Virendra Dayal, as High Commissioner without prior consultation with donor nations.
While some reports suggested that Western donor countries including the United States had expressed a strong preference for the post to be assumed by a European, others claimed that Pakistan, which currently housed an estimated 3,000,000 Afghan refugees, had opposed the appointment of an Indian national.
On Dec. 21 the UN General Assembly approved Sadako Ogata, a Japanese professor of international relations and a member of the UN Human Rights Commission, as the new High Commissioner for Refugees [see p. 37931].
In March an internal UN inquiry had cleared Jean-Pierre Hocké who resigned as High Commissioner in October 1989 [see p. 36989], of all charges relating to the misappropriation of funds [see p. 37888].
During 1990 the UNHCR concluded a number of agreements with individual governments on the repatriation and resettlement of refugees, including an agreement with the government of Hong Kong concerning the repatriation of Vietnamese "boat-people" [see pp. 37319; 37714], and one with the government of Surinam on the repatriation of 1,000 Surinam refugees from French Guiana [see p. 37494].
Relief operations in the wake of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait [see pp. 37631-41; 37697; 37988]were considered to be only marginally the concern of the UNHCR, being seen primarily as the evacuation of third-party nationals to their home countries, rather than the repatriation of refugees.
UN COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS
Date of foundation: 1946.
Status: intergovernmental body subsidiary to the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).
Objective: promotion and protection of human rights.
Number of members: 43 Chair of 46th session (February-March 1990): Purificación Quisumbing.
1990 overview
The Commission in 1990 completed its first investigation into human rights in Iran since the revolution of 1979.
A report submitted by its special envoy, Reynaldo Galindo Pohl, who visited Iran in January 1990 [see p. 37200], was formally approved on Dec. 4 by the Commission, which noted Iran's "violations of human rights" and urged its government "to rectify" these abuses [p. 37929].
In March a proposal at the Commissions's 46th session [see p. 37888]which had sought to limit the powers of the Commission's special envoys (rapporteurs), was deferred to the 47th session, scheduled for February 1991.
The Commission appointed a Japanese professor, Sadako Ogata (subsequently appointed in December as UN High Commissioner for Refugees — see below) as its rapporteur to investigate allegations of human rights violations in Myanma [see p. 37931; for February 1991 report see p. 38004].
According to a report submitted to the Commission in August, a total of 430 judges and lawyers, of whom 67 were killed, were persecuted in 45 countries between July 1989 and June 1990.
In November the Commission approved a report by its special rapporteur on torture, Peter Koojimaans, which alleged that increasing numbers of children were being subjected to cruel and degrading treatment.
A total of 48 countries, four of them EC members, were investigated.
While not exonerated, the four EC countries concerned — Germany, Greece, Italy and Spain — were considered far from the worst offenders.
Some of the most serious allegations of child torture concerned South Africa, where Koojimaans reported that "80 to 90 per cent of children detained under State of Emergency regulations over the past five years had alleged being tortured in detention" .
The Commission's special rapporteur Felix Ermacora said in a report submitted to the UN General Assembly in November that human rights in Afghanistan had failed to conform to international standards.
By Nov. 19, 59 countries had ratified the 1984 UN Convention against Torture [see pp. 33619-20], the most recent signatories including Germany, Paraguay, Somalia and Guatemala.
The Independent reported that torture had become endemic in Syria and Sri Lanka, and that neither country had ratified the Convention.
The Commission marked Human Rights Day on Dec. 10, coinciding with the announcement that since 1980, 134 UN staff members worldwide had disappeared or been arrested, detained, imprisoned or killed.
UNCTAD
Full title: United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
Date of Foundation: 1964 Status: permanent organ of the General Assembly, financed from regular UN budget.
Objective: to promote international trade, particularly that of developing countries, with a view to accelerating economic development.
The Conference of Ministers concerned with trade and development is held every four years.
Secretary-General: Kenneth Dadzie (Ghana).
1990 overview
January: Bangladesh meeting of least developed countries (LDCs)[see pp. 37267-68].
September: second UNCTAD conference on LDCs [see p. 37731].
November: UNCTAD annual report [see pp. 37888-89].
The outbreak of the Gulf crisis in August and the concomitant rise in oil prices [see pp. 37632; 37697]led UNCTAD to predict a worsening of the global debt situation in 1990 [see pp. 37888-89].
It indicated that developing countries dependent on oil imports could face costs of up to US$26,000 million per year if the US$30 per barrel price continued, and warned that this could have serious repercussions on their economies.
The economic consequences of the Gulf crisis dominated the agenda of UNCTAD's 37th session which began in Geneva on Oct. 1.
The plight of the then 41 least developed countries (LDCs) had been highlighted in February at an international ministerial meeting in the Bangladesh capital, Dhaka,[see pp. 37267-68], and again in September during the second UNCTAD conference on LDCs [see p. 37731].
Both meetings had been dominated by calls from LDC representatives who urged that countries in the LDC category be given special treatment, including the writing-off of all outstanding debt [for inclusion of Namibia in the list of LDCs see p. 38263].
An UNCTAD report on LDCs released in April 1991 said that overall economic growth within the group had fallen from 2.7 per cent in 1989 to 2.5 per cent in 1990.
According to the report, "the earlier expectations of a recovery in world economic activity, and consequently for the LDCs', have since been transformed into forecasts of further and significant decline" .
The continued decline of international prices for the LDCs' main export products during the last decade; the danger of a fall in official development assistance and the consequences of the Gulf crisis, were listed as the main factors affecting growth in LDCs.
Apart from Botswana and Cape Verde, most LDCs suffered considerably either from a decline in tourism or a fall in remittances from workers employed in the Gulf.
According to UNCTAD, world maritime trade totalled more than 3,900 million tonnes in 1989, a rise of 5.5 per cent over 1988.
Sea trade made up 95 per cent of international trade relations in 1989, with tankers shipping 1,730 million tonnes, or 6.9 per cent more than 1988, and dry cargo at 2,210 million tonnes, up 4.4 per cent.
UNDP
Full title: United Nations Development Programme.
Date of foundation: 1965 (through the amalgamation of the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and the Special Fund for large development projects).
Status: UN Secretariat body, financed by voluntary contributions from governments.
Objective: co-ordination of UN development activities.
Governing Body: 48-member Governing Council.
Administrator: William H. Draper III (USA)
1990 overview
The Human Development Report 1990 was published in May [see p. 37889].
UN information sources reported in November that a new Centre for Environment and Development for the Arab region and Europe (CEDARE), proposed by UNDP's regional Bureau for Arab States and Europe, was expected to be set up in time for the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development.
CEDARE would initially focus on four issues: desertification and land degradation; marine resources and pollution in the Red Sea, the Gulf and the Mediterranean; urbanization; and the use of fresh water resources.
UNEP
Full title: United Nations Environment Programme.
Year of Foundation: 1972.
Status: body appointed by and accountable to the UN General Assembly.
Objective: promotion of international environmental co-operation, recommendation of appropriate global environmental strategies and review of progress in implementation of environmental programmes by other UN appointed bodies.
Governing body: Governing Council composed of representatives of 58 states, elected by the UN General Assembly on a rotating basis.
Executive Director: Mostafa Tolba (Egypt).
1990 overview
February: 15th UNEP session [see pp. 37293].
May: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report and international environment conference [see p. 37444].
June: Adoption by Montreal Protocol conference of agreement on establishment of UN Global Fund [see p. 37552].
November: World climate conference [see p. 37874].
UNEP marked World Environment Day on June 5 by stressing the theme of "Children and the Environment" .
According to a World Bank report published on Sept. 23, the administration of the US$1,200 million Environment Fund set up under the auspices of the UN was expected to face severe problems stemming from disagreements centring on the degree to which national governments would assume responsibility for environmental projects such as pollution control.
UNEP's first Executive Director, Maurice Strong, was appointed Secretary-General of the UN Conference on Environment and Development scheduled to be held in 1992.
A conference on the environmental consequences of the Gulf crisis convened by UNEP in Geneva on Feb. 5-6, 1991, concluded that environmental damage inflicted by the conflict could jeopardize development in the region.
UNEP's Executive Director said later that UNEP officials were currently engaged in an on-site study of environmental pollution in the Gulf.
FAO
Full title: United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization.
Date of foundation: 1945.
Status: UN specialized agency.
Objectives: to fight malnutrition and hunger and to serve as a co-ordinating agency for development programmes in the whole range of food and agriculture, including forestry and fisheries.
Members: 157 countries.
Director-General: Edouard Saouma (Lebanon).
1990 overview
March: Rainforest action plan [see p. 37890].
May: Anti-screwworm campaign [see pp. 37889-90.
In his end-of-year review in December 1989, the Director-General, Edouard Saouma, described the 1980s as a "lost" development decade for many Third-World countries.
He said that the spectre of famine threatened many parts of Africa in 1990, and that agricultural problems would continue to plague other regions, including eastern Europe.
He stressed that while the world population continued to increase by some 80,000,000 people a year, adequate nutrition was likely to remain a key problem.
Saouma called for fair trade terms to allow developing countries to sell their agricultural products to the industrialized countries.
Experts from 15 countries, meeting jointly with the FAO in St John's, Newfoundland, Canada, on Sept. 9-11, called for more effective measures in international waters in order to conserve and manage existing fish stocks.
The delegates, who discussed ways of strengthening the enforcement of the UN 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea, urged closer co-operation to establish regional organizations which would regulate fishing on the high seas and settle disputes.
Most participants also agreed that, when fish stocks crossed the boundary between a 20-mile zone and international waters, the coastal state's conservation and management measures should also apply to the high seas portion of the stocks.
The FAO observed World Food Day on Oct. 16.
It was estimated that more than 500,000,000 people worldwide were suffering from chronic malnutrition, of whom 17,000,000 were expected to die from hunger.
On Dec. 10 the FAO appealed for 1,300,000 tonnes of food aid for the Sudan in 1991.
An FAO statement said that "a major and immediate relief effort is required to avert large-scale food shortages and human suffering in the coming months" .
The latest report confirmed an October FAO estimate which suggested that at least 5,000,000 people in the Sudan risked death through starvation.
Other food aid agencies put the total at risk from starvation in Africa as a whole at between 10,000,000 and 20,000,000.
The governing council of the FAO in December called on negotiators in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to reach a "successful conclusion" to the "Uruguay Round" trade talks.
In his address, the Director-General underlined the importance to developing countries of agricultural trade reforms, adding that farm prices were plummeting, subsidies rising and market access hedged with restrictions.
The FAO annual report was published on Dec. 28 [see p. 37945].
IFAD
Full title: International Fund for Agricultural Development.
Status: UN specialized agency.
Date of foundation: 1976 (started operations in 1977).
Objective: funding of rural development programmes, mainly for the poorest Third-World countries.
Members: 144 divided as follows: 21 Category I industrialized countries belonging to the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD); 12 Category II countries belonging to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC); and 111 Category III developing countries.
Governing body: Executive Board, consisting of 18 members and 17 alternates, one-third from each of the categories.
President: Idriss Jazairy (Algeria).
The 37th session of the IFAD Council was held in September 1989 [see p. 37890].
WFP
Full title: World Food Programme.
Date of foundation: 1963.
Status: a body jointly accountable to the FAO and the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).
Objective: provision of food aid and emergency relief to developing countries.
Member states on Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes (CFA): 30 (15 appointed by FAO and 15 by ECOSOC).
Executive Director: James Ingram (Australia).
1990 overview
UN information sources in December reported that emergency food aid to the value of more than US$16,000,000 had been provided by the WFP to four countries in West Africa to help feed 380,000 victims of civil strife in Liberia.
The food was to be channelled through international relief agencies to displaced persons within Liberia and to Liberian nationals in Côte d'Ivoire, Guinea and Sierra Leone.
Other food aid was allocated to Nicaragua, Rwanda and the Philippines [see also FAO below].
IMO
Full title: International Maritime Organization (known prior to 1982 as the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization — IMCO).
Date of foundation: 1959.
Objective: maritime safety and the prevention of pollution from ships.
Members: 135 countries (plus two associate members).
Secretary-General: William O'Neil (Canada).
April: ferry safety measures [see p. 37888].
July: accession of Sao Tomé and Príncípe [see p. 37888].
November: London Dumping Convention meeting [see p. 37875].
1990 overview
Belize acceded to the IMO Convention on Sept. 17.
On March 8, 1991, Luxembourg became the organization's 135th member country.
According to the Secretary-General, William O'Neil, the IMO faced its biggest financial crisis in 1990, with little prospect of an improvement in 1991.
In his report to the 65th session of the IMO Council meeting on Nov. 5-9, he said that the organization had so far received only 63 per cent of the contributions due for 1990 — the lowest figure for many years.
The organization's financial crisis, which began in 1988, had been compounded by the failure of Panama and Liberia — the largest contributors — to pay their 1990 contributions.
However, Panama had agreed to pay US$2,800,000 towards its arrears in 1990.
The total owed by member states to the organization over the last three years stood at £6,000,000 (US$11,000,000), compared with the total appropriation for 1990-91 of £25,400,000.
INTERNATIONAL
VATICAN
The sovereign state of the Vatican City includes the area around the Basilica of Saint Peter in Rome, Italy, and 12 buildings in and outside Rome.
Created in 1929, it provides an independent base for the Holy See, the government of the Roman Catholic Church.
Relations with Italy are governed by a concordat signed in 1929 and revised in 1985.
Sovereignty is exercised by the Pope, who has absolute legislative, executive and judicial power.
The Pope is the head of the Roman Catholic Church, elected for life by a conclave of the College of Cardinals.
He appoints a pontifical commission to conduct the administrative affairs of the state.
Pope: Karol Wojtyla, Archbishop of Cracow, Poland, was elected Pope in 1978, and took the name of John Paul II.
Secretary of State: the Most Rev. Angelo Sodano.
1990 OVERVIEW
January: 6th papal tour of Africa [see p. 37202].
February: resumption of diplomatic relations with Hungary [see p. 37258].
March: resumption of relations with Romania and the Soviet Union [see p. 37899].
April: papal visit to Czechoslovakia [see p. 37394].
May: papal visit to Mexico, opening of Banco Ambrosiano trial [see pp. 37475; 37899].
September: 7th papal tour of Africa [see p. 37732].
December: resignation of Secretary of State [see p. 37932].
It was reported on Oct. 19 that cost-cutting measures by the Vatican would help to reduce by US$23,300,000 the 1989 budget deficit, estimated at US$54,700,000.
Archbishop Paul Marcinkus, former head of the Institute for Religious Works (IOR)(the Vatican bank) and a key figure in the collapse of the Banco Ambrosiano [see pp. 33793-94; 35592; 37899]resigned as a governor of the Vatican City on Oct. 30.
On Dec. 6 diplomatic relations were resumed with Bulgaria.
INTERNATIONAL
WAR CRIMES
1990 OVERVIEW
February: agreement by Austria to pay reparations to Austrian Jews [see pp. 37688; 37899].
May: agreement by East Germany to pay reparations to Israeli foundation for holocaust survivors [see p. 37379; 37899].
June: failure of United Kingdom War Crimes Bill [see p. 37899].
On Nov. 19 a French court ordered René Bousquet, a former police chief under the Vichy regime, to be tried for war crimes in an ordinary criminal court [see p. 37899], after overturning a ruling by the prosecutor-general's office which had sent the case to a long defunct Special High Court of Liberation.
It was reported on Nov. 26 that lawyers acting for the convicted Nazi war criminal, Klaus Barbie, were seeking his release on humanitarian grounds, claiming that he was suffering from cancer [for Barbie's 1987 trial see p. 35417].
The trial ended in November 1990 in Siegen (Germany) of a former SS officer Ernst August König, 71, who was accused of killing eight gypsies and assisting in the murder of 1,067 others at the Auschwitz-Birkenau concentration camp.
On Jan. 24, 1991, he was sentenced to life imprisonment after being convicted of torturing three people to death, but acquitted of the murders of the other five people.
The judge said that there was insufficient evidence to convict König on the charge of participating in the murders of 1,076 others.
Die Welt of Dec. 22 reported that France had raised the question of the payment of Second World War reparations to French nationals by Germany during the two-plus-four talks on German unification.
INTERNATIONAL
WARSAW PACT
Full title: The Warsaw Treaty of Friendship, Co-operation and Mutual Assistance.
Date of foundation: May 1955.
Status: Regional alliance for collective defence [but see below for February 1991 signing of protocol to cancel all military agreements, organs and structures].
Original signatories: Albania (withdrew 1968); Bulgaria; Czechoslovakia [see below]; East Germany (withdrew in September 1990 prior to unification with West Germany); Hungary (declared in June 1990 that it would not take part in military exercises in 1990 and that it intended to withdraw from the Pact by the end of 1991); Poland [see below]; Romania; Soviet Union.
Commander-in-Chief: Gen. Petr G. Lushev (Soviet Union).
1990 OVERVIEW
January: Czechoslovak and Hungarian requests for Soviet troop withdrawals [see p. 37195].
February: Soviet agreement to withdraw forces from eastern Europe [see p. 37258].
March: Soviet troop withdrawals from Czechoslovakia and Hungary [see p. 37328].
June: Moscow summit, Hungary's announcement of withdrawal [see p. 37550].
October: meeting on Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE)[see p. 37797].
Political changes in eastern Europe, most notably the unification of Germany, and the steady amelioration in East-West relations, prompted a wide-ranging review of the Pact's military arrangements.
One immediate consequence was increased pressure on the Soviet Union to hasten the implementation of troop withdrawals from Eastern Europe, concerning which negotiations had begun in December 1989 [see p. 37195].
In January Czechoslovakia announced that it would press for the withdrawal of 75,000 Soviet troops from its territory by the end of 1990.
Hungary also announced that it had requested the complete withdrawal of all Soviet troops by the end of 1991 [see p. 37195].
In February the Soviet Union confirmed that it intended to withdraw its troops from Czechoslovakia and Hungary by mid-1991.
It also agreed to begin negotiations on troop withdrawals from Poland, where the then Solidarity leader, Lech Walesa, at a meeting with the Soviet ambassador in Gdansk on Jan. 18, had called for the removal of all Soviet troops by the end of 1990 [see p. 37258].
In March the first Soviet military units began withdrawing with their equipment from Czechoslovakia and Hungary.
A meeting in June of Warsaw Pact Defence Ministers formally endorsed the withdrawal of all Soviet forces from eastern Europe [see p. 37550].
The relevance of the Warsaw Pact in the context of emerging patterns of European security, as reflected in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), came under close scrutiny during a summit meeting in June in Moscow, where a majority of delegates were reported to have favoured the Pact's dissolution [see p. 37550].
Hungary's preliminary announcement at the June meeting of its intention to withdraw from the Pact by the end of 1991 opened the way for Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland to announce in January 1991 their withdrawal with effect from July 1, and Romania and Bulgaria also announced plans to leave the organization [see p. 37979].
In February 1991 the Pact's political and consultative committee unanimously approved the dissolution of all of the organization's military structures and agreements, with effect from March 31.
World Bank
Full title: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development — IBRD (World Bank).
Year of foundation: 1945.
Status: UN specialized agency.
Member states: 153.
Only members of the IMF may be considered for membership in the World Bank.
Subscriptions to the capital stock of the Bank are based on each member's quota in the IMF, which is designed to reflect the country's relative economic strength.
Voting rights are related to shareholdings.
President and Chairman of Executive Directors: Barber B. Conable.
IDA
Full title: International Development Association.
Year of foundation: 1960.
Status: affiliated to World Bank.
Function: advances capital to the poorer developing member countries on more flexible terms than those offered by the World Bank.
Member states: 136.
President and Chairman of Executive Directors: Barber B. Conable (ex officio).
IFC
Full title: International Finance Corporation.
Year of foundation: 1956.
Status: affiliate of the World Bank.
Objective: to encourage the growth of productive private enterprise in its member countries, particularly in the less-developed areas.
Member states: 138.
President: Barber b.
Conable.
INTERNATIONAL
WHO
Full title: World Health Organization.
Date of foundation: 1948.
Status: Specialized agency of the United Nations.
Objective: The attainment by all peoples of the highest possible level of health.
Membership 168 countries (including the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia which acceded in May 1991, when the island of Tokelau became an associate member).
Director-General: Hiroshi Nakajima (Japan).
1990 OVERVIEW
March: resignation of AIDS programme director [see p. 37335].
May: 43rd World Health Assembly [see p. 37475].
On Sept. 9 a joint programme launched under the auspices of the WHO, the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the UN Development Programme (UNDP), undertook to allocate US$150,000,000 towards the development of a universal vaccine effective against common childhood diseases.
According to a WHO report published on Oct. 16, almost 3,000,000 people were still dying from tuberculosis every year.
The report added that almost half of the total number of people infected with the AIDS virus were also suffering from tuberculosis and that the time taken for an HIV carrier to develop AIDS appeared to be "dramatically" shorter among people also infected with tuberculosis.
According to the WHO's 1990 World Health Statistics Annual, between 1,000,000 and 2,000,000 people died from malaria-related diseases every year.
The report showed that there were between 27,000,000 and 35,000,000 blind people in the world, over 90 per cent of whom lived in the developing world, mostly in rural areas.
The WHO's expanded programme of immunization (EPI), launched in 1974, had helped prevent an estimated 2,200,000 deaths yearly from measles, neonatal diseases, tetanus and pertussis, as well as some 360,000 cases of poliomyelitis.
However, about 30 per cent of the world's population were known to have little or no regular access to essential drugs.
The world's population, currently estimated to be about 5,300 million, was expected to increase by another 1,000 million by the year 2000.
The report concluded by saying that cigarette smoking, which killed almost 800,000 people a year, was the leading cause of premature mortality in the developed countries.