

MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Resignation of President Chadli — Cancellation of elections
Following the unexpected resignation on Jan. 11 of President Chadli Bendjedid, a newly created five-member High Committee of State (HCS), chaired by Mohammed Boudiaf, assumed presidential powers on Jan. 14.
The second round of voting in the general election, which had been scheduled for Jan. 16, had in the meantime been cancelled by an existing body, the High Security Council, which included Prime Minister Sid-Ahmed Ghozali.
The cancellation served to block the probable overall electoral victory of the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), which had emerged as winner in the first round of voting on Dec. 26.
Aftermath of first round of voting
In the period between the first round of voting on Dec. 26 and the Jan. 12 cancellation of the second round, the secular parties warned that the FIS, with its project for an "Islamic state" , represented a threat to the successful installation of a multiparty system in Algeria.
The third electoral force, the Socialist Forces Front (FFS) under Hocine Ait Ahmed as secretary-general, was vocal in its opposition to the prospect of an FIS government.
On Jan. 2 over 100,000 people joined an FFS demonstration through the streets of Algiers, shouting slogans such as"No to fundamentalism!
No to dictatorship!".
Some 35 people were arrested, reportedly part of a 300-strong group whose dress showed their "fundamentalist affiliations" and who had intended to disrupt the march.
Ait Ahmed on Dec. 28 told French television: "We have always said: neither a police state nor a fundamentalist state.
It is obvious that the FLN [the former ruling National Liberation Front]had led our country into this dead end, and the FIS had not missed a chance throughout this campaign to deny that Islam is the opposite of human rights, the opposite of democracy…
Neither of them guarantee the right to have an alternation of power."
Chadli's resignation
In the letter of resignation which he conveyed to the Constitutional Council on Jan. 11, Chadli revealed that he had dissolved (on Jan. 4 as it later transpired) by presidential decree the National Popular Assembly.
The Constitutional Council was therefore "the only official institution which remains after the President of the Republic" .
He believed "in the depth of my heart and consciousness that the initiatives being taken are not liable to guarantee peace and harmony" and felt unable to continue to honour his pledge as President.
Ghozali appeared on television on the evening of Jan. 11 to say that he had asked the army to take necessary measures to protect public security.
Tanks and small army units moved into position in front of key government and communications buildings in Algiers and other towns.
On the same day, Jan. 11, the seven-member Constitutional Council chaired by Abdelmalek Benhabyles, 71, had been scheduled to announce its final verdict on the allegations of electoral irregularities during the Dec. 26 poll.
It had the right to annul the first round of voting, if it found sufficient evidence of irregularities, and to organize new elections within two months.
In the event, no verdict was delivered on the irregularities.
Benhabyles, as chair of the Constitutional Council, should have assumed interim presidential powers in the absence of a Speaker of the National Assembly, but was apparently unwilling to take on this responsibility, under which he would have been obliged to organize presidential elections within 45 days.
Cancellation of elections
On the evening of Jan. 12 it was announced that the existing six-member High Security Council had that day, by virtue of a mandate to preserve continuity given it by the Constitutional Council, resolved "that it is impossible to continue the election process until the necessary conditions are fulfilled for the normal functioning of institutions" .
(As well as Ghozali the High Security Council included the Defence Minister, Maj.-Gen.
Khaled Nezzar, the head of the armed forces, Maj.-Gen.
Abdelmalek Guenaizia, the Interior Minister, Maj.-Gen.
Larbi Belkheir, the Foreign Minister, Lakhdar Brahimi, and the Justice Minister, Hamadani Benkhelil.)
Observers were divided over the role played by Chadli himself in this dramatic turn of events.
Some suggested that some of the military and political leadership had found unacceptable Chadli's readiness to negotiate with FIS leaders — a position in which he apparently had the support of Abdelhamid Mehri, secretary-general of the FLN.
Some form of "co-habitation" with the FIS was said to have been under consideration — possibly with the FIS as a coalition partner in a government in which key ministries would remain in FLN hands, with Chadli serving out his term as President (due to end in December 1993).
Creation of High Committee of State
On Jan. 14 the High Security Council, after consultations with the Constitutional Council and the President of the Supreme Court, created the five-member High Committee of State (HCS).
It would assume presidential powers "until the necessary conditions are provided for the normal functioning of institutions and the constitutional order" , which would be for a period until December 1993 at the latest.
It would be assisted by a "national advisory body" .
The chairman of the new committee, Boudiaf, 72, returned to Algeria from Morocco on Jan. 16, having lived outside Algeria since 1964.
The four other members were Nezzar, Ali Kafi, the president of the National Organization of the Mujahidine, the Human Rights Minister Ali Haroun, and Tedjini Haddam, a former Religious Affairs Minister and rector of the Grand Mosque in Paris.
Boudiaf was one of the "nine fathers of the revolution" who had organized armed resistance to French rule in the late 1940s, and he enjoyed the further prestige of having spent five years in prison (1956-61) alongside Ahmed Ben Bella (later President) and Ait Ahmed.
Following independence Boudiaf had, like Ait Ahmed, found himself a political exile after opposing FLN rule.
Nezzar, 54, had become Defence Minister in July 1990 and was regarded as one of the most influential members of the HCS, having supervised the two states of siege imposed during Chadli's presidency, in October 1988 and June 1991 [see pp. 36507; 38312].
Questioning of legitimacy of HCS
From Jan. 16 speculation intensified as to a possible rapprochement between the leaderships of the three main parties.
The FIS, the FFS and one section of the FLN leadership had all questioned the constitutional legitimacy of the HCS.
FLN
Mehri, the FLN secretary-general, enjoyed the support of most of the party's political bureau in rejecting the HCS as unconstitutional, but was challenged on this at the level of the FLN central committee.
On Jan. 15 he told a news conference that the FLN regarded the HCS as "unconstitutional" ; its formation left "the way wide open for any kind of adventurism and extremist theses,[and]makes the road back to political stability long and arduous" .
He said that he had not been informed of the dissolution of the National Assembly on Jan. 4.
In a statement later that day Mehri confirmed that a "first meeting" had taken place between the FLN and FIS leaderships.
By Jan. 17 he had also met with Ait Ahmed and with Ben Bella (leader of the electorally unimportant Movement for Democracy in Algeria — MDA).
A statement issued on Jan. 17 by Ammar Benouda, a member of the FLN's central committee, dissociated the central committee from Mehri's statements of two days earlier.
On the final day of an FLN central committee meeting on Jan. 25-28, Mehri announced the collective resignation of the political bureau, reiterating that he would not recognize the HCS.
He was not prepared to lead the FLN, he said, "as a party which remained a cover for the state and which received its orders from above" .
The meeting ended with the questions of recognition for the HCS and acceptance of the political bureau's resignation unresolved, pending a further session the following month.
FFS
On Jan. 15 the executive committee of the FFS had authorized Ait Ahmed "to examine with all parties concerned" the means of "putting to an end the illegal and illegitimate state caused by the resignation of the President of the Republic" and to promote "the continuation of the democratic process as soon as possible" .
Algerian radio reported that on Jan. 16 Ait Ahmed had met with two FIS leaders, Abdelkader al-Hachani (described as chairman of the FIS provisional executive bureau) and Mohammed Said, at the offices of the Algerian League for the Defence of Human Rights.
Ait Ahmed stressed that the meeting had been mainly concerned with the need to avoid violence at that Friday's prayers; the FFS, while rejecting any alliance with the FLN or the FIS, was in favour of "a dialogue in all directions" .
FIS
A statement released by the FIS on Jan. 13 maintained that the High Security Council "was merely a consultative body with no right to assume power" .
By Jan. 15 Hachani was floating the idea that the 231 FIS, FLN and FFS deputies who had been elected in the Dec. 26 vote might form some kind of legislative body "because they all have legitimacy in this context" .
Arrest of Hachani
Hachani was arrested on Jan. 22, as were eight journalists of the Al-Khabar newspaper.
His arrest was ordered by the Algiers judiciary after the Ministry of Defence accused him of inciting the army to mutiny.
He had made a statement urging soldiers to disobey "despots" and "relieve the people of the imposed custodianship" .
Al-Khabar had published Hachani's statement.
A government statement meanwhile said that regulations would be strictly applied "to prohibit all partisan activity" in and around mosques.
Projected formation of Consultative Council
The HCS referred on Jan. 20 to plans for the formation of a National Consultative Council (majlis al-shoura al-watani) which would work under its auspices in order to allow "the representation of the different trends of thinking and the different components of civil society" .
Hachani had already rejected this proposal at a news conference on Jan. 19, in which he had read out resolutions signed by the 188 FIS deputies elected in the first round and had appealed to parliamentarians and international public opinion to "denounce the halt to the electoral process" .
On Jan. 26 an FIS statement signed by Rabeh Kebih, the official in charge of external relations, asserted that any participation in this Consultative Council would be viewed as treason and that the democratic process should continue.
Jebir was arrested on Jan. 28, shortly after releasing an open letter to Boudiaf which claimed that he was being used by a "junta" which had seized power and which was set to "shed people's blood" behind his back.
International reaction
The United States government initially described the formation of the HCS as in accord with the Algerian Constitution.
The following day, Jan. 14, however, State Department spokesperson Margaret Tutweiler described as a "definite change of position" the strict neutrality the US administration had decided to adopt on this question.
The director of the North Africa and Middle East department of the French Foreign Ministry, Pierre Lafrance, visited Algiers on Jan. 13-16, in order, according to a French Foreign Ministry communiqué, to make contacts "with all the political forces in Algeria" .
Algerian official sources denied that he had met any opposition groups.
A communiqué published on Jan. 23 by the presidency of the European Communities (EC) expressed a strong hope that "the Algerian authorities will undertake every possible effort for a return to normal institutional life so that…the democratic process will pursue a stable course" .
It said that the EC would follow events closely with respect to "human rights and fundamental freedoms" .
By Jan. 21 Boudiaf had received letters of congratulation on his appointment from the heads of state of Morocco, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
Recall of ambassadors
The Algerian ambassador to Iran was recalled on Jan. 18, following what the Algerian Foreign Ministry claimed were unacceptable attacks by the official Iranian media which could harm "the sovereignty and unity" of the Algerian people.
The Algerian embassy in Washington would cease to represent Iranian interests.
On Jan. 21 Ghozali said that he had evidence of Iranian interference in Algerian affairs which "was not confined to making a financial contribution" .
Also on Jan. 18 Algerian television reported that the Algerian ambassador to Paris, Smail Hamdani, would be recalled "for consultations following statements made by various French politicians about the political situation in Algeria" .
Inspection of nuclear reactor
A report in the Sunday Times of Jan. 5, detailing alleged Iraqi government help towards the development of an "Islamic bomb" in Algeria, drew a denial from Ghozali.
On Jan. 19 the Ministry for Research, Technology and the Environment confirmed that two inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), at the invitation of the Algerian government, had visited the nuclear reactor at Ain Oussera, 140 km south of Algiers, which had been under construction since 1986 with technical assistance from China.
On Jan. 19, a further report in the UK press quoted "a senior US State Department official" and other experts to the effect that satellite pictures might have been misinterpreted and that the plant might indeed be intended for merely civilian uses.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Recognition of independence of Croatia and Slovenia
On Jan. 15 the Presidency of the European Communities (EC) announced that the EC and its member states had decided to recognize Croatia and Slovenia as independent states.
Macedonia and Bosnia-Hercegovina, which had also sought recognition, were not included.
The EC Peace Conference on Yugoslavia had heard a report from the EC Arbitration Commission on the republics' adherence to the EC guidelines for recognition of new states [see p. 38685].
Germany, which had gone ahead with recognition of Croatian and Slovenian independence on Dec. 23 [see p. 36865], established diplomatic relations with both republics on Jan. 15, as did Hungary.
Italy established diplomatic relations on Jan. 17.
Other countries which recognized the independence of the two republics included Albania, Australia, Austria (which established diplomatic relations with Slovenia), Bulgaria, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Iceland, Norway, Switzerland, New Zealand, Poland, Romania and Ukraine.
Albania also called for the recognition of Kosovo; Bulgaria also recognized Bosnia-Hercegovina and Macedonia [see p. 38734 for resulting friction with Greece].
On Jan. 13, the Vatican recognized the independence of Croatia and Slovenia, which were largely Roman Catholic.
EC Foreign Ministers, meeting on Jan. 10, had lifted sanctions against Montenegro, leaving only Serbia subject to the sanctions imposed on Nov. 8 [see pp. 38559; 38684].
The Yugoslav Collective State Presidency described the EC decision as "a gross violation of the principles of the UN Charter" , on the grounds that it changed the borders of the state of Yugoslavia.
Status of Yugoslavia, Macedonia and Bosnia-Hercegovina
On Jan. 3, a Convention on Yugoslavia, in which 159 groups had participated, called on the Yugoslav Federal Assembly to establish a procedure for secession from Yugoslavia.
On Jan. 20 a committee of the Assembly produced a draft law on the right to self-determination and proposals for a Constituent Assembly for the new Yugoslavia.
On Jan. 21, the Serbian government initiated negotiations for the continuation of Yugoslavia, hoping for support from Montenegro, Macedonia, and Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The Montenegrin government endorsed the initiative, but on Jan. 24 Macedonia rejected Serbian overtures, preferring to continue its efforts to gain recognized independent statehood.
The EC Arbitration Commission had recommended also recognizing Macedonian independence, but Greece objected to an independent state under that name [see p. 38734], and had insisted on the inclusion of a clause in the EC criteria for recognition stating that republics should renounce "the use of a denomination which implies territorial claims" .
Macedonia had amended its constitution on Jan. 6, to fall in line with EC criteria for recognition.
The amendments stated that Macedonia had no territorial claims on other countries, and renounced interference in their affairs.
Constitutional amendments also abolished Macedonian representation in the Yugoslav Assembly and Presidency.
However, Macedonia's internal divisions were highlighted by a referendum held by the ethnic Albanian minority in Macedonia on Jan. 11-12, in which 99.9 per cent voted for territorial and political autonomy.
The organizers of the referendum, which was declared illegal by the Macedonian Assembly, stated that 276,921 people had voted, amounting to a turnout of 92.56 per cent.
The risk of ethnic conflict in Bosnia-Hercegovina was considered to be too great for that republic to qualify for EC recognition.
The Assembly representing its Serbian population declared an autonomous Republic of the Serbian People of Bosnia-Hercegovina on Jan. 9, and announced that Bosnia-Hercegovina's President and Foreign Minister "no longer represent the interests of Bosnia-Hercegovina's Serbian people in international forums" .
The Presidency of Bosnia-Hercegovina denounced the move as unconstitutional.
On Jan. 25 a debate in the Assembly of Bosnia-Hercegovina, boycotted by Serbian parties, endorsed a referendum on the republic's sovereignty to be held on Feb. 29-March 1.
This followed a constitutional amendment allowing decisions to be taken by majority vote rather than consensus, thus avoiding a veto by the Serbian deputies.
Deployment of advance UN peacekeeping force
A UN Military Liaison Officers' (UNMLO) force, numbering 50 men, arrived in Yugoslavia on Jan. 14, following unanimous approval by the UN Security Council on Jan. 8 of the deployment of an advance force in the planned operation to send 10,000 UN peacekeeping troops to Yugoslavia.
The UNMLO deployment was made possible by the relative stability of the 15th ceasefire in the Yugoslav conflict between the Yugoslav National Army (JNA) and Croatia.
The ceasefire was brokered on Jan. 2 by UN special envoy Cyrus Vance, who had arrived in Yugoslavia on Dec. 31.
However, by the end of the month the UN peace plan seemed in jeopardy, because of the refusal of the leaders of Serbian enclaves in Croatia to allow UN troops to be stationed on their territory.
The UNMLO deployment went ahead despite the shooting down of an EC monitors' helicopter on Jan. 7.
The helicopter, flying from Belgrade to Zagreb via Hungarian airspace, was shot down by the Yugoslav air force, and all five of its crew (four Italians and a Frenchman) were killed.
A second EC helicopter made a forced landing.
The Yugoslav Federal Defence Secretariat admitted responsibility for the "undesired and tragic accident" , and the immediate suspension of Yugoslav air force commander Col. Zvonko Jurjevic suggested that the Yugoslav government was hoping to prevent the incident from impeding the deployment of UN troops.
EC monitors suspended duty until Jan. 10, and Italy suspended air links with Yugoslavia on Jan. 8, citing safety reasons.
On Jan. 8, Yugoslav Defence Minister Gen. Veljko Kadijevic resigned because of his "deteriorating state of health" .
Observers feared that his temporary replacement by Chief of General Staff Col.-Gen.
Blagoje Adzic signalled the ascendancy of hardline nationalists within the Defence Ministry.
Representatives from the EC, the Yugoslav National Army (JNA) and Croatian militia held tripartite meetings in southern Hungary on Jan. 11-12 to discuss the ceasefire and a liaison office for the safety of EC and UN peace monitors.
The talks were reported to have broken down on Jan. 21 over the issue of the withdrawal of JNA forces from areas of Croatia not under UN protection, although both sides affirmed their commitment to the ceasefire.
EC monitors had extended their activities to Hungary to monitor compliance with the arms embargo on Yugoslavia, having signed a protocol to this effect with Hungary on Jan. 16.
The EC Peace Conference on Yugoslavia reconvened on Jan. 9 in Brussels, facing the issues of the recognition of republics' independence [see above]and the implementation of the UN peacekeeping plan.
Signs of progress were seen as Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic accepted the EC plan for guaranteed minority rights [see p. 38513], which affected Serbian enclaves in Croatia.
The meeting was attended by a senior aide of Vance, emphasising the co-ordination of UN and EC policies to solve the conflict.
Marrack Goulding, the UN Under-Secretary-General of the Office for Special Political Affairs, in charge of peacekeeping forces, arrived in Yugoslavia on Jan. 26 for a five-day visit.
On Jan. 27 Goulding met the leaders of Serbian communities in Croatia, in an attempt to persuade them to accept UN peacekeepers in their areas.
The UN plan for peacekeeping operations envisaged three demilitarized areas in Croatia, covering the Serbian enclaves of Western Slavonia, Eastern Slavonia and Krajina.
Irregular forces would be disarmed, and JNA and Croatian National Guard forces would be withdrawn.
On Jan. 28 Goulding said that "one of the conditions which has always been there for the deployment of the UN force in Yugoslavia, namely a stable ceasefire, has now been fulfilled" , although there were still violations of the ceasefire, albeit "comparatively minor" ones.
On Jan. 5, Milan Babic the leader of the "Serbian Republic of Krajina" [see p. 38685], had rejected the proposal to station UN troops in the Serb-populated regions of Croatia.
Borisav Jovic, vice-president of the Collective State Presidency, in talks at the UN on Jan. 23 with Vance and the new UN Secretary-General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, gave assurances that efforts would be made to ensure compliance with the UN plan from the Serbian regions of Croatia.
Boutros-Ghali also held talks with Croatian Prime Minister Franjo Greguric.
Casualty and refugee figures
The human rights organization Helsinki Watch announced on Jan. 23 that the conflict had claimed 10,000 lives in Croatia, and that 5,000 people were still unaccounted for.
In a letter to Serbian President Milosevic, Helsinki Watch detailed atrocities committed against Croatians.
The organization planned to release a further report on atrocities committed by the Croatian forces against Serbs.
The Yugoslavian Red Cross released details of refugee figures on Jan. 23.
There were 170,000 refugees in Croatia with an estimated additional 10,000 unregistered in the republic, and 35,000 in the Serbian area of Krajina, who, according to the Yugoslav Red Cross, had not been registered by the Croatian Red Cross.
In Serbia 157,768 were registered.
A total of 20,000 had fled to Hungary.
There were 87,470 refugees in Bosnia-Hercegovina, 8,159 in Montenegro and 2,350 in Macedonia.
Devaluation
The Yugoslav dinar was devalued by approximately 80 per cent on Jan. 26 to a new initial rate against the deutschmark of DM1.00=65 dinars.
Slovenia and Croatia had introduced their own currencies in October and December respectively, and new banknotes of the Yugoslav dinar were being issued to the other republics to prevent them being flooded with unwanted currency from Slovenia and Croatia.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Government power-sharing plan
In January the National Party (NP) government outlined its plans to hand over sovereignty to a power-sharing administration.
The core of the proposals was described in State President F. W. de Klerk's speech at the opening of Parliament on Jan. 24 and later by Gerrit Viljoen, Minister of Constitutional Development and Planning.
De Klerk reaffirmed his commitment to the principle of establishing a transitional government as soon as possible and the creation of a new parliament in which all racial groups would be represented.
These steps were agreed by the government, the African National Congress (ANC) and 17 other political groups at the first meeting of the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA) in December [see pp. 38662-63].
Having previously committed Parliament to enacting all legislation proposed by CODESA, de Klerk recognized that the whites-only parliament had become largely redundant, and consequently his speech did not include a single new legislative initiative.
Moreover, the government had earlier proposed that Parliament should sit for three days a week, instead of five.
The main thrust of the President's speech was an effort to appease the white right wing.
He said that the establishment of a transitional government and any constitutional changes proposed by CODESA would have to be approved by referendum.
This would effectively give the white population a veto on all constitutional changes.
Although the whole population would vote in the referendum, the counting of the votes would differentiate between racial groups and all changes would have to win the endorsement of those on the white voters' roll.
Foreign Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha commented: "If whites don't approve…it's back to the drawing board." 
The President also put the option of self-determination for whites on the agenda.
He reported that government representatives on one of the CODESA working groups would be proposing that "the principles of self-determination" should be discussed in their "varied manifestations" .
However, he also made clear his own personal doubts on this solution.
On Jan. 28 at a parliamentary press briefing Viljoen expanded on the government's proposals, giving details of a five-step plan.
The steps would be:(i) the drafting by CODESA within a few months of a constitution for a transitional government;(ii) a national referendum on the transitional constitution, probably before the end of the year;(iii) a general election to choose a new multiracial parliament and government, the composition of both to be determined by the transitional constitution [see p. 38422 for NP's views on composition of both bodies];(iv) the commencement of rule by the transitional government, on the authority of the transitional parliament, which would take over from CODESA as the negotiating forum for the "final" constitution; and (v) adoption of the final constitution, probably with another referendum.
The government's plans effectively met the demands of the African National Congress (ANC) and other opposition groups for a transitional constitution to be devised by a constituent assembly chosen on a representative basis.
However, the ANC expressed grave concern that the government had not given a timetable beyond step two of their plan.
An ANC statement issued on Jan. 29 accused the government of wanting to prolong the transition.
It also reacted strongly to the proposal of a white veto over CODESA decisions, which, it said, "smacks of the very precept of racism on which the present unjust order is based" .
Meeting of CODESA working groups
The five CODESA working groups met for the first time on Jan. 20 in Johannesburg.
The working groups, made up of 38 delegates and 38 advisers, focused on five areas, namely the creation of a climate for free political activity; the constitution-making process and principles for a new constitution; transitional arrangements; the future of the "independent" bantustans (Bophuthatswana, Ciskei, Transkei and Venda); and time-frames and the implementation of decisions.
Delegates indicated that the next full CODESA meeting would be held in April (rather than in March as originally intended), when they expected the working groups to have made substantive progress.
Right-wing extremist arrests
There were a number of attacks during January by right-wing extremist groups, which police believed to be part of a protest campaign against CODESA.
A wave of explosions in the Transvaal early in the month caused damage to post offices, multiracial schools, magistrates' courts and a police training school.
On Jan. 6, police arrested 11 members of the Afrikaner Resistance Movement (AWB), the Boer Victory Commando and the Boer Commando.
On Jan. 28 Eugene Terreblanche, leader of the AWB, and nine other senior members of the organization were arrested and charged with public violence arising from a riot on Aug. 9, 1991, outside a hall where President de Klerk was addressing a meeting [see p. 38376].
PAC and Azapo activity
In a series of raids in January the police arrested leading members of the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), the Azanian People's Organization (Azapo) and the Azanian Youth Organization in January.
The arrests were thought to be in connection with a series of violent attacks.
The first was the killing of two policemen on Jan. 2 by the Azanian People's Liberation Army (APLA — the military wing of the PAC).
On Jan. 8 the Azapo-linked Azanian National Liberation Army (AZANLA) bombed the offices of a promotions company involved in the South African tour of the United States musician Paul Simon.
The Simon tour aroused angry protest from some opposition groups including the PAC and Azapo, although it had the backing of the ANC.
Despite a warning of further violence if Simon did not abandon his concerts, they took place without incident.
Death squad allegations
Mbongeni Khumalo, a former central committee member of the Inkatha Freedom Party, provided new evidence of Inkatha and South African Defence Force (SADF) complicity in attacks on the ANC [see p. 38663 for earlier revelations].
Khumalo, who was a leader of the Inkatha Youth Brigade until March 1991, claimed at a news conference on Jan. 10 that 200 Inkatha activists had received massive financial aid as well as military training and political instruction from the SADF.
He further alleged that Inkatha activists carried out attacks on ANC supporters on the instructions of Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi.
Khumalo's allegations were strengthened by similar claims by two gang members who said that the security forces had recruited, trained and armed them to carry out attacks on ANC supporters.
On Jan. 14 Richard Goldstone, chair of an independent judicial commission of inquiry established in September 1991 under the terms of the national peace accord [see p. 38422], said that he had been asked by both the government and the ANC to investigate allegations of SADF complicity in killings in black townships.
However, he said, his commission was empowered only to investigate matters directly related to the "current" violence, apparently ruling out investigation of past incidents.
Reacting to these latest disclosures on Jan. 27, the ANC secretary-general, Cyril Ramaphosa, accused President de Klerk of having full knowledge of the operations of anti-ANC death squads.
He said that de Klerk had "known all along" about the activities of a "third force" firmly lodged within the police and army, but had made no attempt to stop them.
Political killings statistics
The number of deaths attributable to political violence since 1984, according to the South African Institute of Race Relations (SAIRR), had totalled 11,910. 1991 had been the second worst year since 1984, but the figure of 2,672 for the year was 28 per cent down on 1990.
By comparison, the death toll during the period of unrest which had begun in Soweto in June 1976 [see pp. 27886-88]and had lasted until October 1977, had been 700.
Foreign relations
The European Communities lifted the remaining EC economic sanctions against South Africa on Jan. 22.
The decision to lift the 1986 embargo on iron, steel and gold coins was taken in April 1991 [see p. 38132]but implementation was delayed when the minority Danish government failed to win the necessary parliamentary support [see p. 38318].
On Jan. 28 the Netherlands Prime Minister, Ruud Lubbers, cancelled his visit to South Africa planned for February.
Lubbers had been criticized by the ANC and other opposition groups; ANC president Nelson Mandela called his proposed visit "inopportune and ill-timed" .
Japan re-established full diplomatic relations on Jan. 13 [see p. 38516 for lifting of Japanese economic sanctions].
The move coincided with announcements by the governments of Thailand and the Philippines that they were lifting economic sanctions.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Multiparty conference
A meeting between representatives of the government and 26 political parties was held in Luanda on Jan. 14-26 to discuss the transition to democracy.
The main opposition group, the Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), however, declined its invitation.
The first sessions were taken up with a debate on the status of resolutions passed by the meeting.
Several opposition groups rejected the government position that decisions should be binding.
The government, however, refused to countenance demands for a sovereign national conference.
President José Eduardo dos Santos said that a sovereign conference would deprive legally established state organs of their authority, and would seek to replace the People's Assembly.
Although the matter was not completely resolved, participants agreed to discuss other points on the agenda.
At the close of the meeting President Dos Santos reported that a number of issues remained unresolved.
These included membership of the future National Assembly, the electoral process and voting procedures.
On some issues he gave details of steps to settle the debate.
Responsibility for the holding of elections was passed to the signatories of the Bicesse Peace Accords (i.e. the government and UNITA — see p. 38180) and a future National Electoral Council.
The meeting also decided to hold two further 15-day sessions to decide whether legislative and presidential elections should be held simultaneously, and to agree the procedure for the collection of signatures for the registration of parties.
Problems in implementation of peace
Following recommendations made by the Joint Political and Military Commission (CCPM), a new Monitoring Task Group (GAT) was created on Jan. 11 to strengthen the implementation of the peace accord.
The GAT included members of the government, of UNITA and of the UN Angola Verification Mission.
Its creation followed reports of a huge decline in the number of government troops in the confinement areas, apparently as a result of logistical problems and the non-payment of salaries.
There was also concern that several areas had been reoccupied by UNITA and that troops from both sides were involved in criminal acts.
Killing of British tourists
On Jan. 3 four British tourists were killed and two others injured when their vehicle was ambushed near Quilengues in southern Angola.
The killings took place within 300 metres of a road leading to a UNITA confinement area.
However, UNITA officials denied any involvement in the incident, which they initially attributed to criminal elements but later claimed was the responsibility of government troops.
This was repudiated by the government which responded to British demands for an explanation by launching an official inquiry.
Foreign aid
It was announced on Jan. 22 that Italy was providing aid estimated at US$142,000,000, part of which was to be used to assist in the reintegration of demobilized soldiers into civilian life.
Assistance was also provided for other projects including health, education, and the reconstruction of infrastructure destroyed by the war.
News of the Italian support followed announcements in December that France was granting a credit of US$17,000,000 for the reconstruction of a mineral water source; that the European Communities (EC) had allocated US$140,000,000 to assist in the country's socio-economic reconstruction programmes; and that the African Development Bank was granting US$75,000,000 for agricultural projects.
New Finance Minister
Mario de Alcantara Monteiro was appointed Finance Minister, replacing Aguinaldo Jaime on Jan. 30.
No reason was given for the change.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Suspension of national conference — Unrest in military
Prime Minister Jean Nguza Karl-I-Bond on Jan. 19 ordered the suspension of the national conference until further notice.
Some of the conference's decisions, he said, were "provoking a political crisis" and contributing to violence in the country.
News of the suspension of the conference, which had resumed on Jan. 14 after a series of delays but had soon come into confrontation with the government, was greeted with demonstrations in Kinshasa.
The governments of the United States and of European Community (EC) member countries called for its resumption.
On the night of Jan. 22-23, the national radio station in Kinshasa, Voix du Zaïre, was occupied by a group of soldiers who broadcast statements calling for the dismissal of Nguza's government and the resumption of the national conference.
The station was recaptured after about three hours by soldiers loyal to the government, after firing in which two soldiers were killed.
Commenting on the incident, Nguza said that it confirmed him in his decision to suspend the conference.
He accused members of the opposition of involvement in an attempted coup, whereas opposition parties claimed that the soldiers' action was part of a government conspiracy.
In the following days, groups of soldiers were reported to have gone on the rampage in Kinshasa, looting shops and businesses.
On Jan. 29 Nguza said that the government would restore order and deal with the army's concerns over food and pay.
Saying that the conference had lost its "national character" by the departure of some members, he proposed that a "national round-table" with a reduced membership should be set up to replace it.
AFRICA
BURUNDI
Security talks with Zaïre and Rwanda
The Presidents of Burundi, Rwanda and Zaïre met on Jan. 4 in Mbandaka, north-western Zaïre, to discuss the problems of border controls and refugees, following the December flight of Hutu refugees from Burundi into Rwanda and Zaïre.
A communiqué issued at the end of the meeting said that the three countries had decided to reactivate permanent security commissions with responsibility for "investigation, control and observation at the common borders" .
The commissions, which were to recommence work before Jan. 14, were instructed to report at least once a month to the heads of state who were scheduled to meet again in Rwanda on March 14-15.
The Presidents also directed the border authorities to take "all necessary dispositions with a view to facilitating the voluntary return of refugees to their countries of origin" .
AFRICA
MALAWI
New Cabinet
On Jan. 7 President Hastings Kamuzu Banda appointed a new government, in which the most notable change was the appointment of John Tembo as Minister of State in the President's Office.
Tembo, a former governor of Reserve Bank of Malawi, was treasurer-general of the Malawi Congress Party (MCP), the sole legal party, and one of Banda's closest advisers.
He was also the uncle of Banda's confidante and Official Hostess Cecilia Kadzamira and was widely regarded as the President's heir-apparent.
AFRICA
TANZANIA
CCM recommendation on multiparty system
The country's supreme policy-making body, the national executive committee (NEC) of the ruling Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM — Party of the Revolution), met on Jan. 17-21 and unanimously accepted a proposal to end 27 years of one-party rule.
The meeting was convened by President Ali Hassan Mwinyi to discuss the preliminary report of a commission established in February 1991 to test public opinion on political change.
Giving its full endorsement to the commission's call for the introduction of a multiparty system, the NEC recommended that the Constitution be adjusted to allow for the registration of political parties.
It also proposed that legislation on political parties should include stipulations that all parties should be national organizations, embracing both sides of the union (i.e. mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar), and that they should not divide people along tribal, religious or racial lines.
The recommendations were expected to be ratified by a special general congress of the party on Feb. 18.
AFRICA
COMOROS
New government
On Jan. 6 President Said Mohammed Djohar appointed a coalition transitional government.
The President and the country's 22 political parties had signed on Dec. 31 a national reconciliation pact, in which all parties agreed to recognize the legitimacy of Djohar's presidency, to renounce the use of violence or mercenaries, and to eliminate election rigging and misuse of public funds.
The new administration was given responsibility for preparing for the forthcoming general election and drafting a new constitution.
Mohamed Taki Abdoulkarim was named as head of the government with the title "Co-ordinator" .
Abdoulkarim, leader of the Union nationale pour la démocratie aux Comores, had stood against Djohar in the 1990 presidential elections.
Said Hassane Said Hachim retained the Foreign Ministry.
Mohamed Toilibou of the Mouvement démocratique populaire (MDP) was placed in charge of Production, Industry, Crafts and Rural Development, and Mohamed el Arif Oukacha of the Front populaire Mohélien was named Minister of Education and Vocational Training.
The Comoran Union for Progress (Udizma), the former presidential majority party, which had withdrawn its support from Djohar in November [see p. 38565], was not represented in the new Cabinet.
AFRICA
KENYA
Cabinet changes — Arrest of opposition members
Environment and Natural Resources Minister Mungai Njoroge resigned on Jan. 4, the sixth minister to resign from the government within the space of two weeks [see p. 38662].
Giving government corruption and the violation of human rights as reasons for his decision, Njoroge said that he had also left the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU) and was joining the opposition Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD).
Former ministers Peter Oloo Aringo and Geoffrey Kariithi also announced that they had joined FORD.
Appointments to the Cabinet to replace other departing ministers were announced in the first week of January.
Jeremiah Nyagah, hitherto Minister of Livestock Development, was moved to the Health Ministry to replace Mwai Kibaki; the new Minister of Livestock Development was James Kabingu Muregi.
Kiruga M'Mukindia was appointed Minister for Research, Science and Technology, replacing George Muhoho.
The Democratic Party [see p. 38662]was officially launched at a press conference on Jan. 8, when its leader, Mwai Kibaki, outlined the party's commitment to democracy and open government and support for free enterprise.
Observers commented that the party's support appeared to come largely from the Kikuyu, the country's largest ethnic group, and that it lacked the broad-based support enjoyed by FORD.
The formation of a number of other parties was reported during January, including the Social Democratic Party, Rural Democratic Party, Youth Associated with the Restoration of Democracy (YARD), the People's Union of Justice and New Order, and an Islamic party.
Claims by FORD members at a press conference on Jan. 11 that a military coup was being prepared to stifle the democracy movement were dismissed by the government as "malicious rumours" .
Four FORD members — the former Vice-President (in 1988-89) Josephat Karanja, lawyer James Orengo, former MP Matu Wamae and environmentalist Wangari Maathai — were later arrested and charged with spreading unfounded and malicious rumours.
About 150,000 people attended FORD's first legal rally in Nairobi on Jan. 15 to hear calls from the movement's leaders for the formation of a national conference to discuss the country's future.
Replacement of British judges
Attorney General Amos Wako, speaking in London on Jan. 21, said that Kenya intended to phase out the five British judges still employed by the Kenyan legal system, including Chief Justice Alan Hancox.
 "The [original]appointment of British judges," Wako said,"can only be seen as a transitional measure…
It is recognized that this is reaching its final stages."
The Kenyan judiciary had been accused by the opposition of being pro-government after a series of rulings in support of the one-party state.
AFRICA
CONGO
Attempted coup
After a tense week in which five civilians were killed in Brazzaville by mutinous troops, transitional Prime Minister André Milongo in late January acceded to army pressure to dismiss Col. Michel Gangouo, whom he had appointed as Secretary of State for Defence on Jan. 2.
Gangouo had been detained in 1990 after a failed coup attempt against President Denis Sassou-Nguesso [for which see p. 37602].
Gangouo's appointment, and senior military appointments and dismissals on Jan. 14, were presented by Milongo as part of a restructuring necessary to eliminate tribalism in the military.
Some army elements, however, regarded the changes as a move against those loyal to the President.
The interim legislature, the Higher Council of the Republic (CSR), met on Jan. 17 and asked the government to annul Milongo's military changes.
When Milongo on Jan. 19 reiterated his support for Col. Gangouo, troops occupied the national radio and television stations in Brazzaville, and sealed off the airport.
Sections of the elite Presidential Guard led the army intervention, with the backing of the Chief of Staff, Gen. Jean-Marie Michel Mokoko, a close ally of President Sassou-Nguesso.
Milongo went into hiding, but emerged on Jan. 21 after the troops opened fire the previous day on about 2,000 people demonstrating in support of him, killing five.
Compelled to back down, Milongo announced a Cabinet reshuffle on Jan. 28, cutting his Cabinet from 25 to 18 members, and reappointing as Defence Minister Gen. Raymond Danase N'gollo, who had held the post prior the formation of Milongo's government in June 1991.
The formal presentation of the reshuffled Cabinet was cancelled, however, after a boycott by members of the CSR protesting at curtailed discussion of a parliamentary commission's report implicating two Cabinet ministers in a previous failed coup attempt.
Milongo paid tribute to "the extraordinary support" demonstrated by the people for him during the crisis.
He singled out the United States as a leading supporter of the democratic process in Congo, but described French support as "measured" .
Announcement of election timetable
The CSR on Jan. 23 adopted a new election time table, scheduling a constitutional referendum in February, the first multiparty municipal elections in March, legislative elections in April and May, and presidential elections in June.
AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Preparatory meeting for national conference
A meeting on Jan. 6 between representatives of political parties and the government to prepare for the national conference scheduled for Feb. 19 [see p. 38517], ended abruptly when opposition groups walked out.
According to Abel Goumba of the Front patriotique oubanguien-Parti du travail and spokesperson of a coalition of opposition forces, there was dissatisfaction at the appointment of Prime Minister Edouard Frank as chair of the preparatory meeting and at the distribution of seats, which favoured the government.
Goumba, who questioned the government's commitment to a national conference, also said that items had been deleted from the meeting's agenda, dealing with the media and an electoral code, while President André Kolingba in his New Year address had spoken of the February conference as a "broad national debate" which "cannot be a sovereign national conference" .
AFRICA
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
Transition to multiparty democracy
On Jan. 23 the President, Brig. -Gen.
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, appointed a transitional government as a prelude to the introduction of multiparty politics.
Measures taken on Jan. 8 had opened the way to multiparty politics.
Legislation allowed for the establishment of political parties, but prohibited from political activity members of the armed forces and state security services, judges and magistrates, religious figures and foreigners, and stated that no party could be formed on a tribal, regional or provincial basis.
A general amnesty was granted allowing political exiles to return freely.
Other measures included recognition of the right to strike and freedom of association.
Although the Cabinet was composed of members of the ruling Democratic Party of Equatorial Guinea (PDGE), some members were thought to be close to the opposition.
They included Benjamin Mba Ekua Miko (Foreign and Francophone Affairs), Mariano Nsue Nguema (Justice and Religion), and Angel Alogo Nchama (Agriculture and Forestry).
The appointment of the former Minister of Justice Silvestre Siale Bileka as Prime Minister provoked strong criticism from the opposition.
Bileka was considered to have neither the stature nor the political charisma to head a transitional government.
The opposition also expressed concern that political parties would be required to pay a deposit of francs CFA30,000,000 (US$157,800).
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Nigerian National Council of Ministers
New Cabinet — 1992 budget — Election timetable
A new National Council of Ministers was sworn in on Jan. 13; its predecessor had been dissolved on Jan. 3 following a decision to reduce the number of ministries from 25 to 16 as part of a rationalization of the civil service.
The key portfolios — Petroleum Resources, Finance and Economic Planning, and External Affairs — remained unchanged in the new Cabinet, which included two new ministers: Clement Akpamgbo (Minister of Justice and Attorney General), hitherto president of the Nigerian Bar Association, and Sam Oyovbaire (Minister of Information and Culture), hitherto adviser to the Vice-President.
Several ministers were given new portfolios, including Chu Okongwu, hitherto Minister of Budget and Planning, who was reassigned to special duties, marking the return of responsibility for the budget to the Finance and Economic Planning Ministry.
The federal budget for 1992 was announced by President Ibrahim Babangida on Jan. 1.
Government spending for the year was projected at 27,594 million naira (US$1.00=9.4819 naira as at Jan. 6), compared with 22,123 million naira in 1991.
Of total spending, 15,618 million naira was current expenditure, the remainder for capital projects.
Total federally collected revenue was projected at 101,201 million naira, of which the central government would retain 54,037 million naira, with the balance disbursed to state and local governments.
Reporting on economic performance in 1991, Babangida said that there had been a slowing of growth due to declining oil prices in the second half.
Gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 4.3 per cent in 1991, he said, compared with 8 per cent in 1990.
Revenue projections were based on oil sales at the OPEC benchmark price of US$21 a barrel, rather than on recent market prices of US$16-17.
Foreign exchange earnings were projected at US$8,998 million, of which US$2,227 million would be spent on debt service.
Election dates
The dates for elections to complete Nigeria's return to civilian rule were announced by National Electoral Commission chairman Humphrey Nwosu on Jan. 24.
Elections for the Senate and House of Representatives would be held on Nov. 7, 1992, followed by presidential elections on Dec. 5, 1992.
Rioting after arrest of Moslems
At least 10 people were killed in rioting by Shia Moslems in Katsina state on Jan. 8.
The rioting was linked to the arrest of 263 Moslems described by the state governor as "fundamentalists" .
Several hundred people had been killed in religious riots in northern Nigeria during 1991 [see pp. 38519; 38135-36].
AFRICA
GUINEA
Restructuring of CTRN
A major restructuring of the Transitional Committee for National Recovery (CTRN), the country's legislative body, was reported on Jan. 9.
The President, Maj.-Gen.
Lansana Conte, relinquished the presidency of the CTRN, in answer to opposition demands for a separation of the executive and legislature.
The CTRN considered most of its work to be complete following progress at the end of 1991 in legislation relating to political parties and the press, and its membership was thus cut from 36 to 15.
AFRICA
NIGER
Threat of force against Tuaregs
In an address to the country on Jan. 5, Prime Minister Amadou Cheiffou indicated a willingness to use military force to crush the growing armed rebellion by Tuareg tribespeople in the north.
He was determined, he said, to find an "urgent and effective solution" to the continued attacks by the Liberation Front of Air and Azawad (FLAA).
Rejecting any partition of the country, Cheiffou called upon the rebels to disarm, and to air their grievances through dialogue.
He appointed Akoli Daouel, who was himself of Tuareg origin, as a Minister with Special Portfolio to deal with the Tuareg issue.
This represented the first acknowledgment by the government that a rebellion was taking place.
The FLAA responded by listing its preconditions for negotiations, in a communiqué issued on Jan. 7.
The Tuareg demands included the withdrawal of the army to barracks, the ending of massacres and of arbitrary arrests of civilians, and an independent inquiry into the issue, with international observers.
In recent weeks they had mounted attacks on a French aid convoy and against European tourists, four of whom were seriously injured on Jan. 25 near the uranium centre, Arlit, some 1,200 km north-east of Niamey, the capital.
AFRICA
MALI
New Constitution — Local elections
Popular approval was given in a referendum on Jan. 12 to a new Constitution establishing multiparty politics [for July national conference on constitution see p. 38324].
Although the turnout was only 43 per cent, 99 per cent of votes cast gave backing to the Constitution.
Municipal polls held on Jan. 19 offered the first opportunity to vote in multiparty elections.
Once again the turnout was low (35 per cent).
The most successful of the 23 parties contesting the elections was the Alliance for Democracy in Mali (ADEMA) led by Oumar Konare, which was one of the main opposition groupings under former President Moussa Traoré (who was ousted in March 1991 — see p. 38083-84).
The party won 214 of the 761 seats.
Several complaints of electoral irregularities and fraud were made.
As a result a further five political parties decided to withdraw from legislative elections scheduled for Jan. 26, bringing the number of parties boycotting the elections to 21.
Postponement of legislative elections
On Jan. 26 the Minister of Territorial Administration, Lt.-Col. Birama Sire Traore (appointed in a Cabinet reshuffle announced on Dec. 27), announced the postponement of the legislative elections in order "to ensure total openness and the necessary credibility for a genuine democracy" .
Although he did not give a new date for the elections, Traore stressed that the postponement would not affect the timetable for the transition period which had been extended in December [see p. 38563].
The move won the support of several opposition parties including ADEMA.
Tuareg agreement
Following a conference on the Tuareg rebellion in December [see p. 38665], members of the government and the Unified Movements and Fronts of Azawad, representing the Tuaregs, met on Jan. 22-24 in Algiers and agreed on a truce, an exchange of prisoners and the continuation of negotiations.
The 30-day truce, renewable by mutual agreement, would come into force on Feb. 8.
It was also agreed that an independent commission of inquiry would be established in Mopti in northern Mali on Feb. 19 and that talks would continue in Algeria on Feb. 15 [see also p. 38708 for details of Tuareg rebellion in Niger].
AFRICA
BURKINA
Preparations for National Reconciliation Forum
President Blaise Compaore met the general secretaries of 42 political groupings on Jan. 7 for discussions preliminary to convening of a National Reconciliation Forum.
The meeting took place against the background of politically inspired violence in December in which several leading opposition figures had been attacked by unidentified armed gangs.
A minute's silence was held in memory of Clément Oumarou Ouedraogo, the secretary-general of the Burkinabe Labour Party, killed in a grenade attack on Dec. 9 [see p. 38665].
The opposition Co-ordinating Committee of Democratic Forces (CFD) alliance demanded that several preconditions be met before the forum was convened.
These included a guarantee of safety for the leaders of the opposition parties, and assurances that the commission of enquiry into the December killing would be allowed to carry out its work independently.
A preparatory committee was set up, to comprise representatives of all the political parties, chaired by Fr Seraphin Rouamba, with the aim of drawing human rights groups into the process.
Rehabilitation of political opponents of regime
Compaore on Jan. 9 ordered the rehabilitation of over 4,000 people who had been punished for their political or trades union activities since 1983, when Capt. Thomas Sankara took power.
This announcement met one of the key demands of the opposition groups.
It would affect students, civil servants, military personnel and public-sector employees, who would be allowed to resume their former jobs or military ranks.
Those dismissed after being convicted by people's revolutionary courts, however, would be entitled to reinstatement only if the verdict against them was revoked.
Alleged coup plot
Defence Minister Lassane Ouangraoua revealed on Jan. 8 that an army non-commissioned officer had plotted to overthrow the government on Dec. 28.
The embryonic plot appeared to have been an amateurish operation which did not pose a serious threat to the government.
The officer concerned would be subject to internal army discipline.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Attempted currency reform — Appointment of electoral commission
The limited authority of President Amos Sawyer's interim government was highlighted by the refusal of the two main rebel groupings to recognize new banknotes introduced by the National Bank on Jan. 6, in what Sawyer claimed was a currency reform essential to reduce the excess liquidity in the war-ravaged economy.
Both Charles Taylor, leader of the National Patriotic Front for Liberia (NPFL), and Prince Yormie Johnson, leader of the rival breakaway Independent NPFL (INPFL), dismissed the move as politically motivated.
Johnson had three members of his own forces executed on Jan. 7, reportedly for possessing the new banknotes.
The interim parliament condemned him for acting contrary to the peace process, and for a gross violation of basic human rights; Johnson had given an undertaking to Sawyer that he would desist from carrying out executions, after previous killings of rebels and civilians.
The currency reform followed a series of economic sanctions initiated by the interim government depriving the rebels of fuel, alcohol, tobacco and other items, in order to force the NPFL to conform to the demands of the peace plan brokered in Yamoussoukro, Côte D'Ivoire, in October [see p. 38518].
That plan had stipulated the disarming of rebel forces, and their restriction to camps, by Jan. 15, but the deadline passed without compliance by the rebel groupings.
On Jan. 13 a five-member interim election commission was sworn in, with the responsibility of organizing free and fair elections by mid-1992.
It comprised three representatives of the NPFL (including the commission chair, Yonduach Monokomana) and two from Sawyer's Interim Government of National Unity (IGNU).
AFRICA
MAURITANIA
Presidential election results
Official results from the country's first multiparty presidential elections held on Jan. 24 recorded that the incumbent President since the 1984 coup, Col. Moaouia Ould Sidi Taya, had won 62.75 per cent of the votes cast, giving him outright victory without the need for a second round run-off scheduled for Feb. 27.
All three losing candidates appealed against the election results, alleging massive fraud by the government.
The leader of the European Parliament's observer mission, Henry Savy, told El País that there had indeed been "enormous difficulties for the population to participate" in the poll.
Nevertheless on Jan. 29 the country's Supreme Court rejected the three appeals.
Ould Taya was supported by what had been the sole legal party, the Democratic and Social Republican Party (Parti républicain démocratique et social — PRDS), and by the army.
According to the French weekly Jeune Afrique, he was also supported by the Western Saharan Polisario Front.
His main challenger, winning 32.75 per cent, was Ahmed Ould Daddah, brother of the country's first post-independence President Mokhtar Ould Daddah (who was overthrown by the army in 1978).
Ahmed Ould Daddah was supported in his campaign by the main opposition party, the Union of Democratic Forces (Union des forces démocratiques — UFD); by the Islamic fundamentalists of the Umma Party, banned but still influential among the Arab merchants of the capital, Nouakchott; and by the Nasserists, the Democratic Justice Party and the Democratic Centre Party (whose own candidate, Benba Ould Sidi Badi, withdrew).
He also received the personal support of the former President ousted by Ould Taya, Mohammed Khouna Ould Haydalla, who was only freed from internal exile in 1991, and of Col. Djibril Ould Abdullahi, Ould Taya's former deputy and Interior Minister until February 1990 [see p. 37239].
Critical of the discrimination suffered by Afro-Mauritanians and Haratin — the Moorish former slaves — Ould Daddah was seen as representing a more pluralist view of Mauritania's identity than the Arabo-Islamism of Ould Taya.
He won the majority of votes in the Afro-Mauritanian south as well as in the capital, and in the Trarza region where the influence of the maraboutic orders (of Moslem holy men) remained strong.
The other two candidates, Mohammed Mahmoud Ould Mah, former mayor of Nouakchott and leader of the Socialist and Democratic Popular Union (Union démocratique sociale et populaire — UDSP), and Mustapha Ould Mohamed Saleck, the colonel who led the coup against Mokhtar Ould Daddah in 1978, won 1.36 per cent and 2.85 per cent of the vote respectively.
The turnout was just under 50 per cent.
Unrest
Violent confrontations between riot police and opposition sympathizers in the country's commercial capital Nouadhibou on Jan. 26 left five dead and many with bullet wounds according to opposition sources.
The UFD said that all its leaders in the city had been arrested, along with 160 supporters in the capital and others in Kaedi.
Haratin leader Messaoud Ould Boulkheir said that the security forces' clampdown had been particularly targeted at black Mauritanians.
The government said that only two people had been killed as "groups of ill-intentioned people" attacked the security forces.
A curfew was imposed until further notice in both Nouadhibou and Nouakchott.
Resumption by FLAM of armed struggle
The African Liberation Forces of Mauritania (FLAM) announced on Jan. 15 that it would resume its armed struggle against the Mauritanian regime (suspended in July 1991 — see p. 38325).
In a statement published on Jan. 26 the movement said that "dialogue was impossible" with Taya and that it was forced to fight with every means to bring democracy to Mauritania.
AFRICA
CHAD
Rebel invasion — Sending of French reinforcements
The French government airlifted 450 troops to reinforce its 1,100 strong Chad garrison on Jan. 3 after armed rebels advancing from across the Nigerian border into the eastern Lake Chad region had captured the towns of Liwa and Bol and were reported to be threatening the capital, N'Djamena.
The invasion, which was only admitted by the government at the beginning of January, was reported to have been launched on Dec. 22 to take advantage of the international attention focused on the area as the competitors in the Paris to Cape Town motor rally passed through.
Responsibility was claimed by both the Forces armées occidentales (FAO) and the Mouvement pour la démocratie et le développement (MDD).
The latter's leader, Goukouni Guët was a former close supporter of Hissène Habré, but an MDD spokesman in Paris denied that the rebels wanted to reinstate the former President, who was ousted in December 1990 [see p. 37907].
On Jan. 3 the government claimed to have defeated the rebels and on Jan. 7 the French government started to pull out its reinforcements on the grounds that they had only been sent in to protect French expatriates and that this purpose had now been served.
The French action was condemned by the MDD as an unwarranted interference in Chadian affairs, but was praised by United States Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, Herman Cohen, who said that his government was concerned about Libyan influence in Chad.
Reprisals against opposition
According to opposition parties and human rights groups some 10 people were killed and 50 arrested between Jan. 8 and 11 as the government took reprisals against Habré's former ministers and members of the embryonic multiparty opposition.
The government admitted only four killed and 18 arrested and claimed to have discovered arms caches at the victims' homes.
Among the dead were members of the Rassemblement pour le développement et le progrès, an opposition party founded in December 1991, including its leader, Mamadou Bisso.
Amid mounting criticism of the French government's failure to speak out against the killings, French Foreign Ministry spokesman Daniel Bernard on Jan. 13 condemned the attacks on the opposition and said that France would only continue to support the government of President Idriss Déby if he pressed ahead with democratization.
Prisoner releases
After reaffirming his government's commitment to democracy on Jan. 17, Prime Minister Jean Aligue Bawoyeu announced the pardoning of political prisoners on Jan. 24.
The amnesty applied not only to those arrested after the rebel invasion earlier in the month, but also to those accused of involvement in a coup attempt in October 1991 [see p. 38519], including former Interior Minister and Vice-President Maldoun Bada Abbas.
Renewed fighting
Renewed fighting was reported in the Lake Chad region in the last week of January.
The government said that a rebel attack on the town of Tchoukou-Hadje had left several dead.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Transitional parliament
In an Independence Day speech on Jan. 1 Lt.-Gen.
Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir announced the formation of an appointed transitional parliament to pave the way for democracy.
He said that the parliament would have the power to propose and pass legislation, to ratify treaties with foreign countries and to veto decisions of the Revolutionary Command Council, the body which had ruled Sudan since Bashir's June 1989 coup against the elected government of Sadiq el-Mahdi (see p. 36728).
On Jan. 4 Bashir announced that the parliament would consist of 300 members, including all 11 members of the RCC, a number of RCC advisers, the governors of the country's nine states, and representatives of the trade unions and the army.
He gave no indication of when the parliament would be formed or for how long it would sit before elections were held.
He did specify, however, that the principal obstacle to elections was the civil war in the south, and he announced the establishment of a Peace and Development Foundation for the region.
Expulsion of UAE ambassador
On Jan. 5 the government ordered the United Arab Emirates (UAE) ambassador and two other embassy staff to leave, after the expulsion from the UAE of the Sudanese ambassador and six other diplomats.
The Sudanese diplomats had protested about ill-treatment since the Gulf war of the 60,000-strong Sudanese community in the UAE.
The UAE news agency WAM reported that they had been expelled for "activities which harm relations between the two countries including the fabrication of false reports about the Sudanese community in the UAE" .
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Failure of peace talks
A three-day visit to Mogadishu on Jan. 3-5 by UN Assistant Secretary-General James O. C. Jonah at the Office for Research and the Collection of Information failed to end the fighting under way in the city since mid-November between the Abgal clan supporters of interim President Ali Mahdi Mohammed and the Habar Gadir supporters of Gen. Mohammed Farah Aydid.
Jonah said that with no police force or organized administration in the capital he was convinced of the need for a UN peacekeeping force, but that while Mahdi Mohammed was ready for one, Farah Aydid was opposed.
The fighting intensified on Jan. 11 as the previously neutral Murasad subclan entered the battle, against Farah Aydid, after the looting of the home of one of its leaders.
More than 300 casualties a day were reported in the capital's hospitals.
On Jan. 17 Farah Aydid seized control of the city's port from the Achamou, a militia set up by Mahdi Mohammed in August 1991 which had hitherto held aloof from the clan fighting.
In a speech to mark the first anniversary of the overthrow of former President Mohammed Siyad Barre, on Jan. 26, Farah Aydid stated his readiness for a truce, but reiterated his implacable opposition both to Mahdi Mohammed and to the idea of an international peacekeeping force, which he said would serve only to protect the "self-appointed" interim President from the Somali people.
UN Security Council resolution
On Jan. 23 the UN Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution imposing an arms embargo on Somalia, and urging all parties to end hostilities.
The resolution also sought humanitarian aid from all states and international organizations, and empowered the Secretary-General to appoint a co-ordinator to supervise it.
Famine and refugee crisis
On Jan. 12 Mogadishu's water supply failed after the looting of diesel fuel from the pumping station.
On Jan. 21 Radio Mogadishu reported that 7,275 tonnes of food aid awaiting distribution in the city's port had been looted.
On Jan. 16 the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) reported that hundreds of thousands of refugees from the conflict were on the brink of starvation in camps to the south of the capital.
On Jan. 31 the office of UN High Commissioner for Refugees reported that Somali refugees were arriving in Kenya at the rate of 700 a day bringing the total there already to 140,000.
After the shooting of a UNICEF worker on Jan. 5 and of a third Red Cross worker on Jan. 15, decisions were taken to pull out 15 of the 40 or so aid workers reported to be left in the city.
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
Continued fighting
Fighting continued in January (around Tadjoura on Jan. 2, 3 and 25, in Gadade district on Jan. 17 and near Kikhil in the south of the country on Jan. 18) between guerrillas of the Front for the Restoration of Unity and Democracy (FRUD) and troops loyal to President Hassan Gouled Aptidon.
Making it clear that there could be no question of a ceasefire, Foreign Minister Moumin Bahdon Farah said on Jan. 5 that the FRUD was a foreign invading force, and that it was the government's duty to continue to defend the unity and sovereignty of the country.
Controversial French meeting with FRUD
The French Minister Delegate for Foreign Affairs, Alain Vivien, met a delegation led by FRUD leader Mohammed Kadamy, in the Yemeni capital, Sana'a, on Jan. 22.
After the meeting the FRUD announced that it was quite prepared to open a dialogue on the basis of an immediate bilateral ceasefire and reforms announced by Gouled Aptidon.
Bahdon Farah, however, complained in an interview on Radio Djibouti on Jan. 27 that "Alain Vivien has a great love for those who invaded Djibouti" .
The Djibouti government, he said, had never asked the French to mediate with the FRUD; they had merely been asked to honour the mutual defence agreement signed between the two countries in 1977, which they had singularly failed to do in the face of the FRUD "invasion" .
New constitutional committee
A 14-member committee was appointed on Jan. 21 to draft a new constitution for multiparty democracy.
Members included the parliamentary Speaker, the Justice Minister, officials and members of the ruling Popular Rally for Progress (RPP).
AFRICA
BOTSWANA
A contingent of 250 United States troops arrived in Gabarone on Jan. 14 to carry out a two-week training exercise with the 4,500-strong Botswana Defence Force.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA:
Voice of Ethiopia radio reported on Jan. 9 that the remains of several thousand people massacred during the 17-year regime of former President Mengistu Haile Mariam had been found in mass graves near Debre Zeit, 40 km south of the capital, Addis Ababa.
AFRICA
SENEGAL
A peace commission to help bring an end to the separatist violence in Casamance, which had intensified since mid-1990, was established on Jan. 2; the commission, made up of representatives from the government and from the separatist Mouvement des forces démocratiques de la Casamance (MFDC), was placed under the mediation of the government of Guinea-Bissau.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
Following the defeat of Kenneth Kaunda in the presidential elections in October, the United National Independence Party (UNIP) accepted his resignation as party leader on Jan. 6; the UNIP would hold a congress in April to elect a new leader as well as all members of the central committee.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Spending, Revenue and Deficits ($ million)
Source: Office of Management and Budget.
State of the Union address
President George Bush on Jan. 28 gave the third State of the Union address of his presidency, and the last before the 1992 presidential election.
In it he attempted to invoke the spirit of the "Desert Storm" Gulf war campaign in order to combat the current economic recession.
He also announced a short-term plan of tax cuts and spending measures designed to stimulate the sluggish economy, and an eight-point strategy of long-term measures designed to improve US society and thereby to enhance US competitiveness.
These measures included a comprehensive plan to reform the health care system, although only the bare outlines of the scheme were revealed within the speech.
Together with the 1993 budget, unveiled the following day [see below], the proposals within the State of the Union speech were portrayed as both a package for economic growth and an economic election manifesto, although most commentators found little that was new within the package.
Details from the speech are given below.
Defence.
Bush announced additional defence cuts designed to save $50,000 million between 1992 and 1997.
He also announced the possibility of further large cuts if an agreement could be reached with the Commonwealth of Independent States [see also pp. 38744-45].
Foreign policy.
"There are those who say that we can turn away from the world, that we have no special role, no special place.
But we are the United States of America, the leader of the West that has become the leader of the world.
As long as I am President we will continue to lead in support of freedom everywhere, not out of arrogance, and not out of altruism, but for the safety and security of our children."
 "This is a fact: Strength in the pursuit of peace is no vice; isolationism in the pursuit of security is no virtue." 
Short-term economic measures.
Bush emphasized the linkage between economic prosperity and political freedom.
Eschewing "gimmicks" he outlined a number of measures which he was implementing (without requiring congressional authorization) in order to stimulate the economy.
These included (i) a 90-day moratorium on new federal regulations which could hamper growth, and a fundamental review of all existing regulations;(ii) an instruction to all Cabinet departments and federal agencies "to speed up pro-growth expenditure" , which would infuse an extra $10,000 million into the economy in the next six months;(iii) a change in the federal tax withholding schedules which would stimulate domestic demand by returning some $25,000 million to the economy over the next 12 months; and (iv) a commitment to work with the Federal Reserve Board to hold down interest rates and inflation.
He also called upon Congress to approve specific tax reforms [see below]to encourage investment and to revive the ailing housing market.
The most controversial of these was the proposed reduction of capital gains tax, a measure which Congress had previously rejected.
In restating his demand Bush said: "This time, at this hour, I really cannot take no for an answer.
You must cut the capital gains tax on the people of our country."
Eight-point long-term strategy
After calling on Congress to pass the budget by March 20, Bush went on to outline the measures included in his eight-point long-term strategy.
These were as follows:
Free trade.
"We will work to break down the walls that stop world trade; we will open markets everywhere.
In our major trade negotiations I will continue pushing to eliminate tariffs and subsidies that damage America's farmers and workers."
Education.
"The workplace of the future will demand more highly skilled workers than ever…
We must be the world's leader in education; we must revolutionize our schools."
Research and Development.
"We must encourage research and development.
My plan is to make the R&D tax credit permanent, and provide record levels of support — over $76,000 million this year alone — for people who will explore the promise of emerging technologies".
Crime and drugs.
"It is time for a major, renewed investment in fighting street crime.
It saps our strength and hurts our faith in our society, and in our future together…
Surely it's true that everyone who changes his or her life because of crime — from those afraid to go out at night to those afraid to go into the parks they pay for — surely these people have been denied a basic civil right.
It is time to restore it.
Congress, pass my comprehensive crime bill.
It is tough on criminals and supportive of police, and it has been languishing in these hallowed halls for years now."
Housing.
Bush called for greater funding for housing for the poor and for inner city redevelopment.
Health care.
"American health costs have been exploding.
This year America will spend over $800,000 million on health, and that is expected to grow to $1,600,000 million by the end of the decade.
We simply cannot afford this.
The cost of health care shows up not only in your family budget, but in the price of everything we buy and everything we sell.
We must make a choice…
We can move toward a nationalized system — which will restrict patient choice in picking a doctor and force the government to ration services arbitrarily — and what we'll get is patients in long lines, indifferent service, and a huge new tax burden.
Or we can reform our own private health care system, which still gives us, for all its flaws, the best health care in the world.
My plan provides insurance security for all Americans, while preserving and increasing the idea of choice.
We make basic health insurance affordable for all low-income people not now covered.
We do it by providing a health insurance tax credit of up to $3,750 for each low-income family.
The middle class gets new help, too.
And, by reforming the health insurance market, my plan assures that Americans will have access to basic health insurance even if they change jobs or develop serious health problems.
We must bring costs under control, preserve quality, preserve choice, and reduce the people's nagging daily worry about health insurance.
My plan, the details of which I will announce shortly, does just that."
Federal deficit.
Bush called for a rediscovery of "a" home truth "that the American people have never really forgotten: this government is too big and spends too much" .
Therefore he restated his belief in the discipline of enforced spending caps, called for congressional authorization for the elimination of 246 federally funded spending programmes, and repeated earlier calls for the President to be given a line-item veto in order to "end the annual ritual of filling the budget with pork-barrel appropriations" .
Enactment of stalled reforms and celebration of family values.
 "Congress should enact the bold reform proposals that are still awaiting congressional action, bank reform, civil justice reform, tort reform, and my national energy strategy." 
Bush stressed the importance of the family unit, and stated the view that its dissolution was the single most important factor in the growth of social problems.
To this end he called on Congress to approve his tax changes — particularly the increased personal exemption of $500 per child per year — in order to help families.
Within this context he also criticized families for whom welfare assistance had become a way of life.
He expressed approval for the concept "that when able-bodied adults receive government assistance, they have responsibilities to the taxpayer: a responsibility to seek work, education, or job training, a responsibility to get their lives in order, a responsibility to hold their families together and refrain from having children out of wedlock, and a responsibility to obey the law." 
Bush ended his speech by returning to the Desert War theme and informing his audience that"We are still the freest nation on earth; the kindest nation on earth; the strongest nation on earth; and we have always risen to the occasion.
We are going to lift this nation out of hard times inch by inch and day by day, and those who would stop us had best step aside.
Because I look at hard times and I make this vow: This will not stand."
Presentation of 1993 budget
President George Bush on Jan. 29 unveiled a $1,520,000 million budget for fiscal 1993.
The package, which contained numerous tax incentives, was designed to stimulate the stagnant US economy, and to realize the administration's prediction that economic growth would resume in early 1992 and would accelerate thereafter.
Bush had promised tax cuts in his State of the Union Speech delivered to Congress on Jan. 28 [see above].
The budget package suggested that these, together with other mild fiscal stimuli, would be paid for — without violating the existing budget rules — by spending cuts, a higher budget deficit, and a change in the method of accounting.
Caps on discretionary spending were not raised, nor was spending transferred from the defence to domestic programmes.
The President suggested, however, that if Congress objected to the partial financing of the tax cuts through cuts in domestic spending, then he would be willing to countenance an amendment of the 1990 Budget Enforcement Act in order to allow reductions in defence spending to be used to offset the cost of the tax cuts.
The Democratic chairman of the House of Representatives budget committee, Leon E. Panetta, described the package as "gimmickry" and accused the administration of using "smoke and mirrors" in order to finance its tax cuts and spending initiatives.
With revenue set at $1,169,000 million, the budget projected a deficit of $351,000 million.
The budget also projected an increased deficit for 1992 of a record $400,000 million, compared with an estimate of $281,000 million a year earlier and $350,000 million as recently as the beginning of 1992.
More significantly, however, the package departed from recent Republican budgets in that it abandoned any prospect of achieving a balanced budget in the medium term.
The deficit was not projected to fall significantly below $200,000 million (about 3 per cent of gross domestic product — GDP) throughout the next five years.
The biggest spending programmes were the provision of pensions and health care for the elderly and poor.
Office of Management and Budget Director Richard Darman suggested that it was this rapid growth of spending on mandatory or "entitlement" programmes which, together with the recession, had caused an increase in the deficit forecasts.
With mandatory spending projected to exceed 50 per cent of total outlays in 1993, Darman proposed to remedy this "fundamental flaw in the present system of budget discipline" by introducing a cap on mandatory spending growth similar to that which already controlled the growth of discretionary spending.
The budget package was consistent with those of recent years in that it was based on some fairly optimistic projections concerning the future development of the economy.
GDP was set to grow at around 3 per cent until 1997, with unemployment declining slowly from 6.9 per cent in 1992 to 5.3 per cent in 1997.
Although the short-term projections were in line with many of those produced by private-sector forecasts, those covering the longer term were considered somewhat optimistic by many economists.
The Congressional Budget Office, an independent adviser to Congress, had recently forecast growth of around 2.6 per cent per year.
Details of budget
Many details within the 1,600 page budget document remained unclear.
Amendments arising from the process of political haggling within the administration and senior Republican circles had continued until the last moment, thereby resulting in some parts of the budget being incomplete or inconsistent.
Domestic programmes.
The budget sought spending increases for the departments of Education, Justice, State, Energy, Treasury, and Veterans' Affairs.
Those departments which suffered cuts were Agriculture, Commerce, Defence, Housing and Urban Development, Interior and Transportation.
In all, the administration moved some $13,000 million in domestic priorities.
Increased spending on much-vaunted initiatives such as programmes to improve children's nutrition or the level of infant mortality was purchased by the termination or reduction of spending in 330 other programmes.
As in previous years spending on social security represented the biggest item of expenditure.
The budget called for $299,700 million for social security, $224,700 million for a variety of discretionary domestic spending programmes and $126,500 million for Medicare.
Interest payments.
Interest payments on the federal debt were budgeted to rise to a record level of $213,800 million.
Defence.
[For details of defence cuts see pp. 38744-45.]
Tax changes.
The budget contained details of an array of tax changes — outlined in the State of the Union speech [see above]— which were designed to stimulate economic growth.
Among these was a plan to cut the amount of personal income tax withheld by employers during the year.
It was estimated that the move, which did not require congressional approval, would increase the disposable income of the average tax payer by $350, and would create a stimulus to the economy totalling $25,000 million.
The measure was designed for immediate application and short-term effect, with the handout being retrieved in the following year.
Other proposals included (i) a $500 per child increase in personal tax exemption (beginning Oct. 1) for families earning less than $157,000 per year;(ii) a temporary tax credit for first-time home buyers of 10 per cent of purchase price (up to $5,000) on homes bought by the end of the year;(iii) short-term compensation for those selling their homes at a loss; and (iv) a temporary investment tax allowance on the purchase of assets.
Proposed permanent tax changes included (i) a phased reduction in capital gains tax from its current level of 28 per cent to 15.4 per cent on assets held for three or more years, to 19.6 per cent for assets held for two years and to 23.8 per cent for assets held for one year;(ii) greater flexibility for individual retirement accounts (IRAs);(iii) the repeal of the luxury tax on boats and aircraft; and (iv) a tax credit of up to $3,750 to help poor families finance health insurance premiums.
Appointment of new Transportation Secretary
President George Bush on Jan. 22 named Andrew H. Card, deputy White House Chief of Staff, as his new Transportation Secretary.
As with all US Cabinet posts, Card's appointment was subject to confirmation by the Senate.
The office had been vacant since December when Bush had appointed the incumbent Transportation Secretary, Samuel Skinner, as his Chief of Staff [see p. 38667].
In announcing the appointment Bush described Card, a former state legislator in Massachusetts, as "a friend of many years" , who had served in Bush's campaign teams in the presidential elections of 1980 and 1988, had then served for three years as deputy Chief of Staff to the controversial John Sununu, but had maintained a reputation for managerial efficiency and diplomacy.
Card's appointment also appeared to open the way for a comprehensive reshuffle of White House staff following a management review implemented by Skinner.
The Chief of Staff blamed the recent low opinion poll showings for Bush on poor domestic policy formulation and communication.
Bush's tour of Far East
In early January President George Bush made an official 12-day tour of the Far East, visiting Australia, Singapore, South Korea and Japan.
Originally scheduled for November 1991, the tour had been postponed following opinion surveys which suggested that Bush was widely perceived as concentrating too much on foreign affairs and too little on domestic considerations.
It was subsequently rescheduled with a greater emphasis on trade rather than diplomacy.
Linking the US recession to the trade deficit and, therefore, to the barriers against US exports, Bush — accompanied by an entourage of 21 senior US businessmen — promised to prise open protected markets and bring home jobs.
Visit to Australia and Singapore
Bush visited Australia on Jan. 1-4, promising that, despite the end of the Cold War, the USA would stay involved in Asia until "the end of eternity" .
Nevertheless, his pronouncements on the precise nature of the US commitment to the region, and on the future of the ANZUS alliance, were far from clear.
On the issue of trade, whilst decrying protectionism Bush enraged Australian farmers by refusing to agree to scrap subsidies for US wheat exports.
After leaving Australia Bush went on to Singapore on Jan. 4-5 [see pp. 38727-28].
Visit to South Korea — Cancellation of Team Spirit
Bush visited South Korea on Jan. 5-7 for talks with President Roh Tae Woo.
Although some trade frictions were discussed, the agenda was dominated by security issues.
At a meeting on Jan. 6 the two leaders agreed to cancel the annual "Team Spirit" joint military exercises, the holding of which had frequently resulted in the suspension of dialogue by North Korea.
The cancellation, formally announced the following day, was indicative of the dramatic improvement in relations between the two Korean states achieved in December 1991 [see pp. 38659-60].
Nevertheless, Bush reiterated his commitment to maintain the 39,000 US troops stationed in South Korea "so long as there is a need and we're welcome" .
The North Korean government on Jan. 7 welcomed the cancellation of Team Spirit.
It also stated that it would sign an agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency before the end of January which would allow international inspection of its nuclear facilities [see p. 38721].
Visit to Japan — Bush's collapse at state banquet
Bush visited Japan on Jan. 7-10 and held several sessions of talks with the beleaguered Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, when they agreed on a vaguely worded Tokyo Declaration which expressed the commitment of the two countries to work together in support of a new world order.
Although no comprehensive trade agreement was forthcoming, several concessions were made by Japanese businesses which, it was estimated, could boost Japanese imports by $10,200 million by 1993.
Japanese car manufacturers promised to increase purchases of US-made components from $7,000 million in fiscal 1990 to $15,000 million by fiscal 1994.
The Japanese manufacturers also made a "voluntary" commitment to sell an extra 20,000 US-made cars per year, although the new total would still only amount only to some 50,000, and many of these would be Japanese-brand vehicles made in the USA.
The Japanese also promised to improve access for foreign companies to markets including glass, paper, legal services and computers.
In addition to his failure to secure major deficit-reducing trade measures, Bush's visit to Japan was marred by his spectacular collapse at a state banquet on Jan. 8.
The President turned pale, vomited into the lap of Miyazawa and then collapsed to the floor.
Bush appeared to have recovered from what was later described as gastric influenza by the following day, but this was the second occasion within a year that the health of the 67-year-old President — and the possible succession of Vice-President Dan Quayle — had become a major news issue [see p. 38183].
It also provided the single most powerful and symbolic image of the tour: a Japanese leader cradling the head of a stricken US President.
Campaign for presidential nominations
The presidential election campaign intensified in January as candidates for both the Democratic and Republican nominations prepared for the New Hampshire primary on Feb. 18.
Bush opened his re-election campaign; one of the Democratic candidates, Governor of Virginia Douglas Wilder, abandoned the race; and the Democratic front-runner, Bill Clinton, struggled to prevent his challenge from disintegrating in the face of allegations of marital infidelity.
Abandonment of campaign by Wilder
Wilder, the country's first elected black Governor, formally announced his withdrawal from the contest for the Democratic nomination on Jan. 8, at the end of his State of the Commonwealth address on the opening day of the 1992 session of the Virginia state legislature.
He wished, he said, to spend more time concentrating on the problems of his state.
Since Wilder announced his candidacy in September 1991, his campaign had failed to acquire any significant momentum.
The opinion polls showed him lagging a long way behind the front-runners and suggested that he was going to fare very poorly in the New Hampshire contest.
This lack of impact had severely hampered Wilder's fundraising ef-forts.
His campaign had also suffered from a paucity of endorsements from leading black political figures, to the extent that, in late December, Wilder had accused the Rev. Jesse Jackson as the leading black Democratic political figure of sabotaging his candidacy.
Wilder's withdrawal meant that for the first time since the 1980 nomination contest the Democratic campaign would be fought without a major black contender.
While Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska and Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa were expected to accrue some of the black support which would otherwise have gone to Wilder, the principal beneficiary of Wilder's withdrawal seemed likely to be front-runner Bill Clinton, who had won considerable black support in his five campaigns for the governorship of Arkansas.
The remaining five Democrats participated in a second nationally televised debate (the first having been held in December) on Jan. 19.
Although no clear winner emerged from the debate, most commentators believed that Clinton had performed well enough to consolidate his position as the leading contender.
Allegations of infidelity against Clinton
The longstanding rumours of Clinton's alleged marital infidelity crystallized in the form of an accusation by Larry Nichols, a former Arkansas employee who was dismissed in 1988 for allegedly using state telephones to make long-distance calls.
In what was widely seen as an attempt to exact vengeance on Clinton, Nichols had issued a federal lawsuit which claimed that the Governor had had extra-marital affairs with at least five women, and that he had misused official funds in entertaining them.
When the story was picked up in the press in January, Clinton dismissed the allegations as "old stories" and "trash" , but insisted that he would not discuss the details of his 17-year marriage.
Nevertheless, Nichols's allegations received widespread media coverage, and invoked echoes of the 1987 destruction of the candidacy of Gary Hart amid similar allegations [see p. 35246].
Eventually, with opinion poll surveys showing him to be losing ground in New Hampshire, Clinton brought his wife, Hillary Clinton, to the forefront of the campaign.
Her powerful endorsement of her husband, together with Clinton's accusations that the Nichols story had become suddenly prominent because it was being co-ordinated by "filth-mongers" within the Republican Party, appeared to have successfully discredited the story.
The issue resurfaced almost immediately, however, in the form of a sexually explicit interview published by the Star (a supermarket tabloid which had originally published the Nichols allegations), with a state employee, Gennifer Flowers, one of the woman named by Nichols as having been involved with Clinton.
Flowers stated that she had had a sporadic sexual relationship with Clinton between 1977 and 1989, and she had provided the newspaper with a number of taped telephone conversations between herself and Clinton from 1990 to 1992 which appeared to endorse aspects of her claim.
Clinton admitted that Flowers had been an acquaintance, but strongly denied that he had had an affair with her.
Nevertheless, the story provoked questions as to Clinton's honesty and to his possible misuse of influence in appointing Flowers to her current job in return for her silence.
With his position slipping badly in the opinion polls, he took a gamble by electing to appear with his wife on a prime-time television current affairs programme, on Jan. 27, in order to address the charges.
Appearing calm and good humoured, he once again denied that Flowers had been his lover, but refused to state unequivocally that he had never committed adultery.
He acknowledged that his marriage had had difficulties in the past, and conceded "wrongdoing" and "causing pain" within it, but insisted that it was now stable and strong.
Whether these past difficulties should debar him from the presidency was, he said, an issue to be decided by the US people: "We're putting this in your hands, you get to decide." 
A further factor in the scandal arose from remarks made by Clinton on the telephone tapes in which he described Mario Cuomo, the Governor of New York and senior figure within the Democratic Party, as "an aggressive, mean sonofabitch" who acted like a "mafioso" .
Cuomo condemned the comments as indicative of racial stereotyping, and brushed off Clinton's attempts to explain them away as "good-natured and jocular" .
Nevertheless, Clinton's dignified television performance (seen by an estimated 40 per cent of the electorate), together with inconsistencies in some of the claims of Flowers, and the withdrawal of the Nichols lawsuit, appeared to have rescued the Governor's campaign from the point of destruction.
By the end of the month his position in the polls showed that he remained ahead of his Democratic rivals and had recovered some of the ground lost during the early phase of the scandal.
Developments in contest for the Republican nomination
Bush launched his re-election campaign in New Hampshire on Jan. 15 with a promise to unveil a plan for comprehensive health care reform.
He also acknowledged the extent of the country's current economic recession but, invoking the spirit of Desert Storm (the operational codename for the US prosecution of the Gulf war), he promised that it would be overcome.
Opinion polls suggested that Bush was losing ground within the state to his main challenger, Patrick Buchanan, who continued to campaign effectively on an "America First" platform of right-wing isolationism.
The polls suggested that whereas in November 1991 Bush was leading Buchanan amongst Republicans within the state by 56 per cent to 20 per cent, by mid-January this margin had been cut by 10 per cent .
During January it also became clear that both Buchanan and, more especially, David Duke — the third Republican candidate and a former Ku Klux Klan leader — faced increasing difficulties in getting their names entered on to the Republican ballot papers in many states.
Despite denials that efforts to block challenges to Bush were being co-ordinated from either the White House or the Republican Party's national leadership, Duke threatened to contest the presidential election as a third party candidate if he was prevented from campaigning for the Republican nomination.
It was widely feared that, under such circumstances, Duke could syphon off sufficient right-wing votes to cause Bush's defeat in several crucial states.
Abortion
Supreme Court agreement to rule on key abortion case
The Supreme Court agreed on Jan. 21 to rule on the constitutionality of Pennsylvania's restrictive abortion law before the end of its current session in July 1992.
The case brought under this law, Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey, involved a further examination of the constitutional protection of the right to abortion contained within the 1973 landmark ruling, Roe v. Wade.
Several states had passed restrictive laws since the Supreme Court's 1989 ruling allowing them greater opportunity to limit the availability of abortion (in Webster v. Reproductive Health Services — see pp. 36809-10).
The main provisions of the Pennsylvania law were:
Spousal notification.
A married woman was required to notify her husband prior to obtaining an abortion, unless the husband was not the father of the child, could not be located, had created the pregnancy through a sexual assault upon his wife, or might cause physical harm to the woman concerned.
Parental consent.
A minor seeking an abortion was required to obtain parental consent.
Informed consent.
Physicians were obliged to inform abortion patients about foetal development and the alternatives to terminating the pregnancy.
Waiting period.
The statute imposed on a woman seeking an abortion a 24-hour waiting period after she had received the information stipulated by the law.
Medical emergencies.
Under circumstances of medical emergency, defined as a situation which involved immediate risk of death or "substantial and irreversible impairment of major bodily function" , the restrictions could be overridden.
Reporting requirements.
Physicians performing abortions were obliged to file detailed reports on each case to the state health department.
The Pennsylvania law had been considered by the 3rd US Circuit Court of Appeals in Philadelphia in October 1991.
All of its provisions had been upheld other than that relating to spousal notification which was struck down by two votes to one.
Although outright bans on abortion had been passed only in Utah, Louisiana and the territory of Guam, many states were known to have anti-abortionist majorities within their legislatures and governors who were opposed to abortion.
The National Abortion Rights Action League (NARAL) estimated that almost 15,000,000 women in 13 US states would quickly lose the option of having a legal abortion if Roe v. Wade was overturned.
Political implications of Supreme Court decision
Although it was possible that the Pennsylvania law could be upheld without overturning Roe v. Wade in its entirety, the timing of the case ensured that the highly divisive issue of abortion was almost certain to be an important factor in the 1992 presidential and legislative election campaigns.
With polls showing a clear majority of voters in favour of preserving the right to abortion, the issue promised to be particularly difficult for the Republican Party which was deeply divided upon the abortion question.
President Bush was a staunch opponent of abortion under all but the most extreme of circumstances.
On Jan. 22, the day after the Supreme Court's decision, Don Nickles, a Republican senator from Oklahoma and a renowned opponent of abortion, was named as chairman of the 1992 Republican platform committee.
The Supreme Court's decision also focused attention on the Freedom of Choice bill currently awaiting congressional consideration.
The sponsors of the bill made clear their intention to press for a vote on it within the current legislative session.
If passed it would present Bush with the politically undesirable prospect of having to veto the measure during the election campaign.
Anti-abortionist activities in Washington DC
The annual March for Life, held on Jan. 22, the 19th anniversary of Roe v Wade, saw 70,000 opponents of abortion converge on Washington DC.
The rally which accompanied the march was addressed by Bush.
Speaking from the White House — via a telephone line connected to loudspeakers — he restated his opposition to abortion.
Hours before the March for Life, dozens of volunteers from Operation Rescue (a radical anti-abortionist group which had conducted a mass blockade of abortion clinics in 1991 — see p. 38383) attempted for the second morning in succession to block access to two abortion clinics in the capital.
A total of 128 adults and 22 minors were reported to have been arrested as anti-abortionists clashed with pro-choice stewards attempting to escort women patients into the clinics.
Supreme Court ruling on political asylum
The Supreme Court ruled on Jan. 22 that those who had fled from countries where rebel forces had attempted to coerce them into military service were not entitled to political asylum.
The ruling, by six votes to three, could deprive many thousands of refugees, many from Central America, of the opportunity of being allowed to remain in the USA.
The ruling was made in the case of Jairo Jonathan Elias Zacarias who had fled from Guatemala in 1987 after guerrillas had attempted forcibly to recruit him for military service.
The Court reversed a ruling by the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit by adjudging that Zacarias was not protected by the 1980 Refugee Act which required aliens seeking asylum to demonstrate "a well-founded fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion" [see pp. 30411; 34541].
In its majority opinion the Court found that "the mere existence of a generalized political" motive to the coercion was inadequate to qualify someone for protection under the 1980 Act, and that the law required the persecution to be motivated by the opinions of the victim rather than by those of the persecutor.
Opening of fourth Gotti trial
The trial of John Gotti, the reputed head of the Gambino "family" , the most powerful component of the US Mafia, opened on Jan. 21.
Gotti, whose sartorial taste had led him to be widely known as the "Dapper Don" , was charged by federal prosecutors with five murders, extortion, illegal gambling and obstruction of justice.
Since 1986 Gotti had faced three previous trials and had been acquitted on all charges.
In what appeared to be a concerted campaign by the criminal justice authorities to prevent a fourth acquittal, Gotti's previously successful defence lawyer was prohibited from representing his client on the grounds that he was peripherally involved in some of the evidence to be presented by the prosecution.
The latest charges arose from a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) investigation which involved the secret taping of Gotti's conversations at his headquarters in Brooklyn, New York City.
The prosecution was also believed to be planning to call three former Mafia members as witnesses.
These included Salvatore Gravano, allegedly Gotti's most trusted lieutenant, who was a co-defendant on the charges before choosing to turn state's evidence.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Report on Inuit relocation
The Canadian Human Rights Commission released a report on Jan. 15 which concluded that the rights of a group of native Inuit had been violated when they were forcibly relocated from northern Quebec to the Arctic wilderness of Cornwallis and Ellesmere Islands.
The transfer project, conducted between 1953 and 1955, was designed to establish settlements on the barren islands in order to assist Canadian claims to sovereignty over the region.
The government's Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development characterized as "generally acceptable" the report's recommendation that an apology should be made and that a travel fund should be established to allow those Inuit who had remained in the northern Arctic to visit relatives who had returned to Quebec province.
However, the Department refused to discuss demands made by some of the victims for compensation payments for the suffering caused by the relocation.
AMERICAS
CUBA
Execution of "counter-revolutionary" — trade relations
Death sentences were passed on Jan. 11 on three alleged "counter-revolutionaries" convicted of terrorism, sabotage and enemy propaganda.
The three men, members of a small anti-Castro group, had landed in a dinghy from the United States with weapons and explosives, and had been arrested on Dec. 29 at El Júcaro, near Cárdenas on the north coast of the island.
The death sentence on Eduardo Díaz Betancourt was upheld on appeal, and he was executed by firing squad on Jan. 20.
The two others, Daniel Santovenia Fernández and Pedro de la Caridad Alvárez Pedroso, had their sentences commuted to 30 years' imprisonment.
The death sentences attracted widespread international criticism, and several government leaders made appeals for clemency.
The Cuban government rejected the criticism and restated its intention to act strongly against what it perceived as an outside threat to its security.
At the same time as the trials, several leading opposition dissident and human rights figures were detained.
Defections
On Jan. 3, 34 people sought asylum in the USA after flying to Miami in a Air Cubana helicopter usually used for flying tourists to Varadero.
On Jan. 10, three Interior Ministry officers were shot dead and a fourth wounded during an unsuccessful attempt by several Cubans to flee the country by stealing a boat from the Tarara naval base in Habana del Este.
On Jan. 30, the US authorities revealed that two members of a Cuban family were wounded by Cuban security forces while attempting to flee to the US naval base at Guantánamo Bay.
One man successfully crossed the mine fields to enter the base, while 12 others were detained by the Cuban authorities.
Trade relations
After his meeting with Jorge Mas Canosa, leader of the Miami-based Cuban-American National Foundation (CANF), in late December [see p. 38669], the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozyrev was reported as saying that all aid to Cuba would be halted.
On Jan. 17, the Russian Deputy Foreign Minister, Valery Nikolayenko, clarified this position, stating that Russia would maintain formal economic relations with Cuba, although at a reduced volume of trade.
It was made clear that trade would be at international prices, with no subsidies or preferential treatment.
On Jan. 25 Cuba and Lithuania signed a five-year economic co-operation agreement and a trade accord for 1992 under which Cuba would export sugar, citrus fruit and medical goods to Lithuania in return for food, soap and detergent.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Rejection of compromise agreement
A compromise agreement reached on Jan. 8, negotiated under the auspices of the special mission of the Organization of American States (OAS), which would have paved the way for the return from exile of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, was later rejected by military and parliamentary leaders in Haiti, leaving the country's political crisis unresolved.
After two days of talks in Caracas, Venezuela, Aristide agreed to endorse René Théodore, leader of the National Reconciliation Movement (MRN) and secretary-general of the Unified Party of Haitian Communists (PUCH), as candidate for Prime Minister [see p. 38670].
On Jan. 14, however, Théodore insisted on the lifting of the OAS trade embargo before he would form a government, and a restoration of calm before Aristide could return.
The OAS had previously made the lifting of sanctions dependent on the return of Aristide to office.
Fear of the repercussions of Aristide's eventual return prompted some hardline members of the military and anti-Aristide conservatives to make moves to reject the compromise agreement.
Parliament avoided taking the decision on the acceptance of Théodore, which was necessary for the replacement of the current interim Prime Minister, Jean Jacques Honorat.
The parliamentary negotiating team, led by Dejean Belizaire, president of the Senate, refused to attend a further session of talks with the OAS in Washington on Jan. 19, and later suspended any further talks with Aristide.
The mandate of the provisional President, Joseph Nerette, which had been due to expire on Jan. 8 after a three-month term, was extended indefinitely [see p. 38523].
On Jan. 25 one of Théodore's bodyguards was shot dead and Théodore himself was beaten during an attack by gunmen on the headquarters of the MRN in Port-au-Prince where Théodore was meeting parliamentarians.
Breaking of economic embargo
The economic embargo of Haiti, which had caused severe disruption within the country, particularly because of the lack of fuel supplies, was broken on Jan. 2 by a tanker carrying 165,000 barrels of diesel oil from Colombia.
A further tanker-load of petroleum from France, originally bound for Mauritania, also arrived in Haiti in mid-January.
The two shipments were estimated to cover consumption needs for up to two months and helped bolster the determination of the military leaders to resist attempts by the OAS to secure Aristide's return.
Human rights report
Amnesty International, the human rights organization, issued a report on Jan. 22 accusing the security forces of responsibility for the deaths of over 1,500 civilians and for the arrest and detention of a further 300 in the period since the Sept. 30 coup.
It also said that many human rights abuses went unreported, particularly in the countryside.
The Haitian government denied the reports.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Cabinet change — Annulment of Tabasco elections — Imprisonment of generals
President Salinas appointed noted reformist Ernesto Cedillo Ponce de León, hitherto Planning and Federal Budget Minister, as Education Minister on Jan. 7 following the resignation of Manuel Bartlett Díaz.
The budget and finance ministries were combined, consolidating Finance and Public Credit Minister Pedro Aspe Armella's control over the economy.
Tabasco election fraud
The government of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari annulled on Jan. 12 the results of elections held in Tabasco state in November 1991.
This followed accusations of fraud and a 50-day march by 500 peasants from Tabasco to Mexico City, where they joined a demonstration by 20,000 opponents of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI).
The governor of Tabasco, Salvador Neme Castillo, resigned.
The disputed elections concerned three towns, Nacajuca, Macuspana and Cárdenas.
Andrés Manuel López Obrador of the left-wing Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD) claimed that votes for the PRI in Cárdenas exceeded the number of registered voters.
The Cárdenas city government was handed over to the PRD.
This was the third time in six months that the federal government had intervened in state politics to redress alleged fraud.
The PRI governor-elect of Guanajuato state was dismissed in August 1991 and the new PRI governor of San Luis Potosí state was forced aside in October 1991 [see pp. 38385; 38524].
Imprisonment of generals after drugs battle
Two generals — Gen. Alfredo Moran Acevedo and Brig.
Gen. Humberto Martínez Lopez — one colonel and three lesser-ranking officers were imprisoned by a military court in mid-January for their part in the killing of seven anti-narcotics police agents during an abortive drugs raid the previous November.
Two drug smugglers with some 360 kg of cocaine bound for the United States from Colombia had made a refuelling stop at Tlalixcoyan airstrip in south-east Mexico.
Anti-narcotics agents arrived to seize them.
However, the smugglers and the two-man refuelling team escaped as a small army detachment opened fire on the police.
A report by the National Human Rights Commission blamed the army for the deaths but failed to investigate possible complicity between the army and the drug smugglers.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Formal signature of peace agreement
A peace agreement between the government and the opposition Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) was formally signed in Mexico City on Jan. 16.
Minister of the Presidency Oscar Santamaría signed for the government, while Shafik Jorge Handal signed for the FMLN.
The agreement, first reached in September 1991 and concluded in December [see pp. 38414; 38672]officially ended the 11-year civil war which had cost 75,000 lives.
The peace was guaranteed by the UN, which sent a 1,000-strong military force to El Salvador at the end of January.
The powers of the UN Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL), which was set up in 1989, were officially widened on Jan. 14 to include monitoring and verification of the peace agreements.
ONUSAL's mandate was extended to Oct. 31, 1992.
The ceasefire was due to take effect on Feb. 1.
During the period to end-October, two of the three government police forces (the National Guard and the Treasury Police) would be incorporated into the armed forces.
The national police would organize a new National Civilian Police (PNC) with half its membership drawn from the FMLN.
Also by the end of October pro-government paramilitary groups and the estimated 8,000 FMLN guerrillas would be disbanded.
The FMLN would re-organize as a political party.
Changes in the longer term included (i) the halving of the number of armed forces to about 31,000 over two years;(ii) electoral reform;(iii) land reform;(iv) the creation of a consultative body, comprising representatives of government, employers and workers, to set policy for economic and social development; and (v) the creation of a mechanism to allow the FMLN to contribute to the national reconstruction plan.
Imprisonment of army officers
Col. Guillermo Alfredo Benavides Moreno and Lt. Yusshui René Mendoza were each sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment in late January for planning and carrying out the murder of six Jesuit priests, their housekeeper and her daughter in November 1989.
Three other officers were given suspended three-year sentences for destroying evidence.
Benavides and Mendoza, who had been tried and convicted in September [see p. 38414], would not benefit from an amnesty law adopted on Jan. 24, which was applicable only to groups of over 19 people.
There were indications that more senior officers had ordered the killings but had negotiated immunity.
The United States Congress had made prosecution of the case a condition for continued US military aid.
Reconstruction aid
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) on Jan. 6 approved a 14-month standby credit of SDR41,500,000 (US$59,300,0003 million).
The credit would support the government's 1992 economic and financial programme to achieve 3-4 per cent growth, strengthen the balance of payments and reduce inflation to 9-12 per cent.
In mid-January US, Canadian, Japanese and West European government officials met to formulate a joint aid package for the reconstruction of El Salvador and other Central American countries.
The reconstruction cost in El Salvador was estimated at US$1,800 million.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Renewed violence in north — Cabinet reshuffle
Encarnación Valdivia and another leader of the re-contras (rearmed ex-contras) were seriously injured and a third leader, Leonel Benavides, was killed in an ambush by re-compas (rearmed ex-Sandinistas) in northern Nicaragua, it was reported on Jan. 9.
The re-contra commanders were returning from talks in Managua with President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro concerning the continued violence between re-contras and re-compas.
Valdivia was transferred to hospital in Costa Rica on Jan. 14, following re-contra threats of war if he died.
On Jan. 10 Gen. Humberto Ortega, Commander-in-Chief of the Sandinista People's Army (the official army), proposed the creation of a rapid deployment force to re-impose order.
However, on Jan. 13 re-contras were blamed for the kidnapping of four policemen from the Rio Blanco police station.
On the same day, re-contra leader José Angel Morán Flores (known as El Indomable) relaunched negotiations with the government to contain the violence.
At end-January four policemen and two re-compas were killed in an attack on a police station.
Cabinet reshuffle
President Chamorro announced Cabinet changes on Jan. 9.
Ernesto Leal was promoted to Foreign Minister, replacing Enrique Dreyfus Morales who had resigned for health reasons.
Julio Cárdenas took over as Economy and Development Minister from Silvio de Franco.
De Franco was appointed president of the Central Bank of Nicaragua replacing Raúl A. Lacayo Solórzano who had been criticized for his credit policies.
De Franco said that President Chamorro wanted closer co-ordination of long-term monetary and credit policies and to ensure a better response from the credit system for production needs.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Violence between drug cartels
In a statement released on Jan. 6, leading members of the Medellín drug cartel, known as Los Extraditables, declared that they would take reprisals against the rival Cali cartel, claiming that one of the Cali leaders, Gilberto Orijuela, had hired Luis Meneses — more commonly known as Ariel Otero, the former leader of some of the most powerful right-wing paramilitary organizations in the country — to kill them.
On Jan. 10 the body of Meneses, who had headed the "self-defence" groups of the Magdalena Medio region, was found riddled with bullets on the outskirts of Puerto Bocayá [for December surrender of Otero's paramilitaries to government see p. 38673].
In response to the Medellín cartel's statement, Meneses — reportedly once a close ally of Medellín cartel leader José Gonzalo Rodríguez Gacha [for whose death in December 1989 see p. 37119]— had threatened to make public further allegations against imprisoned Medellín drug baron Pablo Escobar [for whose June 1991 surrender see p. 38283].
According to reports, Meneses had earlier worked with the Colombian police and the US Drug Enforcement Agency to capture Escobar and had recently reached a deal with the Cali cartel to provide protection and intelligence services.
Colombian drugs investigators linked the surge in violence to shifting alliances within the Medellín and Cali cocaine cartels, as their various factions competed to gain control of the expanding heroin industry in the country.
Shooting of assassin of presidential candidate
On Jan. 2 the body of 17-year-old Andrés Arturo Gutiérrez Maya, who had confessed his responsibility for the March 1990 murder of Bernardo Jaramillo Ossa, the presidential candidate of the left-wing Patriotic Union party (UP)[see p. 37312], was found, along with that of his father, in an abandoned car in Medellín.
Both had been stabbed and shot.
Gutiérrez had reportedly been due to testify in court that his orders to assassinate Jaramillo had come from Pablo Escobar.
The UP accused the government of responsibility for the murder; until December Gutiérrez had been held in a top-security prison in Bogotá, but he was then transferred to Medellín and released for Christmas to join his family.
On Jan. 22 it was reported that the government had ordered a tightening of security at the prison holding Pablo Escobar amid reports that he had been able to continue running his drug cartel through visitors.
AMERICAS
ECUADOR
Talks with Peru on border dispute
President Rodrigo Borja Cevallos held talks in Quito with President Fujimori of Peru, on Jan. 10-11, in a further sign that relations between the two countries, damaged by a longstanding territorial dispute in the Condor Range Amazonian border region, had improved [for 1981 border clashes see pp. 30763-64; 31090; for threat of renewed skirmishes in 1991 see p. 38526; for first meeting between Borja and Fujimori at December 1991 Group of Rio summit see p. 38673].
In talks with Borja and during a speech to the Ecuadorean Congress, Fujimori reiterated his proposal, made in November 1991 [see p. 38673], that Ecuador be offered navigation rights on the northern Peruvian Amazon and that the border dispute be settled on the basis of the 1942 Rio de Janeiro protocol, which fixed the border after a war between the two countries.
The solution would involve mediation by the signatories of the protocol, a proposal hitherto rejected by Ecuador [see p. 38526], whose territorial claim in the oil-rich area dated back to colonial times and extended as far as the Peruvian town of Iquitos.
In a concession to Ecuadorean demands, Fujimori accepted Borja's proposal, made at the UN General Assembly on Sept. 30 but then rejected by Peru, that the Vatican arbitrate the dispute, albeit at the request of the Rio de Janeiro protocol signatories.
Fujimori's visit — the first to be made by a Peruvian president — was also interpreted as a sign of greater flexibility, with Fujimori referring to the prohibitive financial costs of fortifying the disputed area at a time of economic crisis.
Ecuadorean opposition leaders León Febres Cordero and Abdalá Bucaram Ortiz, however, stayed away from an official dinner held by Borja for Fujimori.
IMF standby credit
On Dec. 12, 1991, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) approved standby credit of SDR75,000,000 (about US$105 million) for 1992 in support of Ecuador's programme of economic reform; 25 per cent of each of the five disbursements were be set aside for possible debt-reduction schemes agreed with Ecuador's commercial bank creditors.
The credit was considerably less than the US$203 million originally requested by the government, keen to increase public spending and the availability of private-sector credit in an election year.
In its letter of intent, the government envisaged a 3 per cent growth in gross domestic product (GDP) in 1992, while reducing inflation from 45 per cent to 25 per cent and containing the fiscal deficit to 1.1 per cent of GDP.
Disturbances in Guayaquil
There were disturbances in Ecuador's largest city, Guayaquil, on Jan. 19 as angry municipal workers protested over the decision of the mayor, Harry Soria, to dismiss over 4,000 pipones — employees on the pay-roll but not working.
Borja ordered the armed forces to intervene after violent clashes, including gunfire, between the security forces and the demonstrators.
Cars were set on fire and a bomb attack was made against the mayor's car with his family inside.
AMERICAS
PERU
Overruling of President over budget
After two days of debate, an extraordinary session of Congress approved the national budget for 1992 on Jan. 7, overruling President Alberto Keinya Fujimori, who had rejected the original draft on the grounds of its inflationary implications for the economy.
Fujimori's "reservations" on 41 articles of the bill had included those relating to the expenses of Congress which, he argued, should also "comply with the principles of austerity" .
According to the Peruvian press, however, the budget bill had allowed for a 300 per cent increase in Fujimori's own salary and for a 17-fold increase in spending by the presidential office.
Dropping of charges against García
On Dec. 3, 1991, the Supreme Court ruled that there was insufficient evidence to bring the former President and senator for life, Alan García Pérez, to trial on charges of illegal enrichment during his 1985-90 period in office.
A year-long investigation by a congressional commission had earlier led to the removal of García's constitutional immunity from prosecution [see p. 38387].
The special state prosecutor in charge of the case said that she would be appealing against the Supreme Court's ruling.
It was reported on Jan. 3 that Luis Adolfo Portugal Rondón had assumed office as the new president of the Supreme Court.
Death of US citizens in helicopter attack
Three United States citizens and a member of the Peruvian National Police involved in Peru's anti-drug programme died near the village of Madre Mía in the Alto Huallaga valley on Jan. 12, when their US-donated helicopter was shot down by alleged terrorists.
According to reports, the US victims were employees of Dyncorp, a US company hired by the US State Department to fly and maintain US aircraft on loan to the Santa Lucía base, one of the main centres for anti-drugs operations in Latin America.
In a statement released on Jan. 22 the Sendero Luminoso guerrilla movement claimed responsibility for the attack, which allegedly used surface-to-air missiles.
Resignation of senior presidential adviser
On Jan. 30 it was reported that Hernando de Soto, a key adviser and personal representative of Fujimori, had resigned, alleging that officials in coca-growing areas were co-operating with drug traffickers.
De Soto had played a major role in re-establishing the confidence of the international financial community in Peru, damaged under García, and had been involved in the drafting of a bilateral anti-drugs agreement signed with the USA in May 1991 [see pp. 38187-88].
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
Mass opposition to privatization plans
Led by the Bolivian Workers' Confederation (COB), workers mobilized throughout the country in December and January, opposing the plans of the Patriotic Accord (AP) coalition government to privatize over 100 state-owned enterprises, including the state mining company Comibol and companies run by regional development corporations.
Spearheaded by workers at the Colquiri tin and zinc mine who began a series of strikes in early December, the protests culminated in a COB-called national strike on Jan. 2, paralysing railways, internal flights, municipal offices and public services.
Miners and workers held hunger strikes and marches, and blocked roads in the following weeks.
A catalyst for the unrest was the passage of a privatization law on Dec. 17, 1991, when pro-AP deputies forced the legislation through the Chamber of Deputies.
On the following day the Senate was compelled to "freeze" the legislation after opposition deputies successfully appealed to the Supreme Court to block Senate ratification of the law until a ruling had been made on the constitutional legality of the AP's parliamentary conduct during the lower house vote.
The government condemned the opposition's move as an obstacle to economic modernization, given the dependence of increased foreign investment and multilateral loans on privatization and deregulation.
On Jan. 29, following the mediation of the Catholic Church and pressure from the President's Office for a settlement, the government and the COB signed an agreement to end the labour dispute.
Under the settlement, the government agreed to allow mineworkers to present alternative proposals and promised thorough discussions with the unions over planned tax increases.
Approval of 1992 budget
On Jan. 19 the National Economic and Planning Council approved the 1992 budget [for 1991 budget see p. 37958].
While proposing an increase in value added tax from 10 to 13 per cent and limiting wage increases to 10 per cent, the budget planned an increase in social spending from the equivalent of US$28,000,000 in 1991 to US$102 million in 1992.
Due to an anticipated 50 per cent fall in natural gas sales to Argentina, however, fuel prices would rise 43 per cent, making it likely that inflation would exceed the planned 10 per cent for 1992.
According to December reports in the Bolivian press, the number of public employees would be reduced over the next five years by over 35 per cent under a programme drawn up by the government with the World Bank.
The ministries of Health and Social Security, Peasant and Agricultural Affairs and Education would be particularly affected, with a 50 per cent cut.
Agreement with Peru — Access to sea
Meeting in the southern Peruvian port of Ilo, President Jaime Paz Zamora signed an agreement with his Peruvian counterpart, Alberto Fujimori, on Jan. 24, which would grant Bolivia, landlocked since it lost territory to Chile in the 1879 War of the Pacific, access to the Pacific Ocean.
Through the Declaration of Ilo, the two presidents committed Bolivia and Peru to implement the terms of the Gran Mariscal Andrés de Santa Cruz bilateral framework agreement, which they signed at the same time, for economic co-operation between the two countries.
Separate complementary agreements relating to the use of Ilo by Bolivian companies and the movement of nationals between the two countries were signed by the Bolivian and Peruvian Foreign Ministers.
Under the various agreements, Ilo would be developed jointly as a free zone with full industrial and commercial facilities, with Peru allowing free access to Bolivian goods along a route leading to Ilo from the Bolivian border town of Desaguadero.
Both governments agreed to seek financial support for the construction of the necessary road and transport links.
For its part, Bolivia, in return for the Peruvian sea outlet, committed itself to help Peru gain access to the Atlantic through the Bolivian town of Puerto Suárez and on through Brazil, offering Peru the same facilities as it had been offered in Ilo.
The Ilo-Puerto Suárez link would help trade with Brazil, Paraguay and Argentina, with Ilo seen as the launching-pad for exports to the Pacific Rim countries.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Dismissal of general over arms scandal
In connection with the scandal over illegal arms shipments to Croatia involving the army and its C.-in-C., former dictator Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte [see p. 38673-74], President Patricio Aylwin Azócar on Jan. 3 ordered the dismissal of the head of the army's ordnance company FAMAE, Brig. -Gen.
Hector Letelier.
Letelier, who was replaced by Gen. Carlos Carvallo Yáñez, was moved to perform other tasks in the army high command.
His removal, reportedly suggested by Gen. Pinochet himself after an internal army inquiry, was accompanied by the arrest of three people connected with the case and the placing of a restriction order on another six.
On the request of Defence Minister Patricio Rojas Saavedra, the Supreme Court appointed a special judge to investigate the case.
Allegations of MIR-ETA links
Following a two-year investigation by Spanish police into terrorist kidnappings (including that of businessman Emiliano Revilla in 1988 — see p. 35746), four alleged members of the Movement of the Revolutionary Left (MIR) were remanded in custody in Madrid after their arrest on Jan. 14, accused of links with the Basque separatist organization ETA.
According to the Spanish Ministry of the Interior, the links between MIR and ETA — denied by a leading member of MIR, Patricio Rivas, on Jan. 29 — dated back to 1978 and had lasted until 1989.
Compensation ruling in Letelier case
An international commission ruled in Washington DC on Jan. 11 that the Chilean government should pay just over US$2,600,000 in compensation to the families of Orlando Letelier, a former Foreign and Defence Minister and ambassador to the United States under the 1970-73 Allende government, and his US associate, Ronni Moffit.
Both were assassinated in Washington in 1976 by a car bomb [see pp. 28273-74; 34989; 36097; 37709; 37914].
The amount was well below the US$14,000,000 claimed by the United States, which was to distribute the compensation (US$1,600,000 to the Letelier family and US$1,000,000 to the Moffit family).
The ruling, which was not subject to appeal, was made by the Bryan Commission, set up by Chile and the United States on Oct. 3, 1991, under a 1916 treaty aimed at resolving disputes between the two countries.
On Jan. 27 the Chilean Supreme Court agreed to submit questions on the Letelier case to US President Bush (head of the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) at the time of the killings), following allegations by Gen. (retd) Manuel Contreras and Col. Pedro Espinoza, the former head and chief of operations respectively of the DINA secret police during the 1973-90 Pinochet regime, that the Letelier attack had been carried out by CIA agents infiltrated into the DINA, in order to discredit the Pinochet regime.
One of the questions asked whether the US-born DINA agent Michael Townley, already sentenced by US courts for his role in the bombing, was a CIA agent.
Death of Tomic
Radomiro Tomic Romero, 77, President Aylwin's Geneva-based ambassador to international organizations, died in Santiago on Jan. 3.
A founding member of the Christian Democrat Party (PDC) and a former ambassador to the USA under the 1964-70 Frei government, Tomic stood as the PDC presidential candidate in the 1970 elections which brought Salvador Allende to power.
Revaluation of peso
On Jan. 23 the Central Bank revalued the peso by 5 per cent, in an effort to prevent a surge in foreign exchange reserves (stemming from direct foreign investment and export earnings) from hindering monetary management and the fight against inflation (18.7 per cent in 1991).
As at Jan. 27, 1992, US$1.00=360.186 pesos.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Resignation of senior officials amid corruption allegations
One of President Carlos Saúl Menem's private secretaries, Miguel Angel Vicco, was forced to resign on Jan. 15 after allegations in the left-wing Página/12 newspaper that he was a shareholder in a company which sold substandard powdered milk at inflated prices to the Ministry of Social Action.
In December another presidential adviser, Carlos Spadona, had been forced to resign for his involvement in the case.
Deputy Minister of the Interior Juan Carlos Mazzón was also dismissed on Jan. 15 after Noticias magazine disclosed that he had served nine months of a three-year prison sentence imposed in 1981 for fraud.
On Jan. 8 President Menem had publicly claimed that the latest wave of corruption allegations surrounding his government [for allegations during 1991 see pp. 37959; 38144; 38674]were part of a smear campaign organised by the opposition Radical Civic Union party (UCR) and a malicious press.
Compensation for dictatorship victims
Under a law signed by Menem on Jan. 2, Argentines jailed without charge during the 1976-83 military dictatorship would be entitled to compensation of US$40 for each day spent in prison, US$30,000 in the case of serious injury, and US$50,000 in the case of the death of a relative.
Government officials anticipated up to 5,000 applications for settlements.
1992 budget — New currency
Approved by the Senate on Dec. 19, the 1992 budget anticipated a 6.5 per cent growth in the gross domestic product, a reduction in annual inflation from 84 per cent to 7 per cent and the continued linkage of the currency to the United States dollar [for the "dollarization" of the economy see pp. 38095-96].
Proceeds from privatization sales would also allow the government to reduce the fiscal deficit to 0.17 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP).
The largest rises in allocations went to security and defence.
In an assertion of its growing confidence in the stability of the economy, the government reintroduced the peso as the national currency on Jan. 1, replacing the austral introduced by President Raúl Alfonsín Foulkes in June 1985 [see p. 33982].
The new peso would be worth 10,000 australes or the equivalent of one US dollar, in line with "dollarization" .
The peso and the austral would be allowed to co-exist for around six months, but with cheques in australes valid only until March 31.
AMERICAS
FALKLAND/MALVINAS ISLANDS
Appeal by Menem for international arbitration
Describing diplomacy as a "continuation of war with other weapons" , President Menem of Argentina on Jan. 3 appealed to the United Kingdom to settle the dispute over sovereignty of the Falkland/Malvinas Islands through international arbitration, along the lines of the border dispute being resolved between Argentina and Chile.
In the following days, however, the Argentinian Foreign Ministry, anxious not to impair the improved climate of relations with the UK [for 1990 restoration of diplomatic relations see p. 37245], toned down Menem's proposal for arbitration, suggesting that it was one option among several.
A similar clarification was made by Menem himself on Jan. 8 when he also suggested the possibility that he might make an official visit to the United Kingdom.
A UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office Minister of State, Tristan Garel-Jones, met Menem, Foreign Minister Guido di Tella and Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo during an official two-day visit to Buenos Aires which ended on Jan. 25.
On Jan. 22, however, the Financial Times reported that the UK, in the run-up to the 10th anniversary of the Falklands/Malvinas war, had rejected a number of informal Argentinian overtures to normalize military relations with London.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Approval of IMF loan
On Jan. 29 the International Monetary Fund approved a standby credit arrangement for SDR1,500 million (about US$2,100 million) to be released in seven quarterly instalments, depending on compliance with IMF targets.
Of each quarterly instalment, 25 per cent would be set aside to support debt-reduction operatons.
The IMF targets included a conversion of the current fiscal deficit into a surplus of 2.4 per cent of gross domestic product and a reduction in monthly inflation (23.6 per cent in December) to 2 per cent by the end of 1992.
In a letter of intent — the 10th since 1982 — handed to the IMF Managing Director, Michel Camdessus, during his December visit, the government had agreed to achieve fiscal adjustment through increases in tax revenues and public-sector tariffs and to maintain reserves (US$7,000 in December) at US$9,000 million.
Zero growth was anticipated for the year.
Approval of the loan was aided by the decision of the House of Representatives on Dec. 19 to pass legislation raising 1992 federal taxes to bring in US$12,000 million in extra revenue.
On Dec. 20 the 1992 budget was passed, allowing expenditure of 470 trillion cruzeiros (US469,000 million).
In return for the tax increases, however, the federal government agreed to roll over the US$70,000 million owed by states and cities to the federal government.
The debt had previously been used, without success, by President Fernando Collor de Mello as a bargaining chip in his efforts to gain legislative approval for constitutional reforms to liberalize the economy [see p. 38526].
The IMF loan was seen by the government as crucial to successful negotiations with foreign creditors over Brazil's US$44,000 medium- and long-term commercial debt.
On Jan. 10, however, Japan announced that it would not help to finance debt-reduction schemes until Brazil had agreed a three-year extended facility with the IMF.
Pensions controversy — Cabinet reshuffle
President Collor carried out a reshuffle of his Cabinet in mid-January, in an effort to overcome a political crisis over pensions.
All four outgoing ministers had been accused of corruption and influence-peddling.
The pensions controversy began on Jan. 7 when Congress, recalled from its summer break, upheld a Supreme Court ruling in favour of a 1992 increase in pensions of 147 per cent(instead of the government's 54).
Claiming that the increase jeopardized the granting of the IMF standby loan and that the government did not have the US$11,000 million needed to fund it, Collor issued a decree on Jan. 20 suspending the rise until 1993.
The courts, however, insisted on the legality of their original verdict and Congress declared its intention to challenge the constitutional validity of Collor's decree.
In an effort to reduce his isolation from Congress, on Jan. 17 Collor announced the replacement of Minister of Labour Antônio Rogério Magri and Minister for Social Action Margarida Procópio, whose ministerial responsibilities included administering the pension fund.
Their portfolios were taken over respectively by Reinhold Stefanis and Ricardo Fuiza, both congressmen from the Liberal Front Party (PFL).
The PFL had voted against the government over pensions, despite being the leading pro-government party in Congress.
A former PFL senator, Jorge Borhausen, was appointed to the newly-created Cabinet post of Secretary to the Presidency, with responsibility for rebuilding relations with Congress, a task previously carried out by Justice Minister Jarbas Passarinho.
On Jan. 23 Collor also dismissed Minister of Health Alceni Guerra and Minister of Integration Carlos Chiarelli, abolishing the latter ministry.
Health was given as an additional portfolio to Education Minister José Goldemberg on an interim basis.
Communist party name change
The Brazilian Communist Party (PCB), founded in 1922, decided to change its name to the Popular Socialist Party (PSP) at its 10th congress held in January.
AMERICAS
URUGUAY
General strike
The Inter-Union Assembly — National Convention of Workers (PIT-CNT — the trade union confederation) organized a 24-hour general strike on Jan. 17 as part of its campaign against the economic policies of the government of President Luis Alberto Lacalle Herrera.
The PIT-CNT had called a 36-hour general strike in December 1991 against measures which included a 12 per cent pay rise for public-sector workers, judged "wholly insufficient" by the PIT-CNT.
The December package also angered employers as it eliminated tax concessions and protection for the vehicle assembly industry, while imposing higher corporate income tax and social security contributions.
New Army and Navy commanders
Gen. Juan Rebonio was appointed Commander-in-Chief of the Army following the retirement of Gen. Guillermo de Nava.
Adml.
Ricardo Murialdo was appointed the new Navy Commander.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA-BELIZE
Argentina and Belize moved to establish relations at ambassadorial level as a result of the signing of a protocol at the Argentine permanent mission to the UN in New York on Jan. 8.
AMERICAS
BARBADOS-GUATEMALA
Barbados and Guatemala established diplomatic relations at ambassadorial level on Jan. 27.
AMERICAS
JAMAICA
On Jan. 14 it was announced that the government had reached agreement with the United States for the rescheduling of repayments of debt principal and interest totalling US$47,000,000, due between June 1, 1991, and June 30, 1992; part of this — US$18,700,000 due to the US Agency for International Development (USAID)— was to be postponed for 10 years, while the rest was to be subject to a six-year grace period.
AMERICAS
PUERTO RICO
Following the rejection of the proposals put forward by the ruling Popular Democratic Party (PPD) in the referendum held on Dec. 8, 1991 [see p. 38670], the Governor, Rafael Hernández Colón, announced his intention not to seek re-election in the gubernatorial elections due to be held in November 1992; it was expected that Victoria Múñoz Mendoza would be endorsed as the PPD's candidate for the governorship.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Growth of scandals
Arrest of LDP legislator
The fortunes of beleaguered Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa took a sharp downward turn on Jan. 13 with the arrest of Fumio Abe, a former Director-General of the Hokkaido and Okinawa Development Agencies (with Minister of State status in the Cabinet) and close associate of Miyazawa, for allegedly accepting bribes from the Kyowa Corp during his tenure of the office between August 1989 and January 1990.
The arrest was particularly embarrassing for Miyazawa as, until his resignation in December 1991, Abe had been secretary-general of the Miyazawa faction of the ruling Liberal Democratic party (LDP).
Following his arrest Abe announced his resignation from the LDP but stated that he would not resign from the Diet.
Abe's arrest was the first occasion on which a serving Diet member had been arrested on bribery charges since the Lockheed scandal of 1976.
With the scandal closing around him, Abe had entered a Tokyo hospital, where he was arrested by officials of the Tokyo District Public Prosecutor's Office.
He was charged with having received 80,000,000 yen (about US$630,000) in bribes from Kyowa, a steel frame manufacturer which had gone bankrupt in November 1990, in return for providing confidential information to the firm concerning development projects on Hokkaido.
The 80,000,000 yen in bribes was part of a total of more than 500,000,000 yen allegedly given by Kyowa to Abe, some of which appeared to have found its way directly into the coffers of the Miyazawa faction without having been registered under the political funds control law.
Shortly after Abe's arrest it was reported that other members of the Miyazawa faction were being questioned in connection with the affair.
Yosahiro Hayashi, the newly-appointed successor to Abe as secretary-general, stated on Jan. 16 that "the faction is in serious trouble" .
Reconvening of Diet
Although Miyazawa denied that his faction had received Kyowa money, he was pressed by the opposition to explain his role in the affair.
When the Diet reconvened on Jan. 24, the Prime Minister sought to fend off charges that Kyowa money had been used by Abe to assist Miyazawa's campaign for the LDP leadership in October 1991 [see p. 38558].
The Prime Minister was also questioned once again about his role in the Recruit-Cosmos scandal which had forced his resignation as Finance Minister in 1988 [see p. 36463], but about which new questions had been raised in December 1991.
With his popularity falling in the opinion polls, and the prospect of much of his planned legislative programme becoming paralysed by the Diet's preoccupation with the two scandals, Miyazawa even hinted that he was considering calling an early general election.
(Although half the members of the upper house were due for re-election in mid-1992, elections in the lower house were not due for another two years.)
The suggestion of an early election confirmed the growing belief that the Miyazawa administration was in desperate trouble.
On Jan. 8 he had attempted to bolster his support amongst other LDP factions by persuading Shin Kanemaru, 77, the leader of the largest faction and arguably the most influential figure within the LDP, to become vice-president of the party and to take on the responsibility of co-ordinating its internal affairs.
It was Kanemaru who was widely credited with having ensured Miyazawa's selection as LDP leader in 1991.
Even with his skills and influence at the Prime Minister's disposal, however, by the end of January Miyazawa's future tenure as Prime Minister appeared to be distinctly uncertain.
Sagawa Kyubin scandal
Miyazawa's position was also threatened by the development of the Sagawa Kyubin scandal, which involved huge payments to politicians by a transport firm with links to organized crime.
It was widely rumoured that if the Sagawa Kyubin affair was to be fully revealed its scope would surpass not only the Kyowa scandal, but also the Recruit affair.
The firm at the centre of the scandal, Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin, was the largest regional affiliate in the Kyoto-based Sagawa Kyubin group, Japan's second largest parcel delivery firm.
In mid-1990 its president and managing director were dismissed after revelations that the firm had issued guarantees for 400,000 million yen in unsecured loans to 40 different companies, of which 100,000 million yen had gone to companies linked to the Inagawa-kai, Japan's second-largest organized crime syndicate.
The company was also reported to have paid more than 40,000 million yen to some 200 politicians, including members of the LDP and opposition parties.
Prior to his dismissal the president of Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin, Hiroyasu Watanabe, compiled a memorandum listing all of those who had received money.
Although the Tokyo District Public Prosecutor's Office refused to release information on the details of the payments, unofficial reports suggested that the names on the Watanabe memorandum included those of five former Prime Minsters and two LDP faction leaders, with individuals receiving amounts ranging from 800 million to 10,800 million yen.
Miyazawa's visit to South Korea — Apology over wartime conduct
Miyazawa made a three-day official visit to South Korea, arriving on Jan. 16 [for Kaifu's visit in January 1991 see p. 37960].
In his two meetings with President Roh Tae Woo the two leaders discussed a wide range of bilateral issues.
Roh expressed concern over Miyazawa's plans to resurrect stalled legislation which would allow the despatch of Japanese military forces overseas in order to participate in UN peacekeeping actions [see p. 38529].
Roh also raised the issue of South Korea's widening trade deficit with Japan, which had reached US$8,800 million in 1991, and which constituted 90 per cent of the whole South Korean deficit.
Miyazawa promised that, by the middle of the year, his government would produce a plan for cutting the deficit, but he resisted Roh's demand for the transfer of technology as a form of compensation for the trade imbalance.
The most controversial issue raised during the visit related to Japan's colonial occupation of Korea, and specifically the forced recruitment of thousands of Korean women — some historians suggested as many as 200,000 — to be used sexually by the Imperial Japanese Army fighting in China and South-East Asia.
Prior to Miyazawa's Korean visit fresh evidence had been uncovered which had caused public outrage both in Japan and elsewhere.
This was in part the result of research in the archives of the Defence Agency in Tokyo, and partly a response to a compensation suit filed in a Tokyo District Court in December by three former "comfort women" .
Whereas the recruitment of comfort women — some of whom had been as young as 12 years of age — had previously been acknowledged by Japan, no proof had previously been uncovered that the practice had been an official and systematically imposed policy.
During his visit to Korea Miyazawa apologised several times over the issue, and stated that Japanese history books should honestly record the true facts of the practice.
In the light of the fresh revelations Roh ordered a full investigation of the issue, and on Jan. 21 the South Korean government formally petitioned Japan for compensation.
Although during his visit Miyazawa had suggested that compensation was an issue which should be decided by the courts, his immediate response to the formal compensation demand was that some form of recompense was necessary to demonstrate Japan's remorse.
Others within the government suggested that the 1965 normalization treaty which had established full diplomatic relations between South Korea and Japan [see pp. 20972; 21310]— whilst not explicitly dealing with the issue of comfort women — had nevertheless resolved all matters relating to war reparations.
Apology in the Diet by Prime Minister
In a speech on Jan. 24, Miyazawa broke with tradition by issuing an apology within the Diet to those who had suffered from Japan's past conduct.
He acknowledged that the "people of the Asia-Pacific region endured unbearable suffering and sorrow as a result of Japanese actions" .
He stated his desire to "reiterate my heartfelt remorse and regret that this happened" .
The Japanese people had to look honestly at "past facts" concerning atrocities committed by imperial troops, he told the silent Diet, and the teaching of history should nurture "a sense of admonition never to repeat these misdeeds" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
North Korean signature of nuclear safeguards accord — Relations with USA and Japan
The North Korean government on Jan. 30 signed a nuclear safeguards accord which would allow international inspection of its nuclear facilities.
It had announced on Jan. 6 that such an agreement would be signed before the end of the month, following a decision by South Korean President Roh Tae Woo and US President Bush to cancel the annual "Team Spirit" military exercises [see p. 38713].
The agreement was signed at the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Vienna by Hong Gun Pyo, North Korea's Deputy Nuclear Energy Minister, and Hans Blix, the IAEA Director-General.
It was due to become effective following its formal ratification by North Korea, which had signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1985, but had not previously discharged its obligation as a signatory to negotiate and sign a safeguards agreement which would allow international inspection.
On Dec. 31, 1991, the two Korean states had initialled an outline agreement designed to ban nuclear weapons from the peninsula [see pp. 38659-60].
They exchanged texts of this agreement, signed by their Prime Ministers, at a working level meeting at the truce village of Panmunjom on Jan. 21.
The accord was due to become operational following the formal exchange of copies scheduled for Feb. 19, in Pyongyang, at the sixth round of Premiers' talks.
North Korean talks with USA
The process of reconciliation between the two Koreas, and particularly the North's apparent abandonment of its alleged plans to develop nuclear weapons, opened the way for tentative contacts between North Korea and the United States.
The US and North Korean governments had been communicating for several years at a low level through the US embassy in Beijing.
The USA let it be known that it was prepared to upgrade the status of these talks if North Korea submitted to nuclear inspection.
This point was reiterated at a meeting on Jan. 22 in New York between US Under-Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Arnold Kanter, and Kim Young Sun, secretary for international affairs in the ruling Korean Workers' Party.
The meeting was the highest-level contact between the two countries since the end of the Korean War, but the USA stressed that it did not represent an upgrading of bilateral relations, but was a one-off event designed to impress upon the North Korean government the importance attached to the nuclear safeguards issue by the USA.
During the talks it was reported that the North Korean delegation made it clear to the US team that Kim Jong Il, the 49-year-old son of veteran North Korean President Kim Il Sung, had been given control by his father of the formulation of foreign policy.
The claim was consistent with other measures apparently taken by the elder Kim to secure the succession of his son, including the appointment in December of Kim Jong Il as Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces.
Relations with Japan — Progress of normalization talks
Further pressure for North Korea to sign the safeguards agreement had come from Japan.
On Jan. 19 the Japanese Foreign Minister, Michio Watanabe, stated that his government was prepared to "take positive steps" on North Korean requests for war reparations and other aid if North Korea submitted to international nuclear inspection.
The compensation claims and the nuclear issue had deadlocked the normalization talks between Japan and North Korea.
The sixth round of the talks was held in Beijing on Jan. 30-31, and was later extended by one day to Feb. 1.
Although no breakthrough was achieved in the discussions, the Japanese delegation offered its approval of North Korea's signature of the safeguards accord and called for an early inspection of the country's nuclear facilities.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Postponement of local elections — Issue of Roh's successor
President Roh Tae Woo announced on Jan. 10 that two rounds of elections for mayors and provincial governors due to be held in mid-1992 would be postponed indefinitely.
With legislative elections due in March or April, and presidential elections later in the year, Roh claimed that the postponement was necessary because of the country's current economic difficulties.
The opposition vehemently condemned the decision and maintained that the government was legally obliged to go ahead with the local polls during the first half of the year.
Some observers were surprised that, despite being pressed on the issue, Roh gave no indication that he was preparing to support Kim Young Sam as his successor.
Kim, a former opposition leader, was the leader of one of the three factions within the ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP).
Roh stressed the importance of choosing the DLP's presidential candidate through the democratic process of a party convention, to be held after the legislative elections.
Many commentators interpreted this to mean that the relative strengths of the DLP factions in the newly elected legislature could be crucial in determining the party's choice of a successor to Roh.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Internal politics — Foreign relations
Visit by Deng Xiaoping to Guangdong — Increased emphasis on economic reform
Commentators claimed that a highly publicized visit by Deng Xiaoping, China's "elder statesman" , to Guangdong province in January indicated that the "reformist line" was once again in the ascendant.
The visit marked Deng's first public appearance in over a year.
According to press reports he appeared fit and in good spirits.
He started the visit on Jan. 19 in Shenzhen, one of China's five special economic zones (SEZs) established in the late 1970s as a showcase for Dengist economic reforms.
On Jan. 23 Deng went on to visit Shuhai, another SEZ.
During his visit to Shenzhen and Shuhai Deng was joined at various times by other high-ranking leaders, including President Yang Shangkun, Yang Baibing, President Yang's younger brother and a member of the central committee secretariat of the ruling Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and secretary-general of the Central Military Commission, Qiao Shih, a member of the CCP politburo standing committee and central committee secretariat, and Zhu Rongji, a reformist Vice-Premier.
Deng made a number of reformist speeches during his visit to Guangdong.
In one speech he called for the creation of several "Hong Kongs" along China's coast.
He also warned conservative elements that "whoever does not reform will have to leave the stage" .
Deng's visit followed publication of a series of articles in the official Chinese media suggesting that economic reform, slowed in the aftermath of the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre and the austerity drive which followed it, was ready to accelerate.
It also coincided with other hints that a more reformist line was emerging, including Premier Li Peng's visit to Europe and the United States in late January [see below].
In a speech delivered on Jan. 25 to the national conference of propaganda department directors Li Ruihuan, a member of the politburo standing committee, called on them to "devote greater efforts to publicizing reform" and to "should stop delivering dry and empty sermons and conveying formalistic propaganda" .
Agreement with USA on intellectual property rights
China and the USA narrowly averted a trade war when a last-minute settlement was signed in mid-January on the protection of intellectual property rights (IPR).
If the IPR talks had failed, the USA, under Section 301 of the 1988 Omnibus Trade Act, would have imposed retaliatory duties on some US$450,000 million worth of Chinese imports.
A final round of talks on the dispute opened in Washington on Jan. 7 [see p. 38575 for discussions in November 1991].
A matter of hours before the Jan. 16 deadline agreement was reached on the final outstanding issues — computer software and chemical patents.
In a full memorandum of understanding signed on Jan. 17 China agreed to provide protection for US inventions and copyrighted works, including computer software, product patents, sound recordings and trade secrets.
Li Peng's European tour — Attendance at World Economic Forum — Meeting with Bush in New York
Li Peng's arrival in Italy on Jan. 26 marked the start of his first visit to the West since the Tiananmen Square massacre in June 1989.
During his visit to Italy on Jan. 26-28 Li held talks with Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti.
Li visited Switzerland on Jan. 28-29 for talks with, amongst others, President René Felber and Economic Minister Jean-Pascal Delamuraz.
A meeting with the Swiss Justice Minister, Arnold Koller, was cancelled after the Chinese side refused to hold separate discussions on human rights and on Tibet.
On Jan. 30 Li travelled to Davos (Switzerland) to attend the opening of the annual meeting of the World Economic Forum.
In his speech to the Forum Li outlined China's policies of economic reform, and affirmed that "China will not change its policies of reform and opening up, which enjoy wide popular support" .
On Jan. 31 Li attended the special summit of the United Nations Security Council [see p. 38744]in New York.
He held a brief meeting with US President Bush at the UN.
Li returned to China via Portugal (Feb. 2-4) and Spain (Feb. 4-6).
Expulsion of Canadian delegation
A delegation of Canadian MPs was expelled from China on Jan. 7 for "engaging in activities incompatible with their status" .
Prior to their expulsion the delegation had met with the families of imprisoned dissidents Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming [see p. 38395].
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Approval of new constitution — Prime Minister's attempted resignation
On Jan. 13 a new Constitution, which had been under discussion since June 1991 [see p. 38290], was adopted by the People's Great Hural (parliament) by 328 votes to one, with two abstentions, and was signed by President Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat at a ceremony on Jan. 15.
The new Constitution renounced socialism, describing Mongolia as a republic with parliamentary government and a directly elected president, which would adhere to the UN Declaration of Human Rights.
Mongolia would seek neutrality in international affairs, and would encourage a mixed economy, including private ownership (but retaining state ownership of pastureland).
The Constitution would take effect from Feb. 12, 1992.
In addition, the legislature was to be altered from the existing bicameral system [see pp. 38626-27]to a unicameral system, whereby the People's Great Hural was to be directly elected by all citizens over 25 years old.
The name of the country was changed from the Mongolian People's Republic to the State of Mongolia, and the yellow star of communism was removed from the state flag.
On Jan. 16, Prime Minister, Dashiyn Byambasuren tendered his resignation to the Great Hural and proposed a government reshuffle, claiming that his economic reforms no longer had the support of the people.
However, a central committee meeting of the ruling Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP) on Jan. 21 urged Byambasuren to remain in his post, and on Jan. 22 President Ochirbat refused to accept his resignation.
The following day, the Great Hural voted by 186 votes to 129 not to accept Byambasuren's resignation.
He would stay in office until the elections scheduled for June 1992.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Legco debate on governorship
During a debate held on Jan. 22 members of the Legislative Council (Legco) attacked the United Kingdom government for the manner in which it was handling the replacement of the colony's Governor, Sir David Wilson.
The UK government had disclosed on Dec. 30, 1991, that Sir David would be replaced as governor at some time during 1992.
The debate was on a motion put forward by the Co-operative Resource Centre, a conservative group of councillors, requesting the Hong Kong authorities to convey to the UK government the "views of the general public" on the issue of the next governor.
The motion was defeated when, after a tied vote, the presiding deputy president of Legco, John Swaine, voted against.
The debate was characterized by widespread dissatisfaction with the way in which the UK had announced Sir David's resignation without appointing a replacement.
The Financial Times of Jan. 23 said that it had reflected "the life breathed into local politics" by the direct elections to some Legco seats in September 1991 [see p. 38436].
Visit by Chinese delegation
Lu Ping, head of the Chinese State Council's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, headed a delegation which visited Hong Kong on Jan. 6-13.
Both sides declined to reveal the subject of their talks, but the Far Eastern Economic Review of Jan. 23 reported that they had discussed progress on Hong Kong's new airport project [see p. 38340], the impasse over the establishment of a Court of Final Appeal [see p. 38679]and reforms to the workings of Legco.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Foreign relations
Visit by Thai Premier and Army chief
Anand Panyarachun, the Prime Minister of Thailand, visited Vietnam on Jan. 15-17, the first Thai Premier to visit Vietnam since its reunification in 1976.
Vo Van Kiet, the Vietnamese Premier, had visited Thailand in October 1991 as part of a South-East Asian tour [see p. 38532].
During his visit Anand held talks with, amongst others, Vo Van Kiet and Do Muoi, general secretary of the ruling Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV).
Much of Anand's visit was concerned with economic relations.
A protocol was signed amending and updating a 1978 agreement on economic and trade co-operation.
A memorandum of understanding on rice trading was also signed (Vietnam and Thailand were two of the world's largest rice exporters).
Thailand offered Vietnam long-term credits worth 150 million baht (about US$6,000,000) to purchase Thai goods.
Vietnam approved the opening of a Thai consulate-general in Ho Chi Minh City and authorized a Thai bank to set up a branch office in Vietnam.
However, the expected signing of a joint fishing co-operation agreement did not take place.
During a press conference at the end of his visit Anand urged the United States government to lift its trade embargo against Vietnam.
Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon, Thailand's Supreme Commander and Army C.-in-C. and the leading figure in the ruling military junta, visited Vietnam on Jan. 6-8.
Gen. Suchinda informed Vietnamese military officials that Thailand was interested in trading spare military parts, and particularly in exchanging parts of US-constructed aircraft (seized by Vietnam during the Vietnam war) for Chinese tank parts.
Gen. Suchinda also invited Vietnamese officials to observe Thai military exercises and activities, apparently making this offer after Vietnamese officials had turned down his request to visit the Soviet naval base at Cam Ranh.
Visit to Malaysia by Premier
Vo Van Kiet visited Malaysia on Jan. 20-23; the last visit by a Vietnamese Premier to Malaysia had taken place in 1978.
He held talks with his Malaysian counterpart, Mahathir Mohamed, who announced his support for Vietnamese membership of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN).
The main issues of the visit were bilateral trade and investment ties, but the two sides also discussed Vietnamese refugees in Malaysia and the disputed Spratly Islands.
Visit by Japanese delegation — Talks on aid resumption
According to most commentators the visit of a Japanese delegation to Vietnam on Jan. 13-18 was a preliminary step towards the resumption of official Japanese aid to Vietnam, suspended after the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia in December 1978.
The nine-member delegation included representatives from the ministries of Foreign Affairs, Finance, and Trade and Industry.
Amongst the topics discussed was the question of the repayment of Vietnam's outstanding debt to Japan, estimated at some 30,000 million yen (about US$240 million).
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Jan. 30 reported that figures for the first nine months of 1991 showed Japan to be Vietnam's second most important trading partner, after Singapore.
Allegations of KGB contacts with US POWs — Visits by US delegations
Maj.-Gen.
Oleg Kalugin, a former senior official of the Soviet State Security Committee (KGB)[see p. 37722], was quoted in the US press in early January as saying that KGB personnel had interviewed US prisoners of war (POWs) in Hanoi in 1978.
The Vietnamese government had always maintained that it had returned all US POWs to the US government shortly after the signing of the Paris peace agreements in 1973.
In a Vietnam News Agency report on Jan. 3 the Vietnamese government denounced Kalugin's allegations as "sheer fabrication" .
Stephen Solarz, chair of the subcommittee for Asian and Pacific affairs of the US House of Representatives, visited Vietnam on Jan. 3 for talks with, amongst others, Vo Van Kiet.
The two sides discussed the issue of US servicemen reported as missing in action (MIA) in Vietnam and the situation in Cambodia.
A US delegation led by Gen. John Vessey, US President Bush's special envoy to Vietnam, visited Hanoi on Jan. 30-Feb. 1 for talks with Vietnamese officials on the MIA issue.
Vessey had last visited Vietnam in October 1991 [see p. 38532].
The two sides reviewed the results of the investigations of the 119 "discrepancy cases" which had been under investigation since 1988.
Relations with South Korea
Jin Nyum, the South Korean Minister of Energy and Resources, visited Vietnam in mid-January.
Chin was the first South Korean minister to visit Vietnam since its re-unification in 1976.
The two countries had no formal relations.
During Jin's visit the two sides signed a memorandum of understanding on resources development and economic co-operation.
Visit by Italian Foreign Minister — Other European visitors
Gianni De Michelis, the Italian Foreign Minister, visited Vietnam on Jan. 5-6, when he held talks with Vo Van Kiet, Do Muoi and Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh Cam.
Voice of Vietnam radio reported on Jan. 6 that De Michelis had informed officials of the Italian government's expanded aid programme for Vietnam, including a US$60,000,000 package to cover new projects to be carried out during the 1993-94 period.
Other European visitors to Vietnam in January included Ursula Seiler-Albring, German Minister of State for Foreign Affairs; the Earl of Caithness, a Minister of State at the United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Office; and a French National Assembly delegation.
Announcement of talks with Russia over Cam Ranh base
Komsomolskaya Pravda reported on Jan. 24 that a Russian military delegation would visit Vietnam before mid-1992 to negotiate the withdrawal of all military personnel from the Cam Ranh naval base.
The former Soviet Union had started to withdraw its warships and aircraft from Cam Ran in 1989.
The Russian news agency Interfax reported on Jan. 9 that the last major warship stationed at Cam Ranh, the Admiral Spiridonov, had returned to Vladivostok on Dec. 22.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Visit by Kaysone to Thailand
President Kaysone Phomvihane of Laos paid an official visit to Thailand on Jan. 6-15 [for signing of Laos-Thailand border co-operation agreement in December 1991 see p. 38681].
The visit was Kaysone's first since his appointment as President in August 1991.
He held talks with, amongst others, King Bhumibol Adulyadej and Prime Minister Anand Panyarachun.
Fighting between government and rebels
Army Television Channel 5 in Thailand reported on Jan. 9 that fighting had recently broken out between Lao government and rebel forces in Vientiane province.
The fighting had erupted after the rebels had launched an attack on a police post at Bang Wang Nua, in the Sanakham district of Vientiane province.
The report claimed that almost 400 Lao civilians had crossed into the Thai province of Loei to escape the fighting.
Thailand subsequently sealed the border to prevent the influx of more Lao civilians.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Progress of UN peace plan — Internal security and politics — Foreign relations
Appointment of UNTAC chief — UN mine clearance plan
On Jan. 9 Yasushi Akashi, the Japanese UN Under-Secretary-General in the Department for Disarmament Affairs, was appointed to take charge of the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC).
Many observers had expected Rafeeuddin Ahmed, the UN Under-Secretary-General responsible for Cambodia since 1982, to take charge of the operation.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Jan. 23 said that Akashi's appointment had "given the impression that Japan is using its financial muscle to secure more senior UN posts" .
The UN Security Council on Jan. 8 unanimously adopted Resolution 728 expanding the mandate of the UN Advance Mission in Cambodia (UNAMIC) to include a major mine-clearing operation.
Release of detainees and POWs
The State of Cambodia (SOC) government released 290 political dissidents and prisoners of war (POWs) from two Phnom Penh prisons on Jan. 15.
The release of the prisoners was attended by Jean-Jacques Fresard, head of operations of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in Cambodia.
An agreement on the release of the prisoners had been reached at a meeting on Jan. 14 between the Cambodian factions, Fresard and representatives of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council.
The SOC government had been set to release some 400 political detainees and POWs on Jan. 3 but the move had been cancelled after Fresard denounced it as "a pure propaganda piece" .
SPK, the SOC news agency, reported on Jan. 30 that 144 prisoners — 24 political detainees and 120 POWs — had been released the previous day.
SNC meetings in Phnom Penh
The all-party Supreme National Council (SNC) convened in Phnom Penh on Jan. 11 and on Jan. 26.
The latter meeting was attended by Akashi and by Ataul Karim, head of UNAMIC.
Assassination of Tea Bun Long — Attempted assassination of Ung Phan
Tea Bun Long, a senior government official in charge of religious affairs, was assassinated in late January.
Long was abducted as he left a "pray-for-peace" ceremony in Phnom Penh on Jan. 22.
His body was discovered on the city's outskirts three days later.
Long's assassination followed a series of large anti-corruption demonstrations in Phnom Penh in December [see p. 38680].
At the time of the outbreak of unrest Long had been one of the most outspoken critics of corruption among politicians and officials.
An Interior Ministry official quoted in the Far Eastern Economic Review of Jan. 30 claimed that Long's killing had been ordered by "a powerful faction within the government which is afraid of losing power in the liberalized political situation brought about by UN intervention" .
The Cambodian head of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, announced that he was "very, very worried" by Long's assassination.
He summoned Interior Ministry officials to the royal palace on Jan. 25 to demand a full investigation into the affair.
Ung Phan, one of Cambodia's leading political dissidents, narrowly escaped assassination on Jan. 28.
Ung Phan had served as Minister of Communications, Transport and Posts until his arrest in mid-1990 for attempting to establish a new, liberal political party in Cambodia [see pp. 37598-99].
He had been released prior to the signing of the October 1991 peace agreement.
Serious breach of ceasefire agreement
Fighting between SOC and Khmer Rouge forces in January, in the north-central province of Kompong Thom, was the gravest ceasefire violation since the signing of the October 1991 peace agreement.
According to press reports the fighting erupted in early January when the two factions fought for control of villages in the districts of Kompong Svay and Stoeung.
In late January ICRC officials reported that almost 10,000 people had been displaced as a result of the fighting.
Appointments
The 22nd regular session of the first National Assembly, held in Phnom Penh on Jan. 27-31 [see p. 38680 for extraordinary Assembly session held in late December 1991], approved a number of appointments.
Bou Thang and Chea Soth were replaced as Vice-Chairs of the Council of Ministers by Sar Kheng and Norodom Chakkrapong.
Sar Kheng was also appointed as Interior Minister, replacing Gen. Sin Song who took charge of the new Ministry of National Security.
The Assembly approved anti-terrorist legislation imposing a sentence of life imprisonment for "kidnapping or the use of illegal force against people" .
Lifting of US trade embargo
In a speech made on Jan. 4 during a visit to Singapore United States President Bush announced the lifting of a trade embargo, imposed nearly 17 years previously when Khmer Rouge rebels forced the pro-Western regime in Phnom Peng from power, against Cambodia.
Bush said that attention needed to be focused on the economic reconstruction of Cambodia "so its new political reconciliation has a home from which to grow" .
The SOC Deputy Foreign Minister Sok An said that the US move would contribute to preventing the return to power of the Khmers Rouges and would raise living standards.
On Jan. 11 Cambodian officials turned over to the USA remains thought to be those of two US servicemen killed during the Vietnam war.
Foreign visitors
There were a number of foreign visitors to Cambodia during January including Nguyen Manh Cam, Foreign Minister of Vietnam, Gen. Phoune Sipaseuth, Foreign Minister of Laos, Ali Alatas, Foreign Minister of Indonesia, Gianni De Michelis, Foreign Minister of Italy, the Earl of Caithness, a Minister of State at the United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Sadako Ogata, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Stephen Solarz, chair of the subcommittee for Asian and Pacific Affairs of the US House of Representatives, and French and Japanese parliamentary delegations.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Pre-election appointments and manoeuvring
Anand Panyarachun, the Prime Minister, appointed a 33-member committee on Jan. 8 to monitor the conduct of the general election due to be held on March 22 [for announcement in December 1991 of election date see p. 38681].
Headed by Kasem Suwannagul, Minister of University Affairs, the committee comprised university rectors, academics, representatives of non-governmental organizations, the media, state and private labour unions and students.
Pre-election party developments
Chart Thai, Samakki Tham, Prachakorn Thai and the Social Action Party announced on Jan. 23 that they would avoid competing against each other in the general election.
Maj.-Gen.
Chamlong Simaung, the popular and charismatic Governor of Bangkok and leader of the Palang Dharma, announced on Jan. 14 that he was resigning his post to allow him to stand in the forthcoming elections in Bangkok Constituency 2, one of the country's most fiercely contested seats.
Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut, former Army C.-in-C. and leader of the New Aspiration Party (NAP), had reportedly been planning to stand in Bangkok Constituency 2, but announced on Jan. 22 that he would be standing in Nonthaburi province.
Internal wrangling within the NAP had led to the resignation of Squadron Leader Prasong Soonsiri — effectively Chaovalit's deputy — and his faction on Jan. 16.
Gen. Arthit Kamlang-Ek resigned as leader of the Puangchon Chao Thai on Jan. 16 and joined the Air Force-backed Samakki Tham.
Position of Chatichai
Kraisak Choonhaven, son of former Prime Minister Gen. Chatichai Choonhaven whose government had been toppled by the military in February 1991 [see pp. 38003-04], announced on Jan. 22 that his father, a former Chart Thai leader, would not contest the forthcoming election.
On Jan. 23 Gen. Chatichai filed an appeal with the Civil Court against the seizure of his assets in December 1991 by order of the military-established Assets Verification Committee (AVC — see p. 38681).
On Jan. 18 the AVC ordered the confiscation of assets worth over 600 million baht (about US$24,500,000) from Subin Pinkayan, a Minister of Commerce and of Foreign Affairs in the Chatichai government.
Other members of the Chatichai government whose assets had been seized after they had been declared "unusually wealthy" by the AVC were Pramual Sabhavasu and Police Captain Chalerm Yubamrung.
On Jan. 20 Chalerm, leader of the Muan Chon, announced that he would stand in the forthcoming elections.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Appointments — Relations with Bangladesh
Appointment of new SLORC members — Cabinet reshuffle
The ruling military junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), was expanded on Jan. 29 with the addition of three new members, Maj.-Gen.
Maung Hla, Maj.-Gen.
Kyaw Min and Maj.-Gen.
Soe Myint.
The Cabinet was also reorganized on Jan. 29, with the creation of a number of new ministries and the appointment of a number of new civilian ministers.
Gen. Saw Maung Prime Minister; Defence U Ohn Gyaw Foreign Affairs
New Myanma Cabinet
***Rear Adml.
Maung Maung Khin Mines
***Lt. -Gen.
Tin Tun Transport; Labour and Social Welfare**
***Lt. -Gen.
Phone Myint Home and Religious Affairs; Culture**
***Lt. -Gen.
Aung Ye Kyaw Co-operatives
***Lt. -Gen.
Sein Aung Industry (I)
***Lt. -Gen.
Chit Swe Agriculture and Forests Brig. -Gen.
David Abel Trade; Planning and Finance Col. Pe Thein Health, Education
*Brig. -Gen.
Myo Thant Information**
*Brig. -Gen.
Maung Maung Livestock Breeding and Fisheries
*U Khin Maung Thein Energy
*U Win Sein Rail Transport**
*U Than Shwe Industry (II)
*U Khin Maung Yin Construction
*U Soe Tha Communications, Posts and Telecommunications**
*New appointment.
**Newly created ministry.
***Altered responsibility.
Continued border tension with Bangladesh — Military offensive against Rohingya and other rebels
Throughout January increasing numbers of civilian refugees from Arakan province crossed into Bangladesh to avoid a military offensive launched by Myanman troops against Moslem Rohingya rebels operating in the area.
Arakan was the sole Moslem majority province in Myanma.
A report on Radio Bangladesh on Jan. 18 claimed that over 60,000 Rohingya refugees had entered Bangladesh to escape what was considered by observers to be an exceptionally brutal assault on a largely defenceless civilian population.
Most were living in poor conditions in refugee camps in the Cox's Bazar district.
The government offensive in Arakan was only part of a broader offensive launched against rebel forces in late 1991.
Government troops were also fighting Karen rebels along the Thai border around Manerplaw, other Kachin rebels in the north-west of Myanma and Naga rebels based along the border with the Indian state of Nagaland.
By the end of January Myanman refugees were also streaming into Thailand and India.
The presence of large numbers of Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh increased tension along the Bangladesh-Myanma border.
Relations between the two countries had deteriorated sharply in mid-December when a Bangladeshi border guard was shot dead by Myanman troops [see p. 38681].
Military officials from Myanma and Bangladesh held "flag meetings" on Dec. 31, Jan. 7 and Jan. 28 in an attempt to reduce tension.
Nevertheless, Bangladesh defence sources quoted in press reports on Jan. 19 claimed that Myanma had deployed over 75,000 troops along its border with Bangladesh.
ASIA — PACIFIC
UZBEKISTAN
Student riots
Students in the Uzbek capital, Tashkent, reportedly rioted on Jan. 16 over high price rises caused by the introduction of free market measures.
A crowd estimated at 10,000 overturned cars and smashed shop windows, and at least one student was known to have died as police fired on the crowd; 50 students and 20 police were reported injured.
The students were prevented by police from marching on the offices of President Islam Karimov.
Demonstrations continued on Jan. 17 and 19, when there were calls for Karimov's resignation.
On Jan. 18, educational institutions were closed for the winter holiday a week early.
The news agency TASS reported that a commission had been set up under Uzbek Prime Minister Abdulkhashim Mutalov, to investigate the disturbances.
Karimov decreed a reduction in prices affecting students, and an increase in their grants (one of the principal grievances of the demonstrators having been that the student grant had not kept pace with prices).
The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet issued a statement on Jan. 20 blaming the riots on "the intrigues of political provocateurs" attempting to hinder Uzbekistan's path to independence.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Termination of US and Soviet arms supplies — Moves towards peace conference
The United States and the former Soviet Union formally ended weapons deliveries to the rival Afghan factions on Jan. 1, in accordance with a US-Soviet agreement signed in September 1991 [see pp. 38437-38].
The Independent of Jan. 10 reported that the UN was pressing ahead with plans to hold a peace conference on Afghanistan in late February, despite the continuing refusal of hardline fundamentalist mujaheddin factions to attend.
The conference was vehemently opposed by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, leader of the Hezb-e Islami, the principal fundamentalist faction.
However, evidence emerged in January that Hekmatyar was under strong pressure from his backers in Pakistan to attend the conference and to abandon his commitment to a military solution to the conflict.
Major change in Pakistan's Afghan policy — Isolation of Hekmatyar faction
On Jan. 27 the Pakistan government announced for the first time its full support for the UN peace plan [see p. 38194]and the conference, and called upon the mujaheddin to follow its lead.
The apparent modification of Pakistan's Afghan policy reflected the change in military leadership which had taken place in mid-1991.
Gen. Asif Nawaz Janjua, Chief of Staff since August 1991, had moved swiftly to alter the pro-Hekmatyar strategy of his predecessor Gen. Mirza Aslam Beg.
In early January 1992 Gen. Nawaz made clear his intention to promote a peaceful settlement of the conflict, attending a meeting in Rome with representatives of ex-King Zahir Shah (an initiative which was condemned by Hekmatyar).
Nawaz then forced the resignation of Hekmatyar's main patron within the Pakistan military, Gen. Hammed Gul, as corps commander in Multan.
Gul, a former chief of Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) until 1989, had continued since that time to play a major role in determining Pakistan's Afghan policy.
Gen. Nawaz also apparently warned the current ISI head, Gen. Assad Durrani, to halt covert aid to all mujaheddin factions.
Commentators noted that Hekmatyar continued to enjoy the support of the Pakistan fundamentalist religious party, Jammat-i-Islami.
Another initiative, by Germany's Social Democratic Party, failed in its attempt to bring the warring parties together in a "workshop" in Bonn in late January.
All parties to the Afghan conflict had been invited to talks, which were postponed after disagreements arose between the rival groups over the conference.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Military agreement with France
An agreement in principle involving the sale of 40 Mirage-2000 fighter aircraft and three naval minesweepers, the latter worth around F1,300 million, was signed during an official visit to France by Prime Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif on Jan. 14-19.
A financial protocol was also concluded, estimated at between F367,000,000 and F458,000,000, to build two conventional power stations in Pakistan.
(As at Jan. 20, 1992, US$1.00=F5.4452.)
The two sides settled a dispute involving compensation by France of an estimated F650,000,000, following its abandonment of a nuclear fuel re-processing plant in 1978.
They were unable to reach agreement on the delivery of a 900-megawatt nuclear power plant, reportedly due to French insistence that Pakistan adhere to the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) subjecting all nuclear exports to inspection.
Addressing a press conference in Paris on Jan. 17, Sharif said that Pakistan had not requested a nuclear plant, which had been promised by France during a visit to Pakistan by French President François Mitterrand in February 1990, as it involved accepting "comprehensive safeguards which for Pakistan today is not possible" .
He stressed, however, that Pakistan had no intention of producing a bomb as it wished to concentrate on economic development.
Relations with USA
Sharif's latest disavowal concerning Pakistan's nuclear programme came amidst renewed controversy prompted by United States Senator Larry Pressler, who claimed during a visit to the country on Jan. 12-13 that Pakistan had the components for at least two nuclear weapons.
Pressler's planned meetings with senior government leaders were cancelled after he accused Pakistan, in New Delhi on Jan 11, of supporting terrorists in Kashmir and Punjab.
He was the author of the 1985 Pressler Amendment to the 1961 US Foreign Assistance Act, under which the US suspended all military aid to Pakistan in October 1990 [see pp. 37764].
Meanwhile, talks aimed at resuming US military supplies continued with US Defence Department officials in Islamabad and Washington [see also p. 38577].
On Jan. 21 and 22, the Chief of Staff of the US navy Adml.
Frank Kelso met Prime Minister Sharif and President Ghulam Ishaq Khan in Islamabad.
Khan was quoted as saying afterwards that "present difficulties in Pakistan-American relations over the nuclear issue can be removed…if each side objectively analyses [the]constraints of the other" .
In mid-January, the army Chief of Staff Gen. Asif Nawaz Janjua, on a week-long private visit to the USA at the invitation of the head of the US Central Command Gen. Joseph Hoar, was reported to have succeeded in winning US assurances on the continued supply of military spare parts.
Reports that the country's US-supplied fleet of F-16 fighter aircraft had been grounded due to a critical lack of spare parts were denied on Jan. 23 by the Minister for Defence Production, Mir Hazar Khan Bijrani.
On Jan. 21 a Senate standing committee urged the government to make "full use of the opportunity provided by the US ban on weapons sales" , saying that "we should not only seek alternative sources but utilize all our capabilities to achieve self-reliance in defence production" .
Meanwhile, details emerged of Pakistan's nuclear co-operation agreement with China [see p. 38684]which confirmed the export of a 300-megawatt nuclear power plant, worth US$500,000,000, to be installed at Chashma, 140 km south-west of Islamabad.
Exchange of nuclear installations list with India
A Foreign Ministry spokesman announced on Jan. 1 that Pakistan and India had exchanged lists of nuclear installations in accordance with an agreement ratified in January 1991 [see p. 37965].
IMF loan
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced on Jan. 6 that financing had been approved for Pakistan, to be made available immediately, totalling SDR231,700,000 (about US$325,000,000).
Of this, SDR109,300,000 (about US$153,000,000) was in support of Pakistan's third annual arrangement under the IMF's structural adjustment facility (SAF), while SDR122,400,000 (about US$172,000,000) was available under the compensatory and contingency financing facility to cover the higher cost of oil imports in the fiscal year ending June 1991.
Action over Islamic court ruling on interest
Reports on Jan. 22 said that the recently privatized Muslim Commercial Bank Ltd and the Agricultural Development Bank of Pakistan, a development finance organization, were to appeal to the Supreme Court against a ruling by an Islamic court banning bank interest [see p. 38683-84].
According to the Middle East Economic Digest of Jan. 24 the government had revived a commission on economic Islamicization to seek a compromise between the banks and the sharia (Islamic law) courts.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Internal political developments
 "Unity march" violence
A 14,000-km "unity march" — ekta yatra — launched by the right-wing Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)[see p. 38682], ended in Srinigar on Jan. 26 (Republic Day) with reports that at least 30 people had been killed in an upsurge of violence attributed to Sikh and Kashmiri militants.
Unfurling the national flag at a brief ceremony in the Lal Chowk area, the BJP president Murli Manohar Joshi told some 70 party colleagues, amidst tight security and a 24-hour state curfew, that the gesture symbolized a victory against the forces of "terrorism and secessionism" .
The military chief of the separatist Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF), Javed Ahmed Mir, claimed, however, that "this is our success" , a reference to the group's stated intention to prevent the cavalcade from entering Srinigar by road.
Joshi and a small group of supporters had decided to abandon the march at Jammu, ostensibly because of a landslide blocking the route, and agreed to be flown to Srinigar aboard an Indian Air Force carrier.
Warnings of impending violence had grown after reports in mid-January that Sikh and Kashmiri militants planned to stop the march entering Punjab and Kashmir.
On Jan. 23 Sikh militants ambushed Joshi's cavalcade near the town of Jullunder in Punjab, killing five people, after the BJP rejected a last-minute appeal by the government to call off the march on the grounds that it could not guarantee protection against attacks by Sikh and Kashmiri militants.
A bomb explosion, claimed by the JKLF, inside police headquarters in Jammu on Jan. 24 killed a constable and wounded several others.
Rejection of Congress (I) post by Priyanka Gandhi
Priyanka Gandhi, 19, daughter of assassinated former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, declined on Jan. 14 to be elected as a member of the Uttar Pradesh Congress (I) committee, saying that her priority was to complete her education.
In May 1991 Rajiv Gandhi's widow, Sonia Gandhi, had refused the presidency of the Congress (I)[see p. 38175], and in October she had decided against contesting her late husband's constituency [see p. 38532].
Further Janata Dal expulsions
Three dissident MPs belonging to the opposition Janata Dal (JD) were expelled on Jan. 4, reducing JD strength in the Lok Sabha to 58.
A senior leader of the JD had been expelled in December 1991 [see p. 38682].
Election of CPI(M) general secretary
The Communist Party of India (Marxist)(CPI(M)) on Jan. 9 elected Harkishan Singh Surjeet, 71, to replace E. M. S. Namboodiripad as general secretary.
Economy
Lifting of steel price controls
The government on Jan. 17 abolished controls on steel prices and drastically reduced duties on scrap and steel-billet imports in an effort to boost domestic output.
According to a report in the Financial Times of Jan. 16 the decline in the manufacturing sector for the first six months of the financial year was 1.9 per cent, while production in mining and quarrying fell 2.6 per cent .
(Import restrictions, held responsible for a fall in the country's external trade deficit, reported on Jan. 15, were understood to have contributed substantially to the scarcity of industrial raw materials and capital goods.)
Announcement of wheat and cotton imports
The import of 1,000,000 tonnes of wheat, reportedly aimed at bringing down grain prices, was announced on Jan. 16.
(In December 1991 the government had raised food grain prices by 20-30 per cent— see p. 38682.)
An attempt to control inflation in cotton prices was said to have prompted a government decision, reported on Jan 24, to allow the import of 1,000,000 bales of cotton (weighing 170 kg each).
Nearly 140,000 workers in 53 jute mills across West Bengal went on strike on Jan. 28 demanding higher wages.
On Jan. 20 the government had announced a delay in the formulation of its public- and private-sector reforms, after meeting labour leaders opposed to its economic programme.
Foreign relations
Relations with Russia and Ukraine
Talks between Russian officials and a high-level delegation led by the foreign secretary J. N. Dixit, who arrived in Moscow on Feb. 13, ended with the signing of a bilateral trade agreement under which goods exchanged were be valued in dollars but paid for in rupees, pending a settlement of the rupee-rouble exchange rate.
On Jan. 21 All-India Radio reported that a treaty updating the 20-year 1971 Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Co-operation between India and the Soviet Union [see pp. 24773; 24820]would be signed during a scheduled visit to India in March by the Russian President, Boris Yeltsin.
According to the government-controlled Press Trust of India (PTI), Russia and Ukraine had also agreed to maintain the delivery of military spare parts to India.
Relations with USA
Talks with high-ranking United States army and naval officials, involving the creation of the first Indo-US joint army steering committee, began in Delhi on Jan. 22.
On Jan. 17 Defence Minister Sharad Pawar had been quoted as saying that Indo-US relations were moving towards greater "openness" .
US Senator Larry Pressler, author of a 1985 amendment to the 1961 US Foreign Assistance Act under which aid to Pakistan had in October 1990 been barred [see pp. 37764; 38726], said in Delhi on Jan. 11 that he would oppose extending the amendment to India as he did not think that the country had a nuclear weapons programme.
In 1974 the government had acknowledged the explosion of what was termed "a peaceful nuclear device" [see pp. 26585-86].
Visit by Foreign Minister to Japan
External Affairs Minister Madhavsinh Solanki visited Japan on Jan. 19-24 where he was reported to have been warned that further Japanese economic assistance would depend on India's adherence to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
On Jan. 21 Solanki was quoted as saying that India's "complicated position" in relation to China and Pakistan, both alleged to be in possession of nuclear weapons, meant that India was not ready to sign the treaty.
Anti-terrorist agreement with UK
Broad agreement with the United Kingdom on an extradition treaty covering terrorists was confirmed on Jan. 16 during a visit by the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary, Douglas Hurd on Jan. 15-17.
(On Jan. 3 the UK Home Secretary Kenneth Baker had held talks in Delhi on a draft extradition treaty.)
Meanwhile, at a joint press conference with Solanki in Delhi on Jan. 17, Hurd indicated that the UK had broached the subject of India's adherence to the NPT; Solanki claimed, however, that the NPT was "discriminatory" and could not, therefore, be accepted by India.
Other foreign relations
Portuguese President Mário Soares held talks with government leaders on Jan. 25-27.
Foreign Minister Solanki visited Egypt on Jan. 12-16.
The imminent Indian diplomatic recognition of Israel was announced on Jan. 29.
States developments
President's rule was imposed on Manipur on Jan. 7.
A French engineer Antonio Silva held by Muslim separatists in Kashmir escaped on Jan. 13 after three months in captivity.
Leaders of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) agreed to end their four-year rebellion after the government announced the suspension of army operations on Jan. 13.
Four of the five main factions of the Akali Dal said on Jan. 17 that they would boycott elections in Punjab to the 117-member State Assembly and of 13 members to the Lok Sabha scheduled for Feb. 19.
During a gun-battle with police in Andhra Pradesh on Jan. 7, 13 Maoist guerrillas belonging to the People's War Group were killed.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Return of first refugees
Talks in New Delhi on Jan. 6, in the framework of the first meeting of a new India-Sri Lanka joint commission, produced agreement on beginning the return of Tamil refugees to Sri Lanka.
The agreement was endorsed by Indian Home Affairs Minister S. B. Chavan, Indian External Affairs Minister Madhavsinh Solanki and Sri Lankan Foreign Affairs Minister Harold Herath.
About 230,000 Sri Lankan Tamils were in India, while in Sri Lanka there were an estimated 700,000 more people displaced by the war.
The majority of the refugees in India (housed mainly in camps in the states of Tamil Nadu and neighbouring Orissa) had fled to escape the violence of 1990-91, after India had abandoned its military involvement and withdrawn the Indian Peace-Keeping Force (IPKF) from the island.
The Indian decision to encourage their repatriation reflected the growing problem of crime and violence in the camps.
Indian security services had tightened their controls of connections between the camps and Sri Lanka itself, holding the Sri Lankan Tamil Tigers responsible for the assassination of former Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in May 1991 [see p. 38175].
According to the Sri Lankan government, 30,468 of the refugees in India were now seeking to return (although refugee organizations were concerned that many had signed consent forms without understanding questions written in English).
The first ship, with some 600 Tamils on board(many of them employees of the Sri Lankan government, who faced a deadline for resuming their posts or being dismissed), sailed for Trincomalee on Jan. 20.
Figures released by the Sri Lankan joint operations command on Jan. 15 recorded the killing of 1,111 members of the security forces, and 4,274 guerrillas of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) in the course of 1991.
There were no figures given for civilian casualties.
Two attacks on Jan. 22 near Trincomalee claimed 38 lives in an explosion at an air force base and in an ambush by LTTE guerrillas, and on Jan. 26 another bomb attack killed eight bus passengers and an air force patrol member.
Disappearances — Official report on army atrocity
A report published at the end of January by the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances highlighted the killing of civilians in Sri Lanka, particularly in connection with the security forces' campaign (which peaked in late 1989 and early 1990) to eliminate the Sinhala insurgent Janatha Vimukti Peramuna (JVP) in the south of the country [see pp. 37042; 37353].
The UN report blamed the army, the police and right-wing death squads for 12,000 disappearances since 1983, confirmed that this was "by far the highest number recorded by the working group for any single country" , and suggested that there could still be many more (a European Parliament team having recently reported its own estimate of 60,000 killed or missing).
The President's special adviser on international affairs, Bradman Weerakoon, had promised on Dec. 12 that the government would consider recent recommendations made by the human rights organization Amnesty International, including extending the investigations of a presidential commission on the disappeared and publishing its final report.
A special presidential commission investigating the June 1991 massacre at Kokkadichcholai near Batticaloa [see p. 38393]reported on Jan. 30.
The first such inquiry of its kind, it found that "unrestrained" vengeance-taking by Sri Lankan troops was responsible for the death of 67 civilians (apparently the number of bodies recovered, with others still feared missing).
The atrocity had been a "deliberate retaliatory attack" after a landmine killed two soldiers; there was no evidence to support claims by army officers that those who died were "caught in crossfire" during an exchange of fire with LTTE guerrillas.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SINGAPORE
Visit by US President — Agreement on relocation of US naval headquarters — Visit by Chinese President
United States President George Bush visited Singapore on Jan. 3-5 as part of a four-country Asian tour [see also p. 38713].
Assuring Singapore and other "friends" that the eventual closure of US bases in the Philippines [see p. 38677]would "not spell the end to American engagement" in the Asia-Pacific region, Bush said that the US would "maintain a visible, credible presence" in the region through the use of forward deployed forces and bilateral defence arrangements.
During Bush's visit the two sides agreed in principle on the relocation of the US naval logistic command headquarters from Subic Bay in the Philippines to Singapore.
The relocation of the unit, which arranged the repair and resupply of US surface warships operating in the Pacific and Indian Oceans, would fall within the terms of a 1990 memorandum of understanding which allowed US military aircraft and ships access to Singapore ports and airfields [see pp. 37860-61].
The Malaysian government expressed concern over the agreement and warned that, along with other ASEAN countries, it would oppose any attempts to establish a new US naval base in Singapore.
President Yang Shangkun of China visited Singapore on Jan. 7-11 for talks with the country's leaders.
President Wee Kim Wee had visited China in September 1991 [see p. 38441].
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
Visit by Chinese President
Yang Shangkun, the President of China, visited Malaysia on Jan. 11-14.
It was the first visit by a Chinese head of state to Malaysia and followed a visit by Sultan Azlan Muhibbuddin Shah, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (paramount ruler) of Malaysia, to China in September 1991 [see p. 38441].
During his visit President Yang held talks with Sultan Azlan and with Malaysia's Prime Minister, Mahathir Mohamad, on a range of topics, including the proposed East Asia Economic Caucus [see p. 38729].
Opening of Kitangan corruption trial
The trial of Datuk Joseph Pairin Kitingan, the Chief Minister of Sabah and president of the state's ruling Parti Bersatu Sabah (PBS), opened on Jan. 6.
Kitingan had been arrested in January 1991 and charged by the federal Anti-Corruption Agency on three counts of corruption [see pp. 37962; 38626].
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Aquino's endorsement of presidential candidate — Other election developments
President Corazon Aquino announced on Jan. 25 her support for the candidacy of Fidel Ramos, her former Defence Secretary, in the presidential elections due to be held on May 11, 1992.
In addition to ending the uncertainty surrounding her preferred successor, the announcement — made on Aquino's 59th birthday — finally convinced even the most sceptical commentators that her previous statements that she did not intend to seek re-election for a further six-year term were genuine.
Aquino's endorsement effectively annointed Ramos, 63, as the legitimate heir to the "People Power" revolt which had provided the impetus for the overthrow of President Ferdinand Marcos and had installed Aquino in office in February 1986.
As acting Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces under Marcos, Ramos had led a military mutiny in support of Aquino, and it was this which had finally convinced Marcos that he could no longer continue to cling to office.
Thereafter, as Chief of Staff under the new government and then Defence Secretary, Ramos had given unswerving loyalty to Aquino, the single most important factor in enabling her to defeat numerous coup attempts.
He resigned as Defence Secretary in July 1991 in order to pursue his presidential ambitions [see p. 38344].
He left the ruling Laban ng Demokratikong Pilipino (LDP — Democratic Filipino Struggle Party) after a straw poll on Nov. 30 — which he claimed had been rigged — had chosen Ramon Mitra, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, as the LDP presidential candidate.
Thereafter Ramos founded a new political group, the People Power Party (PPP), which adopted him as its presidential nominee on Jan. 2.
In accepting Aquino's endorsement of his candidacy Ramos stated that "her unique moral authority" would greatly assist his campaign, and would mean that "we will no longer be voices crying in the wilderness" .
Aquino's choice was criticized in some quarters for threatening the possibility of splitting her support — between those who would remain loyal to the LDP and those who would support Ramos — and thereby allowing an opposition candidate to win.
The choice of Ramos also ran counter to the wishes of Cardinal Jaime Sin, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Manila and a loyal supporter of Aquino, who was known to have advised against choosing a Protestant for the presidency of a predominantly Catholic country.
Other presidential candidates
On the day after Aquino's announcement it was reported that 28 congressmen and 22 governors had broken with the LDP and announced their support for Ramos.
Nevertheless, the ruling party held a convention on Jan. 25 at which Mitra was formally nominated as the LDP presidential candidate.
The weakness of the country's political parties — traditionally they tended to be forged around individuals and networks of patronage rather than clear ideological convictions, a tendency massively accentuated during the Marcos years — was highlighted with the approaching election in the form of splits, internal conflicts and unanticipated alliances.
In this rapidly changing political landscape, at the end of January 1992 there appeared to be eight presidential candidates in addition to Ramos.
These included:
Ramon Mitra.
Mitra had been considered the leading rival to Ramos for Aquino's endorsement.
Despite poor opinion poll showings and his reputation as an old-style patronage politician, the LDP formally selected him as its candidate at a convention in late January.
Many commentators expected significant defections from the LDP to the PPP following Aquino's endorsement of Ramos.
Marcelo Fernan.
A former Supreme Court Justice and broad supporter of Aquino, he announced his candidacy on Nov. 22, and was believed to be backed by several powerful corporations.
Jovito Salonga.
President of the left-of-centre Liberal Party (LP) and the chosen candidate of the LP and the left-wing LDP-Laban (Philippine Democratic Party Fight) which, on Jan. 3, announced that they had formed an alliance known as The People's Coalition.
PDP-Laban leader Aquilino Pimentel was selected as Salonga's vice-presidential running mate.
In December 1991 Salonga had been ousted as president of the Senate, and had been replaced by Nepatali Gonzales, a member of the LDP.
Salvador Laurel.
Aquino's current, but estranged, Vice-President, and the leader of a faction of the Nacionalista Party (NP).
In November 1991 the conflict between Laurel, Eduardo Cojuangco and Juan Ponce Enrile caused the NP to disintegrate into competing factions amidst a series of coups and mutual expulsions.
Enrile eventually withdrew his bid for the candidacy, but the party remained deeply divided with both Laurel and Cojuangco claiming that their candidacies represented the "real" NP.
Eduardo "Danding" Cojuangco.
The estranged cousin of Aquino and a former Marcos associate, Cojuangco was supported by a faction of the Liberal Party, and by his faction of the Nacionalista Party.
He was known to have developed a huge network of patronage, and was widely considered to be the most powerful of the opposition candidates.
Imelda Marcos.
The widow of Ferdinand Marcos, Imelda returned to the Philippines in November 1991 and was offered the nomination of the largely defunct New Society Movement (KBL), the political party created by her late husband.
On Jan. 7 she declared her intention to contest the presidency, and expressed the hope that she could forge a united opposition coalition.
Although her candidacy was dismissed in most quarters as irrelevant, she was potentially the best-funded of the candidates (although much of her wealth was believed to be inaccessible in frozen Swiss bank accounts) and had the advantage of the remnants of her husband's huge patronage network.
She had been indicted on numerous corruption charges since her return to the Philippines, as the government continued to attempt to recover some of the millions of dollars which she and her husband allegedly looted from the country during their years in power.
Keen to secure the support of the NP, she rejoined the party in January 1992 and suggested that she was willing to run as Vice-President to Cojuangco or Enrile.
Joseph Estrada.
Former actor, and current right-wing member of the Senate.
Miriam Defensor Santiago.
A former Agrarian Reform Secretary, who campaigned as a political outsider.
In addition to the posts of President and Vice-President, the May elections were also scheduled to choose 24 senators, 200 members of the House of Representatives, and thousands of local politicians including mayors and provincial governors.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Government defeat in Tasmania elections
Australian Prime Minister Paul Keating acknowledged on Jan. 2 that unemployment had been a crucial factor in the defeat of the ruling Australian Labor Party (ALP) government in state elections in Tasmania in late December.
The elections had been called 15 months early after a group of five Green legislators — who had kept the minority government of Michael Field in office since June 1989 [see p. 37877]— withdrew its support after disagreements over the issue of logging [for May 1989 elections see p. 36658].
Although final results were yet to be computed, the opposition Liberal-National alliance appeared to have won at least 19 of the 35 seats in the House of Assembly, with the ALP suffering an adverse swing of around 5 per cent.
Liberal leader and Premier-elect Ray Groom promised that his new government's first priority would be to combat unemployment within the state.
ASIA — PACIFIC
ASEAN
Fourth summit meeting
Heads of government of the six member states of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) convened in Singapore on Jan. 27-28 for the organization's fourth summit meeting [for third ASEAN summit held in December 1987 see pp. 35907-08].
The summit was attended by Goh Chok Tong, Prime Minister of Singapore, Mahathir Mohamed, Prime Minister of Malaysia, Anand Panyarachun, Prime Minister of Thailand, President Corazon Aquino of the Philippines, President Suharto of Indonesia and Sultan Sir Hassanal Bolkiah of Brunei.
Agreement on establishment of free trade area — Lack of progress on Mahathir's economic caucus
The main achievement of the summit was the signing of a mutual tariff reduction agreement under whose terms the six would establish an ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) by the beginning of 2008.
The AFTA formula had been proposed by Thailand in 1991 and approved at a meeting of Asean Economics Ministers in Malaysia in October [see p. 38535].
AFTA would be implemented through the common effective preferential tariff (CEPT) mechanism, which would become operational in 1993, and under which there would be tariff reductions to under 5 per cent on 15 groups of products by 2008.
The mechanism would apply to manufactures and processed agricultural products and capital goods, but not to agricultural raw materials.
The agreement included an opt-out clause known as "six minus x" which allowed individual countries temporary exemptions.
The summit failed to approve the Malaysian proposal for the establishment of an East Asian Economic Caucus (EAEC).
Malaysia had been seeking endorsement for the EAEC and a programme of action for its implementation.
However, Indonesia in particular was reluctant to endorse the proposal and it was referred for further discussion at committee level.
Indonesia had supported the incorporation of the EAEC within the wider framework of the Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC), a body which included the United States and other countries.
Mahathir had rejected this proposal, arguing that East Asian countries should be allowed to establish their own grouping independently of the USA.
The six leaders agreed that ASEAN should intensify debate on security and political issues through the mechanism of the ASEAN Post-Ministerial Conferences (PMC).
A plan put forward by Singapore to invite the five permanent members of the UN Security Council to accede to ASEAN's 1976 Treaty of Amity and Co-operation (TAC) was rejected.
The six approved in principle the appointment of China and India as "dialogue partners" .
They also invited Vietnam and Laos to accede to the TAC as a first step towards full ASEAN membership.
Cambodia would also be invited to accede following elections and the formation of a new government.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Raushan Ershad, wife of former President Hussain Mohammad Ershad, was released on bail on Jan. 16 after being taken into custody with her husband in December 1990 [see pp. 37906-07; for December 1991 Supreme Court ruling upholding the detention of Gen. Ershad see p. 38684].
ASIA — PACIFIC
MARSHALL ISLANDS
The new Nitijela (legislature) convened in January following the general election of November 1991, and re-elected incumbent President Amata Kabua for a further four-year term.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Thakur Nath Pant was appointed Finance Minister on Jan. 13, replacing Mahesh Acharya [for last round of Cabinet changes see p. 38682].
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
A Status of Forces Agreement, designed to facilitate greater co-operation on security issues between Indonesia and Papua New Guinea, was signed in Jakarta on Jan. 14, but stopped short of permitting joint military operations against the separatist guerrillas fighting the Indonesians in Irian Jaya.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SAARC
An official announcement issued in Kathmandu on Jan. 3 said that Hussain Ibrahim Zaki (Maldives) had succeeded K. K. Bhargava (India) as Secretary-General of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-Operation.
EUROPE
COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES
CIS co-ordination meetings
On Jan. 16 the heads of the 11 member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) held a conference in Moscow (preceded by a preparatory meeting of Foreign Ministers on Jan. 10).
The delegations from Moldova, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan did not include their Presidents.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin was elected as chair of the meeting.
Tadzhikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan.
CIS member states Armenia, Azerbaijan, Byelarus, Kazakhstan, Kirgiztan, Moldova, Russia,
The discussion of military issues was postponed until February, but delegates did agree the military oaths for servicemen in the CIS strategic forces, and in the armed forces which seven states were to have in common(i.e. not Ukraine, Byelarus, Azerbaijan, Moldova).
They would promise allegiance both to the state of which they were a citizen and to "the state of the commonwealth on the territory of which I perform my military service" .
Delegates also set up two commissions, on the Black Sea Fleet and the Caspian Flotilla, comprising representatives of interested parties.
On economic issues, they agreed to limit profit to 50 per cent to restrain price rises under the prevailing conditions of producers' monopolies.
An inter-parliamentary conference in Minsk on Jan. 24 was attended by the deputy chairmen of the parliaments of nine or 10 CIS member states (Uzbekistan was not represented; nor, according to some reports, was Moldova).
Delegates signed an agreement on legislative co-operation, including the regular exchange of draft laws and consultative meetings to "co-ordinate and draw up common approaches" .
A joint commission was established to co-ordinate actions on economy, law, pensions, housing, energy and ecology.
A council of Supreme Soviet chairmen would meet twice yearly, taking decisions by consensus.
The interstate commission responsible for drafting the criteria for dividing Soviet assets abroad met in Minsk on Jan. 25, chaired by Byelarussian Foreign Minister Petr Kravchenko.
Representatives from Moldova and Uzbekistan were absent.
The commission had begun to draw up an inventory of assets.
Army officers' meeting
A meeting of 5,000 army officers, convened by the C.-in-C. of the CIS Armed Forces, Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, opened in Moscow on Jan. 17, with the Presidents of Russia and Kazakhstan also present as delegates from the meeting of heads of state [see above].
The absence of Ukraine's President Leonid Kravchuk, who was pressing for Ukraine to have its own armed forces, caused anger among the delegates.
The main speeches called for unity of the armed forces, and denounced attempts to split the Black Sea Fleet [see p. 38732].
Concern over the standard of living of servicemen was answered by Yeltsin, who detailed provisions for them in the Russian budget.
The meeting established an officers' co-ordination council, of about 100 elected members, to put the army's point of view in CIS negotiations on military and strategic issues.
Conference on aid to CIS
A conference was held in Washington on Jan. 22-23 on the co-ordination of aid to the republics of the former Soviet Union.
Convened by United States Secretary of State James Baker, it was attended by representatives from 47 countries and five international financial institutions, including the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
Foreign Ministers of the European Communities (EC), meeting in Brussels on Jan. 10, had emphasised their presence at the conference as the EC, whereas the US had invited all 12 countries individually.
The German Foreign Ministry called for a fairer distribution of the burden of aid to the CIS, citing figures produced by the European Commission which showed that about 75 per cent of all aid to the Soviet Union since September 1990 had come from the EC and 57 per cent from Germany alone (the figure included humanitarian aid, credits and special payments for troop withdrawal made by Germany).
The aid conference included five specialized working groups for discussions on specific issues: food aid, energy, medicines, housing for returning military personnel and technical assistance.
US President Bush pledged a fresh US$645 million in humanitarian aid (subject to approval by Congress), while Baker announced that 54 emergency airlifts of food and medicines from the USA would begin on Feb. 10, although this was seen as a symbolic gesture rather than as a viable solution to the problem of food shortages in the CIS.
The conference also discussed promoting "triangular trade" between eastern Europe and the CIS using third-party finance, in the hope that this would restore some of the trade between the Soviet Union and eastern Europe which had been lost with the transfer to hard-currency accounting in January 1991 [see p. 37979].
A second conference in Lisbon, sponsored by the European Commission, was to meet before June 1992, and would include representatives from the CIS (France had sharply criticized the USA for not including CIS members in the Washington conference).
Japan offered to host a third conference.
Increased assistance to the CIS already included the promise of food and transport aid from NATO [see pp. 38698-99]; £20 million in fodder grain from the United Kingdom to St Petersburg, offered on Dec. 2; the release on Dec. 16 of the first tranche, worth ECU500 million, of an ECU1,250 million credit agreed by the EC in October [see p. 38539]; and $30,000,000 from Sweden and 30,000,000 Finnish markka (about US$7,250,000) from Finland in aid to CIS areas nearest their countries.
The distribution of ECU200 million of emergency food aid (promised at the EC Maastricht conference in December) had begun in January; the food was to be sold in Moscow and St Petersburg at controlled prices in an attempt to restrict inflation, but the first shipment of 130 tonnes of beef from the UK was refused entry at Moscow because of fears of bovine spongiform encephalopathy [see p. 37534].
The consignment was finally accepted in Murmansk where different import regulations were in force.
The chair of the Russian Central Bank, Georgy Matiukhin, announced on Jan. 10 that Russia wanted a deferral of interest payments on the $84,000 million debt owed by the former Soviet Union to commercial banks and western governments, in addition to the deferral of principal repayments agreed on Dec. 17 [see p. 38656].
Foreign relations
The Foreign Ministers of the UK and France, Douglas Hurd and Roland Dumas, made separate visits to the states of the former Soviet Union on which nuclear weapons were stationed.
Between Jan. 19 and 20, Hurd met the leaders of Kazakhstan and Ukraine, to discuss the security situation, their economic needs and bilateral relations with the UK.
On Jan. 20, while in Moscow, Hurd formally invited Yeltsin to visit the UK, and met Shaposhnikov, Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev, and the Deputy Prime Minister supervising economic reform, Yegor Gaidar.
Hurd declared himself "reasonably encouraged" by his discussions on security issues, although there appeared still to be difficulties over Kazakhstan's signing the nuclear non-proliferation treaty.
Dumas visited Moscow on Jan. 22-23, travelling on to the capitals of Ukraine, Byelarus and Kazakhstan.
Diplomatic relations were established with each state and he signed protocols on regular consultations at Foreign Minister level.
In Ukraine he signed an agreement on the use of nuclear energy and also discussed control of nuclear weapons, receiving assurances from Shaposhnikov that control of nuclear weapons on the territory of the former Soviet Union would be transferred to Russia by July 1993.
The EC announced on Jan. 15 that all CIS members had accepted EC guidelines for recognition [see p. 38685]and were therefore officially accepted by the EC as independent states.
Russian Foreign Minister Kozyrev visited Kaliningrad (Russia), Estonia and Germany on Jan. 14-16.
In Estonia, he ratified the Estonian-Russian Treaty of Oct. 24, 1991, restoring diplomatic relations between the two countries.
In Germany, Kozyrev discussed nuclear security and a settlement area for the Volga German community in Russia.
This had been promised during Yeltsin's visit to Germany in November [see p. 38590].
The Labour Ministers of Russia and Germany, respectively Aleksandr Shokhin and Norbert Blüm, had signed an agreement on social affairs in Bonn on Jan. 7, whereby Germany promised aid in training and labour policy.
US Under-Secretary of State Reginald Bartholemew led a delegation of arms control experts on a visit to Kazakhstan on Jan. 21-22, for discussions of "international security issues of mutual interest" .
Kazakh officials confirmed their commitment to the agreements between CIS members.
EUROPE
RUSSIA
Freeing of prices — Budget
The lifting of state controls on prices in Russia, delayed from Dec.16, went ahead on Jan. 2, followed by similar steps in Ukraine and Moldova on Jan. 2, in Byelarus on Jan. 3, Kazakhstan on Jan. 6, and Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan on Jan. 10.
Byelarus (on Jan. 3) and Ukraine introduced coupon systems for paying for some purchases [see p. 38732].
Russia's freeing of prices had caused controversy with other CIS member states, which were effectively compelled to follow suit, since Russian consumers would otherwise simply buy up goods at controlled prices from neighbouring republics.
Prices in Russia rose between threefold and 30-fold, but many goods were still only available at private markets.
Economists advising President Boris Yeltsin's government blamed the steep price rises on the inflationary credit policy of the Russian Central Bank chaired by Georgy Matiukhin, which had advanced 600,000 million roubles in credit in 1991, at interest rates of 6 per cent, and thereby kept enterprises running (despite the lack of consumer demand) and enabled them to hoard stocks and raise prices.
Ruslan Khasbulatov, Chairman of the Russian Supreme Soviet, at a meeting of the Presidium on Jan. 13, supported the criticisms of Yeltsin's economic policies which were being expressed by Vice-President Aleksandr Rutskoi.
There had been growing demands for Yeltsin to resign as Prime Minister.
On Jan. 16, Yeltsin reported to the Supreme Soviet that on his recent tour of the country to find out the effects of price liberalization he had found that local officials were not implementing government measures for social protection and that producers' profit margins were too high.
He urged the parliament swiftly to pass legislation including the abolition of trade monopolies, faster privatization (especially of shops), agrarian reform and tighter credit and monetary policies.
He also announced that Communist Party money frozen in Russian bank accounts [see p. 38372]would be used for welfare payments to the poorest.
Demonstrations by Communist supporters were held in major cities on Jan. 12, demanding a return to state-controlled prices, and backed by the threat of strikes in mining and other industries.
The number of demonstrators in Moscow was estimated variously at between 5,000 and 55,000.
On Jan. 23 a decree suspended import tariffs retroactively from Jan. 15 until the expected announcement of new tariffs on April 1.
On Jan. 10, the export from Russia of about 60 products, including food and consumer goods, was banned.
On Jan. 24, the budget for the first quarter of 1992, amounting to 420,500 million roubles, was adopted by the Supreme Soviet.
Government expenditure was to be cut severely, including a 7@1/2-fold cut in arms purchases.
In his speech to the Supreme Soviet, the Deputy Prime Minister responsible for economic policy, Yegor Gaidar, said that Russia's gross national product (GNP), which had fallen by 11 per cent in 1991, would fall by a further 19 per cent in the first quarter of 1992.
The budget deficit was set at 10,300 million roubles, to provide for wage rises and social protection, for which 17,600 million roubles were reserved.
The Supreme Soviet voted to cede responsibility for the budget to the government.
Creation of Interior and Security ministries
A report from the news agency TASS on Jan. 17 said that Yeltsin had revoked his decree of Dec. 19 [see pp. 38654-55]merging the security and internal affairs bodies.
The Russian Constitutional Court had ruled on Jan. 14 that the merged ministry "runs counter to the separation of legislative, executive and judicial powers established by the Russian Federation" .
Viktor Barannikov, who had been appointed to head the "super-ministry" , became director of the Russian Federal Security Agency, and Viktor Yerin was appointed Russian Interior Minister.
Conclusion of investigation into coup attempt
The investigation into the attempted coup of Aug. 19-21, 1991 [see pp. 38638-73], was completed on Jan. 14.
Charges of high treason against the 13 defendants, who included the former Soviet Prime Minister, Defence Minister, Vice-President and Chairman of the KGB, were dropped, but they could still face the death penalty for "conspiring to seize power" .
The Deputy Prosecutor-General of Russia, Yevgeny Lisov, who had carried out the investigation, said on Jan. 22 that there was no evidence implicating former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev in the coup, but that his actions might have led the conspirators to think that they could count on his support.
EUROPE
GEORGIA
Armed conflict in Tbilisi
Four months of violent confrontation between government and opposition forces in the Georgian capital, Tbilisi, escalated into full-scale armed conflict between Dec. 22 and Jan. 6, which left 113 dead and 420 wounded and culminated in the flight of President Zviad Gamsakhurdia with 80 of his supporters.
Rebel detachments of the National Guard on Dec. 22 launched their attempt to storm Government House, which was barricaded and defended by soldiers loyal to Gamsakhurdia.
Despite daily bombardment and the desertion on Dec. 28 of three of his most senior ministers, Gamsakhurdia insisted in a series of interviews that he would not engage in negotiations with "terrorists and bandits" or meet opposition demands that he resign.
On Dec. 27 the forces of rebel leader Tengiz Kitovani, a former ally of Gamsakhurdia who had joined the opposition after the President's ambiguous reaction to the August coup, were significantly augmented with the liberation of imprisoned opposition leader Dzhaba Iosseliani, whose nationalist Mkhedrioni militia joined the assault on Government House.
In the final and decisive Jan. 6 attack, 60 highly trained security troops abandoned the President, who then fled from the back of the building.
Opposition forces did not attempt to prevent his departure and he made his way to Idzhevan in north-eastern Armenia, whose government had offered him temporary asylum.
Formation of new military government
On Jan. 2, after meetings with representatives of all major opposition parties, Iosseliani and Kitovani declared that a military council had taken power, and announced a state of emergency in the Georgian capital.
The council said that it had deposed the President, abolishing his office, and had suspended parliament pending new elections.
The new leadership later declared as its long-term goal the restoration of a constitutional monarchy in Georgia.
A ban was imposed on public meetings and masked gunmen on Jan. 3 fired into a peaceful pro-Gamsakhurdia demonstration of about 2,000 people, killing two and injuring at least 27.
Two of the gunmen were captured by the demonstrators and one was beaten to death.
Iosseliani did not deny that anti-Gamsakhurdia forces, reportedly Mekhedrioni members, had opened fire, neither did he denounce them.
The council reinstated Tengiz Sigua (who had resigned in August 1991 when Gamsakhurdia dismissed other senior ministers — see p. 38417) as acting Prime Minister and gave him the responsibility of forming a cabinet, which would assume power temporarily once the situation in the country had stabilized.
Sigua began appointing ministers shortly afterwards and went ahead with government business, announcing a series of economic reforms on Jan. 19, including privatization of the trade and service sectors and the transfer of land to farmers.
Attempts to organize a session of parliament — to sanction its own dissolution and call the new elections for April — failed, however, when the number of deputies attending was too small to produce a quorum.
The cohesiveness of the governing coalition was called into question as both Sigua and Kitovani had been part of the Round Table which had had Iosseliani arrested in February 1991 [see p. 38015].
Differences rapidly emerged, with Sigua and Iosseliani disagreeing over the time-scale for the transfer of power to a civilian government.
On Jan. 23, in an attempt to produce a consensus, a temporary "consultative council" was created, bringing together representatives of all major political forces in Georgia, including the leaders of the military council, to work with Sigua and his ministers.
Gamsakhurdia's attempted return from exile
There was increasing unrest among Gamsakhurdia loyalists in major cities in western Georgia after his flight on Jan. 6.
On Jan. 16 he return from exile, addressing a rally in his home town of Zugdidi and calling for civil war on the "junta" and for the creation of a Megrel-Abkhazian republic in the west.
The new government, however, responded by dispatching troops to the area, and appeared by the end of January to have re-established control throughout Georgia.
The pro-Gamsakhurdia forces, who organized strikes and demonstrations and a media and transportation blockade of the East, were demoralized by their leader's failure to make further public appearances, and ultimately lacked the necessary firepower to hold out against superior forces.
The military council had re-established control in Kutaisi by Jan. 17, setting up new headquarters in the city and bringing in major reinforcements without resistance.
On Jan. 28 and 29, government troops entered the remaining Gamsakhurdia strongholds of Poti and Zugdidi, after hastily negotiated ceasefires with local officials in the two towns had failed to hold.
Referendum in South Ossetia
On Jan. 19 a referendum in South Ossetia produced an overwhelming majority in favour of independence for the region and its reintegration into the Russian Federation [for December 1991 independence declaration see p. 38657].
The turnout was recorded as over 90 per cent.
In Tbilisi, the new provisional government condemned the move as "a blatant attempt to violate the territorial integrity of a sovereign state" .
A state of emergency had been declared, followed by a general mobilization on Dec. 23, in response to the massing of Georgian government troops near Tskhinvali, prompting fears of an imminent assault.
The conflict in Tbilisi, however, had led to the recall of troops for the defence of the embattled Gamsakhurdia, and to a resulting lull in hostilities in South Ossetia.
On coming to power in Tbilisi, the new military council expressed its readiness to search for a negotiated solution to the problems in South Ossetia and, as a gesture of goodwill, on Jan. 7 released the Ossetian leader Torez Kolumbegov who had been held since January 1991 [see pp. 37971; 38014].
The two sides engaged in talks on Jan. 25, which appeared to go some way towards healing any rift caused by the referendum.
EUROPE
MOLDOVA
Diplomatic relations with Hungary and Romania
On Jan. 16 Hungary became the first country to establish bilateral diplomatic relations with the former Soviet republic of Moldova.
A protocol was signed in the Moldovan capital, Kishinev, by Hungarian Foreign Minister Geza Jeszenszky and his Moldovan counterpart, Nicolae Tiu.
Tiu said that about 70 countries had already recognized Moldova as an independent state, and that relations with Hungary would be a first step to closer integration with Europe.
Hungarian officials expressed the hope that the move would "exercise a positive influence on Hungarian-Romanian relations" .
Romania sent its first two envoys to Moldova on Jan. 20 to open a diplomatic mission there.
Meetings at ministerial level had been held on Dec. 28, 1991, and the Presidents of Romania and Moldova, Ion Iliescu and Mircea Snegur, met in Moldova on Jan. 25.
It was decided to hold regular working meetings of the Romanian and Moldovan heads of government, and to conclude a full-scale friendship and co-operation treaty.
On the issue of reunification, the Presidents spoke in favour of "a calm and balanced approach" .
A rally on Jan. 24 in Iasi (Romania) organized by the National Council of Reunification [see p. 38657]was attended by parliamentarians from both countries.
EUROPE
UKRAINE
Economy — Foreign relations
Circulating coupons issued by the government became legal tender in Ukraine from Jan. 10.
Coupons would make up 25 per cent of salaries and would be used to purchase all goods in state shops costing under 1,500 roubles.
However, economists judged the experiment to have been a failure, as the coupons, for a total of 12,000 million roubles, were insufficient, encouraging shopkeepers to raise prices and thus fuelling inflation.
The establishment of Ukraine's own foreign currency bank, the Ukrainian Export-Import Bank chaired by Sergei Yeremenko, was announced on Jan. 14.
It would take over the role in Ukraine of the former USSR Vneshekonombank (Bank for Foreign Economic Relations), whose assets were taken over by Russia pending an agreement between the republics.
Ukrainian Prime Minister Vitold Fokin said on Jan. 29 that Ukraine would pay its share of the Soviet Union's foreign debt (16.37 per cent) independently.
He appealed for international support for Ukraine's claim to an equivalent proportion of Soviet assets abroad, and criticized the inter-republican agreement of Dec. 5 on the division of debt, which Ukraine had refused to sign [see p. 38656].
Foreign relations
A delegation from the Czech Republic, led by Prime Minister Petr Pithart, visited Ukraine on Jan. 9-11.
Among the issues discussed was compensation for the 800 Volhynian Czechs who moved to Czechoslovakia after the Chernobyl disaster of 1986 [see pp. 34460-62].
Polish and Ukrainian delegations, including the Ukrainian Defence Minister, Col.-Gen.
Konstantin Morozov, exchanged visits on Jan. 14 and 27-28, to discuss security issues and a future treaty on good-neighbourly relations.
A barter deal with Iran, which would reduce Ukraine's reliance on Russia for fuel supplies, was announced on Jan. 29.
Worth US$7,000 million, it committed Iran to supply oil and gas to Ukraine in return for chemicals, concrete, pipes and other goods.
Rumours that Ukraine had agreed to supply weapons to Iran went unconfirmed.
Over four years, Ukraine would receive 75,000 million cubic metres of gas and 50,000,000-70,000,000 tons of oil, some of which would be passed on to other European countries.
Iran and Ukraine had established diplomatic relations on Jan. 21.
Disagreement over Black Sea Fleet
During January controversy arose between Ukraine and Russia over whether the Black Sea Fleet was part of the strategic forces, placed under the control of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) by the agreement signed in Minsk on Dec. 30 [see p. 38655].
A Ukrainian Defence Ministry statement of Jan. 2 said that all troops in Ukraine, except strategic nuclear forces, were directly subordinate to the Ukrainian President.
Servicemen would have to swear an oath of loyalty to the people of Ukraine by Jan. 20, and those who refused would transfer to another state of the CIS.
The statement emphasised that the Black Sea Fleet, comprising some 45 warships and 300 smaller vessels, was not considered to be part of the strategic forces, although it did have nuclear capability.
Adml.
Igor Kasatonov, Commander of the Black Sea Fleet, refused to take the oath, saying that he was under the command only of the C.-in-C. of the CIS armed forces, Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov.
On Jan. 27, President Leonid Kravchuk appointed new commanders for the three military districts of Ukraine, and on Jan. 31 he demanded the dismissal of Adml.
Kasatonov.
Ukrainian leaders had been angered by Russian President Yeltsin's remarks on Jan. 9 during a visit to Ulyanovsk that "the Black Sea Fleet was, is and will continue to be Russian and no one will take it away from Russia, including Kravchuk" .
In a communiqué issued after negotiations in Kiev on Jan. 11, Russia and Ukraine said that they had agreed to implement international arms control agreements.
On the division of CIS forces "the sides acknowledge that the armed forces stationed in Ukraine comprise a grouping of CIS strategic forces, excluding a section of the Black Sea Fleet which will form part of the Ukrainian armed forces" .
However, in further negotiations, the size of the section of the fleet assigned to Ukraine came under dispute.
It was announced on Jan. 14 that Kravchuk had cut the line of communication between the High Command in Moscow and Ukraine.
The Ukrainian Cabinet had allocated 350 million roubles to support the fleet for the subsequent three months, according to a report of Jan. 15.
Two resolutions passed by the Russian Supreme Soviet on Jan. 23 stated (i) that servicemen of the Black Sea Fleet had to take the military oath established by the CIS [see p. 38729]and (ii) that the legislative, international affairs and external economic relations committees of the Russian Supreme Soviet were to examine by Feb. 6 the constitutionality of the 1954 decree transferring the Crimean oblast from Russia to Ukraine [see p. 13507].
Yeltsin and Shaposhnikov visited the naval base at Novorossisk on Jan 28, ostensibly to discuss nuclear arms in preparation for Yeltsin's visit to the UN [see p. 38744].
(Yeltsin had unexpectedly cancelled all engagements for Jan. 27 and left Moscow the following day, missing the opening of the Middle East Peace Conference — see p. 38740 — and a meeting with the Japanese Foreign Minister.)
EUROPE
AZERBAIJAN/ARMENIA
Intensified fighting in Nagorny Karabakh
During January fighting intensified in the largely Armenian disputed enclave of Nagorny Karabakh within Azerbaijan.
On Jan. 2, Azerbaijani President Ayaz Mutalibov put the region under direct presidential rule.
Presidential representatives were to replace local councils, staffed mainly by Armenians.
Salam Mahmedov was appointed to head the administration of Nagorny Karabakh, becoming also Deputy Prime Minister of Azerbaijan.
In the Dec. 28 elections held in Nagorny Karabakh for its self-proclaimed republican Supreme Soviet [see p. 38657], 11 of the 81 seats had been reserved for Azerbaijani deputies, but not taken up.
Artur Mkrtchyan had been elected Chair of the Supreme Soviet, with Oleg Yesayan becoming Prime Minister.
On Jan. 3, the Armenian Supreme Soviet supported the Nagorny Karabakh bid for independence.
The capital of Nagorny Karabakh, Stepanakert, was bombarded during January by surrounding Azerbaijani forces, while Armenians attacked the mainly Azerbaijani town of Shusha.
There were reports of fuel cuts and a breakdown of the water and sewage systems in Stepanakert.
Helicopters were bringing in supplies and evacuating the wounded from the blockaded city.
Only three of Armenia's fleet of seven helicopters remained, the rest having been shot down by Azerbaijani forces claiming that they were used for military purposes.
An Azerbaijani civilian helicopter was shot down near Shusha on Jan. 28, killing an estimated 40 people and prompting a major Azerbaijani offensive against Stepanakert on Jan. 31.
According to casualty figures for the conflict in 1991 issued by Nagorny Karabakh 270 Armenians, 216 Azerbaijanis and 15 servicemen of various nationalities had died; 400 Armenians, 180 Azerbaijanis and 34 servicemen had been wounded; and 599 Armenians had been taken hostage, of whom 226 had not yet returned.
EUROPE
BALTIC STATES
Baltic Assembly — Issue of former Soviet troops
The first meeting of the interparliamentary Baltic Assembly [see p. 38587], held in Riga, the Latvian capital, on Jan. 25-26, recommended discussion between the parliaments of the three Baltic states (Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania) on a draft treaty aimed at developing a Baltic market, with "provisions for eventual integration into European economic structures" .
Delegates also adopted a resolution appealing to the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Federation to withdraw the forces of the former Soviet Union from Baltic territory.
The Baltic Council had on Jan. 5 appealed to the leaders of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) to withdraw the troops, but to leave the military hardware for the Baltic States to form their own militaries.
This, it was said, would be the "basis of and a step towards friendly relations between the Baltic states and CIS countries" .
The previous month, on Dec. 13, the Baltic permanent representatives at the UN had called in a letter to the UN Secretary-General for the removal of Soviet troops from their territory, and encouraged monitoring of the situation by the UN, warning of the danger that, as it disintegrated, the former Soviet Union would be unable to control the troops.
On Dec. 16 the then Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev had issued a presidential decree abolishing the Baltic military district and renaming the troop divisions stationed there the "north-eastern group" — terminology reserved for Soviet troops stationed in a foreign country.
He had also appointed professional diplomats to take over from the members of the Soviet Political Consultative Council delegated to negotiate with the Baltic states on issues arising from their independence from the Soviet Union [see p. 38541].
Russian officials had announced on Dec. 18 that in the near future Russian representatives would replace the union delegates in these talks.
Signature of CSCE charter
The Presidents and Foreign Ministers of the three Baltic states signed the Paris Charter of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) on Dec. 6 in Paris, where they were attending the opening of embassies for their countries.
The Charter had been adopted in November 1990 at the CSCE summit, from which the Baltic delegations had been excluded at the request of the Soviet Union [see pp. 37838-39].
North Atlantic Assembly seminar
A seminar of the North Atlantic Assembly (the inter-parliamentary assembly of the North Atlantic Alliance), entitled "European Security and the Baltic States" , opened in Vilnius, the Lithuanian capital, on Dec. 17.
It was attended not only by parliamentary delegates from NATO countries but also by delegations from Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania and observers from Russia, Byelarus and Ukraine.
Announcement of return of gold by UK
It was announced on Jan. 22 that the United Kingdom was to return gold worth £90,000,000 (US$160 million) which had been deposited at the Bank of England before the annexation of the Baltic states by the Soviet Union in 1940.
France had returned 2,246 kg of gold to Lithuania on Oct. 4, 1991 [see also p. 38465].
EUROPE
ESTONIA
Resignation of government
The government resigned on Jan. 23 over its failure to persuade the Supreme Council (parliament) to impose a state of emergency to cope with the country's economic crisis.
Unprecedented shortages of oil, grain and raw materials had been caused by Russia's failure to maintain agreed supplies.
Food rationing was introduced on Jan. 11.
Milk was only sold to families with children under two.
To save fuel hot water was only supplied to hospitals, childrens' homes and similar institutions.
On Jan. 16 the Supreme Council had voted by 54 votes to 47 to give Prime Minister Edgar Savisaar special powers to deal with the crisis.
The majority was only achieved with the support of 25 deputies from the Russian minority community, who wanted firmer economic controls.
A crisis centre was set up to administer supplies and hard-currency deals were being negotiated to buy in supplies from abroad.
The government said that fuel supplies would only last a few weeks, but that meat and butter would run out within days.
On Jan. 20 the Supreme Council failed to win enough votes to set up its part of a joint parliament-government commission to implement the state of emergency.
Most Estonian nationalist deputies voted against the special powers, arguing that they were counterproductive.
They also refused to support a government which relied on Russian former communists.
On Jan. 30 the Supreme Council approved the formation of a new coalition government under caretaker Prime Minister Tiit Vahi.
Vahi, a former Minister of Transport, was seen as a non-party candidate.
He called for constructive co-operation between all parties in the transition to a market economy, and proposed not to implement a state of emergency.
EUROPE
LITHUANIA
Signing of declaration on co-operation with Poland — Citizenship law
Lithuania and Poland signed in Vilnius, the Lithuanian capital, on Jan. 13 a Declaration on Friendly Relations and Neighbourly Co-operation, recognizing the existing Lithuanian-Polish border and guaranteeing respect for human rights, non-interference in internal affairs, and avoidance of the use of force.
The declaration also covered economic co-operation, joint ecological programmes, renewal of consular relations, the setting up of cultural centres, national minorities, and the role of young people.
A treaty was to be signed later.
There had been fears in Lithuania that Poland might claim part of its territory, including Vilnius.
Conversely, Poles in Lithuania had alleged that they were suffering discrimination by the Lithuanian majority.
The Lithuanian citizenship law, passed by the parliament on Dec. 5, had established the criteria of 10 years' residence in Lithuania, knowledge of the language and the Constitution, and a source of income, and had prohibited dual citizenship.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Re-election of Zhelev
President Zhelyu Zhelev was re-elected on Jan. 19 for a term of five years in Bulgaria's first popular presidential election.
His running-mate Blaga Dimitrova, a poet, became Vice-President.
Zhelev's victory came in the second round run-off, when he won 53 per cent of the vote against 47 per cent for Velko Valkanov, an independent supported by the (former communist) Bulgarian Socialist Party.
In the first round of voting on Jan. 12 Zhelev, backed by the ruling Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) of which he was a former chairman, had unexpectedly failed to win the necessary overall majority, but obtained 45 per cent as against 30 per cent for Valkanov and 17 per cent for the third-placed Georgi Ganchev, a former fencing champion who stood as an independent, in a field of 22 candidates.
Both rounds attracted a 75 per cent turnout.
Zhelev, a 56-year-old philosophy professor and former dissident, had originally been elected as interim President in August 1990 by the communist-dominated parliament [see p. 37619].
The narrow margin of this victory in the January 1992 direct elections was attributed to his being held personally responsible for painful economic reforms in 1991, which caused price rises of up to 500 per cent and raised unemployment from 27,000 to 420,000, while inflation in January 1992 stood at 30 per cent.
Zhelev said on Jan. 18 that there was no alternative to privatization and a market economy, and warned that the economic worst was yet to come.
General strike
A general strike was held on Jan. 8 in support of demands for higher wages and pensions, new measures to combat unemployment, and protection for workers during the privatisation of state industries.
The Confederation of Independent Bulgarian Trade Unions (CITUB), which called the strike, claimed that 770,000 workers had taken part, but the government said that a maximum of 330,000 were involved and the rival labour federation Podkrepa ( "Support" ) claimed that no more than 10,000 had stopped work.
Zhelev described the strike as untimely and harmful.
Dismissals at Ministry of Internal Affairs
The Ministry of Internal Affairs carried out a number of dismissals of senior officers in its central administration and eight regional directorates on Jan. 1.
Interior Minister Yordan Sokolov denied press allegations of a purge; most of the officials, it was stated, had been retired, although some were dismissed because they could not fulfil their duties.
The Defence Ministry pensioned off 750 officers including 10 generals on Dec. 29.
Macedonia issue — Other foreign relations
Bulgaria's Foreign Affairs Minister Stoyan Ganev met his Greek counterpart Antonis Samaras in Athens on Jan. 11 to discuss Bulgaria's intention to recognize the breakaway Yugoslav republic of Macedonia.
Ganev stressed that the Balkans would be destabilized if Macedonia was not recognised as independent, and that Bulgaria had no territorial claim upon it.
Greece opposed recognition on the grounds that no country could claim the name of Macedonia; that the republic, if independent, would only survive as the instrument of another country; and that it would threaten northern Greece.
Greek troop reinforcements were drafted into the border region.
Greece had long pointed to Macedonia's Greek heritage, arguing that its name was of Greek origin, and had refused to acknowledge the existence of a separate Macedonian culture and language.
On Jan. 16 Ganev announced Bulgarian recognition of Slovenia, Croatia, Macedonia and Bosnia-Hercogovina.
He hoped, he said, that relations with Greece would improve, stating that the two countries had "no alternative but to live like good neighbours and friends" .
Greece appealed to its partners in the European Communities to reduce or stop aid to Bulgaria.
The opposition (former communist) Bulgarian Socialist Party said on Jan. 21 that "instead of[Bulgaria]being a pillar of peace in the Balkans" the recognition turned it into an "object of suspicions and doubts by its neighbours" .
The small rump Bulgarian Communist Party said, however, that Macedonia should be annexed to the Bulgarian motherland, and that the recognition of its independence was an act of "national treason" .
On Jan. 11 Bulgaria and Greece reached agreement on military co-operation, during a visit to Bulgaria by the Chief of the Greek National Defence General Staff, Col.-Gen.
Ioannis Verivakis.
This agreement, which envisaged exchanges between the two armies and a reduction in the parameters of their military activities, followed the signing of an agreement on Nov. 28, 1991, between both countries' Defence Ministries, also on military co-operation.
Bulgaria-Turkey talks
On a visit to Turkey on Dec. 4, 1991, for talks on developing new economic, trade and political links, Ganev called for talks between Turkey, Bulgaria and Greece to ensure regional stability and co-operation.
On Dec. 16 Gen. Dogun Gures, Chief of Turkey's General Staff, arrived in Sofia for a five-day visit culminating in the signing on Dec. 20 of an agreement on military co-operation.
The agreement provided for a military security zone of up to 80 km on both sides of the border.
A delegation from the Turkish Foreign Ministry visited Sofia on Jan. 7-8.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Debate over constitution plans — Privatization
Important elements of the constitutional proposals put forward in November by President Vaclav Havel [see p. 38584]were rejected when the Federal Assembly debated the relevant issues on Jan. 21.
Havel had proposed the ratification of a new constitution, a new law on the holding of a referendum on constitutional issues, a new law on the dissolution of the Federal Assembly, and a new law on the make-up of the federal parliament.
(He had also proposed a new electoral law, but on Jan. 16 the constitutional and legal committees of both chambers of parliament had refused to recommend his draft to the Jan. 21 joint session of parliament, preferring a draft put forward by deputies, which provided for votes to be cast for parties rather than individuals.)
The Assembly on Jan. 21 voted against acceptance of Havel's constitutional reform, which would have guaranteed the two republics (the Czech Lands and Slovakia) the right of veto over any new constitution.
His proposed referendum law, which would have given the president the right to call a referendum either on his own initiative or in response to a significant demand from voters in both Czech and Slovak republics, was also defeated.
Otakar Motej, Chairman of the Supreme Court, who represented Havel during the Federal Assembly's discussion of his proposals, expressed disappointment at the deputies' lack of trust in the President.
On Jan. 22 Havel withdrew his proposal that the federal parliament should comprise a Federal Assembly and a Federal Council, independent of and acting as a brake upon the Federal Assembly.
The Federal Assembly on Jan. 21 did, however, ratify an Agreement on the Protection of Human Rights and Basic Freedoms, described as one of the most significant steps in Czechoslovakia's road to democracy.
Privatization of banks
The government approved on Jan. 9 the partial privatization of three banks, including one sale involving foreign acquisition.
Some 56 per cent of the Komercni banka Praha and 55 per cent of the Vseobecna uverova banka Bratislava — the country's two biggest — was allocated for sale through the use of privatization coupons.
The government agreed that 40 per cent of Zivnostenska banka should be sold to the German Berliner Handels- und Frankfurter Bank (BHF-Bank) for US$24,000,000 and that 12 per cent be sold to International Finance Corporation (IFC), an affiliate of the World Bank.
Problems over industry sell-off
Plans for the extensive use of privatization coupons, reserving 40 per cent of nationalized property for sale to citizens at special low prices, encountered problems when it was revealed on Jan. 20 that up to 6,000,000 of the 8,000,000 books printed (each worth Kcs1,035 or about US$35 — and exchangeable for shares in state companies — see also pp. 38584-85) had disappeared, allegedly bought up by private investment funds promising individuals a tenfold return on their investment after a year.
The controversy led to a tightening up of the rules preventing hoarding, and extended the registration deadline from the end of January to the end of February.
More than 2,000 companies had been earmarked for privatization in March.
Resignation of Czech Justice Minister
Czech Justice Minister Leon Richter resigned on Jan. 2 for health reasons, saying that his workload had nearly caused a heart attack.
Ivan Masek, chairman of the Screening Commission of the Czech National Council, emphasised on Jan. 3 that Richter had not resigned because of collaboration with the former secret police (StB).
Richter said on Jan. 7 that he had never signed any pledge to collaborate with the StB, nor had he ever given it any information.
He was replaced as Justice Minister by Jiri Novak (Civic Forum — CDP).
Elections law in Slovakia
The Slovak government adopted on Jan. 21 a draft law governing elections to the Slovak National Council, retaining the existing system of proportional representation and the existing constituencies.
EUROPE
POLAND
Budget debate
Debate began in the Sejm (the lower house of parliament) on Jan. 4 on the government's provisional budget for the first quarter of 1992, which included cuts planned by the previous administration of Jan Bielecki and continued reductions in state subsidies.
The first-quarter deficit was expected to reach US$1,600 million, even after the cuts in energy subsidies which had led to strikes and unrest over rises in domestic energy costs [see below].
Prime Minister Jan Olszewski said that his newly-formed government had had no time to prepare its own budget, and asked parliament "with a heavy heart and a true sense of responsibility" to accept the measures before it.
Parliamentary committees began discussion on Jan. 8.
Finance Minister Karol Lutkowski said on Jan. 14 that changes to the bill would kill it.
Olszewski urged the Senate (the upper chamber) on Jan. 15 to adopt the first-quarter 1992 budget, despite its unacceptability in humanitarian terms.
On Jan. 14 Olszewski had agreed to look into budget proposals from the Solidarity trade union which would cause less hardship.
He appealed on national television for patience, and on Jan. 26 promised a rescue plan for the economy.
(The government's economic policy and budget for the rest of 1992 had been promised for Feb. 15.)
Strikes over energy price rises
A wave of strikes, protests and hunger strikes over the economy maintained pressure on the new government.
A nationwide one-hour strike of 2,000,000 Solidarity trade union members was mounted on Jan. 13 to protest at energy price rises imposed on Jan. 1 and at the fall in the standard of living.
The energy price increases, which doubled the cost of home central heating and raised the price of gas by 70 per cent and electricity by 20 per cent, were the consequence of the removal of subsidies in the attempt to control Poland's budget deficit.
The All-Poland Alliance of Trade Unions (OPZZ, the official trade union prior to the fall of the communist regime) and Solidarity led a wave of strikes on Jan. 16, describing the price rises as unlawful.
Pensioners' groups also demanded the cancellation of the energy price rises, arguing that they would lead to increases in food prices which would cancel out the benefits of recent improvements to pensions.
Olszewski said on Jan. 6 that the government was planning compensation to cushion the impact of the rises.
OPZZ said on Jan. 21 that it was still prepared to strike, demanding talks on economic and social policy.
Solidarity agreed to hold talks with Olszewski over energy prices.
Forced retirement of former Defence Minister
Controversy surrounded the forced retirement from the armed forces of the former Minister of National Defence Vice-Adml.
Piotr Kolodziejczyk, on the grounds that he was eligible to retire after 35 years' service.
Kolodziejczyk said that, at 52, he was far from retiring age.
Olszewski said that he had approved the retirement because once a civilian Minister of Defence had been appointed in December 1991 — see pp. 38685-86], there was no post suitable for such a high-ranking officer.
President Lech Walesa was said to have been astonished and upset by Kolodziejczyk's retirement which was seen by observers as an indication of tension between Olszewski and Walesa, who had initially opposed the formation of the Olszewski government.
New security committee
A new National Defence Committee was established on Dec. 31 to scrutinize national security, defence, state security, law and order and citizens' security.
The committee was empowered to specify the scope of activity of the security service, the National Security Bureau (BBN).
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Controversy over census
The first census for 15 years, scheduled for Jan. 7-14, ran into controversy over the collection of data on the Hungarian-speaking minority.
The Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania (HDUR), alleging that the census form was designed to weaken the Hungarian minority by dividing it into four or five ethnic groups, condemned the census, and called on Jan. 14 for an alternative census of the Hungarian population to be carried out.
On the other hand various nationalist groupings such as the Romanian National Unity Party (RNUP) called for checks on information supplied by Hungarian-speakers, alleging on Jan. 15 that the census was open to abuse, and accusing the HDUR of instructing its supporters to give false information to boost the apparent size of the Hungarian-speaking population.
On Jan. 16 the Central Commission on the Population and House Census announced the continuation of the census in areas where it had not been completed by Jan. 14.
Local authorities had missed residents because they had failed to use up-to-date maps.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
New EP president — Aid for Mediterranean countries
Egon Klepsch, the German chair of the European People's Party (EPP)— the Christian Democratic group in the European Parliament (EP)— was elected as President of the EP on Jan. 14.
He gained 253 out of 474 votes cast.
Klepsch was elected as part of an agreement struck between the EPP and the Socialist Group to split the presidency over the five-year life of the EP.
Under the arrangement a Spanish socialist, Enrique Barón Crespo, had been elected President in 1989 [see p. 36818].
A member of the German parliament from 1965 to 1989, Klepsch first entered the EP in 1973 and was elected head of the EPP in 1984.
He was widely considered a strong supporter of further European integration.
Aid for Arab countries and Israel
The EP on Jan. 15 approved a major European Community (EC) aid package to six North African and Middle Eastern countries, but blocked the funds allocated to two others, Syria and Morocco, because of "serious concern" at human rights violations in those countries.
The Parliament approved a total of ECU1,580 million (about US$2,000 million) of aid to Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon and Tunisia.
In the case of Algeria and Israel it strongly advised the EC Commission to delay disbursement of funds until firm guarantees on respect for human rights had been received from the respective governments.
The aid was part of a package drawn up by the responsible EC Commissioner, Abel Matutes Juan, as part of the EC's contribution to economic development in the region (in particular by creating jobs and thus reducing emigration pressures) and of its efforts to stimulate the political dialogue with Arab countries and Israel.
EUROPE
FRANCE
Election of Fabius as PS leader — Moves to oppose National Front — Other political developments
The governing Socialist Party (PS) elected Laurent Fabius as its first secretary on Jan. 9 in succession to Pierre Mauroy, who had tendered his resignation two days earlier.
The leadership change was widely seen as an attempt to rejuvenate the party, whose fortunes had been at their lowest since it first came to power in 1981.
Mauroy had been unable, since his election in March 1990 [see p. 37330], to bring together the party's three main factions, headed respectively by Education Minister Lionel Jospin, by Fabius, and by former Prime Minister Michel Rocard.
Mauroy's departure had been widely expected since the party's extraordinary congress in December [see below], which had failed to resolve personal rivalries.
Fabius, also a former Prime Minister as (successor to Mauroy, in 1984-86) and current president of the National Assembly, was elected without dissent by the party's 131-member executive committee.
In his acceptance speech he said that his goal would be to "renew, reassemble and reform" the party.
His primary task in the short term would be to mobilize it for the regional elections in March.
He also gave a strong indication that he and other leading party figures had accepted that Rocard, the leader of the smallest faction within the party but one of the country's most popular politicians, would be the front-runner for the PS nomination to succeed President François Mitterrand in the presidential elections in 1995.
The rivalry between Fabius and Rocard had been a major component of the party's internal problems.
At the extraordinary congress in December the 2,000 delegates had adopted a programme which committed the Socialist Party to act as a "barrier to the right and extreme-right and to pursue economic modernization, social justice, and the construction of Europe" .
It also accepted that only free markets could achieve economic growth.
Despite the policy agreements, the infighting over the succession to both Mitterrand and Mauroy had not at that point been resolved.
New National Assembly president
The PS candidate Henri Emmanuelli, a Secretary of State in 1981-86, was elected president of the National Assembly on Jan. 22, gaining 289 votes in the second round against 225 for the candidate of the right, Jacques Chaban-Delmas (Prime Minister in 1969-72 and president of the National Assembly in 1985-69, 1978-81 and 1986-88).
Emmanuelli succeeded Fabius, who had resigned after his election as PS first secretary [see above].
Emmanuelli, 46, a banker, had previously been PS treasurer.
UDF and RPR agreement on collaboration
The Rally for the French Republic (RPR) and the Union for French Democracy (UDF), the two main opposition parties, on Jan. 19 agreed to join forces for the forthcoming regional elections in March, the general election in 1993, and the presidential elections in 1995.
The leaders of the two parties, Jacques Chirac of the RPR and Valéry Giscard d'Estaing of the UDF, also agreed to nominate a single candidate for the presidential elections.
This was widely considered essential to their chances of securing the office over the Socialist candidate.
Political commentators noted, however, that there remained serious obstacles to co-operation between the two parties on a range of issues, not least the procedure for choosing a joint presidential candidate.
Libel suit against Le Pen
In an unprecedented move the Prime Minister, Edith Cresson, on Jan. 18 filed a defamation suit on behalf of the government against Jean-Marie Le Pen, the leader of the far-right National Front, for calling her government "a bunch of thieves, racketeers and gangsters" .
Le Pen, who had made the comments at several political rallies in the preceding week, told another rally on Jan. 19 that he would continue to speak out, calling the government "rogues and rascals" .
The Prime Minister's decision to take legal action was given strong support by other Socialists, but criticized by some leading politicians of the centre-right, who argued that it might constitute a restriction of freedom of speech.
The move was widely seen as part of the Socialist Party's strategy for the regional elections in March to counter the growing popularity of far-right views.
At a press conference on Jan. 21 the new PS first secretary, Fabius, called for a "mobilization" against the National Front and declared: "We intend making the struggle against the far right…one of the central pillars of our activities." 
Anti-racist demonstration
More than 100,000 people demonstrated in Paris on Jan. 25 to protest against the rise of right-wing extremism and racism in France and elsewhere in Europe.
Many of the banners carried by demonstrations were specifically aimed at the anti-immigration policies advocated by the National Front.
The demonstration was sponsored by some 70 organizations, including SOS-Racisme, the League of Human Rights, the Federation of Immigrant Workers' Solidarity Organizations (FASTI) and the Movement against Racism and for Friendship between Peoples (MRAP), as well as left-wing political parties and trade unions.
A feature of the demonstration was the large number of placards denouncing the immigration policies of the Socialist government.
Rightward shift in by-elections
In an indication of the Socialist Party's loss of popularity, the party's share of the vote fell sharply in a by-election for the National Assembly and in five local council by-elections on Jan. 26.
The National Front in turn made considerable advances in all the elections.
The PS's worst setback was in the parliamentary by-election, for a seat near the northern industrial city of Lille, traditionally a Socialist stronghold.
The party came third, with 13.0 per cent of the vote compared with 31.1 per cent in the general election in 1988.
The National Front's vote increased from 10.4 per cent to 15.7 per cent, which gave it second place behind the candidate of the centrist Union for French Democracy (UDF).
Since the latter did not obtain an absolute majority, a run-off contest would be held on Feb. 2.
Conviction of Médecin
The former mayor of Nice, Jacques Médecin, was found guilty on Jan. 6 of misusing public funds and was sentenced in absentia to one year's imprisonment, ordered to pay nearly F2,500,000 (about US$480,000) in fines and civil damages, and barred from holding public office for life.
Médecin was specifically convicted of diverting public funds to purchase advertising space in a magazine backing his right-wing views, through an agency which he owned.
He faced at least three other trials of misusing public funds and business fraud.
He had resigned from his political offices in September 1990 [see pp. 37719-20]after evidence had been uncovered of irregularities in the city budget and of personal tax evasion.
At the time he was abroad on an official visit and did not return to France, settling instead in Uruguay.
Because of his absence from the trial he forfeited all rights to appeal.
Mitterrand suggestion on future role of French nuclear forces in European defence
President Mitterrand, speaking at a conference on European unity in Paris on Jan. 10, indicated that the French government would be prepared to discuss the possibility of a wider role for France's nuclear forces within the context of a European Community defence policy.
He said that developing a "European doctrine" on nuclear defence would "soon be one of the major questions" to be addressed by the European Communities (EC) in the movement towards political and economic unity.
Observers noted that this was the first time that France, which had traditionally followed a strongly independent defence policy, had suggested such a possibility.
The President made no specific proposals on the matter, however.
The President of the European Commission, Jacques Delors, speaking at the same conference, said more explicitly that he could conceive of a situation in which France's nuclear umbrella could one day be extended to the entire EC under a common doctrine.
 "One cannot help but wonder why, one day, when the EC has a very strong political union, nuclear arms should not be transferred to this authority," he said.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Border guards trial
Two former East German border guards, Ingo Heinrich and Andreas Kühnpast, whose trial had opened in September 1991, were on Jan. 20 convicted of manslaughter and attempted manslaughter respectively, by a Berlin court.
They had shot and killed Chris Gueffroy, the last person to die trying to escape from East to West Germany, as he attempted to cross the border to West Berlin on Feb. 6, 1989.
Heinrich was sentenced to 3@1/2 years' imprisonment and Kühnpast received a two-year suspended sentence; two other guards were acquitted.
The case would go to appeal on the issue of whether West German law could apply to events which occurred in the former East German state.
In July 1991 it had been announced that some 200 investigations into shootings by border guards would be undertaken; a second trial of border guards had begun in December 1991.
The convictions in the Gueffroy case increased the expectation of the prosecution of former East German leaders over the "shoot-to-kill" policy, including former Prime Minister Willi Stoph, former Minister of Defence Heinz Kessler, and the former head of the East German security service (Stasi), Erich Mielke.
Charges were pending against former head of state and head of the ruling SED party, Erich Honecker, who had taken refuge in the Chilean embassy in Moscow [see pp. 38687-88].
Defence cuts
On Jan. 11 federal Defence Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg announced savings on costs of defence of DM43,700 million (US$27,800 million) spread over the next 13 years.
Reductions would affect especially artillery and anti-tank weapons, while procurement of naval vessels would be slowed.
The total defence budget for 1992 was DM52,000 million.
The armed forces were already scheduled to be cut to 370,000 as a consequence of the negotiations with the former Soviet Union concerning withdrawal of its troops from Germany.
It was confirmed that a new German rapid deployment force would be available for use within NATO by 1995, but controversy continued over a proposed amendment of the constitutional prohibition on utilization of German armed forces outside the NATO area, to allow them to take part in UN peacekeeping operations.
SPD candidate for federal chancellorship
Björn Engholm, chair of the SPD, announced on Jan. 20 that he would seek, at a party congress in late 1993, the SPD's endorsement of his candidacy for the chancellorship in the 1994 elections.
There had been speculation over the candidacy since the SPD's defeat in the 1990 general election and Engholm's election as party chair the following May [see pp. 37904-05; 38199].
Admission on arms sales
The sale of weapons belonging to the former East Germany to Finland and Uruguay was confirmed by a German Defence Ministry spokesman on Jan. 3.
The sale, involving five minesweepers and two tugboats to Uruguay, and small-calibre arms and ammunition to Finland, was described as legal by the spokesman, who stressed that the arms were not destined for "areas of tension" .
EUROPE
FINLAND
Friendship treaty with Russia
Finland and Russia on Jan. 20 signed a treaty of good neighbourliness and mutual co-operation; two other agreements were signed dealing with trade and co-operation in border areas.
The new treaty replaced that first signed between the Soviet Union and Finland in 1948 and renegotiated in November 1991 [see p. 38587].
The Finnish government had cancelled the signing of this treaty in December because of the disintegration of the Soviet Union.
The text of the new treaty was substantively identical to that negotiated with the Soviet Union in 1991, dropping the 1948 commitment for either side to come to the other's assistance if it were attacked.
The new treaty contained no military commitments, specifying that in future relations would be based on international law and the accords of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
Both sides agreed not to use force against each other and to respect the inviolability of their joint border.
The 1948 treaty had been widely criticized in the West for limiting Finnish sovereignty, but was defended by successive Finnish governments for providing an accommodation with a powerful neighbour which protected Finland's market economy and pluralist political system.
EUROPE
SWEDEN
1992-93 budget
The centre-right minority government which had come to office in October [see p. 38542]proposed major expenditure cuts in the 1992-93 budget introduced on Jan. 10.
The budget proposals provided for expenditure of 489,500 million kronor (US$86,500 million) and anticipated a deficit of 70,800 million kronor, despite cuts of around 14,000 million kronor in spending primarily on defence, sick pay insurance, housing subsidies and other social benefits.
One of the most controversial proposals was the abolition of benefit for the first two days of sickness.
In the economic forecasts issued together with the budget the government predicted a rise in unemployment to 3.8 per cent in 1992 and to 4.5 per cent in 1993 (the highest levels since 1945), and a fall in gross domestic product by 0.2 per cent in 1992 (after a fall of 1.3 per cent in 1991) to be followed by a rise of 1.9 per cent in 1993.
The overall economic picture was more gloomy than that set out by the government in November when it first put forward measures aimed at reversing the country's economic decline [see pp. 38587-88]and what it called the mismanagement by the previous Social Democratic administration.
The Finance Minister, Anne Wibble, introducing the budget, told parliament that the government's fiscal policy was centred on promoting growth and development while ending economic stagnation.
She described the budget as "a new start" for the country.
Government policy would "form a basis for growth and enterprise which towards the late 1990s will result in a Sweden with individual freedom, where hard work and thrift will pay off" .
She also warned that 1992 would be a difficult year.
The opposition Social Democrats described the proposals as unfair, saying that they would reduce the opportunities for growth and accusing the government of deliberately creating unemployment.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
BCCI liquidation process
During January courts set in motion the process of liquidating the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI), which had been closed in July 1991 after evidence of massive fraud was revealed [see pp. 38355; 38545].
On Jan. 3 a Luxembourg court ordered the liquidation of the BCCI SA, which controlled the bank's operations in Europe (including the United Kingdom) and most of the eastern hemisphere.
The order did not affect BCCI Holdings (Luxembourg), the ultimate holding entity of the group.
On Jan. 14 the High Court in London issued a winding up order against BCCI operations in the UK.
The judge described the bank as "plainly and hopelessly insolvent" .
The order allowed a deposit protection scheme to come into operation in the UK, under which depositors (numbering some 53,000 in the UK out of a global total of around 1,200,000) could claim 75 per cent of their deposits up to a maximum of £15,000.
On the same day a winding up order was issued in the Cayman Islands against BCCI (Overseas), which controlled the bank's operations in the western hemisphere.
US proceedings
On Jan. 24 a United States federal judge in Washington DC accepted a guilty plea on behalf of BCCI on charges of racketeering.
The plea was part of an agreement reached with the public prosecutor under which BCCI's assets in the USA (worth US$550 million) would be forfeited and criminal charges against the bank would be dropped.
Of BCCI's assets $100 million would be used to bolster First American Bankshares Inc., BCCI's main US subsidiary, while $150 million would go to US creditors, $275 million would go to foreign creditors, and the remainder would pay civil fines and penalties in the USA.
Charges had been brought in the USA in July 1991 against BCCI's founder, Agha Hasan Abedi, and BCCI's former chief operating officer, Swaleh Naqvi [see p. 38355].
On Nov. 15, 1991, Ghaith Pharaon, a Saudi Arabian investor, was charged with involvement in BCCI's allegedly fraudulent takeover of a Californian bank and for fraudulent transactions with a Florida bank.
Sani Ahmad, 53, the head of BCCI's Washington office in 1985-90, was arrested on Jan. 10.
He was not charged with any crime but on Jan. 14 was detained without bail as a material witness in the BCCI case.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Escalation of violence — Suspension of political talks
Fifteen people died in political and sectarian violence in Northern Ireland in January as the Irish Republican Army (IRA) intensified its military campaign to bring about the withdrawal of British troops and specifically to force the abandonment of the cross-party political talks on the future of the province [see below; p. 38300].
At the same time the Unionist paramilitary Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) and Ulster Freedom Fighters (UFF) appeared to step up their activities.
In the worst IRA attack on civilians for five years, eight Protestant workers were killed and five injured on Jan. 17 when a massive bomb destroyed their van at Teebane Cross.
They were returning from a day's repair and construction work at an army base in Omagh.
The IRA regarded civilians who worked for the security forces as "legitimate targets" , but the attacks on civilian workers prompted several joint protest demonstrations by Catholic and Protestant workers.
On Jan. 19 an additional army battalion (around 500 men) was deployed in Northern Ireland.
Although regular army numbers had been increased from 10,500 to 11,000 in November [see p. 38588], these 500 additional troops had in fact returned to England before Christmas; the Northern Ireland Secretary Peter Brooke conceded on Jan. 9 that "you might take the view with hindsight that a different decision could have been taken" .
In a related development, Unionist leaders called for Brooke's resignation after he had appeared on a television chat show in Dublin, Ireland, and given an impromptu rendering of a folksong, shortly after the Teebane bombing.
Brooke subsequently apologized and offered his resignation, but this was rejected by the Prime Minister, John Major.
In other incidents during the month the IRA claimed responsibility for a series of attacks on shops, offices and businesses throughout Northern Ireland.
In particular, incendiary devices and car bombs exploded in the city centre of Belfast on Jan. 5, 21 and 31, causing major damage but no injuries.
The IRA also claimed responsibility for the killing of two civilians on Jan. 14 and 15 (in the latter case a Catholic who, the IRA later admitted, had been shot "in error" ).
The UVF claimed responsibility for the shootings on Jan. 4 and Jan. 30 of Catholic civilians who it claimed were members of the IRA.
The UFF killed a Catholic on Jan. 9, and on Jan. 15 it killed a Protestant builder who it claimed had been an informer for the security forces.
On Jan. 10 the IRA exploded a bomb in Whitehall in London, less than 300 metres from Downing Street, where the Prime Minister's residence was situated.
Although the bomb caused little damage and the surrounding area had been evacuated following a telephone warning by the IRA, the bombing again raised concern about the efficacy of security provisions on the mainland.
The IRA had previously carried out a mortar attack on Downing Street in February 1991 [see p. 38019].
Abandonment of Brooke initiative
The inter-party talks on the future of Northern Ireland, sponsored by the Northern Ireland Secretary, Peter Brooke, were formally suspended on Jan. 27.
The talks between the leaders of the four parties — James Molyneaux of the Ulster Unionist Party, the Rev. Ian Paisley of the Democratic Unionist Party, John Hume of the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP), and John Alderdice of the Alliance Party — had started in June 1991 [see pp. 38300-31]and initially broke down in July [see p. 38356]over procedural disagreements.
Brooke announced that he was giving up his effort to revive the talks when the parties could not agree on a format to proceed in the context of the forthcoming UK general election (due to be held by July).
The SDLP had called on the Unionist parties to give a guarantee to continue the talks after the election regardless of its outcome.
The participants agreed a statement which stressed the "great potential" of political dialogue, and supported the current broad structure of the talks, but concluded "with regret that it was not possible in present circumstances to proceed to launch fresh substantive talks on the lines envisaged" .
They did agree to continue lower-level meetings between party representatives and Brian Mawhinney, a Minister of State at the Northern Ireland Office.
EUROPE
BELGIUM
New Walloon government
While negotiations remained inconclusive on the formation of a coalition government at the national level following the general election in November 1991 [see p. 38589], the Socialist Party (PS) and Social Christian Party (PSC) agreed on Jan. 5 to form a regional coalition government in French-speaking Wallonia, headed by Guy Spitaels (PS).
As required by tradition, Spitaels at the same time resigned as PS president at national level, a post which he had held since 1981.
Philippe Busquin, the Minister of Social Affairs in the outgoing government which was continuing in a caretaker capacity, was elected party leader on Jan. 25.
The PS-PSC coalition agreement in Wallonia provided for significant increases in spending on education, housing, urban renewal and environmental protection.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Moves against neo-Nazis
A well known right-wing extremist, Gottfried Küssel, was arrested on Jan. 7 after the broadcast of a television interview in the United States in which he called for the restoration of the Nazi Party to power and the creation of a Fourth Reich.
On Jan. 17 the police also reported that they had uncovered a neo-Nazi organization, three of whose members were arrested and another six questioned on suspicion of plotting the overthrow of the government.
The Military Sports Group Trenck had come to the attention of the authorities after members had harassed a Viennese youth earlier in the month.
During raids on members' homes the police seized a large amount of weapons as well as racist and anti-immigrant literature.
Neo-Nazi activities were illegal under Austrian law.
The authorities had come under growing pressure to act more vigorously against extreme right-wing organizations and activities after a hotel used as a temporary refugee centre was firebombed on Jan. 17, the first incident of its kind in Austria.
Extended sentence for Proksch
The sentence passed on Udo Proksch in March 1991 for his involvement in the Lucona affair [see p. 38110]was changed from 20 years to life in an appeal hearing completed on Jan. 28.
The appeal had been lodged by both the prosecution and the defence.
No further appeal was possible under Austrian law, but defence lawyers said that they wanted to apply for a retrial because of new expert evidence which cast doubt on their client's conviction.
The affair of the Lucona, which blew up off the Maldives in January 1977, had led to the resignations of three leading politicians who had been close to Proksch.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Renfe scandal — Resignation of Valverde
The resignation of Julián García Valverde, the Minister of Health, was announced on Jan. 14, although he had actually offered his resignation three days earlier.
His replacement was named as José Antonio Griñan.
A parliamentary commission had on Jan. 9 begun investigations into land purchases made in 1990 by Equidesa, a subsidiary of Renfe, the state-owned railway company of which Valverde had then been president.
The land purchases had been made — from a number of companies and at apparently inflated prices — in February-May 1990 in the San Sebastián de los Reyes area of Madrid.
On Nov. 25, 1991, the United Left (IU) opposition grouping had lodged in a Madrid court an accusation against Renfe concerning fraudulent dealings.
On Dec. 4, 1991, Valverde had given to the parliamentary commission on industry a detailed exposition of Renfe's role in the affair, which he claimed had been merely to execute plans made by the Transport Ministry and the Autonomous Community (local council) of Madrid.
It was becoming apparent that some of the companies which had acted as intermediaries in the sale of the land to Equidesa were also under investigation in connection with a fraud involving the sale of value added tax (IVA-impuesto de valor agregado) invoices.
On Jan. 16 the Finance Ministry released a list of 648 companies under investigation, including Renfe and Equidesa and a third state-owned company, Empresa Nacional Bazán.
The parliamentary commission began on Jan. 15 to hear evidence about the land sales, from Valverde and 70 other individuals, and from government departments, local authorities and private companies who had been named by the IU, the conservative Popular Party (PP), the Social and Democratic Centre (CDS) and the Basque parliamentary group.
Valverde told the commission that his immediate superior at that time, the then Minister of Transport and Communications José Barrionuevo, had had full knowledge of the details of the land purchases.
El País of Jan. 19 noted that there had recently been a number of scandals involving allegedly corrupt officials from various political parties in central and local government.
Welcoming Valverde's relatively prompt resignation, it commented: "Perhaps the most disturbing feature of the present situation is the underground connections of these scandals with the irregular financing of the political parties." 
EUROPE
GIBRALTAR
Re-election of Socialists
The Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party (GSLP) led by Joe Bossano was returned to office with nearly three-quarters of the vote in elections in the self-governing British colony on Jan. 16.
The final results showed that the GSLP had gained 73.3 per cent of the vote, a substantial increase on its 58 per cent in March 1988 [see p. 36040].
The Gibraltar Social Democrats (GSD), led by Peter Caruana, came second with 20.2 per cent; the newly formed Gibraltar National Party (GNP) received 4.7 per cent ; and an independent candidate, the only member of the Association for Advancement of Civil Rights — the party which had held power until 1988 — to contest the election, gained 2.0 per cent .
The turnout was 71 per cent.
Under the Gibraltarian electoral system, the GSLP as the leading formation was allowed a maximum of eight seats in the House of Assembly.
The Social Democrats gained the remaining seven seats.
The GSLP, which was traditionally strongly opposed to Spain's claim of sovereignty over the territory, had campaigned on a platform calling for greater autonomy from the United Kingdom, particularly in the economic sphere.
At a victory press conference Bossano denied that the result meant that Gibraltarians were anti-Spanish, "nor that they were expressing hostility nor enmity towards Spain" .
Rather, he said, "it is a clear expression of the desire for self-determination" .
EUROPE
ITALY
Indictment of generals
Nine air force generals and four colonels were indicted on Jan. 15 in connection with the crash near the island of Ustica (north of Sicily) on June 27, 1980, of an Itavia airline DC9, in which all 81 people on board were killed.
Amongst the generals was Lamberto Bartolucci, the former head of the service, as well as Zeno Tascio, Corrado Melillo, Franco Ferri, Franco Pisano and Federico Benincasa Mannucci.
The charges alleged conspiracy against state institutions and obstructing the course of the inquiry into the crash.
Repeated attempts to ascertain the cause of the disaster had encountered difficulties in obtaining information [see pp. 36434; 37096].
One hypothesis which had gained wide acceptance and which was consistent with the damage to the aircraft was that it had been hit in error by a NATO missile.
The indictments came after the principal investigator, Rosario Priore, had returned from a visit to the United States, where he had sought access to US records.
Attempted bomb attack on train
A bomb explosion narrowly failed to derail a train carrying over 1,000 passengers on the night of Jan. 5-6, shortly after the train had left Lecce, in Apulia.
After initial suspicions that right-wing terrorists had laid the bomb, the explosion was later attributed to the Apulian Mafia, known as the Sacra Corona ( "Sacred Crown" ).
The appeal was due to take place in January of several alleged leaders of this organization who had been convicted in 1991.
Two fire-bomb attacks had previously been made against a police barracks and the court in Lecce, where the appeal was to be heard.
Privatization law
Following the approval of the 1991 budget [see p. 38690], two additional economic measures were approved in January.
The first of these, omitted from the budget legislation because of failure to secure a consensus, established the conditions for the privatization of state industries.
The second measure granted the Banca d'Italia, the central bank, independence from the Treasury.
Hitherto, the central bank had only been able to advise the Treasury on interest rate policy, whereas under the new legislation the bank would be free to set the discount rate itself.
Privatization was considered a key part of the government's economic strategy to reduce the public-sector deficit in order to permit Italy to participate in European Community (EC) economic and monetary union from 1997.
This strategy represented a major change in policy, as Italy had maintained a substantial state industrial sector since the 1930s.
The new legislation cleared the way for state holding institutions, such as the Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale (IRI), to become limited liability companies and to draw up detailed plans for disposals.
Such plans would nevertheless still need to be approved by the government or, if majority shareholdings were involved, by parliament.
EUROPE
GREECE
Verdict in Papandreou trial
On Jan. 17 the 13-member tribunal, which since March 1991 had been hearing the case concerning the Bank of Crete, acquitted former Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou of all the charges against him.
It censured him, however, for not having intervened in time to prevent fraudulent dealings involving US$200 million by Georgios Koskotas, the bank's then chairman.
The court found, by a narrow margin of seven votes to six, that Papandreou was not the "moral instigator" of the scandal of public funds being directed into the Bank of Crete.
It cleared him by 10 votes to three of a charge that he had received bribes from Koskotas, and by nine votes to four of a charge that he had embezzled state funds by asking the Ministry of Finance to write off illegally debts owed by an Athens hotelier, Socrates Kalkanis.
Allegations had been first made against Papandreou and three other politicians in connection with their dealings with the bank in late 1988 [see p. 36562]and had been one factor in the electoral victory of the New Democracy party in April 1990.
The tribunal had been created in September 1989 to investigate the matter [see pp. 36822; 36902]and the public trial had opened in March 1991.
Papandreou, who was president of the main opposition party, the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok), and had headed a Pasok government in 1981-89, had consistently refused to appear in the courtroom or to send lawyers to represent him [see pp. 38157-58].
One defendant, former Justice Minister Agamemnon Koutsogiorgas, had died in April 1991 [ibid.].
The two other defendants were former Cabinet ministers Dimitris Tsvolas and Georgios Petsos.
Tsvolas on Jan. 17 was sentenced to 2@1/2 years in prison and loss of civil rights for three years, for breach of trust in connection with the debt write-off for Kalkanis.
Petsos received a 10-month suspended sentence for corruptly facilitating planning permission for a press complex which Koskotas had built near Athens.
Koskotas himself remained in a prison awaiting trial on major fraud charges.
Meanwhile on Jan. 23 he was sentenced to five years in prison, after a two-day trial, for forging the document allegedly signed by Papandreou which had featured prominently in the evidence presented against Papandreou.
There had been threats that Pasok supporters would take to the streets in mass protest in the event of a guilty verdict against their leader.
As the verdict was announced Papandreou called for an immediate general election, claiming that the Greek electorate had been deceived and that the ND's April 1990 election victory had been "the fruit of conscious deception of the voters" .
EUROPE
TURKEY
Intensified action against Kurds — Tensions with Iran
Bombing raids were made by the Turkish armed forces against the guerrilla bases of the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK) for about two weeks from Jan. 8.
The Turkish army claimed that it had killed at least 34 guerrillas in the operation in the Cudi Mountains of south-eastern Turkey, 50 km from the border with Iraq.
Both planes and helicopter gunships had been used.
The Interior Minister, Ismet Sezgin, said that the action had pre-empted a major PKK uprising planned for the spring.
The PKK claimed that only one person had been killed.
[For October 1991 operations against Turkish Kurdish bases in Iraq see p. 38547.]
Eight people were killed in clashes between the army and police in south-east Turkey in mid-January.
Resignation of Kurdish MPs
Two MPs of Kurdish origin, Leyla Zana and Hatip Dicle, resigned in mid-January from the government benches after being accused of giving verbal support to the armed separatist movement.
They had stood for election as Social Democratic (SHP) candidates in the October 1991 general election [see p. 38547].
Tensions with Iran
In an interview published on Jan. 4 Sezgin mentioned Iran along with Syria, Iraq, and three unnamed countries from outside the region, as being responsible for encouraging separatist activity among Turkish Kurds.
The Iranian authorities countered that they had repeatedly asked the Turkish government to present evidence for such claims.
Continuing tensions in relations with Iran also focused on the impounding by the Turkish authorities of a cargo ship, the Cape Maleas, as it was at anchor in the Bosphorus on Oct. 22, 1991.
On Jan. 13 a court in Ankara began a hearing on the matter.
The Foreign Ministry claimed that the ship, which was flying the Greek-Cypriot flag and had sailed from the Bulgarian port of Varna, was found to be carrying arms including grenade launchers and mortars, which were not registered in its documentation and were probably destined for "terrorist groups" .
It was suggested that they might reach Turkey through Syria and Iran.
The Iranian government said that the seizure was illegal and claimed the ship's cargo as property of the Iranian army.
This incident had not prevented the two countries from reaching agreement, on Oct. 31, 1991, on cross-border co-operation on the control of guerrilla activity.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Washington and Moscow rounds of peace talks
The third round of the bilateral talks stage of the Middle East peace negotiations, held in Washington on Jan. 13-16, ended with no agreement having been reached on the date or venue of the next round of bilateral negotiations [for second round of bilateral talks in Washington in December, see p. 38693].
The talks were scheduled to open on Jan. 7 but were delayed by the late arrival of the Arab teams in protest at the issuing of deportation orders on Jan. 2 against 12 Palestinian activists from the Israeli occupied territories [see p. 38741].
The Israeli delegation had arrived in Washington on Jan. 6.
The negotiations started positively, with agreement on separate Palestinian representation within the joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation, the issue which had caused the collapse of the second round of talks.
Israel's apparent recognition of the so-called "two-track approach" meant that Palestinians could negotiate with Israelis with only token Jordanian participation.
During the Israeli-Palestinian talks both sides put forward proposals for Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
[For withdrawal of two nationalist parties from the ruling Israeli coalition following Israel's decision to discuss measures of autonomy with the Palestinian delegation see this page.]
Under Israel's proposed "interim self-government authority" Palestinians would have some measure of autonomy, but no control over security, foreign affairs or settlements.
The Palestinian counter-proposal included measures to assure participation in self-rule by Arab residents of Jerusalem and the election of an organ to assume authority over all people, land and resources in the occupied territories until the final status was decided.
The Israeli delegation refused to discuss the controversial issue of Jewish settlements in the occupied territories.
There was little progress reported in Israel's talks with Syria, Jordan and Lebanon.
According to the Jordanians the Israeli delegation concentred on issues such as diplomatic relations and economic co-operation and refused to discuss the settlements issue and interpretations of UN Security Council Resolution 242.
Moscow round of multilateral talks
The third stage of the Middle East peace talks — the multilateral round — was held in Moscow on Jan. 28-29.
The talks, aimed at tackling practical regional matters such as water-sharing, economic development and the environment, brought together the broadest gathering of Arab states ever to sit at the same table with Israel.
The session was overshadowed, however, by a conflict over the status of the Palestinian delegation.
The Palestinians eventually boycotted the meeting in protest at the US and Russian decision to abide by the so-called "Madrid formula" which stipulated that the Palestinian delegation would include no PLO members, no East Jerusalem Palestinians and no Palestinians from the diaspora outside the occupied territories.
Syria and Lebanon declined to attend the multilateral session on the grounds that Israel had shown no signs of territorial flexibility in the previous rounds of bilateral talks.
Delegations from Algeria and Yemen travelled to Moscow but withdrew at the last moment in solidarity with the Palestinian delegation.
The presence of Egyptian and Jordanian delegations hinted at a possible rift in the ranks of the "front-line" Arab states; according to some commentators the Jordanian decision to attend had greatly displeased the Syrians.
The other Arab countries represented at the Moscow talks were Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Tunisia, Mauritania and Morocco.
Others attending included Canada, China, Japan, Russia, Turkey, the United States and representatives from the European Communities.
The conference established five committees which would convene in April or May.
The economic co-operation committee, chaired by the EC, would meet in Brussels; the environment committee, chaired by Japan, would met in Tokyo; the refugee committee, chaired by Canada, would meet in Ottawa; the water sharing committee, chaired by the USA, would meet in Turkey or Austria; and the arms control committee, chaired by Russia, would meet in Washington.
The Palestinian delegation announced its intention to attend committee meetings and called for the establishment of two additional committees covering the status of east Jerusalem and human rights.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Departure of Tehiya and Moledet from coalition — Budget — Security issues — Foreign affairs
The right-wing, ultra-nationalist Tehiya and Moledet parties resigned from the ruling Likud-led coalition on Jan. 19, in protest at what they considered to be the start of autonomy negotiations with the Palestinians during the recent round of Middle East peace talks in Washington [see this page].
Both parties argued that the discussions in Washington presaged territorial concessions and endangered Jewish settlers in the occupied territories.
The departure of the two parties removed the Shamir government's parliamentary majority.
Without the two Moledet members and the three Tehiya members the coalition now held 59 seats in the 120-member Knesset [see p. 38694 for departure of right-wing Tsomet Party from coalition in December 1991].
The Tehiya leader Yuval Ne'eman resigned his post as Minister of Science and Energy and Moledet leader Rehavam Ze'evi resigned as Minister without Portfolio, with effect from Jan. 21.
Although the government managed to survive a no confidence vote in the Knesset on Jan. 27, Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir had made it clear shortly after the departure of Tehiya and Moledet that he favoured holding an early general election (elections were due to be held before November 1992).
On Jan. 30 the opposition Labour Party informally endorsed Likud plans to hold elections on June 23.
Approval of 1992 budget
The 1992 budget was approved in the Knesset by 60 votes to 53 with one abstention on Jan. 2, two days after a Dec. 31 deadline and a matter of hours before the government was to press for approval of a one-month provisional budget.
The delay had been the result of a period of frantic bargaining between the Likud and its smaller orthodox or nationalist coalition partners.
The final obstacle was a disagreement between Shas and Mafdal over the distribution of funds to their client religious institutions.
In order to ensure the support of the nationalist parties Shamir increased settlement funding, including infrastructural development of the occupied territories.
During 1992 some 5,500 of the proposed 19,500 state housing units were to be constructed in occupied territories.
According to press reports the final cost of the last-minute deals struck by Likud with its partners was an estimated IS220 million about US$97,000,000), to come from budget reserves.
Total budget expenditure was set at IS107,000 million.
The government aimed at reducing the budget deficit to 6.2 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1992, compared with the 6.9 per cent originally forecast in 1991.
However, the figure was still well above the 5.5 per cent recommended by the Central Bank and the Finance Ministry and rested on an assumption that some US$2,000 million in United States bank loans would be forthcoming.
Announcement of deportation of Palestinians — Settlements issue
The Israeli Defence Ministry announced on Jan. 2 that 12 Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza strip were to be deported because of their involvement in "attacks on Israeli soldiers and local Arab residents" .
According to Israeli sources the 12 — seven from the Gaza strip and five from the West Bank — were closely associated with various factions of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
The 12 Palestinians were not immediately deported but were given the opportunity to appeal against the order, and on Jan. 23 the government revoked a deportation order against one of five Palestinians from the West Bank.
Palestinian negotiators at the Middle East peace talks responded to the deportation order by delaying their departure to Washington for the next round of talks [see p. 38740].
The move was greeted with widespread international condemnation.
Israel had been subjected to similar harsh international criticism when it had last deported a group of Palestinian activists, in May 1991 [see p. 38213].
On Jan. 6 the UN Security Council unanimously adopted Resolution 726 which "strongly condemned" the issuing of the deportation order, and the Security Council reaffirmed the applicability of the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention on the protection of civilians in the time of war to all the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem.
Israel criticized the resolution as "one-sided, unjust and disappointing" .
According to most commentators the announcement of the deportations was made in retaliation for the killing by an unidentified gunman on Jan. 1 of a Jewish settler, Doron Shorshan, near the Dir Al Balah refugee camp in the Gaza strip.
Shorshan was the fourth Jewish settler to be shot dead by gunmen since the start of the Middle East peace talks in October 1991.
On Jan. 14 a bus carrying Jewish settlers was attacked near Ramallah by gunmen; seven people were injured, two seriously.
Jewish settlers responded to the shooting by planting mobile homes on five sites across the West Bank and Gaza strip on Jan. 15, but these attempted settlements were immediately dismantled by the security forces.
Establishment of diplomatic relations with China — Other foreign contacts
Israel and China established formal diplomatic relations for the first time on Jan. 24.
Relations were established during a visit to China on Jan. 22-26 by Israel's Foreign Minister David Levi.
Israel and Lithuania established diplomatic relations on Jan. 9.
During a visit to Portugal on Jan. 14 Levi held talks with the Foreign Ministers of Angola and Cape Verde, both of whom announced that diplomatic relations with Israel would soon be established.
Israel and India announced on Jan. 29 that they had agreed to establish full diplomatic relations.
The French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas paid an official visit to Israel on Jan. 8-10, the first by a French Cabinet member since 1989.
Dumas discussed the peace process with Levi and Shamir and with a Palestinian delegation.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Progress of intifada
Israeli security forces carried out a series of raids in the West Bank on Jan. 22 resulting in the arrest of at least 60 Palestinians, most of them supporters of the radical Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP).
The raids were centred on the towns of Nablus, Ramallah and El-Bireh, all of which had been placed under curfew beforehand.
In combination with the raids, the Israeli Army announced that it had increased the number of soldiers deployed in the West Bank by 20 per cent.
Commentators regarded the raids and the increase in numbers of soldiers as measures clearly designed to placate Jewish settlers in the West Bank.
One Palestinian was killed during a gun battle with Israeli troops on Jan. 4 near the West Bank town of Jenin.
On the same day a Palestinian youth died during unrest near Khan Yunis on the Gaza Strip.
On Jan. 7 demonstrations erupted in the Gaza Strip against the planned deportation of 12 Palestinians [see this page].
During the unrest one Palestinian was shot dead and a further 20 were injured.
The next day a Palestinian was shot dead by a soldier in the West Bank village of Salifit after he had refused to show his identity card.
Four Palestinians accused of collaborating with the Israeli security forces were shot dead and their bodies dumped near the West Bank village of Kafr Rai on Jan. 26.
The four had reportedly infiltrated the Fatah-affiliated Black Panther group.
The bodies of three suspected "collaborators" had been discovered in the West Bank and Gaza Strip on Jan. 3.
Conviction of Palestinian for 1982 Pan Am bombing
A Greek court sentenced Muhammad Rashid, a Palestinian, to 18 years in prison on Jan. 8 after convicting him of premeditated manslaughter for his role in the 1982 mid-air bombing of a US Pan-Am airliner over Hawaii in which one person died [see pp. 36563; 36667].
Rashid had been arrested in Greece in 1988.
In September 1991 the Greek government had rejected a US request for his extradition, and his trial had opened in October 1991.
The prosecution contended that Rashid had been chief lieutenant to Abu Ibrahim, leader of the May 15 guerrilla group.
However, the defence argued that the case was one of mistaken identity and that Rashid was in fact Mohammed Hamdan, an officer in the PLO's Revolutionary Army.
Hamdan, it was claimed, had been on a PLO mission to Beirut at the time of the bombing.
Following his conviction Rashid told journalists that the guilty verdict "was a gift for the Americans" and that "the court had to find me guilty to balance the decision against extraditing me" .
Formation of new party
The Palestine Democratic Rally (PDR, al-Tajamm'u al-Dimoqrati al-Filastini) was formed on Jan. 19.
Based in the occupied territories, it was created by former members of the Palestine Communist Party (which had changed its name in late 1991 to the Palestine People's Party).
Voice of Palestine radio reported on Jan. 21 that the PDR's objectives included "the right to self-determination and the setting up of an independent state led by the PLO" .
Execution of Abu Iyad's assassin
The PLO chair Yassir Arafat announced on Jan. 11 that Hamza Abu Zayd, the Palestinian who had assassinated Abu Iyad and two other prominent PLO officials in January 1991 [see pp. 37975-76], had recently been executed.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Security — Internal affairs
Israeli operations in Lebanon — Operations against Israel and SLA
Israeli fighter aircraft launched attacks on "terrorist targets" in Lebanon in December 1991 and January 1992.
During the same period the situation on the ground in southern Lebanon remained tense, with frequent clashes between Hezbollah guerrillas on the one hand and Israeli forces and their South Lebanon Army (SLA) proxy forces on the other.
Evidence emerged in January that Israel was planning to extend its self-declared "security zone" further north into Lebanon.
On Jan. 8 the UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) announced that the village of Rashaf, situated on the edge of the zone, had been under siege by the SLA since late December.
In a statement issued on Jan. 24 the SLA announced that it was fully prepared to extend the zone "for the imperatives of security" .
In the last Israeli raid of 1991, on Dec. 17, Israeli jets attacked a Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine — General Command (PFLP-GC) base in the eastern Bekaa Valley; press reports said that four people were wounded.
Throughout the year Israel had carried out over 20 raids, killing some 35 people and wounding a further 150.
On Dec. 19, Israeli forces crossed over the "security zone" border in southern Lebanon to abduct three Lebanese "terrorist suspects" from the Jibshit area.
Two of the sons of one of the "suspects" died in a bomb explosion shortly after the abduction, and Lebanese police claimed that Israeli forces had planted the bomb during the raid.
The three "suspects" were released by the Israelis on Dec. 21.
There was some speculation that the action had been part of ongoing Israeli efforts to secure the release of servicemen missing in Lebanon.
On Dec. 24 Israel released three Lebanese men abducted by SLA militiamen in November.
Two bombs exploded in the "security zone" on Dec. 30 killing at least one SLA militiaman.
Israeli jets attacked a PFLP-GC base near Damur and Naameh, some 15 km south of Beirut, on Jan. 10.
The Middle East International of Jan. 24 reported that three guerrillas died in the raid, and also that Israeli rockets hit a nearby shanty town killing at least nine women and children.
Hezbollah claimed to have killed some members of a joint Israeli-SLA patrol in a bomb attack in the "security zone" on Jan. 17.
Two days later a bomb exploded in an SLA controlled village, killing the mayor.
The SLA launched artillery bombardments against Hezbollah positions in retaliation.
Hezbollah claimed to have killed at least two "Zionist troops" during an operation in the Western Bekaa Valley on Jan. 21.
Deployment of Lebanese army in UNIFIL areas
A two-month dispute between the Lebanese government and UNIFIL ended on Jan. 15 when UNIFIL agreed to allow the Lebanese army to take control of a number of villages in southern Lebanon.
Lebanese troops replaced Ghanaian UNIFIL forces in the villages — around Tair Debbeh — in late January.
Car bomb in West Beirut
On Dec. 30 a large car bomb exploded in the busy Basta quarter of west Beirut, killing at least 17 people and wounding over 100 others, mostly women and children.
The area was a Hezbollah stronghold but was under Syrian and Lebanese Army military control.
No-one claimed responsibility for the attack, but Hezbollah and Syria both blamed Israel.
In a statement delivered shortly after the explosion the Lebanese Interior Minister, Maj.-Gen.
Sami al-Khatib, vowed to hang the bombers at the scene of the crime.
Call for surrender of light weapons
On Jan. 15 the Cabinet approved a plan which called on all groups and individuals voluntarily to hand over small-calibre weapons by mid-March.
The government threatened that after the deadline it would launch a campaign forcibly to collect the weapons, and warned that the "severest of penalties" would be inflicted on those violating the order.
A number of militias and groups, including the Progressive Socialist Party (PSP), Hezbollah and the Syrian National Socialist Party, announced that they would not comply with the government call.
The plan was also attacked by the Phalangist Lebanese Forces (LF) militia which noted that Hezbollah guerrillas operating in the south had been allowed to retain heavy weaponry.
Government setback on media control
A plan to stop news broadcasting by Lebanon's 42 private (and in many cases militia-controlled) television stations was outlined by Information Minister Albert Mansur and Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister Michel al-Murr on Jan. 9.
The plan was abandoned shortly afterwards, however, having come under heavy criticism.
Some of the stations had, in the past, been extremely critical of the government.
Attendance at Cabinet meeting by Berri and Jumblatt
Nabi Berri, the Amal leader and Minister of State, and Walid Jumblatt, the PSP leader and Minister of State, both attended a Cabinet meeting on Jan 22.
The two militia leaders had been boycotting the Cabinet for several months.
Berri and Jumblatt agreed to attend the meeting after talking with visiting Syrian Vice-President Abdel Halim Khaddam in early January.
During his visit Khaddam also attempted to settle a growing dispute between President Elias Hrawi, Prime Minister Umar Karami and National Assembly Speaker Hussein al-Husseini about the distribution of state powers.
Communist Party congress
The Lebanese Communist Party held its sixth congress in Beirut in early January.
Georges Hawi was re-elected as general secretary, with Faruq Dahruj as his deputy.
A 16-member politburo and 49-member executive committee were also elected.
The congress failed to agree on a new name for the party.
Visit by French Foreign Minister
The French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas visited Lebanon on Dec. 12-13.
Topics discussed included a Lebanese request for a supply of French military helicopters.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Talks on oil sales — Nuclear weapons programme
Talks on the possible sale of Iraqi oil worth US$1,600 million for humanitarian purposes over a six-month period [see pp. 38406; 38452; 38548]were held in Vienna between Iraqi and UN officials on Jan. 8-10.
They were reported to have ended with an agreement involving the appointment of an Iraqi representative on the UN escrow fund managing oil revenues, and permission for Iraq to send observers to oversee oil-pumping operations alongside UN inspectors.
The two sides, led by Iraq's permanent representative at the UN, Abdul Amir al-Anbari, and a UN Assistant Secretary-General and Controller at the Office of Planning, Budget and Finance, Kofi Annan, were expected to resume discussions in February.
They were understood also to have considered Iraqi objections to a proposal to export oil through Turkey [see p. 38548], with a pipeline fee of US$264,000,000 to be paid directly to the Turkish company, Botas, from the UN's planned escrow account.
Annan, who described the talks on Jan. 10 as "constructive and positive" , was expected to submit a report to UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
Fresh efforts to persuade Iraq to sell oil under the terms of UN Resolutions 706 and 712 [see pp. 38406; 38452], rejected by the government as an infringement of Iraqi sovereignty, were prompted by renewed concern over the country's food and medical crisis [see pp. 38452; 38548; 38597; 38696].
The UN Security Council on Jan. 28 re-opened discussions on sanctions against Iraq.
On Jan. 7 the Iraqi Health Minister Umid Midhat Mubarak said that 85,942 Iraqis, including 27,473 children under five [not 80,000 as wrongly given in the first paragraph of the article on p. 38696], had died due to medical shortages.
The Health Ministry subsequently claimed that 160 shipments of medicines and medical equipment, paid for before Aug. 2, 1990 (the date of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait), were detained at foreign ports.
On Jan. 11 Italy unblocked up to 10 per cent of frozen Iraqi assets to pay for Italian exports.
Japan on Jan. 22 announced that it had approved the export of 27 tonnes of surgical anaesthetics.
UN Compensation Commission decision
The governing council of the UN Compensation Commission agreed in Geneva on Jan. 24 to set cumulative ceilings for payments by Iraq to a UN Compensation Fund for victims of its invasion of Kuwait [see pp. 38211; 38406; 38548].
Sums of up to US$30,000 for individuals and US$60,000 for families would be payable as damages resulting from "mental pain or anguish" .
Claimants would also be entitled to file for interim payments of US$2,500 for death or injury.
There was no decision on compensation for losses incurred by businesses.
Iraq on Jan. 20 requested a five-year moratorium on its payments to the Compensation Fund.
Admission on nuclear weapons programme — "Super-gun" issue
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in a report on Jan. 17 summarizing the activities of the ninth UN nuclear inspection team which visited Iraq on Jan. 12-14, said that Iraq had acquired from Germany large quantities of components used to produce several thousand high-speed centrifuges for enriching weapons-grade uranium.
The deputy chairman of the UN Special Commission on Iraq, Robert Galucci, said in Bahrain on Jan. 14 that Iraq had for the first time admitted "pursuing a production-scale centrifuge enrichment programme rather than simply a research programme" , after UN inspectors confronted Iraqi officials with evidence supplied by Germany showing the involvement of German firms in this programme.
David Dorn, a nuclear physicist working for the Commission, was quoted in New York on Jan. 15 as saying that it was possible that Iraq possessed enough components for up to 10,000 gas centrifuges.
Criminal proceedings against several unnamed German companies charged with supplying parts for Iraq's nuclear programme were officially confirmed by a German Foreign Ministry spokesman on Jan. 14.
Claims that Iraq had concealed vital information regarding its nuclear programme were revived by US President George Bush in a report to the US Congress on Jan. 14.
The report showed that although a total of 62 ballistic missiles, 18 launch pads, 33 missile warheads, 127 missile storage-racks and substantial amounts of rocket fuel had so far been destroyed, "questions remain[ed]" about Iraq's capability to manufacture short- and long-range Scud missiles.
Allegations that mobile Iraqi Scud missile launchers, used against Israel and Saudi Arabia during the Gulf war, were manufactured by a US-owned factory at Motherwell in Lanarkshire, Scotland, were denied by a spokesman for the Terex Corporation, which owned the factory, on Jan. 26.
The Sunday Times of Jan. 5 published allegations concerning a supposed "Islamic bomb" programme involving Algeria [see p. 38703].
Reports in late January suggested that the United Kingdom Defence Ministry might have been aware of the export of components used in the manufacture of the Iraqi "super-gun" [see pp. 37332; 37390-91; 37471; 38361].
Chemical and biological weapons inspection
The UN Security Council on Jan. 28 reprimanded Iraq for allowing protestors to assault UN inspectors who arrived on Jan. 27 with responsibility for disposing of chemical and biological weapons stocks.
On Jan. 29 Iraq informed the UN that it had destroyed more than 181,000 bombs, missiles and other explosives used by the allies against it during the Gulf war.
Estimates of Gulf war casualties
The first anniversary of the Gulf war was marked on Jan. 17 by conflicting estimates of the total number of Iraqi civilians killed during the Gulf war.
On Jan. 9 the environmental group Greenpeace claimed that between 70,000 and 90,000 Iraqi civilians had died as a direct result of allied bombing; the total number of Iraqi civilian and military war-related deaths was estimated at between 177,500 and 243,000.
Official US estimates which initially put the number of Iraqi military deaths at 100,000 were readjusted on Jan. 15 to around 10,000.
(In November 1991 the US human rights group, Middle East Watch, estimated that the number of Iraqi civilians killed could total thousands "with an upper limit of perhaps between 2,500 and 3,000" .)
French military estimates, reported in the Middle East Economic Digest of Jan. 31, set the total number of Iraqis killed in the Gulf war at 50,000.
Visit by UN human rights team
The head of the first UN human rights team to visit Iraq since the Gulf war, Max van der Stoel, said on Jan. 20 that "massive violations" of human rights were taking place in Iraq.
(In November 1991 an interim UN report carried accusations of human rights abuses by the government against Kurdish and Shia rebels.)
Stoel, who visited Iraq on Jan. 3-9, made his allegations immediately prior to a report by the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) on Jan. 12, indicating that at least 100,000 Kurds had disappeared as part of a government-sponsored extermination campaign in 1988; subsequent evidence based on a video film smuggled out of Iraq, reported on Jan. 31, alleged Iraqi army brutality against Shia rebels in the south of the country.
Claims that Iraqi soldiers had looted incubators from Kuwait and left babies to die [see p. 37927]were described on Jan. 12 by Middle East Watch as unfounded and "central to the war propaganda effort" .
Internal political developments
RCC decree imposing death penalty
Government-controlled newspapers on Jan. 16 announced that the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) had imposed the death penalty for crimes ranging from looting to car theft.
Reports of tightening security, including the formation of a special force to protect President Saddam Hussein, had grown after Shia opposition groups claimed in early January that 80 army officers, allegedly involved in an abortive coup in December 1991, had been executed.
Dissident Shia groups were also reported on Jan. 9 to have claimed that they were responsible for killing a group of senior air force officers during an attack on air force headquarters in Baghdad.
Suspension of Kurdish autonomy talks
Kurdish leaders announced on Jan. 15 that they would suspend autonomy talks with the government until after leadership elections scheduled for April 3.
Reports in late January spoke of a stalemate in the autonomy talks and of the effectiveness of the government's economic blockade of Kurdistan [see pp. 38458; 38598]which was enforced by a heavily fortified military line across north-eastern Iraq, running from Qasr-e-Shirin on the Iranian border east of Kirkuk and south of Arbil to the Turkish border west of Zhako.
On Jan. 7 a spokesman for the UN's Inter-Agency Humanitarian Programme for Iraq and Kuwait said in Geneva that a minimum of US$145,300,000 would be needed to protect and assist Kurds over the next six months.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
UN resolution on aircraft bombing suspects
The UN Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution on Jan. 21 demanding that Libya agree to extradite to the United States or United Kingdom those accused of the 1988 bombing of Pan Am flight 103 in which 270 people died [see pp. 36409-10].
If Libya did not comply within a short time period, the USA, Britain and France would seek UN endorsement for sanctions.
Resolution 731 also demanded that Libya co-operate with the French inquiry into the destruction of a UTA aircraft near the Chad-Niger border in 1989 in which 170 people died [see p. 36910].
France wanted the extradition of six Libyans to stand trial for the bombing.
The Libyan authorities had opened investigations into both incidents, inviting the French, UK and US authorities to present their evidence against the accused in Tripoli.
This invitation was refused by the governments concerned, which also rejected a compromise solution, put forward by Libya and backed by some other Arab countries, for a UN investigation into the affair.
In early January the Libyan government transfered assets from European banks to Middle East banks in anticipation of the imposition by European countries of new economic sanctions.
However, the government's threat to withhold payment on contracts with European companies if sanctions were imposed was discounted by many firms which had already encountered long delays in payment.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
Political prisoner releases
The Bourequat brothers — three French citizens who had been imprisoned without charge for over 17 years — were pardoned by King Hassan II on Dec. 30 and returned to France on Jan. 3.
Bayazid Jacques, Bourequat Midhat René Bourequat and Ali Auguste Bourequat, who disappeared without explanation after their arrest on July 8, 1973, had been the focus of a long campaign by human rights groups.
After their release they said that they had been "kidnapped" by the authorities after two of them had written to the King warning of a plot by Col. Ahmed Dlimi, then one of his key advisers.
The conditions in which they had been kept in the notorious Tazmamert prison had been so appalling that they had had to be transferred to a hospital for medical treatment to make them fit for release.
In a New Year message to the King, published in Rabat, the Moroccan capital, on Jan. 4, French President François Mitterrand expressed his "deepest gratitude" for the brothers' release, but on French television on Jan. 5 the Minister-Delegate for Humanitarian Action, Bernard Kouchner, described the affair as "scandalous" and "revolting" .
Three more political prisoners, Rakiz Ahmed, Aït Benasser Ahmed and Harif Abdallah, members of the Marxist-Leninist group, Ilal Amam ( "Forward" ), imprisoned since 1977, were pardoned on Jan. 15.
On Jan. 15 the European Parliament blocked $600 million worth of development aid as a protest against Morocco's record on human rights.
Foreign Affairs and Co-operation Minister Abdellatif Filali attacked the decision as an "affront to the dignity of the Moroccan people" .
Death of opposition leader
Abderrahim Bouabid, first secretary of the Union socialiste des forces populaires, the main opposition party, which he founded in 1972, died of cancer on Jan. 8.
The party's politburo appointed Abderrahman el-Yousifi as his successor, with Mohammed el-Yazghi as his deputy.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
On Jan. 9 Interior Minister and Chairman of the State Security Council Abdollah Nouri announced that elections to the 270-member Majlis (Islamic Consultative Assembly) would be held on April 10 and that the new assembly would meet on May 28; previous elections to the Majlis were held in April and May 1988.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
OMAN
The first session of the Consultative Council (announced in November 1990 — see p. 37873) opened on Jan. 5, when its Speaker Sheikh Abdullah bin Ali al-Qatabi said that the council heralded a new era of joint national action; the 59-member council would draft policy proposals for economic and social legislation but only in an advisory capacity.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
QATAR
The Amir, Sheikh Khalifal bin Hamad al-Thani, received a petition in mid-January from 50 leading Qataris demanding the establishment of a consultative assembly with legislative powers; the signatories expressed their concern and disappointment over abuse of power in the emirate and called for reforms of the economy and the education system.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
The government lifted pre-publication censorship of the written media on Jan. 12.
Censorship remained for the state-run broadcast media, and the government retained the right to close down publications which printed articles to which it objected.
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
Security Council summit
The first UN Security Council summit ended in New York on Jan. 31 with a call to strengthen the UN's peacemaking and peacekeeping roles in world affairs.
The summit was attended by heads of government of all five permanent and 10 non-permanent member countries of the Security Council except the Hungarian Prime Minister, Jozsef Antall [for list of non-permanent members as of Jan. 1, 1992, see p. 38555].
It was marked by the presence for the first time at the UN of Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
Initiated by France and the United Kingdom, the summit had reportedly been convened to grant de facto recognition to the permanent membership of Russia which, on Dec. 24, had informed the UN of its intention to assume membership of all UN organs previously held by the former Soviet Union.
Other press reports indicated that the summit had been conceived to reinforce the position of the UK and France.
Their privileges as permanent Security Council members, especially the right of veto, had been increasingly questioned by Germany and Japan which, as major economic powers, had allegedly claimed permanent membership of the Council.
Argentina, Brazil, India and Nigeria were also understood to have favoured an enlargement of the Council's permanent composition.
The opening address to the summit was given by the UK Prime Minister John Major, the UK holding the presidency of the Security Council for January.
He highlighted the UN's role in preventive diplomacy and urged greater assistance for the Russian economy, most immediately through Russian membership of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Later, in his closing speech, Major stressed that "we need economic development and prosperity in order to achieve lasting peace and stability" .
Unveiling proposals for a new global anti-missile system in co-operation with the United States, Yeltsin emphasised that "we do not want to be mere partners, we want to be allies" , adding that a new democratic Russia would play a full role in joint efforts based on collective security.
A proposal by French President François Mitterrand to strengthen UN peacekeeping functions by reactivating the UN Military Staff Committee, composed of senior military officers from the five permanent members of the Security Council [see p. 37640 for its August 1990 meeting over the Gulf crisis], failed to win support, reportedly due to Franco-US disagreement over the command of UN peacekeeping forces.
Summit declaration
In their final declaration issued on Jan. 31, summit participants stressed "the importance of strengthening and improving the UN to increase its effectiveness" , and invited the Secretary-General to recommend by July 1, 1992, ways of rendering "more efficient…the capacity of the UN for preventive diplomacy, for peace-making and for peace-keeping" .
Elaborating further, the declaration noted: "UN peacekeeping tasks have increased and broadened considerably in recent years.
Election monitoring, human rights verification and the repatriation of refugees have…been integral parts of the Security Council's efforts to maintain international peace and security."
(A stronger statement on human rights, favoured by Austria, Belgium and France, was reportedly abandoned in deference to Chinese sensibilities.)
Underlining the commitment to disarmament and arms control, the declaration called on all member states "to prevent the proliferation in all its aspects of all weapons of mass destruction" and "to avoid excessive and destabilizing accumulation and transfers of arms" .
It urged all states to adhere to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and called for more effective international controls and monitoring facilities to establish compliance with the treaty.
The declaration also noted the General Assembly's resolution in favour of a UN register of arms transfers [see p. 38698]and urged all states to provide information called for in the resolution.
The greater involvement of the Security Council in matters pertaining to disarmament had reportedly been resisted by India, a non-permanent member, on grounds that it would set a precedent for future intrusive inspections and controls by the UN.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
US offer to reduce strategic nuclear weapons
United States President Bush on Jan. 28 outlined plans for further cuts in strategic nuclear weapons but sanctioned increased spending on the space-based anti-missile defence system, the Strategic Defence Initiative (SDI) or "Star Wars" .
In his annual State of the Union address to Congress [see also pp. 38711-12], Bush said that the proposed cuts would be the last of their kind, amounting to US$50,400 million over five years.
They would involve the elimination of all 50 Peace-Keeper MX missiles deployed in silos (provided that the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) scrapped all 754 of its land-based missiles with multiple warheads); the reduction in the number of warheads on 500 Minuteman III missiles from three to one; and cutbacks in the number of warheads on sea-based missiles by about one-third.
Bush also announced that the USA would unilaterally cease production of any new Peace-Keeper missiles, would scrap the development of the US single-warhead Midgetman missile and would halt production of the ACM-129 advanced cruise missile, expected to be in service at the end of 1992, at 620.
Other unilateral measures included the "conversion of strategic bombers to primary conventional use" and the curtailment of the controversial and expensive B-2 strategic bomber after the completion of 20 aircraft.
Justifying the decision to boost funding for SDI, Bush said that "we must have protection from limited nuclear missile attack" adding that "there are too many people in too many countries [who]have access to nuclear arms" .
According to defence analysts the US offer signalled cuts deeper than those required by the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START)(signed in July 1991) which sought to reduce the number of "accountable" warheads held by the USA and the Soviet Union to 6,000 each [see p. 38320].
Noting that Bush's measures envisaged cutting 1,500 land-based missile warheads and further reducing by 2,200 the 3,800 warheads on submarine-launched Trident missiles (in addition to 1,600 warheads being phased out of submarine-launched Poseiden missiles), analysts expected the total number of US warheads to be reduced to 5,300.
(In early January a high-level US defence advisory group had recommended that the USA should reduce its warheads to 5,000, as compared with the current stock of 11,000 and the 9,000 permitted under START — see p. 38320.)
Bush's proposals also aimed at reducing the total of CIS warheads to below START levels by seeking the total elimination of the SS-17, SS-18, 9 and SS-24 missiles.
The latest plans were notable for recommending cuts, previously rejected by the USA, in the USA's sea-based strategic force, including the cancellation of the Seawolf nuclear-powered submarine programme.
Despite these cuts, however, it was expected that the balance would shift sharply in favour of sea-based systems where the USA would retain overall superiority.
Russian response to Soviet initiative
In his initial response to Bush's proposals, outlined during an interview with the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) on Jan. 29, Russian President Boris Yeltsin offered to make "deep cuts in strategic offensive weapons…[involving]up to 2,000 to 2,500 warheads on each side" , but failed to specify which missiles would be eliminated.
He called on France, China and the United Kingdom to join the process and urged the USA to replace its SDI programme with a "global system of defence" based on co-operation with Russia [see pp. 38553].
Renewing calls for a ban on all nuclear weapons tests and for an end to the production of weapons-grade plutonium, Yeltsin proposed the creation of an international agency monitoring nuclear weapons "through the whole cycle" , from the extraction of uranium to weapons manufacture.
Yeltsin detailed the nuclear weapons cuts already implemented, including the removal from standby alert of 600 strategic ballistic missiles, the destruction of 130 silo launchers for inter-continental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), the dismantling of launchers in six strategic nuclear submarines and the removal of missiles on Ukrainian territory.
He stressed that "if there is mutual understanding with the United States, we could achieve [cuts]even faster" .
Indications of a change in Russian defence perspectives had emerged after Yeltsin announced on Jan. 26 that Russia would stop targeting US cities with nuclear missiles; on Jan. 30 Yeltsin announced in London, where he held talks with the UK Prime Minister, John Major, that Russia had also decided to retarget nuclear weapons away from British cities.
On Jan. 29 the NATO Secretary-General Manfred Wörner welcomed the US and Russian proposals as "a further far-reaching step in building a more peaceful…world" .
UK Prime Minister John Major also praised Yeltsin's response but stressed that the UK did not envisage any cuts in plans to deploy the Trident missile.
On Jan. 30 China said that it would take part in the disarmament process initiated by Bush and Yeltsin only when the USA and Russia had reduced their nuclear arsenal to "a level matching China" .
France indicated on Jan. 27 that it would sign the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
Talks on disarming Soviet republics
US arms negotiators were reported on Jan. 23 as having assured NATO that talks with Russian defence officials in Moscow on Jan. 14-22 had ended in agreement over the safe disposal of nuclear weapons located in the republics of the former Soviet Union.
The assurance followed the disclosure on Jan. 21 that Kazakhstan had in December 1991 test-fired a multi-warhead ICBM in violation of the START.
Western concern over the control structure governing the nuclear arsenal of the former Soviet Union had been compounded by reports in January that some Third-World countries, including Iran, Iraq, and Libya, had offered ex-Soviet scientists substantial financial rewards to persuade them to develop their nuclear programmes.
Other reports said that some republics, notably Kazakhstan and Russia, had also agreed to sell arms to Taiwan and Yemen.
The C.-in-C. of the CIS Armed Forces, Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, who met US Secretary of State James Baker in Moscow on Jan. 29, said in London on Jan. 30 that tactical nuclear weapons located in all former Soviet republics, except Ukraine and Byelarus, would be withdrawn to Russia by July.
Resumption of CFE talks
Talks on the implementation of the Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) resumed in Vienna on Jan. 13.
On Jan. 30 the USA announced that it was withdrawing in 1992 17,000 more troops than had been planned, and closing or cutting back 83 more bases.
US forces in Europe were expected to fall to 208,000 by October 1992, down from 314,000 in mid-1990.
INTERNATIONAL
CSCE
Foreign Ministers' meeting
The second meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers of the Conference on Security and Co-Operation in Europe (CSCE) opened in Prague on Jan. 30-31 [for first meeting see p. 38314].
The former Soviet republics of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Byelarus, Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Moldova, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Ukraine were admitted as new members on Jan. 30, with Russia taking over the Soviet Union's seat, bringing the total number of CSCE members to 48.
(The Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania had been admitted as full members in September 1991 — see p. 38458.)
Georgia did not apply for membership.
Slovenia and Croatia, recognized as independent states by the European Communities (EC) on Jan. 15 [see p. 38703], were granted temporary observer status following Yugoslavia's refusal, under the unanimity principle, to accord them full membership.
Austria, Hungary and Bulgaria had reportedly pressed for full CSCE membership for Croatia and Slovenia (and, in Bulgaria's case, for Macedonia and Bosnia-Hercegovina) during a preparatory meeting of CSCE officials in Prague on Jan. 27-29.
Foreign Ministers called for a comprehensive political settlement, and spoke of "the need to create the conditions for an early deployment of UN peacekeeping forces" .
In a document aimed at strengthening CSCE institutions, Foreign Ministers agreed on Jan. 30 "that appropriate action could be taken by the Committee of Senior Officials (CS0) in cases of clear and gross violations of CSCE commitments, without the consent of the state concerned, if necessary" [see also p. 38366].
In his inaugural address to ministers earlier that day the Czechoslovak President, Vaclav Havel, had urged the CSCE to create "a smaller organ similar to that of the UN Security Council, to which it could also give some executive powers" .
A proposal by Germany to create CSCE peace-keeping units was opposed by the United States, the United Kingdom and France.
Ministers also endorsed a plan to despatch fact-finding and conciliation missions to areas of tension and, on Jan. 31, agreed to send the first such mission to the disputed mainly Armenian-inhabited enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh within Azerbaijan.
Missions to monitor human rights in the newly-democratized states of eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union were approved [see also pp. 38458; 38554], and agreement was reached to expand the functions of the Office for Free Elections in Warsaw, renamed the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights.
In a further declaration on arms control, Foreign Ministers stressed their readiness to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and control the spread of missile technology.
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
Report on Gladio
An Italian parliamentary report on Jan. 29 claimed that a secret anti-communist force, codenamed "Gladio" , allegedly backed by NATO [see p. 37875], was an illegal "armed band" which had overstepped its brief by engaging in a "strategy of tension" involving terrorist attacks aimed at justifying repressive state laws.
The report followed 16 months of investigation by a commission headed by Libero Gualtieri.
It said: "There was no justification for Gladio, neither at the start nor the finish.
Indeed, there was an increase in its threat and its illegality with the passing of years."
Although the report noted that "to the state [Gladio]was" unknown "" , it urged the courts "to act to punish those responsible for the deception" .
On Jan. 13 Italian President Francesco Cossiga admitted his involvement in an anti-communist paramilitary force formed in 1948 and claimed that "everyone then and now knew about Gladio's activities" .
Reports on Jan. 30 said that two military judges in Padua examining the legality of "Gladio" had, in an interim indictment, charged the organization with "possible acts of terrorism" and claimed that it had maintained close links with the fascist "Marine Star" established after the Second World War.
Meeting of High Level Working Group
A High Level Working Group (HLWG) held its first informal meeting, mandated by the Foreign Ministers of the North Atlantic Co-Operation Council in December 1991 [see p. 38669], in Brussels on Jan. 10.
The meeting, convened to discuss the ratification and implementation of the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty [see p. 37838], included representatives from all 16 NATO countries and from Armenia, Azerbaijan, Byelarus, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Romania, Russia, and Ukraine.
A communiqué issued after the meeting said that agreement had been reached on (i) the implementation of the CFE treaty without renegotiation;(ii) a commitment by all former Soviet republics to honour the obligations of the Soviet Union under the CFE treaty; and (iii) the ratification of the CFE treaty by all newly-independent states and completion of the process in time for the March-July session of the Helsinki Review Conference.
INTERNATIONAL
INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES
G-7 Finance Ministers' meeting
A one-day meeting of Finance Ministers and central bank governors from the Group of Seven (G-7) industrialized countries was held in Garden City, New York, on Jan. 25.
It ended with a statement indicating that while recent forecasts of a resurgence in economic activity had been premature [see p. 38555], prospects were significantly brighter following agreement "to intensify co-operative efforts to strengthen world economic growth" .
Agreement on higher growth
In a lengthy communiqué, regarded by observers as a carefully crafted compromise between United States pressures to boost growth and German determination to control inflation, ministers observed that "forces that have been inhibiting economic activity in many countries are dissipating" .
They noted that "inflation expectations had eased considerably and, with the exception of some countries [reportedly a reference to threats of industrial action in Germany]wage and price pressures have been declining markedly." 
Despite its overall stress on growth, the statement recommended a cautious approach, observing that "the appropriate framework is one of fiscal and monetary policies geared to sustainable growth with price stability over the medium term" ; it also recognized that "the specific mix of policies would vary depending on the circumstances in each country" [see also p. 38314].
Ministers took a similarly careful line on the issue of interest rates [see pp. 37977-78; 38314], noting that "those countries which in the future experience better than expected inflation performance may have a basis for an easing of monetary conditions and interest rates without jeopardizing the commitment to price stability and exchange rate objectives" .
The communiqué urged prudence, calling for the "reallocation" rather than an expansion of government spending in some countries, and warned others, such as Italy, to reduce their budget deficits.
Outlining the economic policies of individual members, the statement promised fresh US proposals to "strengthen growth and competitiveness" (detailed the following day by US President George Bush in his State of the Union address — see pp. 38711-12), including "measures to improve consumer confidence, incentives for savings and investment, and increased research and development expenditure" .
While ministers abstained from recommending measures aimed at stabilizing exchange rates [see pp. 38314; 38555; 38601], they agreed "to monitor market developments" and to co-operate to develop "favourable conditions for stable exchange markets" .
Commenting on the outcome of the meeting, reported as notably lacking in the acrimony which had marred recent gatherings [see pp. 38170; 38314], the US Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady told a press conference afterwards that the US had secured an "unequivocal commitment" from its G-7 partners to concentrate on growth.
The French Finance Minister Pierre Bérégovoy also highlighted the meeting's positive endorsement of higher growth, claiming that "we have issued a message of confidence to consumers and investors" .
Responding to the absence of clearer guidelines on exchange rates, Bérégovoy told reporters that it indicated that current parities suited all G-7 partners.
UK Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont expressed enthusiasm, saying that "the clear view was that recovery had been delayed, not cancelled" .
Expectations of an early cut in German interest rates were dampened after reports that Germany Finance Minister Theo Waigel and the president of the German Bundesbank, Helmut Schlesinger, had warned that continued inflationary pressures were likely to keep rates high in order to maintain a strong market.
Germany's resistance to any easing of strict economic and monetary stabilization measures had reportedly been compounded by fears of a rise in unit labour costs coinciding with wage demands and threatened strikes in the steel and banking sectors.
(Forecasts by the Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD) in December 1991 showed that of the G-7 countries, only Germany and Japan faced rising unit labour costs.)
Differences on financial support for former Soviet republics
The meeting failed to adopt measures aimed at providing financial assistance to the newly-independent republics of the former Soviet Union, including the creation of a "stabilization fund" to underpin the Russian rouble.
Ministers did agree that the IMF should accept the former republics as members by April [see also p. 38747].
They stressed, however, that the republics would have to continue payments on debts "as a precondition for maintaining credit-worthiness and for further financial assistance" .
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
Extension of Uruguay Round
The Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC) consisting of senior trade officials from 108 governments, agreed in Geneva on Jan. 13 to extend the deadline for the conclusion of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) from January to April amidst reports of bitter disagreement between the European Communities (EC) and the United States over agricultural subsidies.
(In November 1991 trade negotiators had postponed an earlier deadline — see pp. 38601-02.)
Although officials stressed that the decision to extend negotiations had been anticipated in a draft accord, submitted by GATT's Director-General Arthur Dunkel on Dec. 20, it was understood that the EC had expressed fierce opposition to Dunkel's latest proposals to cut internal price supports by 20 per cent, to reduce export subsidies by 36 per cent and to trim the volume of subsidized farm exports by 24 per cent .
The EC insisted that all its direct payments to farmers, envisaged as part of the EC's reform of the common agricultural policy (CAP), should be reclassified as eligible for the so-called "green box" of non-trade-distorting subsidies permissible under the GATT.
Dunkel's draft accord had categorized such compensation as production support and, therefore, ineligible for the GATT "green box" .
The EC Trade and Agriculture Ministers, meeting in Brussels on Jan. 10-11, had restated their reservations (expressed at an earlier meeting on Dec. 23), saying that "insofar as the Dunkel paper calls into question the foundation of the Communities' agricultural policy, the paper is not acceptable" .
Subsequent reports disclosed that EC ministers had been divided, with a minority, led by the United Kingdom and Germany, pressing for acceptance of the Dunkel draft as "the basis for an agreement" , and the rest claiming with the French Agriculture and Forestry Minister, Louis Mermaz, that it "would be the ruin of European agriculture" .
On Jan. 16 the German Economy Minister Jürgen Möllemann accused Germany's EC partners of undermining prospects for an agreement on world trade adding that "we cannot preach market economy and close our own markets at the same time" .
On Jan. 13 US President George Bush, addressing farmers in Kansas City, accused the EC of hiding behind an "iron curtain" of agricultural protectionism.
Bush hinted that GATT officials had bowed to EC pressure by agreeing to re-open negotiations.
On Jan. 14 the EC Commissioner for External Relations, Trade Policy and Co-operation with other European Countries, Frans Andriessen said that he had been "disagreeably surprised" by Bush's criticism and stressed that the EC had approached the trade negotiations in a spirit of co-operation.
French President Mitterrand said on Jan. 15 that "France is not ready to bow to American demands, nor to submit to the interests of any other country, and will not give way" .
On Jan. 16 the EC Commissioner for Competition Policy and Financial Institutions, Sir Leon Brittan, accused the US of undermining multilateral trade by embarking on a policy of "managed trade" exemplified by recently concluded bilateral agreements with Japan.
Hopes of a US-EC compromise were revived on Jan. 21 after Andriessen promised in Washington, following a meeting with the US Representative for Trade Negotiations, Carla Hills, that the EC was prepared to come forward with specific amendments to the Dunkel plan if the USA and Japan did the same.
Both Japan and South Korea had expressed reservations about Dunkel's draft accord on the grounds that it would oblige them to open their rice markets by imposing "tariffication" under which import quotas would be converted into tariffs [see p. 38602].
Criticism of the Dunkel plan came also from groups opposed to its proposals to liberalize textile trade and its endorsement of a five-year transition period before less-developed countries would be required to comply with copyright and patenting provisions.
Australia and Brazil, members of the "Cairns group" of agricultural exporting countries, publicly endorsed Dunkel's proposal.
INTERNATIONAL
IMF
Application for membership by former Soviet republics
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) in January received applications for membership from six former Soviet republics: Azerbaijan (Jan. 7), Russia (Jan. 7), Armenia (Jan. 13), Kazakhstan (Jan. 14), Kirgizstan (Jan. 24) and Moldova (Jan. 24); Ukraine had applied on Dec. 31, and Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania — the Baltic states — had applied on Sept. 9, Oct. 1 and Sept. 12 respectively.
An association agreement concluded in October 1991 had sanctioned economic consultations between the IMF and the Soviet Union, as well as with individual union republics [see p. 38554].
On Dec. 12 the IMF's Managing Director Michel Camdessus had announced the creation of a new area department, European II, to co-ordinate the work of the organization with respect to new applications for membership.
INTERNATIONAL
WAR CRIMES
Involvement of clergy in protecting war criminal
A report by a commission of church historians published on Jan. 6 claimed that high-level French Roman Catholic clergy had helped protect the suspected war criminal Paul Touvier for almost 45 years during which he succeeded in winning a brief pardon in 1971.
The report, commissioned by the Archbishop of Lyon, Cardinal Albert Decourtray shortly after Touvier's arrest in May 1989 at a monastery in Nice [see pp. 37019; 37899], said that while the church as a body was not involved in assisting Touvier, senior churchmen had provided material support and the Catholic charity, Secours Catholique, had paid him a monthly stipend up to the time of his arrest.
Commenting on the report, Decourtray said that this demonstrated how "so many men of the Church…could in the name of charity, misunderstand…the demands of truth and justice" .
Rejection of Demjanjuk plea
Israel's Supreme Court on Jan. 20 rejected a defence plea to free John Demjanjuk, convicted of war crimes in April 1988 [see p. 36189], refusing to admit evidence allegedly showing that Demjanjuk had been the victim of mistaken identity [see p. 37898].
However, evidence submitted by the prosecution, appearing to support the defence claims, was admitted.
INTERNATIONAL
WHO
AIDS
Figures released by the World Health Organization (WHO) on Jan. 1 showed that the total number of officially reported cases of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) worldwide had risen to 446,681, with an estimated 11,000,000 people carrying the AIDS virus (HIV).
On Jan 20 the administrator of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), William Draper, warned in Manila (Philippines) that AIDS would kill 20,000,000 people by 2000, sweeping Asia and devastating the economies of several Asian nations.
Cholera epidemic
Over 500,000 cases of cholera were reported to the WHO in 1991, 70 per cent from 13 Latin American countries, with over 16,700 deaths attributable to the disease.
1991 was the worst year of the current 30-year pandemic of cholera, with more cases than in the past five years combined.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Report on global warming
At a meeting in Canton, China, on Jan. 16-17, the science working group of the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) declared itself more certain than ever that global warming was under way, but agreed that its full impact might be delayed by other human factors, including a limited cooling effect produced by sulphur pollution and ozone depletion.
Reviewing the latest research on the greenhouse effect, the working group confirmed its previous conclusions that average global temperatures would rise by between 0.2 and 0.5 degrees centigrade per decade, but decided that its previous "best guess" of a 0.3 degree rise might be too high, and that it could take until 2030, rather than 2025, for global temperatures to rise by a full degree.
The group reviewed evidence that the warming effect might be delayed by the high levels of sulphur dioxide present in the atmosphere as a result of industrial pollution, on account of the gas's property of reflecting some of the sun's incoming heat.
Similarly, the depletion of the ozone layer, also due to human activity, was believed to be having a cooling effect.
However, international efforts to halt acid rain pollution (in part caused by sulphur dioxide) and to reverse the damage to the ozone layer were expected soon to have an effect, so that overall global warming would increase rapidly from the middle of next century.
Upholding of Amoco Cadiz ruling
A US federal appeals court on Jan. 24 upheld the fine of US$155 million levied against the Amoco Corporation, in respect of damages caused by the 1978 oil spillage from the Amoco Cadiz tanker off the coast of Brittany, north-west France [see pp. 29216-18; 29730].
The fine was increased by $640,000 to cover clean-up costs.
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
French Airbus disaster
A French Airbus A-320 airliner en route from Lyon crashed in the Vosges mountains some 50 km south of Strasbourg in eastern France on Jan. 20, killing 87 of the 96 people aboard.
It was the worst air accident in France since 1974, when 346 people died in a Turkish Airlines DC-10 crash near Paris [see p. 26426].
The French government ordered an inquiry team to report within a month, but found that there was no reason to ground other A-320s immediately.
Controllers in Strasbourg said that they had lost radio contact with the airliner without warning and that no distress signals had been released.
Following the crash the airliner's emergency radio beacon failed to function and rescue teams experienced difficulties locating the wreckage.
According to some reports a number of passengers survived the impact but succumbed to the freezing cold.
Two A-320s had crashed previously in the four years since the aircraft went into operation.
In June 1988 one had crashed during an air show in eastern France killing three people [see p. 36230].
In February 1990 an A-320 had crashed near Bangalore in India, killing 92 people [see p. 37268].
Investigations into both crashes had blamed pilot errors.
The Strasbourg disaster rekindled speculation that the sophisticated computerized "fly-by-wire" control system fitted in the A-320 might, in some circumstances, affect a pilot's ability to cope with an emergency.
However, Airbus Industrie, the four-country European consortium which manufactured the A-320, had long argued that "fly-by-wire" avionics, by which flying control systems were initially activated electronically rather than hydraulically, made the aircraft safer.
Casualty figures for 1991
According to a report in the January issue of the aviation journal Flight International, a total of 1,090 people were killed worldwide in aircraft accidents during 1991.
A total of 815 people had been killed in 1990.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
Shuttle flight
The first of the eight United States space shuttle missions planned for 1992 took place on Jan. 22-30.
The shuttle Discovery carried in its cargo bay the European-built Spacelab, where the crew of seven (including a Canadian and a German astronaut) conducted experiments to ascertain the effects of weightlessness and space radiation on plants, insects and humans.