

AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Los Angeles riots
Between April 29 and May 4 the Californian city of Los Angeles experienced the worst rioting in recent US history.
Up to 58 people were killed, 4,000 injured and 12,000 arrested; some $1,000 million-worth of damage was inflicted.
There was some dispute over the precise number of lives claimed by the riots.
According to the coroner's office the total number of dead was 58, while the police department calculated the figure at 52, claiming that six of the deaths recorded by the coroner's office were not riot-related.
The catalyst for the rioting was the decision by an all-white jury to acquit four officers of the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) on charges arising from the beating of Rodney King, a motorist who had been stopped for traffic violations.
The savagery of the treatment meted out to King was captured on videotape by an amateur cameraman and constituted a key piece of evidence at the trial.
The fact that it was extensively broadcast on television meant that news of the acquittal of the defendants was greeted with widespread disbelief and anger [see p. 38856].
The rioting began at the junction of Florence and Normandie Avenues in south-central Los Angeles, and rapidly spread to neighbouring areas, although many of the most prosperous areas of the city remained relatively unaffected.
Initially the unrest was characterized by interracial mob violence, with white and hispanic motorists being dragged from their vehicles and beaten by black gangs.
Increasingly, however, the pattern of the disturbances became one of looting and arson.
Although predominantly black, the looters included people of all races.
Shops and businesses, particularly those owned by Asians, were looted and burnt.
In some cases looters were killed by shop-owners intent upon defending their properties.
Within the Korean community in particular, heavily armed shop-owners organized themselves in defence of their businesses.
Data on riot deaths
Gender: Male 51, Female 7.
Racial type: black 26, hispanic 18, caucasian 10, Asian 2, unknown 2.
Cause of death: gunshot 41, traffic accident 6, arson-related 4, beating 4, stabbing 2, natural causes 1.
Response by the authorities
The initial response to the rioting by the LAPD was to withdraw in some confusion.
It was a reaction for which Police Chief Darryl Gates was widely criticized and which he, in retrospect, admitted had been a serious mistake.
Initially withdrawn to be regrouped and reinforced, the police remained entirely absent from the worst-affected areas during the early stages of the unrest.
At 8.45 p.m. on April 29, with the violence continuing to escalate, Mayor Tom Bradley contacted California Governor Pete Wilson to request the deployment of the National Guard.
A curfew was declared, although it remained largely ineffective, and Wilson made a live television appearance in which he declared a state of emergency, and announced that the National Guard was to be deployed.
Thousands of fires were reported to be burning, and in many cases firefighters were attacked while attempting to bring them under control.
As news of the riots broke President George Bush appealed for calm and promised that the Justice Department would examine the question of whether federal charges should be brought against the acquitted police officers.
He described the original verdict as having "left us all with a deep sense of personal frustration and anguish" .
Later he expressed his "revulsion and pain" over the street violence, condemning the "mob brutality" as "sickeningly sad" .
After two days and nights of violence, and the outbreak of disturbances in other US cities — there was sporadic violence in San Francisco (California), Seattle (Washington), Eugene (Oregon), San Jose (California), Las Vegas (Nevada), Madison (Wisconsin), Birmingham (Alabama), Tampa (Florida), and Atlanta (Georgia)— a huge military operation was conducted in order to reassert control of Los Angeles.
On May 1 more than 10,000 US Army troops and National Guardsmen were deployed in and around the city.
These included 6,000 National Guard troops, 1,500 Marines, and a brigade of 2,500 infantrymen with armoured vehicles.
They were supported by 1,000 federal law enforcement officers, special weapons teams, and riot police from the border patrol, the prison service and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
By the time that the troops began patrolling the streets there was already evidence that the riots were losing their momentum, and in the face of such overwhelming military force remaining disturbances were quickly quelled.
The curfew was lifted on May 4.
Governor Wilson ordered withdrawal of the last National Guard units on May 18, declaring that it was "time to bring the troops home and get on with the task of rebuilding Los Angeles" .
Visit by Bush — Retrial order for Powell
President Bush visited Los Angeles on May 7-8 to survey the scene of the rioting and used the occasion to announce a $19,000,000 anti-drug and anti-gang programme for the worst-affected areas of the city.
He also supported the ideas of Housing and Urban Development Secretary Jack Kemp for a conservative, market-orientated approach to inner-city problems, comprising ghetto-enterprise zones with no, or low, taxes; welfare reform; privatization of public housing; and greater choice within the education system.
Superior Court Judge Stanley M. Weisberg, who had presided over the King trial, on May 15 ruled that the principal assailant, Officer Laurence M. Powell, should be retried on a felony assault charge.
Although he was acquitted on one count of assault and another of filing a false police report, the jury had been unable to reach a decision on the charge that Powell had abused his authority through the use of excessive force.
If convicted of the charge he could face a prison sentence of six years.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Anti-Suchinda demonstrations and army crackdown — Resignation of Suchinda
Massive demonstrations in Bangkok against the premiership of Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon resulted in a violent military crackdown in mid-May.
The unrest provoked an unprecedented intervention by King Bhumipol Adulyadej after which Suchinda resigned and the National Assembly approved a series of major constitutional amendments.
Growing opposition to Suchinda's premiership — Chamlong's hunger strike
Gen. Suchinda, the former army commander and military junta leader, had been appointed as Prime Minister in early April [see p. 38865]following an inconclusive general election in March which had resulted in the formation of a weak, pro-military coalition dominated by Chart Thai and Samakkhi Tham [see p. 38816].
Demonstrations against the appointment of Suchinda, a non-elected soldier, as Prime Minister had started in mid-April [see p. 38865].
On May 4 Maj.-Gen.
Chamlong Srimaung, leader of the opposition Palang Dharma, announced his intention to fast to death unless Gen. Suchinda resigned.
At the time of Chamlong's announcement a number of other opposition figures had launched hunger strikes in protest at Suchinda's appointment, but none were of Chamlong's stature.
In Bangkok, where he had served as governor, Chamlong was deeply respected because of what the Financial Times of May 8 described as "his uncompromising piety and idealism" .
At the start of his hunger strike Chamlong seated himself outside Government House in Bangkok.
On May 5-6 thousands of his supporters congregated around him.
In the National Assembly itself on May 6 Suchinda delivered his government's policy statement, which was noisily condemned by opposition members.
The following day Suchinda responded to opposition criticism of his statement with a denunciation of Chamlong and New Aspiration Party (NAP) leader Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut.
That evening some 70,000 people, ignoring a military order halting demonstrations, joined a visibly weakened Chamlong at a rally on the Sanam Luang parade ground in central Bangkok.
On May 8 Chamlong led another large rally at Democracy Monument, where some demonstrators came close to clashing with riot police.
Agreement on constitutional amendments — Government backtracking and resumption of demonstrations
On May 9 the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Arthit Urairat, announced that the government and opposition parties had agreed on a number of constitutional revisions, including one which would bar a non-elected person, such as Suchinda, from becoming Prime Minister.
Other changes agreed were a reduction in the powers of the appointed (and military-dominated) Senate; the appointment of the House of Representatives Speaker rather than the Senate Speaker as president of the National Assembly; and an enhancement of the powers of the representatives.
In response to the announcement Chamlong called off his hunger strike, at the same time resigning as leader of the Palang Dharma.
The next day he called a halt to the anti-Suchinda rallies, but warned that they would be resumed if the government failed to implement the constitutional changes.
Suchinda announced on May 12 that he would accept parliament's decision to amend the constitution, even if it meant that he had to resign as Prime Minister.
However, coalition leaders subsequently appeared to backtrack on the agreement, when they claimed that the proposed constitutional changes would only become effective once Suchinda had served his full four-year term.
Army crackdown on demonstrators
On May 17 Chamlong denounced Suchinda as a dictator at a rally in Sanam Luang Square attended by an estimated 150,000 people.
As in the previous demonstrations, a large number of those attending were middle class, some of whom had been involved in the demonstrations of 1973 (which had effectively deposed the existing military dictatorship — see pp. 26209-10) and had also witnessed the army massacre of students at Thammasat University three years later [see pp. 28102-03].
Although Chamlong called for peaceful action to depose Suchinda, violence erupted in the evening as a group of demonstrators attempted to march on Government House.
Police set up barricades to halt the marchers, who began burning cars.
The government responded to the outbreak of violence by declaring a state of emergency in Bangkok and four surrounding provinces.
Demonstrations were banned, restrictions placed on the media, and schools closed.
In the early morning of May 18, police manning barricades were replaced by army paratroopers who opened fire with machine guns.
Although they fired mainly in the air, at least five demonstrators were killed.
Later that day Chamlong and hundreds of his supporters were arrested and moved to army camps.
In the evening thousands of demonstrators, this time accompanied by a number of motorcycle gangs, gathered again in the city centre.
The demonstrators attacked and burned buildings and cars; the soldiers responded by opening fire, killing an unknown number of demonstrators.
By early the next morning the troops had managed to seal off the city centre area.
Large numbers of the demonstrators, trapped by the army, entered the Royal Hotel, already filled with journalists and opposition figures.
Troops entered the hotel and arrested an estimated 1,500 demonstrators, many of whom were beaten before being taken away.
According to government figures the final death toll for the May 17-19 riots was under 50, but most other estimates put the figure at well over 100.
In a televised speech delivered on May 19 Suchinda blamed the violence on the Communist Party of Thailand (CPT).
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of May 28 he also added "a clear but indirect insinuation" that Gen. Chaovalit was a leading CPT member.
That evening the city was tense, with groups of demonstrators gathered around Ramkhamhaeng University.
The next day the government declared a curfew from 9 p.m to 4 a.m., as sporadic rioting and shooting continued.
Meanwhile rumours swept Bangkok of an impending coup by "moderate forces in the military" .
Intervention by King — Resignation of Suchinda
In the evening of May 20 the King personally intervened in the crisis, summoning Suchinda and Chamlong to a meeting which was televised live.
Accompanied by two of his closest advisers, foermer Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda and Sanya Dharmasakdi, he appealed to them to work together for the sake of the people and the economy.
In a televised address on May 21 Suchinda announced that Chamlong and others arrested during the demonstrations were to be freed.
He also said that he would ask parliament to convene to discuss the amendments to the Constitution.
Chamlong, seated beside Suchinda, appealed to protestors to refrain from violence.
Some 3,000 protestors were released from prison that day and the curfew was lifted.
On May 23 the King issued a decree granting an amnesty to all those involved in the violence, both the military and the demonstrators.
This angered opposition groups, who asserted that Suchinda and his supporters should be held accountable for the killings.
Suchinda resigned as Prime Minister on May 24, stating that he strongly regretted the events which had occurred during his brief premiership.
The five-party coalition remained in power, however, with Meechai Ruchuphan, hitherto a Deputy Prime Minister, as interim Prime Minister.
On May 25 the House of Representatives passed by 533 votes to none, with nine abstentions, the first two readings of a constitutional amendment bill which included all the opposition-backed reforms.
The third and final reading was scheduled for June 10.
At its first meeting under Meechai on May 26 the Cabinet lifted the state of emergency.
EUROPE
ITALY
Assassination of Falcone — Election of President — Milan corruption scandal
The assassination on May 23 of a leading anti-Mafia judge, Giovanni Falcone [see below], shocked public opinion and galvanized the political parties into breaking the deadlock over the election of a successor to President Francesco Cossiga, and on May 25 the Christian Democrat (CD) Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies, Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, was elected.
Deadlock in voting for President
The resignation of Cossiga following the general election of April 5-6 [see pp. 38869-70]had left Italy without a President, and thus without anyone authorized to appoint a new Prime Minister and government.
In the absence of any inter-party consensus on who should fill the office of President, no candidate secured a sufficient majority in 15 rounds of voting between May 13 and May 23 in the 1,014-member electoral college which comprised the 630 deputies, the 315 elected senators, the 11 life senators and 58 delegates from regional councils.
In the first three rounds a two-thirds majority was required, and thereafter only a simple majority.
As the two houses of Parliament convened in a special session on May 13 there was a dispute over voting procedure and a fist-fight broke out when deputies of the neo-fascist Movimento Sociale Italiano (MSI-DN) accused the Christian Democrats (DC) of being "thieves" .
In the two ballots held on May 17 it was discovered that some voters had voted twice, and Scalfaro, the Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies since April [see p. 38870], ordered that the voting regulations should immediately be amended; deputies would be handed a single voting slip as they entered a specially constructed voting booth.
By the 11th ballot on May 19th the failure of the major parties to agree on a common candidate allowed the Northern League's candidate, Gianfranco Miglio, to poll the highest number of votes, underscoring the potential influence of the League, with its 80 parliamentary seats.
Forlani's resignation
On May 22 Arnaldo Forlani resigned as secretary-general of the DC, leaving the party without a leader.
Forlani, 66, had on May 17 withdrawn his candidacy for the presidency after up to 60 members of parties participating in the former ruling coalition, including many DC deputies, had failed to vote for him in the fifth, sixth and seventh rounds.
Assassination of Falcone
On the night of May 23 Falcone died in hospital after a bomb attack which also killed his wife, Franca Morvillo, who was an examining magistrate, and three of their bodyguards; 13 people were injured.
Falcone, 53, himself a Sicilian, had in recent years been a leading figure in the Italian state's campaign against the criminal activities of the Sicilian Mafia.
A bomb containing 2,200 lb of explosive was detonated in an irrigation canal as Falcone's car (and the three other cars in a convoy) passed over it on the motorway leading away from Punta Raisi airport about 5 km from Palermo, Sicily.
Following his death reports emerged that Falcone had been working closely with Judge Antonio di Pietro on the investigations into corruption in Milan's local government [see below].
His killing drew condemnation from the leaders of all the main parties, and prompted speculation as to its significance at such a time of crisis on the level of national politics.
Falcone had been one of those responsible for bringing to trial 473 members of the Mafia in December 1987 [see p. 35990].
In February 1991 he had moved from Palermo to Rome in order to become director-general of penal affairs in the Justice Ministry, and it had been widely expected that he might head a new judicial body which was to be created as part of a fresh anti-Mafia drive.
Five people were assassinated at Acerra, near Naples, on May 1 by a group of men who apparently belonged to the Camorra, the Neapolitan equivalent of the Mafia.
Four of the victims were Vincenzo Crimaldi, brother of the head of one clan of the Camorra, and three of his immediate family.
Election of Scalfaro as President
On May 25 Scalfaro, 73, was elected President.
He had secured the support not just of members of parties which had formerly been members of the ruling coalition, but also of the Democratic Party of the Left (PDS — the former Communist Party) and the Greens.
Scalfaro won 672 of the 1,002 votes cast in the 16th round, against 75 for Miglio, the second-placed candidate.
Members of nine parties voted for Scalfaro, with only the Northern League, the Republicans (PRI), the MSI-DN and the Communist Refoundation (PRC) voting against.
Scalfaro had succeeded was Interior Minister in 1983-87, and was known as a committed Catholic and anti-communist.
Milan corruption scandal
By the end of May more than 40 local government officials, politicians and businessmen had been arrested in Milan and nearby towns as the investigation of local government corruption continued.
Six parliamentary deputies faced criminal prosecution once their parliamentary immunity had been removed.
It was becoming clear that not only Socialist Unity Party (PSU — the renamed Socialist Party still generally referred to as the PSI) officials and politicians were involved.
There appeared to have been cross-party complicity in dividing up funds from "commissions" taken by party officials (and in some cases passed on to national party headquarters), amounting to 5-10 per cent of the total cost of projects.
Figures from the DC, the PDS, and PRI were also arrested, as well as numbers of businessmen.
The investigation into malpractice from 1979 onwards was led by Judge di Pietro.
Among contracts under investigation were those for work on Milan's hospitals, metro extensions, the rebuilding of Linate and Malpensa airports, the construction of the San Siro football stadium, built for the 1990 World Cup, and the Piccolo theatre.
Some 150 northern businessmen were being questioned by the police, having come forward to volunteer information about bribes they had paid.
At least L150,000,000 (US$123,000) was estimated to have been laundered through some 50 non-lire bank accounts in Lugano, in the Swiss canton of Ticino.
The investigation had gathered momentum in mid-April, following leads provided during his questioning by Mario Chiesa, who had been arrested at the end of February [see p. 38824].
Two former PSI mayors of Milan, Carlo Tognoli (Tourism Minister in the outgoing government), and Paolo Pillitteri (brother-in-law of the PSI leader Bettino Craxi), had investigation warrants issued against them on May 2.
They had run the city respectively from 1976 to 1986 and from 1986 to December 1991, and both were protected by parliamentary immunity, having been returned to parliament at the general election.
On May 5 the judges made a formal application for their immunity to be lifted.
Craxi's son Bobo, 28, was suspended as PSI local secretary for Milan by the PSI national executive on May 4, and former Treasury Minister Giuliano Amato was dispatched to Milan to cleanse the local party apparatus.
The DC on May 8 set up a special commission to manage the affairs of its Milan branch.
On May 11 the incumbent mayor of Milan, Pietro Borghini, resigned, automatically taking the rest of the council with him.
A former member of the Italian Communist Party, he had become mayor in early 1991, having switched to the PSI.
On May 12 the national treasurer of the DC, Senator Severino Citaristi, was given notice that he was among those to be included in the investigation, for allegedly accepting a bribe of the equivalent of $650,000; he claimed on May 13 that the sum had been a legitimate contribution made to party funds.
The parliamentary leader of the PRI, Antonio del Pennino, had an arrest warrant issued for him on May 14.
Those arrested in May also included three members of the DC's national executive; Sergio Radaelli, the PSI nominee to Cariplo, Milan's biggest savings bank; Massimo Ferlini, a PDS member who had previously been public works commissioner for Milan; and prominent industrialists such as Roberto Schellino, a former technical director of Cogefar-Impresit (Italy's leading construction company, which had recently been bought by the motor company Fiat) and Mario San Vittore Lodigiani, vice-president of the Lodigiani construction company.
Investigations had begun into similar webs of corruption in Bergamo, Genoa, Palermo, Varese, Venice and Verona.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Government scandals
While the country's political leaders prepared for the next round of constitutional negotiations, the National Party (NP) government struggled to maintain its credibility as press reports revealed a series of corruption scandals and allegations against the South African Defence Force (SADF) and the South African Police (SAP).
Fraud in Department of Development Aid.
On May 7 details were published of the report of a judicial inquiry into massive levels of fraud and waste at the Department of Development Aid between 1984 and 1989.
The report, which had been in the government's possession for eight months, revealed that department officials had misappropriated funds, running into many millions of rands, intended for distribution in rural communities in the bantustans (homelands).
The report singled out Gerrit Viljoen, who headed the department during the period in question, for particular criticism.
Report implicating SADF intelligence chief in 1985 killings of activists.
The Johannesburg New Nation of May 8 carried a report based on a copy of a June 1985 signal to the State Security Council (SSC), detailing a conversation between a member of the SSC secretariat and Gen. C. P. van der Westhuizen (then a brigadier), the chief of the SADF military intelligence department.
The document proposed that three leading anti-apartheid campaigners — Matthew Goniwe, Mbulelo Goniwe and Fort Calata — should be "permanently removed from society as a matter of urgency" .
On June 27, 1985, Matthew Goniwe, Calata, Thomas (Sparrow) Mkhonto and Sicelo Mhlawuli, who were all active in the Cradock Residents' Association, an affiliate of the United Democratic Front (UDF), were killed [see p. 33768].
The document also pointed to state involvement in the unsolved disappearance of three leading UDF members.
The government denied all knowledge of the SSC signal and State President F. W. de Klerk on May 8 ordered the reopening of the inquest into the four deaths.
On May 8 the Democratic Party called for a judicial inquiry into the New Nation allegations.
Allegation of existence of police "third force" for "dirty tricks" .
On May 14 the SAP applied for an injunction to restrain two newspapers, the Weekly Mail and the Vrye Weekblad, from publishing allegations about SAP "dirty tricks" operations.
The allegations centred on the existence of a national network of secret bases which formed part of a "third force" instigating violence in the townships.
The African National Congress (ANC) issued a statement on May 12, saying that the government had "become accustomed to ruling South Africa without compunction" and should relinquish power to an interim regime.
The statement concluded that, as long as the NP remained in government, "abuse of power, fraud, the misappropriation of public funds and violence" would remain the "order of the day" .
CODESA II negotiations — Other internal developments
The second plenary session of the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA II) was held on May 15-16 in Johannesburg.
However, CODESA II, which brought together the government, ANC and 17 other organizations, ended in deadlock and delegates failed to adopt any of the reports of the five working parties which had been established at the first CODESA session in December 1991 [see pp. 38662-63; 38705].
The talks foundered essentially on the issue of the size of the majority required for decision-making in a future transitional parliament, whose principal function would be to establish a new democratic constitution.
The ANC and its allies modified earlier demands for a two-thirds majority, proposing a 70 per cent majority for most decisions but conceding a higher majority, of 75 per cent, for a bill of rights.
The government and its supporters eventually accepted this but then insisted on a 75 per cent majority applying to regional issues, including the country's future status as a unitary or a federal state.
This position was flatly rejected by the ANC.
While the difference appeared small, the gap represented an assessment of the support each side could command in the transitional body.
It was generally estimated that the government would be able to secure 25 per cent of the votes to have an effective veto, whereas the ANC would be unlikely to win the support of more than 70 per cent of the interim government.
It was agreed to disband the working parties.
The 40-member steering committee was mandated to formulate agreements on all outstanding issues and to draft legislation to formalize any agreements.
It was expected that talks would resume by the end of June.
Cabinet reshuffle
Following the April resignation of Finance Minister Barend du Plessis [see p. 38850], President de Klerk announced on May 4 a reshuffle involving several senior members of his Cabinet.
Gerrit Viljoen, hitherto Minister of Constitutional Development, was appointed to the newly created post of Minister of State Affairs, effectively making him the State President's deputy.
Roelf Meyer was named as the new Minister of Constitutional Development.
Although Meyer remained Minister of Communications, his responsibilities for Defence were given to a Gene Louw, hitherto Home Affairs Minister, who was also named as Minister of Public Works.
Derek Keys was appointed the new Minister of Finance, but retained the Trade and Industry portfolio, and continued to have the specific responsibility for economic co-ordination.
Louis Pienaar was appointed Minister of Home Affairs and remained in charge of Environment Affairs.
Leon Wessels, who had relinquished the Public Works portfolio, was appointed as Minister of Manpower in addition to his other portfolios of Planning, Provincial Affairs and National Housing, and Local Government.
Piet Marais, Minister of Administration, Education, Culture and Manpower (i.e. with responsibility for white education), took over in addition the overall Ministry of National Education, previously held by Pienaar.
ANC conference
The ANC held a policy conference in Johannesburg on May 28-31 aimed at developing the organization's principal guiding document, the Freedom Charter, which had been adopted in 1955.
The 700 delegates approved a series of wide-ranging policies which highlighted the organization's commitment to a democratic, accountable, bicameral parliament and which also emphasized the necessity for a bill of rights.
Delegates rejected the concept of a federal state and made it clear that they would only accept a proportional representation system based on one-person-one-vote in a unitary state.
It was agreed that parliament should consist of a national assembly, which would be responsible for the preparation and adoption of principal pieces of legislation and which would control the budget, and a senate, which would represent the regions and would have the power to review, refer and delay legislation.
Delegates also proposed that a president, with ceremonial and executive powers and chosen by the national assembly, should supervise the functions of the Cabinet acting through a prime minister.
Delegates rescinded the Freedom Charter's commitment to comprehensive nationalization, confirming more recent statements by the leadership [see p. 38516]as they agreed that emphasis should be placed on a mixed economy.
The ANC used the conference to confirm its commitment to the negotiations process, but declared that it would adopt "mass action" programmes to force a change in the government's position, setting a mid-June deadline.
On May 31 the ANC secretary-general Cyril Ramaphosa told the press that the "conference has given us our battle orders" and that campaigns would focus on the release of all the remaining political prisoners, the election of a sovereign constitution-making body, the establishment of an interim government of national unity, and the creation of the conditions for free and fair elections.
Agreement on train violence
An agreement signed in Johannesburg on May 14 sought to end armed attacks on commuters by unidentified assailants on trains in the Pretoria-Witwatersrand-Vaal (PWV) region.
Signed by representatives of the rail companies, the Ministry of Law and Order, the ANC, the transport workers' trade union and various community organizations, it included an agreement that the police would redeploy personnel as soon as possible to cover the train network; working groups were established to investigate issues such as the installation of closed-circuit cameras in train coaches and the implementation of screening systems at stations.
Peace monitors
A number of international organizations responded to calls made by the ANC for the deployment of teams of international observer to monitor township violence [see p. 38850].
Amnesty International and the International Commission of Jurists were both said to be planning campaigns to monitor progress towards democratic elections.
On May 3 the Danish Foreign Minister Uffe Ellemann-Jensen told an informal meeting of his counterparts in the European Communities (EC) that the SAP were neither willing nor able to stop the violence.
Speaking after a visit to South Africa, Ellemann-Jensen concluded that the security forces were not in a position to supervise a democratic transition.
He called for the EC to support calls for international supervision of the security situation and of the elections.
The ministers agreed on the urgency of the situation.
However, they remained undecided as to the precise role for the EC and agreed that a decision would be deferred pending the forthcoming visit to South Africa by the Foreign Ministers of the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and Portugal.
A delegation from the Organization of African Unity (OAU) ended a nine-day monitoring visit on May 18.
The 10 members of the delegation, led by Nigerian External Affairs Minister Ike Nwachukwu, were also observers at CODESA II.
OAU officials indicated that the visit was only the beginning of the organization's involvement and suggested that it would maintain a permanent presence in the country until the establishment of a democratic government.
Poverty report
Details of a confidential government report sponsored by the Ministry of Agriculture were published in the press in May, containing the estimate that over half the population was living below the breadline and that 2,000,000 people were in urgent need of food aid.
Relations with other African states
Relations with African states continued to improve throughout May.
On May 1 an agreement was signed with Zambia opening the way for the establishment of representative offices in the two countries.
A similar agreement with Kenya was signed on May 11 at the end of a visit from the Kenyan Foreign Affairs Minister, Wilson Ndolo Ayah.
In an interview with the South African Communication Service broadcast on May 21, Foreign Minister Amr Mohammed Moussa of Egypt expressed hope that co-operation with South Africa would begin as soon as a political settlement was negotiated.
On May 21 Lesotho announced the decision to establish diplomatic relation as soon as possible.
Following de Klerk's visit to Nigeria in April [see p. 38851]the Nigerian Foreign Ministry announced on May 22 that Nigerians were free to transact business with South Africa.
On May 28 Foreign Affairs Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha arrived in Senegal where his talks with his counterpart Djibo Ka included the possibility of bilateral ties as well as South Africa's joining the OAU, which was due to met in Senegal in June.
AFRICA
MALAWI
Anti-government rioting
In the most serious expression of anti-government feeling since independence in 1964, at least 40 people were killed and several hundred injured in several days of rioting in early May, as strike action brought Lilongwe and Blantyre to a halt.
The unrest began on May 5 as textile workers went on strike in support of a pay demand.
The industrial action quickly spread to transport and municipal workers and workers on tea, sugar and tobacco plantations.
They were joined by anti-government protestors.
Looting and rioting broke out and the Blantyre offices of the ruling Malawi Congress Party were burnt down.
Most of the deaths occurred when the security forces fired on demonstrators in Blantyre, with paramilitary police using live ammunition to quell the disturbances.
On May 7 up to 5,000 people gathered outside the High Court in Lilongwe where Chakufwa Chihana, the trade union leader arrested in April [see p. 38851], was due to appear.
The crowd, shouting opposition slogans, later accompanied a car carrying Chihana's wife and lawyer away from court after he failed to appear.
The demonstrators then marched to the old town and began to destroy property owned by President Hastings Kamuzu Banda.
Banda made several appeals for calm and said that "genuine grievances" should be addressed in a peaceful manner to the proper authorities.
Speaking at a military parade on May 14 to mark Kamuzu Day (the President's birthday), Banda accused foreigners of inciting the violence.
Suspension of Western aid
Western aid donors meeting in Paris under World Bank auspices on May 12-14 decided to suspend all non-humanitarian aid to Malawi for 1992-93.
They blocked requests for new development assistance worth US$74,000,000.
A World Bank statement issued at the end of the meeting said that donors were "seeking tangible and irreversible evidence of a basic transformation" in the way Malawi approached basic freedoms and human rights.
It was agreed that the situation would be reviewed in six months to check the progress of political reforms.
Donors pledged US$170,000,000 in drought aid, US$100,000,000 less than the amount requested by the Banda regime.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
MPLA-PT special congress
With preparations under way for the first multiparty elections on Sept. 29-30, the ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-Workers' Party (MPLA-PT) held its third special congress on May 7-12.
Delegates made a significant change to the party structure, voting to increase the membership of the central committee from 180 to 193 members.
The move was widely regarded as a victory for reformers in the party, as the enlarged membership embraced members of the business community, intellectuals and a number of former dissidents.
Among those elected was a former dissident, Daniel Chipenda, who had earlier put himself forward as a candidate for a new post of vice-chairman of the party.
Delegates, however, decided against the creation of this post.
Chipenda was also elected to the political bureau.
Correction.
The final paragraph of the article on p. 38898 should have read: "Delegates made a significant change to the party structure, voting to increase the membership of the central committee from 180 to 193 members.
The move was widely regarded as a victory for reformers in the party, as the enlarged membership embraced members of the business community, intellectuals and a number of former dissidents.
Among those elected was a former dissident."
AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Resignation of minister — Imprisonment of opposition leader
Etienne Goyemido resigned as Minister of Primary, Secondary and Technical Education and of Youth and Sports on May 2 in protest at the dismissal of four teachers and a watchman.
Goyemido told the Agence France-Presse news agency that the dismissals — reportedly prompted by suspicion that the five belonged to an opposition party — "broke the law" .
He also indicated that he had disagreed with other members of the government on the running of the education department and said that he had been "gradually marginalized within the government" .
On May 20 Joseph Bendouga, leader of the opposition Democratic Movement for Renewal and Evolution in Central Africa (MDREC), was sentenced to six months' imprisonment on charges of sending an "insulting and offensive" open letter to President André Kolingba.
AFRICA
CONGO
Cabinet reshuffle — New electoral timetable
On May 16 the Higher Council of the Republic (CSR — the transitional legislative body) relieved the transitional government of responsibility for organizing elections and ordered Prime Minister André Milongo to reshuffle his Cabinet.
The decisions followed municipal elections on May 3, which the CSR accused the government of mishandling.
Milongo was instructed to form a "government of national unity" which would exclude Alexis Gabou, Minister of Interior and Decentralization.
Gabou was reportedly accused of "dangerously compromising" the elections.
On May 21 Milongo announced a major Cabinet reshuffle, naming only 10 ministers in addition to himself, eight fewer than in the previous transitional administration.
The CSR appointed a national commission to take charge of the election process and announced a new election calendar [see pp. 38802-03 for earlier postponement].
Under the new timetable, legislative elections were scheduled to take place in two rounds on June 21 and July 5, with senatorial elections on July 12 and presidential elections on July 19 and Aug. 2.
André Milongo Prime Minister, Supreme Chief of Armed Forces Gen. Raymond Damase Ngollo Defence
Congo Cabinet
**Dieudonné Ganga Foreign Affairs and Co-operation; Posts and Telecommunications and Communications
*Alphonse Nzoungou Interior and Decentralization, in charge of relations with CSR
**Jean-Luc Malekat Finance, Planning and Economy
**Justin Koumba National Education, Science and Technology, Youth and Sports, Culture and Arts
*Jean Pierre Mika Justice, Keeper of the Seals, Labour and Civil Service
*Delphin Luembe Industry, Commerce and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises, Crafts, Mines and Energy
*René-Lambert Nuane Agriculture, Water, Forestry, Animal Husbandry and Environment
*François Lounga Public Works, Transport, Town Planning and Housing and Tourism
*Médard Mdoya Health and Social Affairs
*New appointment.
**Altered responsibilities.
AFRICA
BURKINA
Legislative elections
In legislative elections held on May 24 the Organization for Popular Democracy-Labour Movement (ODP-MT) led by President Blaise Compaore won an unexpected victory, taking at least 78 of the 107 seats in the National Assembly.
Political party Seats won ODP-MT 78 CNPP-PSD 8 African Democratic Assembly 6 Alliance for Democracy and Federation 4 African Independent Party 3 Movement of Social Democrats 1 Burkinabe Socialist Party 1 Union of Independent Social Democrats 1 Rally of Social Democrats 1 The results of four seats were undeclared as at May 31.
Burkina election results
In the days before the election opposition figures as well as members of the ODT-MT had predicted that no single party would win control of the new parliament.
As provisional results were announced, opposition leaders claimed that there had been a "giant fraud" after polling stations closed.
Pierre Tapsoba of the National Convention of Progressive Patriots-Social Democratic Party (CNPP-PSD) claimed that there had been "widespread fraud and massive vote-buying" in the first legislative elections since 1978.
European observers were reported as saying that they had witnessed no serious problems during voting but did not comment on the claim of fraud after the close of stations.
Compaore had been re-elected President in elections in December 1991 which were boycotted by opposition parties [see p. 38665].
However, as the sole candidate and with the very high rate of abstention (only 28.28 per cent of voters turned out), his presidency had been widely regarded as lacking in legitimacy.
The ODP-MT victory in the legislative elections enabled him to claim that his credibility had been increased.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
Debt rescheduling agreement
An agreement rescheduling Cameroon's debt with France was announced on May 4.
The rescheduling covered a total of almost 90,000 million francs CFA (about US$331 million).
This included 39,000 million francs CFA granted by the Central Fund for Economic Co-operation, 45,000 million francs CFA in commercial loans granted by the French Insurance Company for Foreign Trade, and 4,000 million francs CFA in loans refinanced by the Bank of France.
Under the terms of the agreement the debt would be repaid over a 20-year period, at an interest rate on 5 per cent.
AFRICA
COTE D'IVOIRE
Resignation of opposition deputy
On May 19 Francis Vaudier, the sole remaining opposition member in parliament, suspended indefinitely his activities in the National Assembly.
He described his action as a gesture of solidarity with Laurent Gbagbo, the imprisoned leader of the Front populaire ivoirien (FPI), who received a two-year prison sentence in March following a riot in Abidjan in February [see pp. 38753; 38802].
Vaudier also said that his position as an opposition deputy had been "extremely serious and humiliating" and that he had himself been arrested and held for two days.
His announcement followed the sentencing earlier in the month of a further 45 opposition activists on charges arising from the February disturbances.
Michel Gbagbo, son of the IPF leader, and 44 others were sentenced to one year's imprisonment.
AFRICA
THE GAMBIA
Fifth Jawara presidential term
Sir Dawda Jawara was sworn in as President on May 11 to begin his fifth consecutive term in office after winning 58.4 per cent of the votes in the presidential elections held on April 29.
Jawara's closest opponent in the presidential polls was Sheriff Mustapha Dibba, leader of the National Convention Party (NCP), who gained 22 per cent of the vote.
Others contesting the election included Assan Musa Camara of the Gambia People's Party (GPP) and Sidia Jatta of the People's Democratic Organization for Independence and Socialism (PDOIS).
In the legislative elections which took place on the same day, Jawara's People's Progressive Party (PPP) secured 25 of the 36 directly elected seats in the House of Representatives, six fewer than at dissolution.
The NCP increased its parliamentary presence from five to six seats, while the GPP, which had not been represented in the previous parliament, won two seats.
The remaining three seats were taken by independent candidates.
On May 11 Jawara announced a new government, with the most significant change being the promotion of Saihou S. Sabally, hitherto Economic Affairs Minister, to the post of Vice-President.
Sabally also took the National Defence and Women's Affairs portfolios previously held by Jawara.
AFRICA
GHANA
Lifting of ban on party politics
Following the adoption in April of a new Constitution allowing for multiparty politics [see p. 38856], the ban imposed in 1981 on party politics was lifted on May 17.
However, the registration process was boycotted by several opposition groups, which took legal action to challenge the legislation regarding the formation and conduct of political parties.
On May 14, Komla A. Gbedemah, a minister under former President Kwame Nkrumah and a presidential candidate in the 1970 elections, and 28 other prominent opposition figures, applied to the Accra High Court for an injunction against the Interim National Electoral Commission (INEC) to halt the implementation of the Political Parties Law 1992.
Under the terms of this law, 21 political parties which had existed prior to the 1981 ban remained proscribed, including Nkrumah's Convention People's Party and the Progress Party.
The law also prohibited the use of the symbols, names or slogans of these parties by any new organizations.
The opposition leaders further objected to the restrictions on individual monetary contributions to parties, which limited annual personal donations to C200,000 (about US$480).
They argued that these sections of the law were intended to hinder the organization of opposition parties.
On May 26 the High Court dismissed the action against the INEC, which subsequently began to issue registration forms to prospective parties.
Four organizations had reportedly been issued with documentation by May 28.
On May 29 the government announced that the Political Parties Law had been amended to allow the INEC to set a new limit for individual contributions.
Imprisonment of editor
George Marshal Naykene, editor of the Christian Chronicle, was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment with hard labour after being found guilty of criminal libel.
Naykene had written an article in which he alleged that all members of the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council, which ruled for a period in 1979, had benefited from an illegal foreign loan.
AFRICA
NIGER
Tuareg truce
Following a series of meetings the government and the Liberation Front of Air and Azawad (FLAA), representing the Tuareg rebels, on May 12 issued a joint communiqué in which both sides committed themselves to working to create a favourable climate for effective negotiations, beginning with a 15-day truce from May 15 [for January threat of force against Tuaregs see p. 38708].
It was also agreed that Algeria and France would act as mediators in the peace process.
Algeria had played a similar role in the negotiation of a peace pact between Tuareg rebels and the government of Mali [see pp. 38801-02].
Prime Minister Amadou Cheiffou had earlier in the month held talks in Algiers with his Algerian counterpart, Sid-Ahmed Ghozali.
AFRICA
MALI
Attack on Tuaregs
The fragility of a national peace pact, signed in April between the government and Tuareg rebels [see p. 38853], was revealed as the government came under attack following the killing of Tuaregs.
The Azawad Popular Movement accused the government of "masterminding" an attack on a Tuareg convoy delivering humanitarian aid to the nomads.
The organization claimed that several people, including church workers, had been held hostage and that at least 11 Tuaregs had been executed.
However, a government statement issued at the end of a meeting with the Unified Movements and Fronts of Azawad on May 20 declared that both parties were convinced that the attack was the work of "unscrupulous and lawless" people.
Cabinet changes
A number of Cabinet changes were made on May 14, in which three ministers were dismissed.
Sy Maimouna Ba was relieved of her duties as Minister of Agriculture, Stockbreeding and Environment.
Her portfolio was allocated to Cisse Khaidama Mariam Youba Sidibe who continued as Minister of Planning and International Co-operation.
Jean Brière de l'Isle was replaced as Minister of Public Health, Social Welfare and Women's Promotion by Mohamed Ag Erfal, also Minister of Tourism and Handicrafts.
Col. Moussa Diabate, Minister Delegate for Internal Security, took on additional responsibility as Secretary of State for Social Welfare and Women's Promotion, a post hitherto held by Bocoum Mariama Suzane Maiga.
No reason was given for the changes.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Anti-government protests — Religious violence
Outbreaks of anti-government protests and of religious violence in several parts of the country in May left up to 300 people dead.
The first series of riots began in Lagos on May 4 when commuters protested against a 500 per cent fare increase imposed by taxi and minibus drivers who were trying to cope with an acute fuel shortage [see p. 38853]and with spiralling inflation.
The demonstrators set fire to vehicles and blocked access roads with barricades made from burning tyres.
In the next 10 days they were joined by hundreds of unemployed youths who looted shops, damaged cars and demanded money from passers-by.
On May 13 a peaceful demonstration of students calling for the resignation of Ibrahim Babangida's military regime degenerated into violence when police fired on the demonstrators with rubber bullets and live ammunition, killing at least seven people.
Similar incidents were reported in three other southern states.
Fresh rioting was reported in Lagos on May 21 after the arrest on May 18 of Beko Ransome Kuti, chairman of the Campaign for Democracy (CD), and of leading CD activists Femi Falana and Baba Omojola.
On May 10 CD, an umbrella organization of 25 opposition groups, had called for the resignation of the government.
Ransome Kuti had accused it of instigating the violence in order to thwart the handover to civilian rule scheduled for January 1993.
Religious violence
Clashes between Christians and Moslems in Kaduna state were reported on May 18 [see p. 38708 for religious violence in January].
Disturbances began on May 16 in a village about 250 km from Kaduna, the state capital, after a land dispute between the minority Christian Katafs and the mainly Moslem Hausa people.
By May 17 the unrest had spread to Kaduna itself.
Churches were destroyed and thousands of Christians converged on a military academy and police stations in the town to seek protection.
According to diplomatic sources up to 300 people were killed in the violence.
On May 18 the state authorities imposed a dusk-to-dawn curfew.
Although calm was reported to have been restored, on May 19 the federal government announced an immediate ban on all associations with "religious, ethnic, tribal, cultural, social group or individual interests" .
Failure to observe the ban was punishable by up to three years' imprisonment.
According to the Ministry of Justice the measure was necessary because such organizations had a "largely destructive influence" .
On May 25 President Babangida announced a series of security measures to "defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity" of the country.
A National Guard, reporting directly to the President, was to be established immediately, in order to reduce the role of the army in riot control; according to official sources it would number tens of thousands, and would incorporate the riot police.
AFRICA
SIERRA LEONE
New Sierra Leone Cabinet
There were in addition Ministers Resident of the Northern, Southern and Eastern provinces.
NPRC government
On May 1 Capt. Valentine E. M. Strasser was named as chairman of the National Provisional Ruling Council (NPRC), the body which had assumed control of the country after a successful coup against President Joseph Momoh on April 30 [see pp. 38552-54].
Strasser, who had led the coup, was later named Head of State as well as Minister of Defence in the new Cabinet.
The NPRC consisted of 23 members who, an NPRC statement said, represented all the country's ethnic groups.
A 19-member Cabinet was announced on May 3; it included several members of the NPRC and featured six civilians including two senior members of the former government, James S. A. Funna and Ahmed Dumbuya, who retained their portfolios.
On May 4 the NPRC dissolved the House of Representatives and suspended all political activities.
It also issued a detailed policy statement.
Declaring that "corruption, indiscipline, mismanagement, tribalism, nepotism, injustice and thuggery" were rampant, the NPRC committed itself to returning the country to multiparty democracy in the "shortest possible time" .
To this end it announced that the electoral commission was to be reconstituted in order to free it from political influence and manipulation.
The statement announced the NPRC's commitment to economic recovery and asserted its intention to exercise "maximum fiscal discipline" .
Particular concern was expressed about the dissipation of the country's mineral wealth; the NPRC promised a review of all mining contracts and action against smuggling.
The NPRC also placed a high priority on the conclusion of the war with rebel forces from neighbouring Liberia.
Although the government indicated that it was prepared to negotiate with the rebel National Patriotic Front of Liberia, it said that it had not renounced the use of force.
On May 16 the NPRC announced that it would respect all Sierra Leone's obligations to the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and to the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) including the deployment of the ECOMOG (ECOWAS Monitoring Group) in the country as part of the Liberian peace process [see p. 38853].
The announcement served to dispel the fears of the Nigerian regime of President Ibrahim Babangida, who on May 20 assured the new government of Nigeria's support.
AFRICA
SAO TOMÉ AND PRINCIPE
New government
On May 16 a new Cabinet was announced with Noberto José d'Alva Costa Alegre, hitherto Minister of the Economy and Finance, as Prime Minister.
Earlier Costa Alegre had been elected as leader of the ruling Party of Democratic Convergence (PCD), replacing Daniel Lima dos Santos Daio who had been dismissed as Prime Minister in April [see p. 38854].
Sao Tomé and Príncipe principal ministers
*Norberto José d'Alva Costa Alegre Prime Minister Evaristo do Espirito Santo Carvalho Defence and Internal Order
*Albertino Homen dos Santos Sequeira Braganca Foreign Affairs
*Olegario Pires Tiny Justice, Labour and Public Administration Arlino Afonso de Carvalho Economy and Finance
*Member of previous Cabinet.
AFRICA
TOGO
Armed attack on opposition
A group of leading opposition figures was ambushed in northern region of Assoli by unidentified assailants on May 5.
The attack was widely regarded as an assassination attempt on Gilchrist Olympio, chairman of the opposition alliance Union of the Forces of Change (UFC), who suffered serious injuries.
At least 10 people were killed, including Marc Atti Depe, leader of the Togolese Union for Reconciliation, and Elliot Ohin, chairman of the Togolese Movement for Democracy.
Although he had not formally announced his candidature Olympio, son of President Sylvanus Olympio who was himself assassinated in 1963, had been expected to be a very popular presidential candidate.
He received medical treatment in Benin and was later flown to France.
On May 6 thousands of demonstrators took to the streets of Lomé calling for the resignation of President Gnassingbe Eyadema and Prime Minister Joseph Kokou Koffigoh, who, they claimed, were "accomplices" in the attack.
A call by the Collectif des syndicats indépendants (CSI) for a three-day general strike beginning on May 7 was widely heeded, paralysing the capital, Lomé.
Rioting was reported in several other towns.
On May 10 the government sent requests to the UN Security Council, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the European Communities (EC) for the establishment of an international commission of inquiry into the incident.
On May 12 Eyadema, Koffigoh and Mgr Sanouko Philippe Kpodzro, Chairman of the High Council of the Republic (HCR — the transitional legislature), met to discuss the deteriorating political situation.
They called for the temporary suspension of activities by all political parties, who were further requested to draw up a code of conduct to regulate their activities.
They also called for the disarming of civilians and of members of the militia, and appealed to the security forces not to become involved in the political debate.
On May 15, 16 leading opposition parties rejected the proposals.
On May 29, the HCR announced the postponement of the electoral timetable, due to begin on May 31 with a constitutional referendum and local elections [see p. 38854].
According to the official statement the process was delayed because the census had still to be completed and the election code had not been adopted by the HCR.
The statement also cited the "general insecurity" in the country, but said that elections would take place "within a month or two" .
IMF loan
The IMF on May 21 approved a loan equivalent to SDR15,360,000 (about (US$22,000,000) under the third annual enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF) arrangement in support of Togo's 1992 economic and financial reform programme.
The IMF had in May 1989 approved a three-year ESAF arrangment totalling SDR46,080,000 ($65,000,000).
AFRICA
CHAD
New Prime Minister and Cabinet
A new Prime Minister, Joseph Yodemane, was appointed by presidential decree on May 20.
In an interview with French radio the following day he said that "we must not forget that this government has a lifespan which may be limited by the national sovereign conference" [see below].
He also spoke of the need for a multiparty system to be explained to and accepted by "the supporters of the current regime" .
Yodemane was reported to be "close" to the National Alliance for Democracy and Development (ANDD).
A new Cabinet which was announced on May 22 was described as containing a number of opposition figures; eight ministers who were members of the ruling Patriotic Salvation Movement (MPS), however, left the Cabinet.
The new Foreign Minister was Mahamat Ali Adoum, Koibla Djimasta became Interior Minister and Mohiaddine Salah became Minister for Finance.
Postponement of conference
The national conference which since late 1991 had been planned as the next stage in the democratization process, was on May 8 postponed until later in the year on the grounds that its preparatory commission had not completed its work.
The conference had been scheduled for May [see pp. 38665-66], and a government statement of May 8 emphasized that the government still had a "firm determination to hold the sovereign national conference" .
On May 13, at the first official meeting between President Idriss Déby and four opposition party leaders, it was suggested that the conference might be held in September.
According to the London-based Africa Confidential newsletter of May 22, the delay came at the insistence of the opposition, which, while claiming that the rainy season would create transport problems for delegates, was in fact concerned that comparatively few parties had as yet been granted legal status.
By May 25 a total of eight political parties had been recognized, while the following day, 16 of the country's 21 political parties (recognized and unrecognized) were reported to have combined to form the National Co-ordination of the Opposition (CNO).
Kassire Koumakoye, president of one of the recognized parties, the National Rally for Democracy and Progress (RNDP), became the CNO spokesperson.
Tension in capital
On April 18-19, Easter weekend, soldiers predominantly from the Zaghawa tribe (President Déby was a member of the related Bideyat group) had surrounded the presidential palace in protest at the attempts to demilitarize the capital, Ndjamena, and at planned cutbacks in the armed forces.
The Transport Minister, Abbas Koty, who was himself a Zahgawa, negotiated on behalf of the troops and by April 23 they had agreed to withdraw.
Opposition allegations
On April 10 the opposition Movement for Development and Democracy (MDD), which had never been recognized as a political party, had stated that more than 40 people, including the MDD leader Goukouni Guët, had been arrested in February in neighbouring Nigeria and extradited to Chad at the request of the Chadian government.
At least 20 of those extradited were reported to have died in prison or to have been executed, including Guët himself.
The Chadian embassy in Paris described the allegations as "without foundation" [for attack led by Guët from Nigeria in January see p. 38710].
A document published by a committee of the Justice Ministry on May 20 claimed that as many as 40,000 people might have been executed or have died in detention under the previous regime of former President Hissène Habré.
According to Le Monde of May 22, the report contained implicit suggestions that the same structures of repression still existed, in spite of the change of government.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Talks between government and SPLA
A new round of peace talks between the Sudanese government and the southern rebel movement began in the Nigerian capital of Abuja on May 26.
For the first time in such talks the Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA), which in previous weeks had been losing ground to government forces throughout southern Sudan, was represented by two independent delegations: the so-called Torit group led by Col. John Garang, and a splinter group supporting Lam Akol, based at the town of Nasir [for SPLA split see p. 38426].
The talks were hosted by Nigerian President Ibrahim Babangida in his capacity as chair of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
Reports in the Sudanese media in early April had said that the government's agreement to participate in the talks came in return for an agreement by the Kenyan government to withdraw material and moral support from the rebel groups.
Garang's faction had been slower to agree to participate than Akol's supporters, and on May 27 the Chairman of Sudan's Revolutionary Command Council (RCC), Lt.-Gen.
Omar Hassan Ahmed al-Bashir, claimed that this delay had been due to the unwillingness of the Torit group to accept the participation of the Nasir group in the peace negotiations.
He also said that "the rebel movement" had sought a ceasefire as a precondition for talks.
Continuation of fighting
On May 1 Sudanese radio reported that "the biggest rebel camp in Bahr al-Ghazal" in western Sudan had been destroyed, that 512 rebels had been killed and large quantities of arms and ammunition seized.
Further south, government forces reported that they had on May 12 taken from Garang's forces the town of Liria (east of Juba and on the road to Torit) and on May 28 Kapoeta (some 50 km north of the border with Kenya).
By the end of May some 45,000 civilian refugees were reported to have recently travelled from Sudan to Kenya, including a group of 12,500 boys who were either orphaned or separated from their families.
This group had already trekked from Pochala on the Ethiopian border; some of the boys had been living a transitory existence for four years.
New currency
On May 17 the Council of Ministers announced that a new currency, the dinar, worth 10 Sudanese pounds, would gradually replace the Sudanese pound.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Relief situation
An estimated 4,500,000 of the 6,000,000 population of Somalia were reported by relief agencies in May to be facing starvation as the looting of food and drug supplies continued to delay relief operations.
People in the countryside in central and southern Somalia were especially at risk.
A UN-chartered ship succeeded in docking in Mogadishu port on May 3 and unloading 5,000 tonnes of wheat — the first significant emergency food relief for almost six months.
It was planned to send an equal amount every 10 days.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) had since April 30 landed food on three different beaches along the coast up to 25 km from the capital.
By May 19 the Lutheran World Federation was flying in essential supplies daily from Mombasa, Kenya, for the Mogadishu programmes of the UK-based Save the Children Fund and French-based Médecins sans frontières.
After reports in the Washington Post that the ICRC and UN field workers had hired several thousand local "mercenaries" to protect food distribution operations, the ICRC on May 8 issued a statement to the effect that "local relief committees" organized by the clans and sub-clans were acting as a "police force" ; a small amount of the food aid was to be given them as "food for work" .
Mohammed Sahnoun, a former Algerian permanent representative at the UN who in late April had been appointed the special representative in Somalia of the UN Secretary-General, arrived in Somalia on the weekend of May 9-10.
This was the first permanent UN presence in Somalia since shortly before the fall of former President Mohammed Siyad Barre in January 1991 [see pp. 37946-47].
On May 11 Sahnoun met with the chairman of the United Somali Congress (USC), Gen. Mohammed Farah Aydid (whose dispute with interim President Ali Mahdi Mohammed was the immediate cause of continuing instability), to discuss the possible deployment of UN observers and of security personnel in Mogadishu.
In the first week of May some 30,000 more Somali refugees were reported to have crossed the border into Kenya, fleeing further fighting in the south [for February UN report on Somali refugees in Kenya see p. 38755].
On May 4 the Kenyan government requested assistance from the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for its efforts to receive these most recent Somali refugees, and by May 15 UNHCR had issued an urgent appeal for US$34,000,000 to provide care for about 140,000 Somali and 90,000 Ethiopian refugees in Kenya.
The UNHCR was already operating eight camps in Kenya but said that more were needed as refugees were arriving in Kenya at the rate of 2,800 a day.
By May 18 the development ministers of the EC member states agreed that some $5,000,000 of emergency aid would be granted to Somalia, to be channelled through European non-governmental organizations as well as through the UNHCR.
Fighting in south
There was a resurgence of fighting around Kismayo (the main port town of southern Somalia) between USC forces apparently supporting Gen. Aydid and southern forces headed by Gen. Mohammed Said Hersi, who was described as the son-in-law of Siyad Barre.
Hersi unsuccessfully defended Kismayo with the help of the Somali Salvation Democratic Front (SSDF) and one faction of the Somali Patriotic Movement (SPM).
On May 14 the town fell to the Somali Liberation Army (SLA)— described as a loose grouping which included the faction of the USC which supported Farah Aydid, a new group entitled the South Somali National Movement (SSNM), and another faction of the SPM.
Siyad Barre was meanwhile reported to have left Nairobi, the Kenyan capital, for Nigeria on May 17, after more than 200 Kenyan members of parliament had called for his expulsion, expressing fears that the instability in Somalia might spread to Kenya.
A statement by the Nigerian presidency on May 17 said that Siyad Barre had been given temporary asylum since no other African state had offered to accept him.
AFRICA
KENYA
Return of Matiba
Kenneth Matiba received a hero's welcome from thousands of cheering supporters when he returned to Kenya on May 2 after 10 months in London.
Matiba, a former Cabinet minister, had left Kenya after almost a year in detention [see p. 37603 for his arrest in July 1990].
His return sparked off a power struggle within the Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD), the country's leading opposition group.
On May 3 Matiba announced that he wished to stand as the FORD candidate in the presidential elections, expected to take place before the end of the year.
However, Oginga Odinga, the interim chairman of FORD, had earlier declared that he would not relinquish his own candidacy.
On May 8 Martin Shikuku, interim secretary-general of the party, declared his intention to stand for the presidency.
It was widely believed that Paul Muite would be persuaded by younger members of the party to become the fourth FORD candidate.
Allegations of terrorist camps
On May 18 Ngonya wa Gakonya, interim chairman of the Democratic Movement Party, was arrested with 33 other opposition figures.
Their arrest followed press reports of allegations by unidentified members of the opposition that private armies were being assembled by people close to the government, including the former Minister of Energy and IndustryKiprono Nicholas K. Biwott [for whose dismissal from office see p. 38563].
The reports, carried in several local newspapers including the Kenya Times and the Daily Nation, alleged that seven camps had been established in the Maasia Mara game reserve where "terrorists" were being trained to kill opposition leaders.
It was also implied that these illegal forces had been deployed in western Kenya where they were being used to foment ethnic violence [see p. 38854].
The allegations were denied by Biwott and by the government, which said that security in the game reserve had been stepped up because of attacks on tourists.
AFRICA
COMOROS
New transitional government
President Said Mohammed Djohar announced a new transitional coalition government on May 10, after dissolving the previous administration on May 6.
Mohamed Taki Abdoulkarim, the Co-ordinator (head of government, appointed in January — see pp. 38706-07), was not consulted.
The changes came after several weeks of pressure on the President to reshuffle the government.
At the end of April, 18 political parties demanded the resignation of Mohamed Said Abdallah Mchangama, Minister of Finance, Budget, Economy, Commerce and Planning, after press disclosures of an ambiguous contract involving the purchase of rolling stock from Italy.
The composition of the new Cabinet, however, was widely regarded as strengthening the position of Mchangama, leader of the MWANGAZA party and son-in-law of the President.
Several of the new members of the Cabinet were identified in the press as either members of MWANGAZA or parties affiliated to it.
Among the changes was the replacement of Ahmed Mohammed as Minister of Equipment, Energy, Posts and Telecommunications by Ahmed Said Islam of the Maecha Bora party.
Islam relinquished his responsibilities as Secretary of State for the Interior, Immigration and Administrative Reform to Ali Mohammed Bacar.
Postponement of referendum
Despite several declarations by Djohar that the political timetable detailed at the end of the national conference [see p. 38855]would be respected, the government announced the postponement of the constitutional referendum, scheduled for May 24, until June 7.
Eight political parties, including the former ruling Union comorienne pour le progrès and the Front démocratique, established a "" No "front" on May 26, urging a no vote in the constitutional referendum as a "vote of censure" against the President.
AFRICA
BENIN
More than 5,000 striking civil servants demonstrated in Cotonou on May 12 in support of demands for higher wages and the regularization of their working conditions, and in protest against government control of the media and restrictions on the right to strike; the government responded by assuring the strikers that their wage demands would be met as soon as the budget had been voted on.
AFRICA
CEEAC
The eighth annual summit of the heads of state and government of the Economic Community of the Central African States was held in Bujumbura, Burundi, on May 17-18.
AFRICA
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
Antonio Sibacha, secretary-general of the Gabon-based opposition Union for Democracy and Social Development in Equatorial Guinea (UDDS), claimed on May 4 that opposition activist Feliciano Moto had been beaten to death by guards from the presidential palace, that two other opposition activists had been arrested, and that the regime was employing the tactics of "assassination and imprisonment" .
AFRICA
GUINEA
On May 8 the government announced the introduction of the death penalty for those convicted of murder or the attempted murder of magistrates, jurors, government ministers or security force commanders; at the same time penalties of up to 10 years' imprisonment and fines of up to GF10,000,000 (about US$12,500) were introduced for the organizers of public demonstrations ending in violence.
AFRICA
OAU
The Organization of African Unity and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) signed in Geneva on May 4 a co-operation agreement which formalized the longstanding collaboration between the two organizations and allowed the ICRC to participate in all OAU meetings as an observer.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Primary elections for presidential nominations
President George Bush and Governor Bill Clinton continued their progress towards capturing the nominations of their respective political parties during May.
There appeared an increasing possibility, however, that they would face a powerful challenge in the November presidential election from the independent candidacy of Texan billionaire Ross Perot.
In the Indiana, North Carolina, and Washington DC primaries on May 5 Bush won 80, 70 and 81 per cent of the vote respectively, compared with the 20, 20 and 19 per cent polled by Pat Buchanan.
Among the Democrats Clinton secured 63, 64 and 74 per cent respectively, compared with 21, 10, and 7 per cent for his only remaining rival for the nomination, Jerry Brown.
Paul Tsongas, who had formally withdrawn from the contest, polled 12, 8 and 10 per cent respectively.
Bush swept to victory in West Virginia and Nebraska, on May 12, winning over 80 per cent of the vote in each case.
Clinton also won comfortably with 70 and 48 per cent respectively.
In the Oregon primary on May 19 Bush scored 76 per cent against 22 per cent for Buchanan.
Among the Democrats Clinton polled 50 per cent compared with 35 per cent for Brown and 11 per cent for Tsongas.
In the Arkansas, Kentucky and Idaho primaries on May 26 Bush scored 87, 74, and 64 per cent respectively, while Clinton secured 68, 56, and 50 per cent.
Although he had not definitely declared his candidacy, Perot had ignited a grassroots campaign involving the collection of the hundreds of thousands of signatures necessary to include him on the ballot in all 50 states.
Eschewing the traditional media, Perot used telephone banks and television and radio talk shows to exploit the anti-incumbency mood currently prevalent within the USA, by portraying himself as a principled outsider, untarnished by the exercise of power.
After steadily improving his position in the opinion polls, Perot achieved a breakthrough in mid-May when, for the first time, he registered a higher rating than both of his main Republican and Democratic rivals.
The Time-CNN poll gave him 33 per cent support, compared with 28 per cent for Bush and 24 per cent for Clinton.
Controversy over amendment to Constitution
A constitutional amendment first proposed in 1789, designed to prohibit a Congress from voting pay rises for itself while in session, finally achieved during May the approval of enough states for it to be incorporated in the Constitution.
Ratifications by the legislatures of Missouri and Alabama (on May 5) and Michigan and New Jersey (on May 7) brought the total to 39, more than the necessary three-quarters majority.
Opinions were divided, however, as to whether the protracted time-scale had rendered the amendment invalid.
The amendment specified that "No law varying the compensation for the services of senators and representatives shall take effect, until an election of representatives shall have intervened" .
It had originally been proposed by James Madison in 1789 as one of a package of 12 measures, 10 of which were quickly approved and became the Bill of Rights.
The pay rise prohibition, however, had been approved by only six states by the end of 1791.
It then lay dormant until it was passed by Ohio in 1873 and then by Wyoming in 1978.
A campaign by Gregory D. Watson, an aide to a Texas Democratic state legislator, led to the proposal's approval by 31 states between 1983 and 1992.
The growing mood of disillusionment with incumbent politicians in recent years assisted in this process.
The Speaker of the House of Representatives, Tom Foley, suggested that the measure violated "the principle of contemporaneous consideration by the states" .
Although the Supreme Court had ruled that amendments should be ratified within a reasonable period in order to reflect a contemporaneous consensus — the time limit most usually accepted was seven years — no such restriction had applied at the time when the amendment was first sent to the states for consideration.
On May 13 Don W. Wilson — who, as the head of the National Archives and Records Administration, was generally accepted as the custodian of the Constitution — declared his support for the validity of the measure and stated that he was preparing to certify its adoption as the 27th Amendment.
Veto of campaign finance bill — Controversy over Bush's election finances
President Bush on May 9 vetoed legislation designed to overhaul the much-criticized system for financing congressional election campaigns, the cost of which had sharply escalated in recent years.
Bush rejected the campaign finance bill, the first such measure to have been approved by Congress in more than a decade of partisan dispute over the issue, on the grounds that it offered public subsidies to House and Senate candidates and because it did not eliminate donations from political action committees (PACs).
The President condemned it as a "taxpayer-financed incumbent protection plan" .
The bill had been passed by the Senate on April 30 on a largely party-line vote of 58:42, having been approved earlier by the House of Representatives by 259 votes to 165.
It reflected growing concern about the level of spending on congressional election campaigns.
As the Supreme Court had ruled that capping the amount which a candidate could spend would amount to an unconstitutional interference with the right of free speech, the bill aimed to establish voluntary spending limits in return for the receipt of benefits.
Candidates whose spending remained below the thresholds of $600,000 for the House and $5,500,000 for the Senate, would be eligible for federal campaign funds.
The bill also limited the amount of funds which a candidate could receive from PACs, reduced the flow of "soft money" (unregulated contributions from party organizations to candidates), limited personal spending by wealthy candidates and closed other loopholes through which special interests could influence campaigns and the conduct of congressional business.
According to congressional estimates, the public subsidies would have cost up to $150,000,000 for a two-year election cycle.
The bill did not include a method for funding the changes, leading Bush to suggest that it would "inevitably lead to a raid on the Treasury to pay for the elaborate scheme of public subsidies" .
On May 13 the Senate unsuccessfully attempted to override the presidential veto; its vote of 57:42 fell short of the required two-thirds majority.
Within days of the veto it emerged that four of Bush's leading donors and fund-raisers were the targets of law suits by federal regulatory authorities over their role in failed Savings and Loans institutions ( "thrifts" ).
The four included Lawrence Bathgate, the national finance chairman of the Republican Party's national committee and a long-standing donor to Bush's campaigns, and Ray Hunt, vice-chairman for finance of the Bush re-election campaign.
The two others were both co-chairmen of the President's dinner, a lavish event held in Washington DC in April, which had raised $9,000,000.
It also emerged that a $400,000 donation, the largest made at the dinner, was from Michael Kojima, a heavily indebted businessman who was being pursued by numerous creditors.
Indictment of congressman — Issuing of subpoenas over Post Office scandal
Joseph M. McDade, a Republican congressman who had represented Pennsylvania for 30 years, was on May 5 charged with racketeering, conspiracy and falsifying his financial disclosure statements.
The indictment arose from the allegation by federal prosecutors that he had accepted $100,000 in bribes from military contractors and lobbyists.
McDade, the senior Republican member of the House appropriations committee, denied the charges, which carried a maximum sentence of 34 years in prison.
He did, however, admit to having accepted some "improper" contributions which he had subsequently reimbursed.
He alleged that he had been the victim of a politically motivated investigation and stated that it remained his intention to seek a 16th term of office in November 1992.
The charges against McDade coincided with the ongoing investigation into the House "Rubbergate" scandal [see p. 38807]and the strong anti-incumbency sentiments consistently uncovered in recent opinion polls.
On the day after McDade's indictment, subpoenas were issued against three House members — including the Democratic chairman of the House ways and means committee, Dan Rostenkowski — and several officers of the House in connection with a grand jury investigation of criminal activity at the House Post Office.
Five former employees at the post office had already been indicted on charges of drug dealing and embezzlement.
Supreme Court rulings
The Supreme Court on May 4 took a further step in the ongoing process of restricting the rights of prisoners convicted by state judicial systems to have their cases reviewed in federal courts.
The 5:4 ruling came in the case of Keeney v. Tamayo-Reyes, and was accompanied by sharply worded dissenting opinions from those justices who argued that the decision went too far in restricting the rights of habeas corpus.
The case involved Jose Tamayo-Reyes, a Cuban immigrant, who was attempting to challenge his no-contest plea to manslaughter charges, on the grounds that he had not understood the meaning of the term manslaughter.
In accordance with a 1963 judgment, which had been enshrined in a habeas corpus law by a congressional statute in 1966, a lower appeals court had ruled that the defendant was entitled to a federal court hearing on his claim.
In an example of the sort of judicial activism traditionally deplored by conservatives, however, the Supreme Court effectively overturned the 1966 legislation by ruling that Tamayo-Reyes had forfeited his right of access to a federal court by failing to outline the essence of his objections during the earlier state court proceedings.
The ruling highlighted the strength of the conservative majority on the current Supreme Court.
The two remaining liberal justices, Harry A. Blackmun and John Paul Stevens, were joined in opposing the decision by Sandra Day O'Connor and Anthony M. Kennedy, both of whom were more usually associated the conservative majority.
President Bush's two appointees to the Court, David Souter and Clarence Thomas, both endorsed the majority opinion.
Further evidence of the Supreme Court's political disposition was apparent in another 5:4 ruling issued on May 4.
In the case of United States v. Williams the Court decided that federal prosecutors were permitted to withhold exculpatory evidence — material favourable to the defendant — from a grand jury.
The five-member majority in the judgment was composed of Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, together with justices Byron R. White, Antonin Scalia, Souter, and Kennedy.
On May 18 the Court ruled 5:4 that those acquitted of crimes by reason of insanity could not, after regaining sanity, be kept in mental institutions on the grounds that they might still be dangerous.
The majority was composed of Blackmun, Stevens, O'Connor, Souter and White.
Execution of Roger Coleman
Roger Keith Coleman, convicted of the rape and murder of his sister-in-law in 1981, was executed in Virginia's electric chair on May 20.
The execution ended a case which had aroused intense public interest, not least because of strong evidence that Coleman was innocent of the crime of which he had been convicted.
The case against Coleman was largely circumstantial, supported by some inconclusive forensic evidence.
Substantial doubts had been raised by the difficultly of Coleman's having committed the crime in the short space of time for which he had no alibi on the night of the murder, and by numerous statements gathered after the trial attesting that another resident of the small town of Grundy had boasted of having committed the crime.
Despite the new evidence, the Virginia judiciary had refused to order a retrial of the case, partly because Coleman's lawyer filed an appeal document one day too late, and partly because of a state law which forbade the consideration of new evidence discovered more than 21 days after the date of the original conviction.
Douglas Wilder, the Governor of Virginia, on May 18 rejected appeals to intervene in the Coleman case.
He did, however, arrange for Coleman to take a lie-detector test on May 20, which the prisoner failed.
On the final day of Coleman's life an appeal for a stay of execution was denied by the Supreme Court by a vote of 7:2, reflecting a growing determination to uphold the decision of state courts and, thereby, to limit the scope of appeals by Death Row prisoners [see above].
In an attempt to avoid the confusion and last-minute delays which had surrounded the execution of Robert Alton Harris in April [see p. 38857], however, the Court did not announce its decision until 10.59 p.m., one minute before the scheduled time of Coleman's death.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Referendum on division of Northwest Territories — Nunavut political accord
A referendum held on May 4 in the Northwest Territories resulted in a vote in favour of the boundary changes required to establish a native Inuit homeland, Nunavut.
Residents voted by 8,334 to 7,020 in favour of the division of the Northwest Territories into two sections.
An agreement to carve a semi-autonomous Inuit territory out of the eastern half of the Territories had been reached in December 1991 [see p. 38669].
The Inuit were scheduled to hold another referendum in November 1992 to ratify the terms of the land claim settlement agreed in December 1991.
A further step towards the creation of an Inuit homeland had been taken on April 27 when government and Inuit negotiators announced that they had initialled the Nunavut Political Accord.
The Accord, negotiated in accordance with the December 1991 agreement, dealt with the powers of a future Nunavut government, its institutions and financing.
It also provided for the appointment of a 10-member Nunavut implementation commission to deal with issues arising during the transition process, leading to the formal creation of the homeland by April 1999.
AMERICAS
CUBA
Relations with Russia
In the first meeting between Cuban and Russian government representatives since the disintegration of the Soviet Union, First Deputy Foreign Minister Alcibiades Hidaldo met with his Russian counterpart, Deputy Foreign Minister Georgy Mamedov, in Moscow on May 12.
A Cuban Foreign Ministry briefing afterwards stated that the talks had laid a new basis for bilateral relations, both sides having agreed to cast off the "ideological narrowness of the past" in favour of a new "mutually advantageous base" in keeping with "the possibilities and real interests" of both parties.
Recognizing the need to accelerate the drafting of a new model of commercial and economic co-operation, Cuba and Russia had signed an agreement under which Cuba would supply 1,000,000 tonnes of sugar in exchange for between 1,800,000 and 1,900,000 tonnes of oil in 1992.
It was emphasized that this barter was worked out in accordance with world prices.
At a news conference on May 5 a member of the Cuban Communist Party political bureau, Carlos Lage Dávila, stated that projected imports for 1992 were expected to be 58 per cent down on 1991 and that imported fuel would total 6,000,000 tonnes compared with the previous "usual" annual figure of 13,300,000 tonnes.
Most critically, the island's main export crop, sugar, was expected to total only 5,500,000 tonnes in 1992, compared with 7,600,000 tonnes in 1991, due to a 30 per cent drop in fuel supplies since 1990.
Imprisonment of dissidents
Indamiro Restano and Maria Elena Aparicio, both leaders of the illegal Harmonious Social Democratic Movement, were sentenced to 10 and seven years' imprisonment respectively on May 26.
They were accused of "rebellion" and of establishing the Movement to attract supporters for the purpose of promoting activities, including the use of violence, intended to "destroy the socialism prevailing in Cuba" .
The sentences were condemned as "excessive" by Western diplomats.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Tightening of sanctions
The Organization of American States (OAS), meeting on May 17 in Nassau, the capital of the Bahamas, agreed to step up trade sanctions in a renewed attempt to persuade the military-backed provisional government to restore constitutional rule.
The existing trade embargo, imposed following the September 1991 military coup [see pp. 38430; 38522-23], had failed to produce concessions, and had apparently provided opportunities for the rich pro-coup elite and sections of the army to profit from widespread smuggling, but there was evidence that it had had a devastating impact on Haiti's economy.
The majority of the population had been reduced to a state of extreme poverty, an estimated 150,000 people had lost their jobs, and famine was reported in the north-west region.
The flow of refugees attempting to reach the USA by boat had increased accordingly [see below].
The new sanctions (i) barred from all ports in the hemisphere ships delivering oil and other commercial cargoes to Haiti;(ii) stipulated that commercial air flights could not transport goods; and (iii) ended the issuing of travel visas, withdrawing those which were still outstanding.
However, communications and diplomatic links were not cut, and US businesses with assembly operations in Haiti were allowed to continue operating.
The OAS requested the European Communities (EC) to impose a trade embargo, but EC diplomats at the meeting stated that an embargo would contravene the Lomé Convention (under which the EC accorded preferential trading status to African, Caribbean and Pacific countries), and that the EC did not have the legal authority to order companies not to trade with Haiti.
Tripartite accord
The Chamber of Deputies on May 21 ratified a tripartite accord already approved by the Senate, which had been signed by the army, the provisional government and the leaders of the bicameral legislature on May 8.
The accord made provision for a new prime minister and a "national consensus Cabinet" to negotiate with the OAS for the lifting of sanctions.
It envisaged an independent council to organize elections, although no timetable was provided.
No mention was made of the February 1992 US-sponsored Washington accord between the legislature and President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, providing for the latter's return to power [see pp. 38758; 38808].
Pro-Aristide deputies of the National Front for Change and Democracy (FNCD) had boycotted the Senate and Chamber of Deputies sessions.
Secondary schools were seriously disrupted by pro-Aristide protests throughout May.
A general strike on May 21, called by 29 trade unions demanding Aristide's return, received little visible support in the capital, Port-au-Prince, but seven students and one teacher were reported to have been arrested.
The Ministry of National Education announced on May 25 that all schools would be closed "temporarily" .
The same day a dissident group of rank and file soldiers called on the army commanders to withdraw from politics.
The dissident group, believed to be 40 in number, which held its first formal meeting on May 26, was denounced by Army C.-in -C.
Lt.-Gen.
Raoul Cédras, who claimed that none of the group was soldiers.
Increased US restrictions on refugees
US President Bush announced on May 28 that Haitian "boat people" intercepted at sea by the US Coastguard would be returned immediately to Haiti.
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata, stated that she was "deeply disturbed" by the decision, which was denounced by US human rights groups as racist and as a violation of national and international law.
Previously, the refugees had been taken to the US Guantánamo naval base on Cuba for screening prior to being offered temporary political asylum or, as in the majority of cases, repatriated as "economic" migrants.
More than 35,000 had fled Haiti since the coup but only 9,000 had been admitted to the USA to have their cases further examined.
The US administration claimed that the recent dramatic increase in the numbers of refugees far exceeded the total of 12,500 who could be accommodated at Guantánamo.
The refugee camp there was said to be acting as a "magnet" , encouraging more Haitians to put to sea, and it was confirmed that the camp would be phased out.
AMERICAS
ST LUCIA
New St Lucia Cabinet
**John Compton Prime Minister, Finance, Planning and Development
**George Mallet Deputy Prime Minister, Foreign Affairs, Trade, Industry and Home Affairs
**Stephenson King Health and Local Government
**Romanus Lansiquot Tourism, Public Utilities and National Mobilization
**Louis George Labour, Education and Culture
*Ira D'Auvergne Agriculture, Lands, Fisheries and Forestry
**Desmond Braithwaite Community development, Co-operatives, Youth, Sports and Social Affairs Gregory Avril Communications, Works and Transport
*Lorraine Williams Attorney General and Legal Affairs
*Rufus Bousquet Minister of State for Trade and Industry
*Edward Innocent Minister of State for Youth, Sports and Co-operatives
*Michael Pilgrim Minister of state in the Office of the Prime Minister
*New appointment.
**Altered or additional responsibilities.
New Cabinet
Following the emphatic victory of his United Workers' Party (UWP) in the April 27 general election [see p. 38859], Prime Minister John Compton appointed a new Cabinet on May 4, which contained five new ministers, including Lorraine Williams, the first woman to hold the post of Attorney General.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Guadalajara explosion aftermath
Carlos Rivera Aceves of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) was elected by the Jalisco state legislature on May 1 to be interim state Governor in place of disgraced PRI hardliner Guillermo Cosio Vidaurri.
Cosio, 62, had on April 30 taken a 12-month "leave of absence" , one of Mexico's unwritten political courtesies allowing a public official to leave office voluntarily rather than be removed by presidential decree or through legal action.
His removal, known to have been sanctioned by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, followed a public uproar when he attempted to exonerate state and local officials after explosions in the sewers of the city of Guadalajara on April 22 had left 200 people dead and caused widespread devastation [see p. 38859].
Residents had been warned of an explosion, he claimed, but had "acted like children" and failed to obey instructions given to them.
The Guadalajara explosion led to the arrest, on charges of criminal negligence, of four local executives of the state oil company PEMEX, the city's mayor Enrique Day Flores (who had gone into hiding), the Jalisco Secretary for State and Rural Development Aristo Mejía Durán, and three directors of Guadalajara's water and sewage system.
IMF credit
The IMF announced on May 21 that it had agreed to the government's request to extend for an additional year its current three-year extended arrangement granted in 1989.
The original credit of SDR3,263.4 million (about US$5,131 million), granted in May 1989, was increased by SDR466,200,000 (about $653 million).
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Coup rumours
President Jorge Serrano Elias on May 20 publicly dismissed the possibility of a military coup, rumours of which had been widely circulating in recent weeks.
A spate of bombings and bomb threats in the capital, Guatemala City, was believed to be the work of "dissident" military officers, in league with right-wing elements in the business sector, aimed at forcing Serrano to halt peace negotiations with the left-wing Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity (URNG) guerrillas and to drop his tax reform plans.
There were also fears that public disenchantment with current economic austerity policies, and with widespread corruption in both the public and private sectors, could be used by the military to justify a seizure of power, in line with the abortive February coup attempt in Venezuela [see pp. 38759-60]and the successful military-backed coup of President Alberto Keinya Fujimori in Peru on April 5 [see pp. 38846-47].
Cabinet changes
In a move interpreted by analysts as a concession to the right, Serrano had dismissed four key ministers, all members of the ruling Social Action Movement (MAS), on April 27, replacing them with non-politicians with business experience in the private sector.
Public Health and Social Welfare Minister Miguel Angel Montepeque Contreras, a founder member of MAS who was known to cherish presidential ambitions, was replaced by Eusebio del Cid Peralta.
Culture and Sports Minister Antulio Castillo Barajas was replaced by Eunice Lima Shaul, Energy and Mines Minister Carlos Leonel Hurtarte Cano by César Fernández, and Rural and Urban Development Minister Manolo Bendfeldt Alvarez by Ricardo Castillo Sinibaldi.
Also dismissed was Manuel Conde Orellana, Private Secretary to the Presidency, who was replaced by Castillo Barajas.
Conde had been Serrano's closest adviser and was a major negotiator in peace talks with the guerrillas, a role which he was to retain but with his authority sharply diminished.
The peace process remained stalled due to continued disagreements on how human rights violations should be investigated [see also p. 38758].
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Peace process
The Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) on May 27 rejoined the Commission for the Consolidation of Peace (Copaz) following a government pledge to investigate the shooting and serious wounding of an FMLN bodyguard.
Despite official denials the FMLN blamed the shooting on the paramilitary police, and had responded by announcing on May 19 that it was on "a state of alert" and was withdrawing from Copaz, the body set up in March to oversee the implementation of the detailed peace treaty signed by the FMLN and the government in January [see p. 38716].
Tension had mounted throughout the country in recent months as each side accused the other of failing to fulfil the terms of the peace agreement [see p. 38809].
Defending its decision not to disarm 20 per cent of its forces by May 1, the FMLN claimed that the government had yet to disband the paramilitary National Guard and Treasury Police.
The National Assembly in late April had removed the public security functions of these two paramilitary formations; in practice, the former now guarded national borders and the latter had been transformed into an internal military police.
In line with the peace treaty, however, both should have been replaced by a new national civil police force, and the FMLN claimed that the government had deliberately withheld the necessary resources for this to be accomplished.
The government, however, attributed the delays to "technical" difficulties and said that in late May the National Guard and Treasury Police would be "concentrated" in 62 locations.
The FMLN also accused the government of (i) obstructing the process of transferring to former guerrillas the land abandoned by its former owners; and (ii) failing to issue a decree conferring legal status on the FMLN as a political party [see below].
The government in turn accused the FMLN of compiling a dishonest inventory of the number of weapons it held and of having staged illegal land occupations after the signing of the peace treaty in order to boost its land tenure claims.
It described as exaggerated the FMLN's claim that it controlled 5,000 sq km of territory — a quarter of the country.
It also insisted that the FMLN could not be granted political status until it had disarmed.
Due to the problems with implementing the peace process, it was reported on May 22 that the complement of 290 military personnel who formed part of the UN Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) mission would not be reduced in June but would continue their duties until September.
Formation of FMLN as political party
At a symbolic rally, held on May 23 in the capital San Salvador, the FMLN transformed itself into a political party.
The FMLN radio station Venceremos described this as marking the reintegration of the guerrillas into civilian society.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Joint struggle for land
In mid-May the government, in a largely symbolic gesture, awarded rights to 800 plots of land close to the capital Managua to re-armed right-wing "contra" rebels recontras and re-armed left-wing Sandinista recompas.
In recent weeks the two groups had buried their differences to stage joint armed protests across the country.
They had ceased operations in February 1992 on the basis of government's pledges to provide land and credits, and were now demanding that these pledges be honoured.
Calling themselves revueltos ( "those mixed together" ), they blocked roads, including the main highway to Honduras, occupied towns, in particular such key centres as Matagalpa and Jinotega, took over public buildings and occupied farms.
In clashes with the Sandinista People's Army (EPS) and the national police, several people were reported to have been killed and dozens injured, especially in the districts of Cebaco, Ocotal, Estelí, Masaya, León and Chinandega.
The first phase of the disarmament of the re-armed groups of both sides had begun on Jan. 21 and had concluded with the demobilization of the high commands of the recontras and recompas on Feb. 10-15.
A second phase was concluded on March 20 and a third phase, scheduled to end on April 25, had been extended into May due to the large amounts of weapons in the hands of civilians which needed to be destroyed.
According to EPS figures released on May 28, a total of 12,627 recontras and 9,278 recompas had been demobilized during the first two phases and 22,197 infantry weapons and 215 support weapons had been currently destroyed.
The number of revueltos was estimated at 4,000.
On May 5 the leaders of the revueltos met with the Presidency Minister Antonio Lacayo Oyanguren and the former President and leader of the main opposition Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN), Daniel Ortega Saavedra.
This meeting resulted in a government pledge to speed up the meeting of the revueltos' demands.
The FSLN, an informal supporter of the government's national reconstruction plan, had publicly backed the demands but strongly criticized their methods.
Criticism of President's policies within ruling UNO coalition
Within the ruling National Opposition Union (UNO) coalition there was growing criticism of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, and of her inner Cabinet of advisors headed by Lacayo, on the grounds that she had made an "illegitimate and immoral marriage" with the FSLN.
At least six of the 14 UNO member parties were thought likely to support the formation of a new opposition grouping, within which Vice-President Virgilio Godoy Reyes was expected to be a leading figure.
In late April Alfredo César the President of the National Assembly and (like Godoy) an open opponent of Lacayo, had announced that he was planning to introduce a bill to "review" thousands of land rights decisions made by the former Sandinista government.
In September 1991 Chamorro had blocked a similar bill passed by the Assembly in August [see p. 38432].
New Interior minister
Interior Minister Carlos Hurtado, had resigned on April 2 citing personal health problems, although it was widely known that he was hostile to Chamorro's and Lacayo's policy of co-operating with the Sandinistas.
Alfredo Mendieta was appointed as interim Interior Minister.
Death of former contra leader
A leading former contra leader, Israel Galeano, 38, known as Commander Franklin, and one of the last to surrender after the victory of Chamorro in the February 1990 presidential election, was killed in a car accident near Matagalpa on May 4.
He had resigned in January 1992 from a presidential committee with responsibility for handling problems relating to the repatriation and distribution of land to demobilized contras.
AMERICAS
PANAMA
Social unrest
In what was described locally as the worst social unrest since the US military invasion of December 1989 [see pp. 37112-13], demonstrators clashed with heavily armed police on May 5-11 in the Caribbean coastal city of Colón.
At least 30 people were reported to have been seriously wounded and a further 23 were arrested.
On May 8 the government imposed a curfew on the city.
The violence originated when the Movement of the Colón Province Unemployed (Modesco) mobilized demonstrators to condemn official corruption and to demand that the government act to reduce mass unemployment in the city and surrounding region, the poorest in the country.
They also demanded that President Guillermo Endara Gallimany, 56, make a personal visit to the old part of the city to see for himself the severe level of poverty the population was being forced to endure.
Endara's wife, Ana Mae Díaz de Endara, 25, whose growing influence over government appointments and policy was widely resented, was declared persona non grata in the region after publicly stating following the Colón riots that the police should have fired into the groups of demonstrators.
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Demands for reduction of presidential term
Humberto Celli, president of the ruling Democratic Action (AD) party, announced on May 22 that the leaderships of both the AD and the main opposition Social Christian Party (COPEI) had agreed the previous day on a joint "platform of understanding" .
This was to be drawn up by commissions of both parties in the belief that it would evolve into a "national agreement" , supported by the business and trade union sectors and other political parties, which would extend beyond the term of the current government.
Analysts suggested that Celli's announcement was intended to counter the May 11 claim by opposition deputies and AD dissidents that they had collected more than 100 signatures from congressmen in favour of reducing the current term of President Carlos Andres Pérez and that of the legislature by one year (to four years), and also in favour of the use of the referendum as a permanent formula to guarantee the public's participation in political affairs.
Eduardo Fernández, the secretary-general of COPEI (two of whose members had joined a "Cabinet of national unity" on March 10 — see pp. 38809-10), warned on May 12 that such a reduction in the presidential term would create the danger of another military coup attempt like that of February [see pp. 38759-60].
Strikes
Strikes which began on May 11, involving workers in both the public and private sectors, escalated on May 14, when the involvement of merchant seamen raised fears that Venezuela's crucial oil exports would be badly affected.
The government blamed the unrest on the activities of several small left-wing groups intent on creating general instability; Douglas Bravo, a veteran of the 1960s guerrilla war and current leader of the Venezuelan Revolutionary Party (PRV), was arrested on May 28.
New Supreme Court President
Gonzalo Rodríguez Corro was elected on May 27, in an internal election, as the new President of the Supreme Court.
AMERICAS
SURINAM
Suspension of guerrilla hostilities
The leaders of Surinam's two principal rebel groups announced on May 5 that they would suspend hostilities.
The Surinamese Liberation Army (SLA) led by Ronnie Brunswijk had maintained a seven-year insurgency campaign (punctuated by short-lived peace accords).
The SLA had accused the other main guerrilla group, the Tucayana Amazonicas led by Thomas Sabajo, of furthering its own ambitions by accepting guns and ammunition from the army.
The army, which had overthrown the government of President Ramsewak Shankar in December 1990 [see pp. 37912-13], apparently perceived the SLA as the greater threat and had been keen to isolate it.
Romeo Venetiaan, President of the Peace Commission of the government of President Ronald Venetiaan, described the decision as a "distinct development" and promised development aid to the interior jungle regions controlled by these groups and inhabited by an estimated 50,000 indigenous people, effectively disenfranchised and living in largely autonomous village communities.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Arrest warrants for former guerrillas
Antonio Navarro Wolff, president of the April 19 Movement Democratic Alliance (AD/M-19), announced on May 21 that he would call on the government to hold a plebiscite on whether an amnesty should be granted to former M-19 guerrillas who had participated in an assault on the Palace of Justice in the capital, Bogotá, on Nov. 6-7, 1985, during which 106 people were killed [see pp. 34152-53; 34804-05].
M-19 had accepted a presidential amnesty and had demobilized in March 1990 [see p. 37311].
However, on May 19 a judge had issued warrants for the arrest of the former guerrilla movement's general staff in connection with the 1985 attack.
AD/M-19 leaders accused the government, in accepting this ruling, of letting political decisions be taken by judges.
Navarro Wolff declared AD/M-19 to be in a state of emergency and it was reported that its leaders had been concentrated in one place to resist arrest.
The authorities took no immediate action to implement the arrest warrants, and Attorney General Carlos Gustavo Arrieta stated on May 22 that the Constitution and the law could not be used as "instruments to promote retaliations which neither society nor its institutions needed" .
Health Minister Camilo González Pozo, a member of AD/M-19, said that he would resign if the arrest warrants were enforced.
Guerrilla and army offensives
In what military sources described as the fiercest fighting for months, an estimated 40 left-wing guerrillas and 20 soldiers died on May 23-25 in clashes around Dabeiba, in Antioquia province, 600 km north-west of Bogotá in the foothills of the Andes.
Throughout May there had been an increase in army counterinsurgency missions and in attacks by the guerrilla Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and National Liberation Army (ELN), combined in the Simón Bolívar National Guerrilla Co-ordinating Board (CNGSB).
This followed an announcement on May 6 that peace negotiations between the government and the CNGSB in Mexico, broken off in March, would not be resumed.
On May 28, President Cesár Gaviria Trujillo stated that he had virtually ruled out any possibility of reaching an agreement with the guerrillas, and that the actions of the armed forces were aimed at "wiping them out" .
Arrest of leading drug traffickers
A leading member of the Medellín drug cartel, Javier "Tito" Parco Cardonma, was arrested on May 21 in Mexico City.
This followed the arrest in Colombia on April 25 of Ivan Urdinola, considered by US anti-drugs officials as one of the most ruthless of a new and powerful group of drug traffickers linked to the Cali cartel.
AMERICAS
ECUADOR
Presidential and congressional elections
Two right-wing candidates faced a run-off ballot on July 5 following an inconclusive result in the presidential elections on May 17.
The new president was due to take office on Aug. 10.
Sixto Durán Ballén of the recently formed Republican Unity Party (PUR), a coalition of conservative parties, won 36.1 per cent of the vote to finish ahead of Jaime Nebot Saadi, the president of the Social Christian Party (PSC), who won 26.2 per cent.
Abdalá Bucaram Ortiz, the director of the Ecuadorean Roldosist Party (PRE), came third with 20.7 per cent, and Raúl Baca Carbo, candidate of the ruling Democratic Left (ID), came a distant fourth with 8.4 per cent .
There was a total of 12 candidates; although voting was obligatory an estimated 25 per cent of the 5,700,000 electorate abstained.
Polling passed off relatively peacefully.
Durán, 70, a former mayor of the capital, Quito, and an unsuccessful candidate for the presidency on two previous occasions, received most votes in the central highlands but also drew significant support in the western coastal regions.
Nebot, 46, a former governor of the western Guayas province and the representative of powerful commercial interests, received most of his support in the Pacific coastal region.
Both the leading candidates advocated free market policies and foreign investment to revive the stagnant economy.
Bucaram, 46, of Lebanese extraction, was a former mayor of the port city of Guayaquil, the capital of Guayas.
Accused among other things of being a gangster, a drug trafficker and an unapologetic admirer of Adolf Hitler, he had fled abroad to Panama in 1986 to avoid charges of embezzling public funds.
He returned under a congressional amnesty to contest the 1988 presidential elections, when he narrowly lost the second round run-off ballot to the ID's Rodrigo Borja Cevallos [see p. 36097].
Congress had granted him another amnesty to contest the 1992 election.
Noted for his populist class warfare rhetoric, he retained strong support among the rural and urban poor, especially in Guayaquil,
The opposition attacked the ruling ID as the only government in Latin America which continued to insist on state-led growth rather than market-orientated economic reforms.
Despite falling export earnings from oil products, government policy was blamed for modest growth of 2.9 per cent in 1991, for annual inflation of 50 per cent, for a 30 per cent underemployment rate and the fact that an estimated 70 per cent of the population was living below the poverty line.
In preparation for the second round, Nebot, presenting an image of an energetic young leader, made public overtures to Bucarám on May 16 which hinted at the possibility of a populist alliance.
Nebot received the support of the right-wing (PSC) former President León Febres Cordero Rivadeneira, arrested in January 1990 on corruption charges [see p. 37482], who on May 17 was elected mayor of Guayaquil with 70 per cent of the vote.
Durán, projecting the image of elder statesman, was expected to attract votes from the left in the run-off election.
Congressional election results
In elections on May 17 to the 77-seat unicameral Congress, the PSC emerged as the largest party with 21 seats, followed by the PRE with 13 and the PUR with 12.
The PUR's allies, the Conservative Party (PCE), won six seats.
According to analysts, personal rivalry between Nebot and Durán made a right-wing coalition between the PRE and PSC unlikely, despite their common economic beliefs.
Centrist and left-of-centre parties did modestly, mirroring their reported poor performance in simultaneous local elections, and were not expected to form an effective alliance due to entrenched inter-party animosities.
The ID won only seven congressional seats, the Popular Democracy Party (DP) five, the Popular Democratic Movement (MPD) four, the Ecuadorian Socialist Party (PSE) three, and the Liberal Radical Party (PLR) two; the Concentration of Popular Forces (CFP), the National Liberation Party (PLN), the Alfaroist Radical Front (FRA), and the Ecuadorian Popular Revolutionary Action (APRE) each received one seat.
Legal title to land for indigenous peoples
President Borja ended months of hostility between the government and the Quechua, Achuar and Shiwiar tribes, representing 148 communities and an estimated 20,000 indigenous people, when on May 13 he granted them legal title to more than 3,000,000 acres of homelands in the eastern province of Pastaza.
The negotiated settlement was hailed as a historic breakthrough which would protect the ecology of the rainforest, but it was bitterly opposed by non-Indian landowners who feared that they would be driven off and their properties confiscated.
Political analysts stated that Borja was able to make the land grants because he did not face re-election.
Indigenous organizations had threatened to boycott the presidential and congressional elections unless their demands were met.
AMERICAS
PERU
Post-coup election pledge
The Organization of American States (OAS), holding a special meeting of foreign ministers in the Bahamas on May 18, urged a swift return to democracy in Peru but declined to impose sanctions.
President Alberto Keinya Fujimori, in an unexpected address to the meeting, defended his April 5 presidential coup [see pp. 38846-47], but promised direct elections within five months to establish a "Democratic Constituent Congress" .
He invited the OAS to monitor the vote and to provide technical assistance to ensure its honesty.
Only days before, he had maintained his opposition to an elected constituent assembly, and had refused to receive an OAS human rights delegation which wanted to investigate the clash between the police and Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrillas in the Miguel Castro Castro prison in the capital Lima [see below].
Fujimori's change of heart reportedly came after a visit to Peru on May 16 by the Uruguayan Foreign Minister Héctor Gros Espiell, as an OAS emissary.
Close advisors were also thought to have warned him that unless a compromise solution was found, crucial funding for the IMF-approved economic adjustment programme would be severed and the country would be diplomatically isolated.
One meeting of the Andean Pact, of which Peru was a leading member, had already been cancelled.
Bernard Aronson, US Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, had reportedly issued similar warnings during a meeting with Fujimori on May 2 in Lima.
Aronson also met representatives of human rights organizations and leaders of the opposition.
Despite Fujimori's assurances to the OAS, US Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger stated that the USA would adopt a wait-and-see attitude on whether or not to restore all or part of US$320,000,000 in suspended economic and security aid.
Radio Canada International (Montreal) reported on May 20 that Canada would suspend economic aid until democracy was restored.
Panama suspended diplomatic relations on May 26, but cited as its reasons Peru's granting of asylum to alleged military opponents of the Panamanian government, as well as official disapproval of the April coup.
Panama later insisted that bilateral trade links would not be broken.
Opposition response
Responding after the OAS meeting, foremr First Vice-President Máximo San Román Caceres, who had been named "constitutional" president by the dissolved Congress [see p. 38846], dismissed Fujimori's proposals as "unilateral, arbitrary and dictatorial" and as a "meaningless manoeuvre" to confuse the OAS.
An opposition communiqué released on May 20, however, expressed a willingness to hold talks with the government in order to pave the way for a return to democracy.
The prospect of talks diminished after Fujimori's announcement on May 24 that the proposal for the "constitutional congress" would be put to a national plebescite on July 6.
The opposition stated that this was tantamount to "legitimizing the coup" and on May 28 set conditions for future dialogue, stating that it should be based on a commitment to convene a "free, sovereign constituent congress without restriction" .
They announced that the dialogue should begin on June 8 and that elections for the new Congress should be held on Nov. 8.
Fujimori had already intimated that the size of such a Congress would be reduced from 240 to 80 deputies and that the "direct participation of the citizenry" would be encouraged in order to counteract the "the traditional elitist dialogues of the party chieftains and union bosses" .
On May 13 he had enraged the opposition by dismissing the president and vice-president of the National Electoral Board and naming César Polack Romero to be its new head.
It was reported on local radio on May 23 that a commission had already been established to draft the rules and basis for the Democratic Constituent Congress.
It was to be headed by former UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar and would include representatives of political parties, the government, the National Peace Commission and the Church.
Jorge del Castillo of the main opposition American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA, whose secretary-general Alan García Pérez had gone to ground following the April presidential coup — see p. 38846), announced on May 15 that the party would not participate in the municipal elections, still scheduled to take place in November 1992.
New Attorney General
The appointment of a new "temporary" Attorney General, Blanca Nerida Golán Maguina, was announced in late May.
The previous holder of the post, Hugo Ernesto Denegri Cornejo, had himself been appointed only shortly after the coup [see p. 38846].
Following the resignation in late April of the Foreign Minister, Augusto Blacker Miller [see p. 38846], further changes to the Council of Ministers were made and a list was published on May 10.
Raid on prison
The top security Miguel Castro Castro prison in Lima, two cell blocks of which were controlled by Sendero Luminoso guerrillas, came under assault by armed paramilitary police from May 6 until May 9, when 451 Sendero prisoners were officially said to have surrendered.
The government later announced that 35 prisoners and two policemen had been killed and that another 20 had been seriously wounded; other sources, however, gave much higher casualty figures.
There had been fierce resistance when an attempt was made on May 6 forcibly to remove 120 female Sendero prisoners to another prison.
The women, armed with smuggled weapons, explosives and bottles of acid, were joined by male inmates.
In the final assault on May 9, police blew a hole in a wall surrounding the guerrilla-controlled area.
Unofficial figures put the number of dead at 39, with 75 wounded and Sendero sources abroad claimed that 80 guerrillas had been killed and that over 60 were missing.
A lawyer, Jorge Cartagena, who had represented some of the Sendero leaders, claimed that more than 150 people had still to be accounted for.
On May 12 the director of the Lima morgue showed reporters the bodies of 36 people whose autopsies apparently showed that they had been shot dead after the siege had finished.
This gave credence to the claims of some transferred Sendero women prisoners who told human rights workers that they had seen at least two women surrender who were later officially reported to have died in the fighting.
One of them, Janeth Sánchez Talavera, was a journalist believed to have been close to Sendero leader Abimael Gúzman Renoso.
Other prominent Sendero members, also officially said to have been killed during the fighting, included Tito Travesano Valle, Yovanka Trujillo Pardave and Deodato Cruzatt Juárez.
New anti-terrorist law
As part of Fujimori's attempt to crack down on Sendero Luminoso, prison terms for guerrilla offences were increased on May 5, and the penal code was significantly modified, eliminating a clause dealing specifically with "disappearances" .
Opposition critics claimed that since the practice of making people "disappear" was mostly carried out by the military, the new law effectively granted it immunity from future prosecution and the power to abduct anyone with impunity.
Post-coup Peruvian Cabinet
**Oscar de la Puente Raygada Prime Minister, Foreign Affairs Carlos Boloña Bohr Economy and Finance Gen. Juan Briones Davila Interior
*Fernando Vega Santa Gadea Justice Gen. E. P. Víctor Malca Villanueva Defence
*Alberto Varillas Montenegro Education
*Victor Paredes Guerra Health
*Absalon Vásquez Villanueva Agriculture
**Augusto Antoniolli Vásquez Labour and Social Promotion
**Alfredo Ross Antezana Transport and Communications, Housing and Construction Jaime Yoshiyama Tanaka Energy and Mines Jaime Augustín Sobero Taira Fisheries
*Jorge Camet Industry, Commerce, Tourism and Integration
*New appointment.
**Altered responsibilities.
<NXR = Last article pp. 38846-47; reference article p. 38248.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
COB congress
The ninth congress of the main trade union confederation, the Bolivian Workers' Confederation (COB), held in the southern (legal) capital of Sucre on May 4-13, ended with the approval of a political programme which, as reported by the Spanish EFE news agency, advocated popular insurrection.
The congress urged that a movement of opposition, confronting the government's current austerity policies and privatization plans, "should end in a war involving the entire population — a method that must be the responsibility of the masses — to take over power" .
The document also proposed the defence of state enterprises, the expulsion of "Yankee troops" and the rejection of government anti-drug plans to eradicate traditional coca leaf production, which threatened the livelihood of an estimated 60,000 peasant farmers.
In its choice of language at least, the programme marked a break with the COB's accommodation with the ruling Patriotic Accord (AP) coalition government which followed the Jan. 2 general strike [see p. 38718].
However, the election of Oscar Salasas the COB's new executive secretary, an ex-Communist Party militant and the current leader of the small Democratic Socialist Alternative party (ASD), indicated that the moderates held the initiative rather than the more militant sections.
=
In an address to the congress, Ricardo Parodi, the secretary of international relations of the General Confederation of Peruvian Workers (CGTP) and a representative of the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU — previously dominated by trade unions of the former Soviet bloc countries but with numerous affiliates from Third-World countries), stated that "classic" and "traditional" protest and struggles had to be accompanied by "realistic" and "concrete" proposals to halt the spread of right-wing neo-liberal policies across the continent.
He also warned delegates of the danger of the April 5 presidential coup in Peru [see p. 38846]being repeated elsewhere and called for support for Cuba in the face of increased US economic sanctions [see pp. 38858-59].
AMERICAS
CHILE
Aylwin's US visit
President Patricio Aylwin Azócar was told by US President Bush on May 14, during his first official visit to the USA since taking office in March 1990, that Chile would be the next country with which the US would negotiate a free trade agreement, after the completion of talks between the USA, Mexico and Canada to establish a North American Free Trade Area (NAFTA — see p. 38761).
A NAFTA agreement was not expected until after the November 1992 US presidential elections.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Corruption allegations against President
The Congress on May 27 approved the creation of a special commission of inquiry to look into allegations of corruption made by Pedro Collor de Mello, 39, against his elder brother, President Fernando Collor de Mello, 42, and Paulo Cesar Farias (known as PC), his 1989 election campaign treasurer.
With the UN Earth Summit due to open in Rio in early June, the government tried to minimize the impact of the crisis, describing it as a domestic matter.
Pedro Collor stated in a television interview on the same day that he would not repeat the charges against his brother in court for lack of proof.
This news sent stock markets rising after serious losses over recent days due to fears that the President could face impeachment proceedings.
However, Pedro Collor did claim that Farias, through a mutual friend, had attempted to bribe him with US$25,000,000 to leave the country until the end of President Collor's term of office in 1995.
In an extensive interview published in the leading news magazine Veja on May 24, Pedro Collor had claimed that Farias had pocketed US$15,000,000 of the US$100,000,000 election campaign fund and continued to broker contracts between private companies and the government, sharing commissions with the President.
He stated that supporting evidence was on a videotape stored in a New York bank vault.
He claimed that his intention was not to bring down the government but merely to remind his brother of his election pledge to root out official corruption.
He went on, however, to accuse the President of having been a habitual cocaine user in the 1970s, and of attempting to seduce his (Pedro's) wife.
Leda Collor de Mello said that her son Pedro was suffering from a "severe emotional crisis" , and removed him as the director of the family's media empire, whose pre-eminence in the north-eastern state of Alagoas was in some quarters reported as being threatened by business activities of Farias.
To rebut his mother's allegations, Pedro Collor subsequently consulted medical specialists and was passed mentally and physically fit.
President Collor, in a nationwide television broadcast on May 26, announced that he had ordered the Justice and Economy Ministers to open a police inquiry to reveal the full truth and examine the "false and foolish" allegations against him.
He also announced that he would press charges against his brother for the "moral damage" which he had caused.
The Attorney General immediately requested that Pedro Collor hand over his videotaped evidence.
Killing of Governor
Edmundo Pinto, Governor of the western Amazonian state of Acre, was shot dead in a Sao Paulo hotel on May 17, two days before he was due to testify to a congressional hearing on corruption involving officials in his own state.
A few hours previously he had reportedly made a videotape recording, accusing people of wanting to kill him.
AMERICAS
CENTRAL AMERICA
Joint European tour
The Presidents of Costa Rica, Honduras and Panama undertook a joint European tour on May 19-22, when they attended top-level meetings with the UK, French and Italian governments and with representatives of the European Communities (EC) in Brussels.
Their three-pronged diplomacy followed proposals made on April 7 by the EC Commission (which still required approval by EC member governments) to introduce an EC-wide quota on banana imports from Latin and Central America.
So-called "dollar bananas" from Costa Rica, Honduras and Panama and also from Colombia, Ecuador and Guatemala accounted for over 50 per cent of EC banana imports according to World Bank figures.
A 20 per cent tariff was already imposed on "dollar banana" imports into the EC (though not on those from African, Caribbean and Pacific — ACP — countries) except in Germany (which consumed 1,300,000 tonnes of bananas a year of an EC-wide total of 3,300,000 tonnes) where no tariff was levied.
The German government reportedly opposed the quotas.
President Rafael Leonardo Callejas of Honduras said that the economic prospects of exclusion were "unacceptable and catastrophic for us" and that Caribbean producers were very inefficient.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
Group of Rio agreements with EC
On May 28-29 in the Chilean capital, Santiago, the Foreign Ministers of eight Rio Group countries (Panama and Peru being suspended) and their counterparts from four European Community (EC) member countries (Spain, Portugal, the United Kingdom and Ireland) signed four agreements on joint investment in Latin America, to be financed over the next three years by a line of credit from the European Investment Bank (EIB) worth US$900,000,000.
They also agreed to create a commission of experts to tackle problems arising from the different trade policies adopted by Latin American and EC countries.
To stimulate regional economic development, the EC agreed advanced technology transfers to offices located in Argentina, Colombia, Chile, Uruguay and Venezuela, and also to support training for small and medium-sized businesses.
The ministers expressed their solidarity with the Venezuelan government, which survived a coup attempt in February [see pp. 38759-60].
They called for a return to democracy in Peru following the April presidential coup [see pp. 38846-47]and declared themselves "profoundly preoccupied" by the political situation in Haiti and Cuba.
AMERICAS
CAYMAN ISLANDS
In late May Michael Gore, currently UK High Commissioner in the Bahamas, was appointed to succeed Alan Scott as Governor with effect from Sept. 1.
AMERICAS
OAS
The Russian TASS news agency announced on May 15 that Russia had been granted observer status at the Organization of American States (OAS).
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Presidential, legislative and local elections
At the end of May Fidel Ramos and his supporters claimed victory in the Philippine presidential elections.
The official results of the May 11 contest were not expected until June, and then had to be endorsed by Congress, but, with an estimated 86 per cent of the votes counted, unofficial tallies showed Ramos leading his closest rivals, Eduardo "Danding" Cojuangco and former judge Miriam Defensor Santiago, by a comfortable but not extensive margin.
The four other presidential candidates were some distance behind.
A total of eight candidates had originally been registered for the presidential contest [see pp. 38768-69], but one, Joseph Estrada, had later decided to withdraw his candidature in favour of contesting the vice-presidency.
Ramos, a liberal Protestant from one of the country's most patrician families, had acquired a reputation for scrupulous honesty throughout his career.
Although in command of the Philippine Constabulary during the martial law years of the Marcos regime, he remained largely untainted by the corruption and nepotism which was characteristic of that period.
As acting Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces Ramos had led the military mutiny in early 1986 in support of President Corazon Aquino which had finally driven Marcos from office.
Thereafter, as Chief of Staff under the new government and then Defence Secretary, his unswerving loyalty was the single most important factor in Aquino's defeat of the numerous coup attempts against her.
He resigned as Defence Secretary in July 1991 in order to pursue his presidential ambitions.
He left the ruling Laban ng Demokratikong Pilipino (LDP — Democratic Filipino Struggle Party) after he was defeated for the party's presidential nomination by Ramon Mitra, the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
In January Aquino acknowledged her debt to Ramos by endorsing him as her chosen successor for the presidency [see pp. 38728-29].
Election campaign and progress of count
The 90-day campaign began officially in early February and culminated in polling day on May 11.
By recent Philippine standards both the campaign and the process of voting were conducted in a peaceful and orderly fashion, with no reported instances of large-scale or systematic fraud.
As of May 21, the Commission on Elections (Comelec), the official watchdog agency of the electoral process, calculated that 103 people had been killed in election-related incidents.
One of the key themes of the campaign was the degree to which the country's recently re-established democratic process would be safe in the hands of any of the traditional party leaders, all of whom were widely perceived as personifying a political culture traditionally steeped in patronage and money.
Although the strong campaign of Cojuangco — a close associate of Marcos — illustrated the continuing strength of a powerful and wealthy political machine, it was considered highly significant that the other two front-runners of the campaign, Ramos and Santiago, both stood as outsiders who lacked the support of established political parties.
Early returns in the presidential contest showed Santiago leading Ramos by a narrow margin, with Cojuangco trailing some way behind in third place.
However, Santiago's early lead was due to heavy support in and around the Manila area, and as the count progressed, the unofficial returns showed her having slipped into third place behind Ramos and Cojuangco.
She reacted by claiming that the vote was being unfairly manipulated and, on May 23, began a protest fast to draw attention to the "rampant cheating" involved in the counting process.
She described her protest as a "fast to the death" , but abandoned her hunger strike on May 25 after an appeal to desist by Cardinal Jaime Sin, the Archbishop of Manila.
In an attempt to halt the confusion arising from different media tallies, Comelec had prohibited all unauthorized vote counts as of midday on May 15.
The order allowed only the Media Citizens Quick Count, a private organization accredited by Comelec, to tabulate unofficial early returns.
The Quick Count organization suffered from computer problems, however, and other unofficial tallies continued to leak out from the count.
Although the other results remained incomplete at the end of May, it appeared that Estrada was comfortably ahead of his rivals in the poll for Vice-President.
The LDP was believed to have won the bulk of the 17,000 congressional and local posts also being decided by the election.
This meant that whichever of the leading candidates was eventually declared president, he or she would have to face a legislature dominated by a rival party.
A further problem for the winner was that it appeared almost certain that the new President would have no more than 30 per cent of the total vote, and would, therefore, lack the sort of unequivocal popular mandate which Aquino had enjoyed.
The potential instability of the this position was heightened by uncertainty over how the eventual losers would respond to defeat.
Santiago had written to US President George Bush on May 17 complaining of "institutionalized tampering" with the count, and had threatened to orchestrate a campaign of civil disobedience to invalidate the election.
In the case of Cojuangco, who had shown no hesitation in spending lavishly in pursuit of his presidential ambitions, there were fears that he could attempt to overturn the result through armed insurrection.
When questioned about this possibility by Far Eastern Economic Review Ramos stated that "he has the organization; he has the capability; he has the experience" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Foreign relations
Talks with Russia over disputed territories
Japan's Foreign Minister Michio Watanabe visited Moscow for talks with his Russian counterpart, Andrei Kozyrev, on May 3-5, concerning the longstanding territorial dispute between the two countries over the four most southerly islands in the Kurile chain which had been occupied by the Soviet Union in August 1945.
Although they achieved no breakthrough, they reportedly agreed to begin a dialogue on security issues with a view to negotiating a draft peace treaty prior to Russian President Boris Yeltsin's visit to Japan, scheduled for Sept. 13-15.
Visit to France and Germany by Miyazawa
The Prime Minister, Kiichi Miyazawa, made a brief official trip to Europe in late April and early May, visiting France on April 29-30 and Germany on April 30-May 2.
In talks with both President François Mitterrand and Chancellor Helmut Kohl, Miyazawa was reported to have discussed economic and trade issues, but also to have appealed for support in Japan's territorial dispute with Russia.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Preliminary international inspection ofnuclear facilities
The North Korean government on May 4 submitted a thorough report on its nuclear industry to Hans Blix, the Director-General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
The move followed the signature and ratification of IAEA inspection accords [see p. 38818-19; 38863].
The report, which was more detailed than required, contained data on many previously unknown facilities and included information on a controversial installation at Yongbyon, 100 km north of Pyongyang, the capital.
The report defined the Yongbyon plant as a "radio-chemical laboratory" designed for research on separating very small quantities of uranium and plutonium as a means to control nuclear waste.
According to US intelligence claims, however, the Yongbyon facility was a nuclear reprocessing plant capable of producing weapons-grade plutonium.
Immediately after the report's submission the North Korean government did reverse its previously stated position by admitting that a small quantity of plutonium had been produced for experimental use only.
According to the report the country possessed four nuclear reactors.
These included an ageing Soviet-supplied 8-megawatt plant; a 50-megawatt and a 200-megawatt plant, both of which were still under construction; and a 5-megawatt natural uranium experimental facility, the existence of which had previously been unknown internationally.
The fuel for the plants came from several uranium mines located around the country.
The report also stated that there were longstanding moves to purchase at least three 400-600-megawatt reactors from the former Soviet Union, but that these had been subject to numerous delays.
The failure of Western intelligence to detect the 5-megawatt plant led some analysts to speculate that much of the country's real nuclear potential might remain hidden.
Others, however, believed that the North Korean government had exaggerated the extent of its nuclear programme in order to increase its diplomatic influence.
Although a full inspection of the sites was not due to be conducted until June, the North Korean authorities allowed Blix and a team of inspectors to make an immediate "courtesy visit" in mid-May.
At the conclusion of the six-day visit, on May 16, Blix held a press conference in Beijing, China, in which he gave details of his preliminary findings.
Speaking of the alleged reprocessing facility he stated that "if it were in operation and complete, then it would certainly in our terminology be called a reprocessing plant" .
He also found evidence, however, to support the contention that the country's nuclear power programme was designed only for civilian power generation.
This included the existence of electric power distribution grids in the vicinity of the reactors, the existence of which had been previously denied by Western intelligence officials.
Normalization talks with Japan
The seventh round of normalization talks with Japan was held in Beijing on May 14-15, although no significant progress was made on any of the outstanding issues.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Choice of ruling party's presidential candidate
A 6,713-delegate nominating convention of the ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP), held on May 19, chose Kim Young Sam as its candidate for the 1992 presidential elections.
Kim received 4,318 votes (66.6 per cent) compared with 2,214 (33.4 per cent ) cast for his only rival for the candidacy, Lee Jong Chan; there were 53 abstentions and 28 spoilt ballots.
The decision was greeted by violent demonstrations in Seoul and elsewhere as thousands of students denounced Kim as a traitor and demanded democratic reform and the disbanding of the DLP.
Kim, 65, was a former opposition leader who had contested the 1987 presidential elections against the country's current leader, President Roh Tae Woo.
In 1990 he merged his party with Roh's ruling Democratic Justice Party (DJP)— together with one other small opposition group — to form the DLP [see pp. 37187-88].
Although he immediately became favourite to succeed Roh as President when his term of office expired in February 1993, the delicate factional structure of the DLP meant that Roh was reluctant to endorse him as his chosen successor.
Kim's years as a dissident meant that he remained unpopular with many of those DLP members who were associated with the old ruling DJP.Moreover, as the DLP's executive chairman and the chief architect of the its March 1992 general election campaign, Kim was also extensively blamed for the party's poor showing.
Lee Jong Chan, 56, was a four-term legislator from Seoul and a former secretary-general of the DLP.
Although an accomplished politician he was hampered by his background as a member of the South Korean Central Intelligence Agency and as a graduate of the Korean Military Academy.
Two days before the convention, on May 17, Lee announced his withdrawal from the nomination, complaining that the result had been determined in advance by a series of backroom deals.
Following the formal election of Kim, Lee gave notice of his intention to contest the presidential elections as an independent.
The announcement made the prospect of a split in the DLP's conservative vote — already a possibility raised by the planned candidacy of Chung Ju Yung, the founder of the Hyundai business group and leader of the newly created Unification National Party — all the more real.
Kim's main opponent on the left was likely to be his erstwhile dissident colleague Kim Dae Jung who had also unsuccessfully contested the 1987 presidential elections.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Seventh round of Premiers' talks — Armed clash in Demilitarized Zone
The North Korean Premier, Yon Hyong Muk, met his Southern counterpart, Chung Won Shik, in Seoul, the South Korean capital, on May 6-7 for the seventh round of Premiers' talks [for sixth round see pp. 38766-67].
The two men signed agreements to open liaison offices at the peace village of Panmunjom on May 18 and to form three joint commissions to encourage military, economic and cultural exchange and co-operation.
They also agreed to exchange visits from some 100 senior citizens around Aug. 15, in an effort to reunite dispersed families.
The agreements, particularly that on the reunion of dispersed families, had not been expected by political commentators, but were seen as an important contribution towards providing some fresh momentum for the Premiers' talks which, after the dramatic progress of December 1991, had failed to make much progress in succeeding months.
The Premiers failed, however, to narrow their differences on the issue of nuclear inspections.
The issue was discussed further at the May 12 meeting of the Joint Nuclear Control Commission (JNCC) which had been established in March [see p. 38819].
Meetings of the newly established political, military, and exchanges and co-operation subcommittees took place on May 19, 25 and 30, respectively, but no significant progress was recorded.
Armed clash in DMZ
The most serious border incident for several years was reported to have occurred on May 22 in the Demilitarized Zone.
Three North Koreans were killed and two South Korean soldiers wounded after a heavily armed North Korean patrol was said to have infiltrated the DMZ and encountered a South Korean unit.
CHINA
Death of Marshal Nie
Marshal Nie Rongzhen, a founding member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA), died on May 14, aged 93.
Nie, the last of the PLA's 10 marshals, relinquished his Chinese Communist Party politburo post in 1985.
Nie was regarded as a political moderate close to "elder statesman" leader Deng Xiaoping; analysts said that his death was unlikely to have any major political impact.
Tibet
Amnesty International report — Visit by Dalai Lama to Australia
Amnesty International, the human rights organization, on May 20 issued a report on Tibet which accused the Chinese authorities of widespread human rights violations against Tibetan monks and nuns.
The exiled Tibetan spiritual leader, His Holiness Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, visited Australia in early May when he held talks with Prime Minister Paul Keating.
Keating told the Dalai Lama that while Australia recognized Chinese sovereignty over Tibet, his government would be forthright in speaking out against human rights abuses.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Visit by Premier to China
Prime Minister Dashiyn Byambasuren visited China in early May for talks with Chinese leaders, including Premier Li Peng, President Yang Shangkun and Chinese Communist Party general secretary Jiang Zemin.
Xinhua, the official Chinese news agency, reported on May 9 that the two sides had signed an agreement on economic co-operation and another on a loan to be provided by China to Mongolia.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Revision of sedition law
Taiwan's harsh sedition law (Article 100 of the criminal code) was revised on May 16.
President Lee Teng-hui signed into law a new revised article, under which discussion of Taiwanese independence or advocation of communism would no longer be a criminal offence.
Only those advocating acts of violent sedition would be liable for punishment under the criminal code.
A number of people convicted under Article 100 were subsequently released from prison, including Huang Hwa, Taiwan's most prominent dissident, on May 18.
Huang had been sentenced to 10 years in prison in 1990 after being found guilty of raising funds to promote Taiwanese independence [see p. 37917].
The Far Eastern Economic Review of May 28 reported that "more than a dozen" prisoners charged under Article 100 had been released.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
UK-Vietnamese agreement on return of refugees
Vietnam and the United Kingdom signed an agreement in Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, on May 12 which provided for the forcible repatriation of all Vietnamese "economic refugees" from Hong Kong.
A joint statement specified that the two countries had "agreed on the repatriation of those Vietnamese illegal immigrants who have not qualified for resettlement in third countries" and that the forced returns would be "conducted under conditions of order, safety and dignity" .
There were currently 55,462 Vietnamese "boat people" in Hong Kong.
Of these, 3,434 had been designated as genuine refugees, 22,466 had failed the screening process and had been designated as "economic migrants" and the remaining 29,562 awaited screening.
Alistair Asprey, Hong Kong's Secretary for Security, forecast that all illegal Vietnamese immigrants in Hong Kong could be repatriated by 1995.
Vietnam and the UK had signed an agreement in principle on forced repatriation on Oct. 29, 1991 [see p. 38531], but Vietnam had at that time only agreed to immediate repatriation of new arrivals and so-called "double-backers" — people who had fled to the colony a second time.
There had been a significant fall in the number of new arrivals since the October agreement — only seven between January and mid-May 1992, compared with 3,920 in the corresponding period in 1991.
Launch of pro-Chinese party
A new, pro-Chinese political party, the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment of Hong Kong (DABHK), was launched on May 19.
The DABHK, led by Tsang Yok-sing, was the first party in the colony to be backed openly by China.
Pro-Chinese elements had traditionally convened in the Federation of Trade Unions and through complex webs of professional, social and business organizations.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Relations with China and USA
Relations between Vietnam and China, formally normalized in November 1991, continued to improve during May.
Nguyen Van Linh, the former general secretary of the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV), visited China during the first half of May.
Linh made the visit in his capacity as CPV central committee adviser and held talks with, among others, Chinese Communist Party general secretary Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng.
A delegation of the Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA) visited Vietnam in early May.
The visit was the first by a PLA delegation since the normalization of relations.
Commercial air links between Vietnam and China, cut in 1979, were formally restored on May 14.
The United States further eased its trade embargo against Vietnam on April 29 with an announcement that commercial sales of food, medicine and agricultural supplies to meet basic human needs would be allowed.
Restrictions were also lifted on the activities of US non-governmental and non-profit organizations carrying out humanitarian work in Vietnam.
In a statement issued on April 29, US State Department spokesperson Margaret Tutwiler said that the relaxation reflected Vietnam's strengthened commitment to helping resolve the cases of US servicemen listed as missing in action (MIA) in Vietnam.
On April 13 the USA had announced the lifting of an embargo on humanitarian links with Vietnam [see p. 38865].
The 17th joint US-Vietnamese search for MIAs ended on May 20 [see p. 38865 for launch of operation in April].
A Vietnam News Agency report on May 21 said that the joint team had investigated "11 reports on sightings of live Americans" in various cities and provinces.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
IMF loan agreement
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced on May 4 that it had approved a credit equivalent to 5,860,000 special drawing rights (about US$8,000,000).
The credit, under the Fund's structural adjustment facility (SAF), was in support of the country's economic reform programme and constituted the third, and final, instalment of a three-year SAF credit equivalent to SDR20,510,000 approved in 1989.
Loans totalling SDR14,650,000 had already been disbursed [see p. 38150].
The press release provided a positive appraisal of the government's economic reform programme.
Economic growth had recovered from a negative rate in 1988 to an average of 8 per cent during 1989-91, and inflation declined sharply from 75 per cent in 1989 to about 10 per cent in 1991.
The government's programme for 1992 aimed at a rate of gross domestic product (GDP) growth of 6.5 per cent, a reduction in the rate of inflation to 6-7 per cent and a strengthening of the country's external payments position.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Continuing liberalization
The State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), the ruling military junta, continued to free political prisoners during May, under the new liberalization policy introduced in late April after the removal of Gen. Saw Maung as SLORC chair and Prime Minister [see pp. 38865-66].
By the end of May more than 100 of an estimated 2,000 political prisoners had been released.
Aung San Suu Kyi, the country's main opposition figure who had been under house arrest since mid-1989, was permitted a visit by her husband, Michael Aris, and two sons during May.
She had not been allowed visits from her family, who lived in the United States, for over two years.
Following his visit, Aris issued a statement in Bangkok on May 17 saying that Aung San Suu Kyi was "resolved to continue her endeavour to bring peace and happiness in her country" .
The SLORC had repeatedly offered her freedom on condition that she went into exile, but Aris said that she never discussed this "because she says that it is not negotiable" .
Details on national convention
On May 28 the SLORC issued more details about the planned national convention to draft a fresh constitution.
A "co-ordination meeting" was scheduled for June 23, to be attended by a SLORC-appointed "leading committee" (chaired by Maj.-Gen.
Myo Nyunt, SLORC member and Religious Affairs Minister) and by representatives from the following political parties: National League for Democracy, Shan Nationalities League for Democracy, National Unity Party, Union Pa-O National Organization, Khami National Solidarity Organization, Shan State Kokang Democratic Party and La-Hu National Development Party.
The national convention would be held no later than one month after the end of the co-ordination meeting.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Prime Minister's visit to India
Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia visited India on May 26-28 for talks with her Indian counterpart P. V. Narasimha Rao.
The two sides agreed to evolve a "comprehensive and permanent plan" for the sharing of water resources; discussions on the issue would take place within a "stipulated time-frame" .
Agreement was reached on the establishment of a joint task force to deal with border problems, including that of Indian insurgents operating from Bangladesh and of Bangladeshi refugees crossing into India.
Visit by Iranian Foreign Minister
Ali Akbar Vellayati, the Iranian Foreign Minister, paid a visit to Bangladesh on May 17-18 where he held talks with Begum Zia and President Abdur Rahman Biswas.
Vellayati's talks with Zia were dominated by the issue of the Moslem Rohingya refugees arriving in Bangladesh from Myanma [see p. 38866].
Vellayati subsequently visited a number of refugee camps in the Cox's Bazar district.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Financial scandal
India's financial markets were hit during May by what commentators described as the country's worst financial scandal, leading to a dramatic slump on the Bombay stock market.
The scandal stemmed from unsecured loans made by three state-owned commercial banks (State Bank of India, national Housing Bank and United Commercial Bank) to one of the country's leading stockbrokers, Harshad Mehta.
Mehta claimed that the Reserve Bank of India (central bank), had been "fully cognisant" of his dealings, which involved the use of bankers' receipts as collateral to fund share purchases in Bombay's stock market.
However, many of the securities supposedly backing the receipts did not exist or had not been purchased.
On May 11 Finance Minister Manmohan Singh announced that the government would pursue possible fraud charges against senior bank officials involved in the securities trading scandal.
By May 12 the Bombay stock exchange index had fallen by 1,047 points or almost 24 per cent of the market's capitalization since the scandal first emerged at the end of April.
Despite heavy government intervention aimed at warding off a further crash in prices, trading continued to be nervous as a result of fears that Mehta would dump holdings to clear his bank debts, which included Rs6,200 million (about US$214,000,000) to State Bank of India, the largest commercial bank.
India's stock markets were closed on May 15 to prevent a further collapse in prices; the previous day Mehta had been suspended from membership of the Bombay stock exchange and the police seized his assets.
The scandal and accompanying crash came as a severe blow to Finance Minister Singh's attempts to open the Indian economy to foreign investors, and in addition hurt many smaller, first-time investors attracted by the soaring bull market of the previous six months, of which Mehta was described by the Financial Times of May 18 as the "driving force" .
Seizure of Union Carbide assets
On April 30 a court in Bhopal ordered the seizure of all Indian assets of the US company Union Carbide, valued at Rs420,000,000 (about US$14,500,000), following the failure of its employees to appear to stand trial in connection with the December 1984 poison gas leak which killed more than 3,800 people [see pp. 33647-48].
The order followed reports that Union Carbide was attempting to transfer shares in its subsidiary to a trust for building a hospital for victims of the disaster, in order to forestall seizure by the court.
Closure of university following "death sentence" 
Jamia Millia Islamia University in Delhi remained closed from the beginning of May following the issuing of a "death sentence" by Moslem fundamentalist students against the pro-Vice-Chancellor, Professor Mushirul Hasan, who had called for the lifting of the ban, in force since October 1988 on the grounds of blasphemy, on the Indian-born British novelist Salman Rushdie's novel The Satanic Verses [see p 36450].
Banning of Tamil Tigers
The Sri Lankan separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE or the Tamil Tigers) were declared an "unlawful association" by the government on May 14.
In a statement to the Rajya Sabha (the upper house of the legislature) on May 14, Home Minister S. B. Chavan said that the larger objective of the LTTE went beyond the establishment of a Tamil homeland in north-eastern Sri Lanka and hence posed a threat to India's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In particular, Chavan cited evidence that the LTTE was encouraging secessionist activities in the southern state of Tamil Nadu, and that it had established links with the banned United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA).
Gandhi assassination charges
On May 20 India formally charged the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) leader, Vellupillai Prabhakaran and his intelligence chief, Pottu Amman, with the assassination of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in May 1991 [see p. 38175].
According to Minister of State for Home Affairs, M. M. Jacob, "all steps" were being taken to ensure their capture and extradition from Sri Lanka.
The charge sheet cited "organizational motive" as the prime cause for Gandhi's murder, together with a belief that the Tamil cause had been let down by India.
Five Sri Lankans were reported on May 18 to have been arrested in connection with Gandhi's assassination.
Foreign relations
Diplomatic crisis with Pakistan
On May 24 Pakistan ordered a senior Indian diplomat to leave the country after he accused Pakistani intelligence officials of abducting and torturing him.
A Pakistani Foreign Ministry statement said that Rajesh Mittal, political counsellor at the Indian high commission in Islamabad, had been caught receiving highly classified documents and had refused to reveal his identity.
Mittal asserted that he had been abducted from outside his home and later beaten and tortured with electric shocks before being left at a police station.
On May 25 India reacted by expelling from Delhi two Pakistani diplomats of similar rank, and on May 26 called off talks with Pakistan scheduled for the following week.
Visit by Russian State Secretary — US sanctions over Russian rocket deliveries
Russian State Secretary Gennady Burbulis arrived on May 3 for a three-day official visit.
On May 4, India and Russia signed a five-year agreement on trade and economic co-operation which stipulated that payments were to be in freely convertible currencies, and agreed to find "mutually advantageous" solutions to outstanding problems including Russia's supply of rocket technology and defence spares.
On May 5 Russia confirmed that it would honour a commitment to supply the Indian government with rocket engine technology worth $250 million, despite US threats to suspend technological collaboration with the two countries if the agreement was carried out.
Despite claims that the technology was to help India's space programme, the USA argued that the agreement violated Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) rules against missile technology proliferation, and on May 11 announced limited trade sanctions including two-year bans on US-licensed exports to the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) and its Russian counterpart, Glavkosmos.
President's visit to China
President Ramaswamy Venkataraman paid the first state visit to China by an Indian President on May 18-23.
Both Venkataraman and his Chinese counterpart, Yang Shangkun, emphasized that increased co-operation between their two countries was necessary for stability in Asia.
Following a meeting on May 19 with Chinese Premier Li Peng, both India and China called for the peaceful resolution of their long-running border dispute [for December 1991 talks see p. 38683].
States developments
Electoral college membership of Delhi and Pondicherry
The two most populous union territories, Pondicherry and Delhi, became part of the electoral college on May 7 by a unanimous decision of the Indian parliament; elected members of the Pondicherry and the proposed Delhi legislative assemblies would thereby be able to participate in presidential elections.
Orissa liquor deaths
By May 10 more than 200 people had died and hundreds had been admitted to hospital after drinking poisonous liquor laced with methyl alcohol in Orissa.
Police arrested 13 people and closed down all liquor shops.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Departure of JIP from ruling coalition
On May 5 the fundamentalist Jamaat-i Islami Pakistan (JIP), the second-strongest party within the Pakistani government, announced its withdrawal from the eight-party Islamic Democratic Alliance (IDA).
JIP parliamentary leader Liaquat Baluch alleged that the government had betrayed Afghanistan's most militantly Islamic mujahedeen organization, the Hezb-i Islami led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, by supporting the recently installed Afghan government at the expense of forging consensus among all mujahedeen groups.
In addition, the JIP criticized the Prime Minister, Mian Mohammed Nawaz Sharif, for failing to implement the process of Islamization which was part of the IDA election manifesto.
Despite the loss of the eight JIP National Assembly members the government retained a clear parliamentary majority.
However, criticism from within Nawaz Sharif's own Moslem League party resulted in the establishment of a rival Moslem League to support Hekmatyar.
In response, Nawaz Sharif accused the JIP secretary-general Amir Kazi Hussain Ahmad of responsibility for confrontation between Afghan mujahedeen groups.
Mass arrests of PPP supporters
On May 14, police arrested more than 1,000 Pakistan People's Party (PPP) supporters in Sind, following an announcement by PPP leader Benazir Bhutto that protest rallies were to be held the following day over alleged ballot-rigging in earlier local elections.
Bhutto also accused the government of "fabricating" an encounter on May 8-9 with Al Zulfiqar, a terrorist organization alleged by the government to be a militant wing of the PPP, but claimed by Bhutto to have been disbanded almost 10 years previously, in which seven members were reportedly killed, in order to justify its crackdown against the PPP.
1992 budget
On May 14 Finance Minister Sartaj Aziz presented his budget statement for 1992/93 to the National Assembly.
The budget, totalling Rs292,910 million (US$6,900 million), included a record government deficit of Rs 89,000 million, which would be funded by borrowing Rs65,000 million, raising Rs17,500 million in taxes and trimming Rs6,500 million from its annual development plan.
The deficit, according to the Finance Ministry, represented 5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP)— a figure it believed acceptable to the IMF.
Aziz also announced that the 1991/92 deficit had overshot its target of 4.6 per cent of GDP and would be closer to 6.1 per cent.
Defence spending was set to increase by nearly 6 per cent to Rs76,000 million.
The very narrow tax base meant continued heavy reliance on massive borrowings and indirect taxes.
Measures to generate further revenue included higher excise and other duties, the introduction of a retail sales tax, and improved computerization in the collection of personal taxes.
Incentives for the private sector included a five-year plan under which companies were promised gradual income tax reductions amounting to 11-15 percentage points.
The budget also allowed key government monopolies to increase resources according to their investment needs without limitations imposed by federal budgetary controls.
Aziz claimed that the budget aimed at the transfer of resources from rich to poor and it accordingly avoided measures which would be unpopular among the majority of the population.
Urban calls for a tax on farm income were ignored, although Aziz did announce the taxation under certain conditions of military and police welfare foundations (which hitherto had run a wide variety of tax-exempt businesses).
A provision for interest in the budgetary estimates indicated the government's likely intention to block a 1991 court order outlawing interest, which was forbidden under Islamic law [see also pp. 38683-84].
Series of bilateral defence talks
On May 3 the Minister of Defence, Sayed Ghaus Ali Shah, returned from a three-day visit to Kuwait.
Later the same day he met the Turkish Commander of Ground Forces, Gen. Muhittin Fisunoglu, in Islamabad.
The Chief of Staff of the Pakistan Air Force, Air Chief Marshal Farooq F. Khan, paid a 10-day visit to China from May 10.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Continued fighting in Kabul — Other developments
Events in Afghanistan during May were dominated by the efforts of the various ethnic, military and religious factions to secure positions of power in the new regime, following the overthrow of the Najibullah government by mujaheddin guerrillas and the establishment of an Islamic State in April [see pp. 38847-48].
Ahmed Shah Masud Defence Gen. Yahya Nawroz National Security (acting) Yaser Construction Affairs (acting) Faruq Water and Electricity (acting) Sayd Solayman Gaylani Foreign Affairs (acting) Musa Tawana Higher Education (acting) Ahmad Shah Home Affairs (acting) Anwar Observation of Martyrs and the Disabled (acting) Abdol Ahad Khan Karzay Border Affairs (acting) Zabihollah Hadi Rural Construction and Development (acting) Mohammad Akram Communication (acting) Mawlawi Arsala Islamic Affairs and Endowment (acting) Lt.-Gen.
Hamidollah Rahimi Finance (acting) Mawlawi Jalaloddin Haqani Justice (acting) Haji Abdol Hafez Beg City Construction (acting) Rahmatollah Khan Wahedyar Returnee Affairs (acting) Haji Solayman Light Industries and Foodstuffs (acting) Najibullah Mojaddedi Public Health (acting) Mawlawi Abdol Manan Social Affairs (acting) Mohammad Sediq Chakari Culture and Information Wakil Shahbaz Commerce (acting)
New Afghan Cabinet
*Abdol Qayum Education and Training (acting) Mawlawi Mohammad Mir Minister-Councillor (acting)
*Abdol Hay Minister-Adviser (acting)
*Shaykh Nur Ahmad Taqadossi Minister-Adviser (acting)
*Appointed on May 7.
Leadership issue
Under an agreement (the so-called Peshawar Accord) reached by a majority of the mujaheddin groups in Peshawar, Pakistan, on April 24 [see p. 38847], power in the new state would rest in the hands of the 51-member Islamic Jihad Council (IJC), headed by interim President Seghbatullah Mujjaddedi, but the IJC was to be replaced by an interim government (headed by Burhanuddin Rabbani, leader of the moderate Jamiat-i Islami) in late June.
On May 5 Mujjaddedi, who had already indicated that he might remain as interim president for longer than the specified two months, appointed a Cabinet (most members in an acting capacity) in a move regarded by some commentators as a violation of the Peshawar Accord.
The Press Trust of India news agency reported on May 6 that Rabbani opposed the formation of the Cabinet.
On May 6 a self-proclaimed Leadership Council, chaired by Rabbani, attended by Mujjaddedi and including IJC representatives, held its first session in Kabul, the Afghan capital.
Other possible power centres in Kabul included a Kabul City Security Commission headed by Ahmed Shah Masud (the Defence Minister and the dominant military figure in the new regime), and a council of mujaheddin commanders.
Abolition of former state structure — Islamization
At its first meeting on May 6 the Leadership Council formally abolished the structure of the former regime, including its Cabinet, the National Assembly, the state security apparatus, the former ruling party (Hezb-e Watan) and all laws and resolutions contrary to the Sharia (Islamic law).
A "special court" was established to try officials of the old regime.
On May 7 the Council banned the sale and use of alcohol and called on all "Moslem sisters" strictly to observe Sharia Hejab (Islamic dress).
Fighting between rival mujaheddin forces — Agreement between Hekmatyar and Masud
The military confrontation between the mujaheddin forces led by Masud and his rival Gulbuddin Hekmatyar continued during May.
In late April Masud had succeeded in pushing Hekmatyar's forces out of Kabul [see pp. 38847-48].
Hekmatyar, a hardliner who had opposed the Peshawar Accord, regrouped his fighters in the hills to the south of the city and began issuing demands to the new regime, principal among them being the expulsion from Kabul of Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostam, the ethnic Uzbek militia leader who had fought for the Najibullah regime until switching allegiance to Masud in March [see p. 38847].
Dostam's support for Masud had signalled the end of the Najibullah regime, but Hekmatyar accused him of being a communist and a war criminal.
Hekmatyar's forces launched an artillery barrage on Kabul on May 4-5, killing more than 70 people, mostly civilians, and wounding a further 400.
Fighters in Kabul loyal to Masud and Dostam counterattacked.
A visiting Algerian delegation managed to arrange a tentative ceasefire on May 6 and negotiations opened to try and halt the fighting.
The subsequent peace negotiations were brokered by Jalaluddin Haqqani, commander of a mujaheddin mediation committee.
On May 21 Haqqani announced that Masud and Hekmatyar had agreed upon, but not signed, a five-point peace pact.
This pact called for the rival forces, confronting each other in the south of the city, to pull back and allow a neutral force under the control of the interim government to establish a buffer zone.
However, on May 21-22 small, localized clashes erupted in Kabul between Hekmatyar's and Dostam's forces.
The agreement appeared further to be jeopardized on May 24 when Mujjaddedi promoted Dostam to full general.
On May 25 Hekmatyar and Masud, accompanied by mediators from Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, met for face-to-face talks on the outskirts of Kabul.
After seven hours of talks it was announced that they had signed a peace agreement.
Details were not released, but reports indicated that Hekmatyar had finally agreed to join the interim government and that Dostam and his forces would be moved out of Kabul.
The agreement also called for a strict implementation of the Peshawar Accord.
Visit by Russian Foreign Minister — Visit to Pakistan by Mujjaddedi
The Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozyrev, visited Kabul on May 13-14.
Kozyrev, who brought with him a cargo of food and medicine, congratulated mujaheddin leaders on toppling the Najibullah regime.
During his visit Kozyrev made a plea for the release of Russian prisoners of war (POWs) believed to be held by the mujaheddin.
One Russian POW was released on May 19.
Mujjaddedi visited Islamabad, the Pakistan capital, on May 26-27, his first official visit to a foreign country [see p. 38848 for late April visit by Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to Kabul].
He also visited Peshawar on his way back.
As his aircraft reached Kabul on May 30 it was hit by a rocket, but landed safely.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KAZAKHSTAN
Oil exploration agreements
Two agreements with foreign oil companies to explore and produce oil from Kazakhstan's as yet unexploited fields were signed in April and May.
It was announced on April 30 that the French company Elf Aquitaine had negotiated an agreement on the Aktyubinsk oblast (region) field.
The US company Chevron reached agreement with the Kazakh authorities to develop the Tengiz and Korolev fields and a 4,000 sq km exploration area.
Discussions over the Chevron deal had started four years previously, and were renewed when the collapse of the Soviet Union in December 1991 allowed control over natural resources to pass to individual republics.
The deals were said to give Kazakhstan up to 80 per cent of expected profits.
Establishment of Defence Ministry
The Kazakh leadership, originally a strong supporter of unified Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) armed forces, announced on May 7 that the republican State Defence Committee had become the Kazakh Defence Ministry.
Gen. Sagadat Nurmagambetov, chair of the Committee [see p. 38538 for his appointment in October 1991, when he was initially described as Defence Minister], was promoted to the rank of Col.-Gen. and appointed Kazakhstan's Defence Minister.
A presidential decree published on May 8 transferred all military formations and property of joint CIS armed forces on Kazakh territory to the jurisdiction of Kazakhstan, incorporating them into the Kazakh armed forces.
The President became, for the interim, Supreme Commander, while immediate responsibility for troops passed to the newly appointed republican Defence Minister.
The decree stated that "the existing system of managing strategic [nuclear]forces in accordance with agreements between CIS member-states will be preserved" until the elimination of nuclear-armed formations.
[For Kazakhstan's signature of START protocol see p. 38937.]
In April President Nursultan Nazarbayev<$! = had announced that the 40th Army was to be removed from the Turkestan military district command and subordinated to the CIS joint armed forces C.-in-C.
The Commander of the 40th Army was in future to be appointed by decree of the Kazakh President (the current incumbent remained).
New Interior Minister
It was announced in Izvestiya of April 22 that Vladimir Shumov had replaced Mikhail Bersenev as Interior Minister.
Doubling of minimum wage
The monthly minimum income was almost doubled to 600 roubles from May 1, following a presidential decree of April 25 raising wages and regulating prices.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAJIKISTAN
Violent demonstrations — New coalition government
Demonstrations throughout April and the first part of May organized by activists opposed to (ex-Communist) President Rakhmon Nabiyev's regime culminated in the formation of a coalition government, announced on May 11, in which eight of the 24 ministerial posts went to opposition members, while Nabiyev remained as President.
Background to demonstrations
Rallies had been held repeatedly since March 26 in Dushanbe, the capital, organized by the opposition parties calling for the resignation of the Supreme Soviet Chair, Sarafali Kenjayev.
At a Supreme Soviet session, Kenjayev had accused Interior Minister Mamadayez Navjuvanov of exceeding his authority.
Navjuvanov was dismissed, accused of corruption, and it appeared to have been this event which sparked off the rallies outside the parliament building in Shahidan ( "Martyrs'" ) Square.
The opposition Islamic Renaissance Party (IRP), the Democratic Party and the Rastokhez (Renaissance) Movement were said to have organized the rallies.
The demonstrators demanded Kenjayev's resignation, the dissolution of the Supreme Soviet and the freeing of Dushanbe's mayor, Maksud Ikramov, who had been arrested in March [see p. 38811].
Nabiyev noted on April 12 that their demands were inconsistent, as any new constitution would have to be approved by the Supreme Soviet.
Kenjayev resigned both as Chair of the Supreme Soviet and as Presidium member on April 22 on the release by the opposition of 16 deputies and two deputy ministers whom it had taken hostage on April 21 (having issued an ultimatum); they were released when they agreed to press for Kenjayev's resignation.
A compromise agreement between the opposition and the leadership, reported on April 22 on Tajik radio, met some of the opposition's demands, including representation on the Constitutional Commission, investigation of Ikramov's and Navjuvanov's cases and discussion of a motion put forward on April 13 by the Gorny Badakhshan autonomous oblast (region) Supreme Soviet and prompted by local demonstrations, to upgrade the region into the Badakhshan Autonomous Republic.
Kenjayev became chair of the State Security Committee (KGB) on April 24.
His predecessor, Anatoly Stroikin, was criticized for failing to prevent the taking of hostages on April 21.
Demonstrations flared up again after the Tajik Supreme Soviet accepted in emergency closed session on April 30 a proposal from Nabiyev to introduce a six-month period of presidential rule; Kenjayev was reinstated as Supreme Soviet Chair on May 3.
The majority of deputies from the opposition bloc were absent from these sessions.
A third rally in addition to those for and against the government gathered on April 29 demanding that Nabiyev settle the conflict without holding the Supreme Soviet emergency session.
Armed skirmishes — Shooting of demonstrators
Armed skirmishes took place in Dushanbe between supporters and opponents of the government in the first week of May and large demonstrations and counter-demonstrations were held, with up to 100,000 people gathering on May 5.
Opposition militia appeared to control large parts of the city, including the presidential palace and the television station, which was occupied on May 7.
On May 10 demonstrators gathered in front of the KGB headquarters, where Nabiyev had taken refuge, and where negotiations were taking place between the government and opposition groups.
KGB troops loyal to Nabiyev fired from the building at the demonstrators, causing up to 20 deaths.
The Dushanbe garrison commander (CIS armed forces), Col. Vyacheslav Zabolotny, said afterwards that he had ordered tanks to the KGB headquarters to stop the violence which threatened to erupt when demonstrators attempted to break in to the building.
He denied that they had fired on the demonstrators and also claimed to have acted as an intermediary in organizing the meeting between the government and opposition on May 10-11.
Resignation of hardline ministers — Establishing of Majlis
Following the negotiations on May 10-11 Nabiyev signed a decree on the creation of a coalition government.
The Vice-President, the Chair of the Defence Committee, the Procurator General and the Television and Radio Chair, all hardline figures, resigned.
Posts going to the opposition included the Defence and National Security portfolios.
A transitional legislative body, the Majlis, was established, and a commission to examine the violence in Dushanbe was appointed, including opposition and government members, journalists and legal experts.
The 80-seat Majlis would consist of Supreme Soviet deputies and representatives of political parties, and would sit until fresh elections on Dec. 6, 1992.
The Deputy Chair of the IRP, Davlat Usmon, was appointed Deputy Prime Minister by presidential decree, and would supervise security matters.
A draft constitution, published on April 30 for nationwide discussion, had envisaged replacing the Supreme Soviet by a new multiparty elected legislature, the Majlis-i Milli (National Assembly).
The leader of official Islam in the republic, the Kazi Akbar Turandjonzonda, was instrumental in negotiating an end to the rallies by May 14.
Regional dissent
The local soviets of the Khodjent (formerly Leninabad) and Kulyab oblasts (regions) voted on May 20 to refuse to recognize the new coalition government and not to contribute to the republic's resources.
The two regions were more industrially developed and russified and showed little support for the IRP.
Khodjent was also Nabiyev's home town.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TURKMENISTAN
New Constitution
A draft constitution for Turkmenistan, published on March 19, was adopted unanimously by the Supreme Soviet on May 18.
The new Constitution increased the power of the republican President, making him both head of state and head of government, and abolished the post of Vice-President.
The President was empowered to issue laws, except those altering the Constitution or the criminal code, and to appoint judges and the heads of local administrations.
(The system of local government would enjoy less power than did the former local Soviets.)
The new legislature, the Majlis, consisted of 50 deputies elected by district constituencies for a five-year term.
The supreme representative body, the People's Council (Khalk Maslakhaty), consisted of Majlis deputies and 50 separately elected members, together with the chairs of the Supreme Court and the Supreme Economic Court, members of the government, the Procurator General and the heads of local administration.
The People's Council would be headed by the President.
Until its formation, the duties of the People's Council would be carried out by the Supreme Soviet and the President.
The Supreme Soviet became the Majlis as of May 19.
Presidential elections were to be held on June 21 with candidates nominated by the Majlis.
Although the constitution was passed unanimously, fears were raised that it would infringe the rights of the Russian minority in Turkmenistan.
Only Turkmen citizens would be allowed to work in state enterprises, and Russian would no longer be the official language for inter-ethnic communication.
It was noted that a presidential decree issued in May banning the sale of private property violated the constitutionally assured right to private ownership.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CENTRAL ASIA
Summit meeting
The heads of state of Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Uzbekistan and Iran, and the heads of government of Pakistan and Turkey, met in Askhabad (Turkmenistan) on May 9-10.
Tajikistan and Azerbaijan, suffering internal crises, were unrepresented.
Iran established diplomatic relations with Uzbekistan and Kirgizstan and signed memoranda of understanding with Turkmenistan.
The participants adopted a joint statement of intent to expand economic and political co-operation and to initiate discussions on transport links and a gas pipeline.
The former Soviet Central Asian leaders emphasised that the meeting was not attempting to undermine the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).
Turkey and Iran were widely seen to be vying for influence in the area.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Ministerial resignation over "Marshall Islands affair" 
The government of Prime Minister Paul Keating suffered a serious blow on May 18 when Graham Richardson, one of the most senior members of the Cabinet, resigned as Minister of Transport and Communications.
The move followed the development of a scandal, popularly dubbed the "Marshall Islands' affair" , which included allegations concerning Richardson's relationship with Greg Symons, a relative by marriage, who faced trial in the Marshall Islands on forgery charges.
In addition to his ministerial role, Richardson was a key spokesman for the ruling Australian Labor Party (ALP) in the Senate, and was widely considered to be one of the party's most influential figures.
He had also been a close friend and political ally of Keating for more than 20 years, and had been influential in engineering Keating's successful bid for the leadership in December 1991 [see pp. 38675-76].
While emphatically denying that he had acted improperly — Richardson claimed that his resignation was motivated by the desire to avoid damaging the ALP's prospects in the next federal elections, due by mid-1993 — he admitted meeting Symons in his Senate office, writing a reference for him, and telephoning Amata Kabua, President of the Marshall Islands, after Symons was arrested.
He initially denied any knowledge of Symons's business affairs, but later admitted knowing that he was involved in a business emigration scheme aimed at attracting Asian investors to the Marshall Islands.
Keating expressed regret over the resignation, describing Richardson's relationship with Symons as unfortunate but not improper.
The departure of Richardson represented a considerable victory for the opposition which, for the past month, had sought to embarrass the government over the affair.
With John Hewson, leader of the Liberal-National Party opposition alliance, continuing to demand a full investigation — and, in particular, investigation into the role of Foreign Minister Gareth Evans — there was speculation that the scandal could yet claim further government victims.
On May 26 Keating conducted a minor Cabinet reshuffle which saw Richardson's portfolio filled by Bob Collins, hitherto Minister of Shipping and Aviation.
The portfolios relinquished by Collins were added to the responsibilities of Peter Cook, Minister of Industrial Relations.
Other changes included the elevation of Ben Humphreys, Minister of Veterans' Affairs to full Cabinet rank, and the appointment of Jeanette McHugh as Minister of Consumer Affairs.
Conviction of Bond
Bankrupt former entrepreneur Alan Bond was found guilty on May 29 of acting dishonestly while attempting in 1987 to organize the rescue of the Perth merchant bank, Rothwells Ltd.; on May 30 he was sentenced to 2 & 1/2 years in prison.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Landing of government troops on Bougainville
The government confirmed on May 13 that it had landed a contingent of troops on the southern tip of Bougainville for the first time since 1990, when it had withdrawn its forces from the island in the face of a protracted secessionist guerrilla war conducted by the Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA).
Prime Minister Rabbie Namaliu asserted that the operation, which began on May 9, did not represent a departure from his government's commitment to finding a peaceful solution to the secessionist crisis.
Namaliu claimed that the landing was in response to requests from local chiefs and village leaders, who feared for their safety following a spate of executions carried out by the BRA.
He also stated that the landing was designed to assist with the restoration of services to Bougainville.
The island had suffered from shortages of food, power, and medical supplies, since the Port Moresby government imposed a blockade in 1990 in response to the BRA's declaration of independence.
In a statement broadcast by Radio Free Bougainville and repeated by Radio Australia, a BRA spokesman vowed to drive out the invasion force.
ASIA — PACIFIC
FIJI
General election — Appointment of Rabuka as Prime Minister
On May 23-30 Fiji held its first general election since the two military coups of 1987 [see pp. 35251-55; 35567-70].
In July 1990 a new Constitution had institutionalized the dominance of ethnic Fijians in a 70-member House of Representatives and an appointed Senate [see p. 37614].
The Fijian Political Party (FPP), with Maj.-Gen.
Sitiveni Rabuka as its president, won 30 of the 37 House of Representative seats reserved for ethnic Fijians.
Rabuka, who in May 1987 had ousted the civilian government elected one month earlier, was appointed Prime Minister on June 2 and named a coalition government on the following day.
The results of the elections, in which 275,500 people had been eligible to vote, were announced on May 31.
The Fijian Nationalist United Front (FNUF), described as representing a more conservative version of FPP policies, won five of the 37 Fijian seats, and independents the remaining two.
Of the 27 seats reserved for Fijian nationals of Indian descent, 14 were won by the National Federation Party (NFP) and 13 by the Fiji Labour Party (FLP — which had also unsuccessfully fielded a number of candidates for Fijian seats).
The new Constitution allocated one seat to a representative of Rotuma island.
The remaining five seats, allocated for election by minority communities such as Chinese, Europeans and other Pacific islanders, were all filled by candidates of the General Voters' Party (until 1990 the General Electors' Association).
FPP leadership contest — Rabuka's deal with FLP
The FPP (also known as the Soqosoqo ni Vakavulewa ni Taukei) had been formed in March 1990 not 1991 as given on p. 38646]by the Council of Chiefs — a 100-strong body to which ethnic-Fijian members of parliament and government nominees were now also admitted, outnumbering the traditional chiefs.
Rabuka, 43, had been challenged for the post of Prime Minister by Josefata Kamikamica, who was Finance Minister in the outgoing government of interim Prime Minister Ratu Kamisese Mara.
He had, however, succeeded in demonstrating to President Ratu Penaia Ganilau that he had the support of the majority of the FPP leadership behind him.
Rabuka had by June 2 secured an understanding with the FLP leader Mahendra Chaudry according to which the FLP would participate in the new legislature.
The FPP in return promised a review of the Constitution and of recent measures concerning trade unions, value added tax and land-leases for Indian cane farmers.
The trade-union based FLP had initially decided to boycott the elections.
Later, at a party conference in Lotoka on April 26, delegates had decided that it should put up candidates in the elections, but should refuse to take up any seats which it won, to underline the rejection of the racially based Constitution.
New Cabinet
The 19-member Cabinet announced on June 3 omitted Kamikamica.
In addition to FPP members, it included two members of the GVP, one Fijian independent and the MP for Rotuma.
Filipe Bole (FPP) was Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs and Civil Aviation.
Col. Paul Manueli (Rotuman Islander) was Minister of Finance and Economic Planning, and Harold Powell (GVP) was Minister of Trade and Commerce.
ASIA — PACIFIC
REGIONAL AFFAIRS
Annual ADB conference
The annual meeting of the 52-member Asian Development Bank (ADB) was held in Hong Kong on May 4-6.
Discussion centred on the replenishment of the Bank's capital resources.
The Bank was seeking new commitments of US$25,000 million in 1994, but the USA, the Bank's equal largest shareholder with Japan, made it clear that it would oppose a replenishment until the Bank reformed its lending policies.
In particular, the USA wanted the Bank to make loans conditional on adherence to policy reforms, especially private-sector development, and to end co-financing with commercial banks.
At the meeting the USA was almost isolated in its opposition to the resumption of loans to Vietnam.
Four economic powers meeting
On May 4 monetary officials from Japan, Australia, Hong Kong and Singapore held informal talks on the sidelines of the ADB meeting in Hong Kong.
They discussed co-operation in financial markets, specifically over equities and futures trading.
According to some commentators, the talks, which had been requested by Japan, were a first step towards regular meetings of the four regional economic powers.
However, participants denied reports that the four planned to create an alliance modelled after the Group of Seven industrialized countries.
Malaysian plan for regional security talks
The Far Eastern Economic Review of May 14 reported that Malaysia had offered to host an Asia-Pacific security dialogue in 1993.
The Malaysian proposal envisaged a high-level exchange of views by civilian and military officials on security issues.
The magazine's report stated that the offer had "lent momentum to the evolution of a concrete framework for security co-operation in the region" .
Indonesia and Australia had both expressed support for regional security talks.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Various factions of the Communist Party of Nepal organized general strikes on May 3 and May 6 to protest against the government's violent response to a previous general strike held on April 6 [see p. 38867].
ASIA — PACIFIC
SAARC
The South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation held trade liberalization talks in New Delhi on May 4-5 under the auspices of the Association's intergovernmental group on trade liberalization, when various proposals for dismantling economic barriers between the seven member countries were discussed.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA BOSNIA-HERCEGOVINA CROATIA
Intensified conflict — Sanctions against Serbia/Yugoslavia
As war continued in Bosnia-Hercegovina, the Serbian-dominated new Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY)[see p. 38848]was internationally ostracized, culminating in UN-imposed sanctions.
The authorities in Bosnia-Hercegovina (whose independence, proclaimed in March — see p. 38832 — had been recognized widely since early April — -see pp. 38848-49) repeatedly requested foreign military aid and there were warnings that a flood of refugees, both Moslems and ethnic Croats, could pose a serious problem for neighbouring countries.
Islamic countries put particular pressure on the FRY to halt the attacks on the Bosnian Moslems.
Meanwhile, Serbian communities in Croatia appeared to have jeopardized the success of the UNPROFOR (UN Protection Force in Yugoslavia — see p. 38849) by refusing to demilitarize, and the Serbian population of Bosnia-Hercegovina formed its own government on May 12, announcing the formation of its own armed forces.
UN action — International sanctions
UN Under-Secretary-General Marrack Goulding visited former Yugoslav republics from May 5 to assess the possibility of sending UN troops to Bosnia-Hercegovina.
On May 12 the UN Secretary-General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, made recommendations, based on Goulding's report, to the Security Council that (i) UNPROFOR headquarters should no longer be in Sarajevo for the safety of its own personnel;(ii) no UN peacekeeping force should be sent to Bosnia-Hercegovina;(iii) the UN peace plan for Croatia was in jeopardy from the failure of Serbs in Croatia to demobilize.
The UNPROFOR left Sarajevo on May 17 for Belgrade, the Yugoslavian capital, leaving a skeleton force of 120.
Other international bodies evacuating Sarajevo during May due to the indiscriminate nature of the fighting included the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR); the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), one of whose workers died on May 19; and European Community (EC) monitors [see below].
Croatia, Slovenia and Bosnia-Hercegovina were accepted as members of the UN on May 22 by decision of the General Assembly.
Resolution 757 of the UN Security Council imposed comprehensive sanctions on the FRY on May 30.
These included (i) severing trade links;(ii) freezing government assets abroad;(iii) an oil embargo;(iv) a sporting and cultural ban; and (v) cutting air links (already severed by Canada, Germany, Italy, and the USA).
Formation of Krajina army
Plans were announced on May 18 by the Serbian Autonomous Region (SAR) of Krajina [see p. 38849]to form its own army.
Serbian community leaders in Croatia during May criticized the UN peacekeeping plan agreed in January [see p. 38778]as not defending "their" territory from Croatia.
The Serb-dominated Yugoslav National Army (JNA) halted its withdrawal from Krajina on May 23.
EC action
EC Foreign Ministers, meeting in Guimaraes (Portugal) on May 2, accepted a French package of proposals for action including (i) humanitarian aid;(ii) collaboration with any UN action to separate the warring parties;(iii) reinforced diplomatic efforts.
Three EC forums were in place to solve the Yugoslav crisis: the EC Peace Conference chaired by Lord Carrington bringing together representatives of the former Yugoslav states; the Conference on Bosnia-Hercegovina under Portuguese EC envoy José Cutilheiro; and the Arbitration Commission, chaired by Robert Badinter.
The EC Monitor Mission (ECMM) was suspended briefly in protest when one of its members was killed in Bosnia-Hercegovina on May 2.
The remaining ECMM members withdrew from Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, on May 12.
An EC declaration on Bosnia-Hercegovina of May 11, following a Foreign Ministers' meeting, said that although all parties in the conflict bore responsibility, "by far the greatest share of the blame falls on the JNA and the authorities in Belgrade which are in control of the army, both directly and indirectly by supporting Serbian irregulars" .
The EC demanded JNA withdrawal from Bosnia-Hercegovina and the reopening of Sarajevo airport, and threatened the international isolation of, and sanctions against, Yugoslavia.
EC states recalled their ambassadors from Belgrade "for consultations" .
An EC trade embargo was imposed on the FRY on May 27, freezing export credits and blocking scientific co-operation.
France successfully objected to a proposed severing of air-links.
CSCE
Senior officials of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) meeting in Finland on May 12 agreed that consent from the FRY was not needed to approve decisions on Yugoslavia and its former republics [for April CSCE meeting on FRY see p. 38848].
Kozyrev's visit
Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev visited all the former Yugoslav republics during May.
A ceasefire which he negotiated on May 26, together with an agreement from the SRBH to lift the blockade of Sarajevo airport, was immediately broken.
On May 25 Russia established diplomatic relations with Slovenia and Croatia, during Kozyrev's visits to Ljubljana and Zagreb, their capitals.
Bosnia-Hercegovina
Sarajevo was under intensive attack from Serbian forces throughout May.
Several ceasefires were short-lived, and there were no food and medical supplies.
On May 4 the FRY Presidency ordered its citizens (i.e. of Serbia and Montenegro) in the JNA to withdraw from Bosnia-Hercegovina within 15 days.
Since only one-fifth of the estimated 100,000 troops of the JNA in Bosnia-Hercegovina were FRY citizens, the remainder being Bosnian Serbs, the FRY thus disclaimed responsibility for the fighting.
The Bosnian government announced on May 20 that it would form a republican army and declared the JNA an "occupying force" as the deadline for withdrawal had passed.
Negotiations between the three ethnic communities in Bosnia-Hercegovina [see p. 38849 for leaderships]under the auspices of the EC continued in Lisbon, but were broken off on May 2 when the ceasefire was broken.
A session set for May 13 was cancelled, and resumed negotiations were again suspended on May 27 when the ethnic-Moslem Party of Democratic Action (SDA — chaired by Bosnian President Alija Izetbegovic) withdrew in protest at alleged Serbian atrocities in Sarajevo, including the shelling of a maternity hospital on May 25-26, and a mortar attack on civilians queuing for bread on May 27 in which more than 20 people were killed.
Izetbegovic was detained by the Serbian forces on his return to Sarajevo from Lisbon on May 2.
His release was negotiated by UNPROFOR and ECMM representatives in return for the safe passage of a JNA convoy blockaded by Bosnian forces.
Discussions on possible partition
Serb and Croat leaders of Bosnia-Hercegovina's ethnic communities met in Graz (Austria) on May 6 to discuss partitioning Bosnia-Hercegovina between Croatia and Serbia.
The negotiations were said to be part of ongoing secret negotiations backed by the Presidents of Croatia and Serbia.
Fighting confirmed reported disagreements over the proposed partition, with Serb and Croat forces both seeking to win control of north-eastern Bosnia, a potential corridor between Serb communities in eastern Croatia and Serbia proper.
Control of Mostar, in southern Bosnia-Hercegovina, was also fiercely disputed in view of its proximity to the Croatian coast and its armaments factories.
Estimates of war damage
The republican Health Ministry reported on May 27 that since the start of the conflict 5,190 people had died or were missing and 18,400 people had been wounded and that there were 580,000 displaced persons and 640,000 refugees.
According to a report dated May 21, Bosnia-Hercegovina had suffered by that date material damage estimated at US$60,000 million-100,000 million; electricity output was down to 17 per cent of normal levels; and about four-fifths of the republic's industrial plant had been destroyed.
FRY developments
Army purge
The FRY Presidency, meeting on May 8, retired 38 generals and admirals in the Yugoslav armed forces.
They included some senior generals who over the previous months had been criticized in the Belgrade media for poor leadership in the military campaigns in the former Yugoslavia.
Col.-Gen.
Zivota Panic became Chief of General Staff of the FRY armed forces and acting Defence Minister, replacing Col.-Gen.
Blagoje Adzic.
Le Monde of May 10-11 characterised the purge as replacing officers by younger men educated in "nationalism not Titoism" .
The army commander in Bosnia-Hercegovina, Col.-Gen.
Milutin Kukanjac, was replaced on May 10 by Gen. Ratko Mladic, a close ally of the Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) leader and SRBH president Radovan Karadzic.
Elections
Opposition to Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic grew in May, but an opposition boycott of elections to the republican and federal legislatures on May 31 allowed his Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS) to win 61 per cent of the vote and 73 seats in the new Chamber of Citizens [full results will be given in the next News Digest].
Tens of thousands of Serbs took part in an anti-war demonstration in Belgrade on May 31 which was organized by the parliamentary opposition parties — the Serbian Renaissance Movement (SPO) and the Democratic Party.
The Serbian Orthodox Church on May 27 dissociated itself from the regime, criticizing the new constitution and forthcoming elections.
Acting Yugoslav Federal Foreign Secretary Milivoje Maksic retired on April 28 [see p. 38559 for his appointment in November 1991].
A new FRY government was due to be appointed later in 1992.
Kosovo elections
Elections held in the overwhelmingly ethnic-Albanian Serbian province of Kosovo on May 24, declared illegal by the Serbian authorities, were won by the Democratic Alliance of Kosovo (DSK), which secured most of the seats in the 130-member Assembly.
The DSK leader Ibrahim Rugova was elected President of the self-proclaimed "Republic of Kosovo" [for independence referendum see p. 38513; see p. 38848 for Kosovo's reaction to FRY formation].
Reports of violence on the part of the Serbian authorities in Kosovo against the civilian population drew an official protest on May 26 from Albania (which refused to recognize the FRY).
Macedonia
The EC Foreign Ministers' meeting on May 2 [see above]concluded that the EC was "willing to recognize Macedonia as a sovereign and independent state within its existing borders and under a name that can be accepted by all parties concerned" .
[For Greek reluctance to recognize Macedonia see p. 38779.]
Kozyrev described his visit to Macedonia on May 27 as a de facto recognition by Russia of Macedonia's independence.
EUROPE
CROATIA
Controversial minority rights legislation
The passage of controversial human and minority rights legislation through the Croatian Assembly on May 8 prompted the resignation of a high-ranking minister and the withdrawal of a major opposition party from the "democratic unity" government.
The legislation, adopted with only three votes against, effectively provided special status to Serbs in Knin and Glina, the two Croatian districts where Serbs formed an absolute majority.
Following the vote Bosiljko Misetic resigned as Minister of Justice and Administration.
A member of the Croatian People's Party (HNS), he had been appointed to the democratic unity government alongside other opposition figures in August 1991 [see p. 38375].
The HNS, widely regarded as the strongest opposition party in Croatia, withdrew from the government on May 14 in support of Misetic's resignation.
HNS party president Savka Dabcevic-Kucar, said that the party would oppose the legislation for "as long as the aggression against Croatia lasts" .
EUROPE
SLOVENIA
New government
Prime Minister-designate Janez Drnovsek, elected by the Slovene Assembly in April [see p. 38849], secured the Assembly's approval on May 14 (by 123 votes to 30) for his new Executive Council.
In his speech to the Assembly, Drnovsek laid out the main themes of his government's programme.
These included (i) the swift holding of elections;(ii) the bringing under control of inflation;(iii) adoption of property legislation and privatization;(iv) financial legislation;(v) talks with international financial institutions and the European Communities (EC); and (vi) social policy, including measures on the unemployment issue.
Economic negotiations with Croatia
Government delegations headed respectively by the outgoing Prime Minister of Slovenia (Lozle Peterle) and the Croatian Prime Minister Franjo Greguric, met in Mokrice on May 6-7.
The issues of financial relations and the balance of trade were discussed.
It was agreed to supervise the volume of trade between the newly independent countries by means of monthly meetings between Finance Ministry representatives.
Croatia currently had a negative trade balance with Slovenia of 1,400 million Croatian dinars.
A ban on fishing by foreign vessels in its waters, imposed by Croatia with effect from April 1, was suspended for Slovene fishermen, who took 90 per cent of their catch from Croatian coastal waters, pending further negotiations.
A Croatian-Slovene economic chamber had been established in Zagreb on March 30.
Janez Drnovsek Prime Minister Joze Pucnik Deputy Prime Minister for general affairs Herman Rigelnik Deputy Prime Minister for economy Viktor Zakelj Deputy Prime Minister for social services
New Slovene Executive Council
*Igor Bavcar Interior
*Dimitrij Rupel Foreign Affairs
*Janez Jansa Defence
*Lojze Janko Legislation Franc Avbersek Energy Maks Tajnikar Small Industries Dusan Sesok Industry and Civil Engineering Joze Jeraj Trade Janez Sirse Catering and Tourism Joze Protner Food, Agriculture and Forestry
*Marjan Kranjc Transport and Communications
*Miha Jazbinsek Conservation and Environmental Planning
*Jozica Puhar(f) Labour Bozidar Voljc Health, Family and Social Security Anka Osterc(f) Veterans and War Invalids Slavko Gaber Education and Sports
*Peter Tancig Science and Technology Borut Suklje Culture
*Jelko Kacin Information Janez Kopac Finance Miha Kozinc Justice and Administration Davorin Kracun Planning
*Held post in previous government.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Berisha's Strasbourg address
President Sali Berisha met with Jacques Delors, President of the European Commission, in Brussels on May 5.
Addressing the European Parliament in Strasbourg on the following day, Berisha appealed for food aid, technical and financial assistance and "organized emigration" from Albania to other European countries.
Berisha also spoke of the rights of ethnic Albanians in the Yugoslav autonomous region of Kosovo and the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia.
[For EC-Albanian economic co-operation ageement see p. 38931.]
Decree on the "80 per cent rule" 
A Cabinet decree published on May 19 provided the framework for the phasing out of the system by which workers laid off due to lack of raw materials continued to receive 80 per cent of their salaries.
This measure came largely in response to suggestions made to the government in April by representatives of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Mitsotakis's visit
Constantine Mitsotakis, the Greek Prime Minister and acting Foreign Minister, paid an official visit to Albania on May 3.
Emigration was discussed, and Greece promised to create more seasonal and other openings for Albanians to work in Greece.
Mitsotakis said that there were some 150,000 Albanians in Greece, about half of whom were illegally resident there.
The question of Kosovo and the rights of Greek communities in Albania were also discussed, as was the issue of the Cams (also known as the Tsamidhes or the Cameria people, of the Camovia region along the border between Greece and Albania).
This community of some 25,000 Albanian Moslems had fled Greece for Albania in October 1944.
Mitsotakis rejected an Albanian request that the Cams should be allowed to return to Greece and reclaim property there, telling an Albanian journalist that although compensation for property might be subject to negotiation, the Cams had left as war criminals and international law on this subject should be observed.
Resolution of dispute with UK
The United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Office on May 8 announced that the UK would return to Albania gold worth £10,000,000 (US$18,000,000) which had come into British hands after its confiscation by the Nazis during the Second World War.
In return, the Albanian government was to pay the UK £1,100,000 ($2,000,000) in damages for the sinking of two British ships in 1946.
The longstanding dispute was resolved following talks in Rome between Albanian and UK officials.
The 1,574 kg of gold, found in southern German caves at the end of the war, had since that time been administered by a tripartite commission of France, the UK and the USA.
When the destroyers, HMS Volage and HMS Saumares, ran into Albanian mines while passing legitimately through the Corfu channel between Albania and Corfu, 44 men had been killed; in 1948 the International Court of Justice at the Hague had ruled that the Albanian government should pay £843,947 compensation.
It was unclear if or when any money or gold would actually change hands following the formal resolution of this long-standing dispute [see also pp. 37746; 38303].
Return of Kadare
The Albanian novelist and former parliamentary deputy Ismail Kadare, 56, returned to Albania on May 6.
He had become a political exile in France in October 1990, and had made public statements to the effect that he would not return to Albania until democracy had been restored there [see p. 37792].
Transfer of Hoxha's remains — Confiscation of SPA property
On May 3 the remains of Enver Hoxha and 12 other "former leaders of the Party of Labour" (the PLA — the former ruling party, later renamed the Socialist Party of Albania — SPA) were discreetly transferred from the Martyrs' Cemetery in Tirana to a public cemetery in the suburbs of the city.
On May 14 the Cabinet resolved that PLA funds amounting to almost US$2,000,000 would be expropriated and credited to the balance of payments of the state budget.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Cabinet changes — External debt — Relations with Turkey
Cabinet reshuffle
The Bulgarian parliament, the Grand National Assembly, approved a major Cabinet reshuffle on May 20 [see p. 38583 for appointment of Cabinet in November 1991].
The new ministers were elected by an open ballot en bloc.
Prime Minister Filip Dimitrov spent close to a month holding consultations on the reshuffle with key figures within the increasingly fractionalized ruling coalition, the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF).
Dimitrov had also been obliged to co-ordinate the reshuffle with the Movement For Rights and Freedoms (MRF), the ethnic Turkish party which held the balance of power in the Assembly.
In early May Dimitrov, who was constitutionally barred from dismissing a minister without Assembly approval, had threatened to resign unless the Defence Minister, Dimitur Ludzhev, stepped down.
Although relations between Dimitrov and Ludzhev were strained, some commentators suggested that Dimitrov's threat was the visible sign of a larger battle for control of the UDF.
Aleksandur Staliyski, a lawyer and a UDF Assembly member, replaced Dimitur Ludzhev as Defence Minister.
Three new Deputy Prime Ministers were appointed: Ilko Eskenazi, a UDF Assembly member, would co-ordinate the economic ministries; Svetoslav Luchnikov, Minister of Justice, would co-ordinate the activities of the law-enforcement agencies; and Nikola Vasilev, Health Minister, would take charge of the government's relations with the trade unions.
Nikolay Vasilev retained his posts as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Education and Science; he would take charge of co-ordinating activities in the intellectual and humanitarian spheres.
The Foreign Minister, Stoyan Ganev, was relieved of his Deputy Premiership.
The ministries of Industry, Trade and Services and of Agriculture were closed down and the two respective ministers, Ivan Pushkarov and Stanislav Dimitrov, left the Cabinet.
Three new ministries were set up instead: Industry, headed by Rumen Bikov, a UDF Assembly member and a metallurgical engineer; Trade, headed by another UDF Assembly member Aleksandur Pramatarski; and Agricultural Development, Land Use and Land Restitution headed by Georgi Stoyanov.
IMF credit — Debt rescheduling agreement with Germany
The IMF announced on April 20 that it had approved a stand-by credit for Bulgaria, authorizing drawings up to the equivalent of 155,000,000 special drawing rights (about US$212 million) over the next 12 months in support of the government's economic reform programme [see p. 38467 for previous credit approved in March 1991].
Bulgaria and Germany signed a debt rescheduling agreement in Sofia on May 8, under which Germany would allow a postponement of repayment of trade credits guaranteed by it, the deadlines for which had expired in March 1992.
Visit by Dimitrov to Turkey — Friendship treaty
Dimitrov paid his first official visit to neighbouring Turkey on May 5-7.
During his visit Dimitrov held talks with his Turkish counterpart, Suleyman Demirel.
On May 6 the two Prime Ministers signed a treaty of friendship, good-neighbourly relations, co-operation and security [see p. 38830 for reported signing of Bulgarian-Turkish defence agreement in March].
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
First round of "large" privatization
May 18 marked the start of the first round of the so-called "large" privatization through the voucher system [for details of the scheme and previous stages, see pp. 38469; 38734; 38777].
Under this stage all holders of vouchers who had not placed them with investment funds were able to use them to apply for shares in the 1,500 companies selected for privatization.
When the application period ended (on June 8) an assessment of the results would be made and unsold shares would be put up for sale at a lower price.
According to figures released by the Finance Ministry on May 21, some 8,500,000 citizens had bought their entitlement of vouchers, of which some 72 per cent had subsequently been placed with investment funds [see pp. 38776-77].
Defeat of motion on Slovak sovereignty
On May 7 the Slovak National Council voted 73-59 in favour of a declaration of sovereignty of the Slovak Republic, but a previous procedural decision that a three-fifths majority was required to amend the Constitution meant that the margin was not large enough for the declaration to be adopted.
Pro-independence groups had submitted a series of similar declarations in March and April, each of which was defeated.
The difference in votes became progressively smaller, however, and the result on May 7 — shortly before the dissolution of parliament prior to the June general election — was the first showing an overall majority for independence.
Clearing of editor
The Czech Supreme Court ruled on May 7 that Zdenek Porybny, the editor of Rude Pravo (the former organ of the Communist Party), had been arrested without justification in March [see p. 38831].
Foreign relations
The Prime Minister, Marian Calfa, paid an official visit to South Africa on May 4-6, during which he stressed in particular the advantage to both countries of closer economic co-operation.
On May 25 he visited Kiev for talks with his Ukrainian counterpart, Vitold Fokin.
The United Kingdom Prime Minister, John Major, visited Prague on May 27.
He signed a declaration in which the UK formally declared null and void the 1938 Munich Agreement under which Hitler Germany occupied parts of Czechoslovakia.
In meetings with President Vaclav Havel and other government leaders Major also expressed strong support for Czechoslovakia's accession to the European Communities by the end of the decade.
On May 21 the German Bundestag ratified the friendship treaty with Czechoslovakia signed in February [see p. 38777].
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Adoption of third compensation bill — Other developments
The Országgyülés (parliament) on May 13 passed by 186 votes to 37 the third and final bill aimed at compensating victims of the communist and Nazi past [see also April 1991 and April 1992 measures — pp. 38161; 38880].
The current bill provided for compensation in relation to those killed, imprisoned or deported or whose property was expropriated for political reasons between March 11, 1939 (the date of the enactment of the first anti-Jewish laws) and Oct. 23, 1989 (the date of the proclamation of the post-communist democratic republic).
No official estimates existed on the number of potential claimants.
Among those eligible were (i) surviving spouses, children or parents of those killed;(ii) anyone detained for more than 30 days, imprisoned, pressed into forced labour or deported on racial, religious political grounds during the Second World War; and (iii) soldiers sent to Soviet labour camps at the end of the war.
Compensation would be paid in the form of shares in newly privatized companies, or in annuities.
Second phase of privatization — By-election — Spy case
The start of the second phase of privatization was announced on May 5 by Tamas Szabó, Minister without Portfolio in charge of privatization matters.
He said that it would proceed broadly in line with the first phase, begun in 1991 [see p. 38479].
An important by-election in the south-eastern town of Bekescsaba on May 24 was won by a member of the opposition Alliance of Free Democrats (SzDSz).
The candidate of the ruling Hungarian Democratic Forum (MDF), Bela Kádár, the Minister for International Economic Relations, came third.
The result was widely considered to be indicative of the government's increasing unpopularity.
A military court on May 13 sentenced an air force ensign to 12 years in prison for selling secrets to Yugoslavia.
Visits by Fokin and Major
During a visit by the Ukrainian Prime Minister, Vitold Fokin, to Budapest on May 21, the two governments signed several bilateral agreements on co-operation, particularly in the economic field.
United Kingdom Prime Minister John Major met Hungarian government leaders during a visit to Budapest on 28 May, and in a joint statement expressed strong support for Hungary's accession to the European Communities by the end of the decade.
EUROPE
POLAND
Government crisis
In a letter to the Speaker of the Sejm (parliament) on May 26, President Lech Walesa announced that, having lost confidence in the government, he was withdrawing his support and proposing the formation of a new Cabinet.
The "small coalition" of opposition parties in the Sejm (the Democratic Union (UD), Liberal Democratic Congress (KLD) and Polish Economic Programme (PPG)) proposed a no confidence motion against the government on May 29.
Walesa's letter said: "The lack of co-operation between the government and the head of state results in the constitutional powers of the President being disregarded." 
The paralysis of the minority governing coalition had intensified in May, following the unsuccessful attempt in April to create a "10-party coalition" [see p. 38881].
In a speech to the Sejm on May 8 Walesa had renewed his call for a French-style constitution, with presidential powers to appoint and dismiss ministers.
The position of the minority governing coalition had worsened with the resignation of Finance Minister, Andrzej Olechowski, on May 6 following the Sejm's refusal to oppose a Constitutional Tribunal ruling concerning index-linked revaluations of pensions and public sector salaries.
Olechowski warned that this would add 20,000 to 30,000 million zloty to state expenditure.
Olechowski's resignation came during talks with IMF representatives over renewing an agreement with the IMF, suspended in 1991 because of the budget deficit [see p. 38832].
After the talks on May 4-12, IMF representatives said that agreement before July was still possible.
Olechowski continued to serve as caretaker Finance Minister.
Defence Minister Jan Parys resigned on May 18, in what was seen as another blow to the government of Jan Olszewski; he was replaced by his deputy, acting Defence Minister Romuald Szeremietiew.
Parys had been suspended after alleging on April 6 that politicians were planning to involve army officers in political intrigue.
The underlying problem was the competing authority of the Defence Ministry and the National Security Council attached to the President's Office.
Parys resigned because, he said, the Sejm Commission investigating the affair had concluded that the office of Defence Minister should be subordinated to the National Security Office.
The Commission also concluded that Parys's statements on April 6 were "groundless and harmful to the state" , Polish Radio reported on May 15.
In a motion to the Sejm on May 23 recalling Parys as Defence Minister, Olszewski praised Parys's work, and emphasised the ambiguity in the constitutional provisions for defence.
He noted that the government commission which he had established to investigate the Parys affair had paid more attention to this than the commission later appointed at Walesa's request [see p. 38881].
The Sejm voted by 235 to 18 with 58 abstentions for Parys's recall.
Abortion controversy
A code of ethics drafted by the Doctors' Congress in December 1991 went into force on May 3, 1992.
The code threatened doctors with suspension if they performed abortions unless the pregnancy involved rape or threat to the woman's life.
This ran counter to the 1956 law granting abortion on demand (with amendments in 1990 requiring approval from three doctors for abortions in state hospitals), and Poland's ombudsman, Tadeusz Zielinski, began a campaign against the new code, calling it an "attempt to undermine the state's legal order" .
The Constitutional Court had been unable to rule on the code, as the version adopted at the Congress had since been altered.
Zielinski ordered criminal proceedings against a Warsaw hospital which had refused a patient an abortion and even an examination of the state of her pregnancy.
The right-wing Catholic party, the Christian National Union (ZChN), asked Zielinski to oppose the 1956 law, but Health and Social Welfare Minister Marian Miskiewicz called on him to clarify its status with the Constitutional Court.
In March a draft anti-abortion bill in the Sejm had been signed by 171 deputies mostly from the ZChN and the Centre Alliance.
It was announced on May 6, however, that two independent bills had been brought before the Sejm to overrule the Doctors' Congress resolution.
[For May 1991 rejection of anti-abortion bill see p. 38207.]
Foreign relations
On his first visit to Russia on May 21-23, President Walesa signed a friendship and co-operation treaty with President Boris Yeltsin intended to strengthen future ties and mark an end to the Communist era.
The Foreign Ministers signed a document covering the withdrawal of Russian forces from Poland by Nov. 15, and an agreement binding each side to make no claims for compensation over the stationing of Soviet troops in Poland.
Walesa also held a private meeting with former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev and visited Katyn, the site of the massacre of Polish officers by Soviet security services during World War II [for Soviet admission of responsibility for massacre see p. 37383-84].
UK Prime Minister John Major announced on May 26, the first day of a visit to Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary, that the UK would lift visa requirements for Polish visitors (lifted for Czechs, Slovaks and Hungarians in 1991).
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Controversy over Hungarian minority
Measures ordered by Gheorghe Funar, Mayor of Cluj-Napoca, a town in Transylvania with a population which was about one-quarter Magyar, raised fears of renewed oppression of Romania's Hungarian minority.
As reported on May 5, Funar, a member of the National Unity Party, had banned an international conference on local government scheduled for April 25-26, implying that it would encourage Hungarian separatism.
He also ordered that all public meetings or conferences had to be cleared with the Mayor's office three days in advance.
A Romanian Foreign Ministry spokesman on May 13 dissociated the government from the ban on the meeting, saying that it was a local government matter.
Funar had ordered at the end of March that Hungarian or dual language signs in Cluj-Napoca be removed.
The Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania (HDUR), the political party representing the Magyar population, protested against this order.
The mayoral elections in Tirgu Mures on May 24 returned to office an ethnic Hungarian, Nagy Gyozo, raising fears of ethnic tension in the Transylvanian town which had seen ethnic riots in March 1990 [see p. 37743].
The election of a mayor had been delayed since the resignation of a candidate originally elected on Feb. 9 (an independent supported by the HDUR).
Romanian nationalist parties had attempted through the courts to force elections to be held with only the participating candidates from the first elections, which would have excluded the HDUR, whose candidate had then been ruled ineligible by a local court [see p. 38778].
The Central Electoral Commission in Bucharest and the government, however, were said to have favoured holding elections with all parties participating.
EUROPE
CIS
Tashkent summit
The Councils of Heads of State and Heads of Government met in Tashkent (Uzbekistan) on May 15.
All 11 Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) member countries attended, but Ukraine, Moldova, Tajikistan, Azerbaijan and Kirgizstan were not represented by their presidents.
Preparatory meetings had been held between Foreign Ministers (on May 10) and Defence Ministers (on May 12-13, but without Moldova).
Military agreements
The Heads of State meeting, chaired by Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev, negotiated a five-year collective security agreement signed by Russia, Armenia, Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, providing for a collective response to aggression against any of its signatories.
Other agreements signed by most participants at the meetings included (i) reducing armed forces of the former Soviet Union;(ii) reducing chemical weapons in accordance with international agreements;(iii) creating a single air space, a single information space and, in principle, a CIS television and radio company;(iv) social provision for servicemen; and (v) agreement on border troops.
Quotas were agreed for financing of joint armed forces and border troops.
Russia took 75 per cent; Moldova and Ukraine would finance in full the troops on their territories and participate in financing joint forces through absolute contributions; Tajikistan, Kirgizstan and Turkmenistan were not paying for the upkeep of troops on their territory.
On May 23, the USA signed a protocol with Russia, Ukraine, Byelarus and Kazakhstan on strategic arms reduction, adjusting the original USA-Soviet Union treaty [see pp. 38890; 38320]to accommodate redistribution of nuclear weapons among the four republics.
The USA, European Communities (EC), Japan and Russia initialled an agreement establishing an international science and technology centre to employ ex-Soviet nuclear scientists.
Financial agreements
The Council of Heads of Government agreed that where possible republics would repay a proportion of the debt outstanding between them, balance of payments statements would be issued, and 0.2 per cent interest would be incurred on overdue payments.
A routine conference of heads of national banks of 11 CIS states on May 19 in Taskhkent was also attended by IMF representatives.
According to Izvestiya of May 19, banks needed to co-ordinate credit and monetary policies before the rouble became convertible.
National banks in the rouble zone, responsible only to their governments, were currently issuing money to plug gaps in their national budgets.
Lisbon aid conference
A conference on aid to the states of the former Soviet Union took place in Lisbon on May 23-24.
Sponsored by the EC, it followed the US-initiated Washington conference in January [see p. 38730], with a further conference scheduled for Tokyo in autumn 1992.
Delegations from 63 countries were joined by representatives of international institutions, and, in contrast to the Washington conference, by the Foreign Ministers of CIS member states.
The conference concluded that aid to the CIS needed to move from the provision of emergency food and medical aid to a long-term strategy of economic development.
Reviewing the US$86,000 million already spent or pledged, it was agreed to improve co-ordination among both donor and recipient countries.
The conference reiterated the importance of technical assistance and of "triangular trade" between eastern Europe and the CIS [see p. 38730].
EUROPE
RUSSIA
Creation of Russian Federation armed forces
President Boris Yeltsin issued a decree on May 7 establishing Russian Federation (RF) armed forces and making himself their C-in-C.
All former Soviet troops and military installations on RF territory as well as troops and naval forces outside the RF but under its jurisdiction were to be included in the RF armed forces.
The Defence Ministry was ordered to submit proposals for military reform, including reducing the strength of the armed forces and moving from a conscript to a professional army.
The RF Defence and Foreign Ministries were to negotiate the status of troops on Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) states' territories not forming part of those states' armed forces or of the CIS strategic forces.
The strategic forces on RF territory were part of the CIS joint armed forces.
Gen. Pavel Grachev (promoted from colonel-general) was named Russia's new Defence Minister on May 18, succeeding Yeltsin, who had held the post since the creation of a Russian Defence Ministry in March [see p. 38825].
Gen. Grachev, who had hitherto been Yeltsin's deputy Defence Minister, had played a key role in the military opposition to the coup attempt in August 1991 [see p. 38369].
Russian Federation Security Council
A law signed on March 5 (given in full in Rossiskaya gazeta of May 6) laid down the legal foundations of individual and state security and set up a Security Council responsible for this area, chaired ex officio by the Russian President.
At the first meeting of the Security Council on May 20 Yeltsin warned the new body against trying to monopolize power as had the ex-Soviet State Security Committee (KGB), saying that "the provision of security…should strictly comply with the law" .
Cabinet reshuffle
Presidential decrees at the end of May effected a minor Cabinet reshuffle.
Vladimir Shumeiko, formerly president of the Russian Confederation of Entrepreneurs' Unions (the managers' body) was appointed First Deputy Premier.
Viktor Chernomyrdin, a former chair of the state gas industry, was made Deputy Premier responsible for energy (replacing Vladimir Lopukhin); Georgy Khizha (former Deputy Mayor of St Petersburg) became Deputy Premier in charge of industry (replacing Aleksandr Titkin who was named in a privatization scandal involving state-sector industry); and Anatoly Chubais, chair of the State Committee on Property (in charge of privatization), became in addition a Deputy Prime Minister.
Aleksandr Shokhin, a Deputy Prime Minister hitherto with responsibility for Social Policy was given responsibility instead for Foreign Economic Relations.
Gennady Burbulis was appointed State Secretary under the Russian President, having previously been Russian State Secretary.
Sergei Shakhrai resigned as state counsellor for legal affairs on May 7.
Constitutional Court hearing on CPSU
The Russian Constitutional Court convened on May 26 to discuss the legality of Yeltsin's decrees of Nov. 6, 1991 [see p. 38583]banning the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) and the Russian Communist Party (RCP) and confiscating their property.
(Under Soviet law, political parties could only be dissolved by court order.)
However, the attempt to revive the CPSU and RCP — and to discredit Yeltsin — was overturned when the Court ruled by nine votes to three to discuss also the constitutional legality of the activities of the CPSU and RCP.
The case would begin on July 7.
The motion was proposed by People's Deputy and leader of the Russian Social Democratic Party, Oleg Rumyantsev.
On May 25, Sergei Shakhrai, one of Yeltsin's three advocates at the hearing, had revealed documents proving that the CPSU had supplied international terrorist organizations with weapons.
He promised that more such documents from the archives of the CPSU central committee would be released.
The separate inquiry into the disappearance of state funds through the CPSU was scheduled to be completed by July.
The funds were said to have been laundered and deposited in foreign bank accounts.
Yeltsin's visit to provinces
Yeltsin made a four-day tour of the Altai and Buryat regions beginning on May 26.
The tour was part of a programme of visits to the outlying areas of the Russian Federation [for visit to north see p. 38876].
The Altai krai (area) included the Gorny Altai Autonomous Republic (newly upgraded — see p. 38826).
On May 7, the Postfactum news agency reported that the Gorny Altai Supreme Soviet had voted to change the name to the Republic of Altai.
The Autonomous Republic of Buryatia was extending economic co-operation with ethnically similar and neighbouring Mongolia.
During his visit Yeltsin confirmed that he was intending to hold a referendum on the main clauses of the new Constitution and on the issue of private ownership, which the Congress of People's Deputies (the supreme legislature) was blocking [see also pp. 38875-76].
Economy
A nationwide strike by medical workers beginning in April intensified during May and achieved backing from the Federation of Independent Trade Unions.
The health-care workers were demanding a 300 per cent pay rise and extra funding for health care.
Teachers were also on strike with similar demands.
A presidential decree given in Rossiskaya gazeta of May 15 increased pay in budget-funded sectors by a factor of 1.8 and raised supplements paid as a percentage of salary from May 1 for health and education workers and from June 1 for other sectors.
Interfax reported on May 13 that the health unions would postpone strike action until Aug. 1.
The salaries of government employees such as doctors and teachers were subject to inflation and still suffered from the Soviet concept of paying intellectuals less than manual workers.
Other developments
On May 30 after government discussions on the fuel industry, it was announced that prices for energy would not be raised to world prices as sought by the IMF because of fears of rising social tension.
The Energy Minister, Lopukhin, a supporter of liberalizing prices, was replaced [see above].
The prices for oil and gas sold to Russian enterprises had been increased sixfold from May 18, but were still controlled.
A 50 per cent rise in costs to domestic consumers was predicted.
Fuel would be sold to other CIS member states at free market prices if there were no regulatory agreements in place between these states and Russia.
A government resolution aiming at a solution of the cash crisis, reported on May 15, included the introduction of non-cash methods of payment exclusively for transactions worth over 10,000 roubles (1 rouble=US$0.5646 at the official rate as at May 18, 1992).
An increased number of rouble notes would be put into circulation, including a new denomination of 5,000 roubles, to try to reduce the tension caused by cash shortages.
The RF Central Bank announced on May 9 that in January-April 1992, 143,100 million roubles were put into circulation — 1.6 times more than during the whole of 1991.
The Russian government amended its original plan to make the rouble fully convertible by Aug. 1, 1992, saying that a unitary floating exchange rate, due to be introduced from July, would continue for several months before the rouble was fixed within a 7.5 per cent fluctuation band either side of a central rate.
Rossiskaya gazeta of May 14 carried budget plans approved by the Supreme Soviet and dated April 4, which set the RF budget deficit in the first quarter of 1992 at Rbs. 67,500 million.
Economic indicators from the RF State Statistics Committee reported in Ekonomika i zhizn issue 17, April 1992, showed that in all sectors the first quarter of 1992 showed a fall in output compared with the similar period in 1991.
The statistics included a 14 per cent drop in national income.
Foreign relations
Protocol on German autonomous republic
On April 27 it was reported that Russian Minister for Nationalities Valery Tishkov and Horst Waffenschmidt, German representative for immigration, had initialled a protocol on co-operation in the restoration of the Russian Germans' autonomous republic on the Volga, which had been eliminated under Stalin in 1941.
The German side emphasised that the promised financial assistance would only be forthcoming if the 2,000,000 Russian Germans remained in the Volga republic or other regions of the former Soviet Union.
[For earlier discussion on ethnic-German republic see pp. 38349; 38583; 38590.]
Relations with Turkey
On a visit to Moscow on May 25, Turkish Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel signed a treaty on the foundation of relations with Russia.
The Turkish proposal to form a Black-Sea economic co-operation region was welcomed by Yeltsin.
On May 15, Russia and Turkey renewed a 1984 Soviet-Turkish trade agreement on Russian natural gas, having solved a debt-repayment dispute.
EUROPE
BYELARUS
Military and economic issues
On May 7 Lt.-Gen.
Pavel Kozlovsky replaced acting Defence Minister Lt.-Gen.
Petr Chaus who became one of nine deputy Defence Ministers.
It was announced on May 9 that the government of Byelarus had taken over the former Soviet troops in the Byelorussian Military District.
Kozlovsky said that the troops of the Byelorussian Military District would form the base of Byelarus's ground forces.
On May 6 the Council of Ministers raised servicemen's pay by up to 100 per cent, backdated to February 1992.
Introduction of parallel currency
Byelarus introduced its own internal currency, the rubel, on May 25, six days ahead of schedule; the chair of the National Bank, Stanislav Bogdankevich, denied that Byelarus was leaving the rouble zone.
Up to 50 per cent of wages would be paid in rubels, which would be exchanged at a rate of one to 10 with the rouble.
Officials said that the introduction of what they called the "settlement note" (raschetny bilet) had been forced by a severe shortage of rouble notes from Russia.
Initially the currencies would coexist, but according to a radio report of May 22, it would in future only be possible to pay in food shops with rubels, since "their basic function is to protect the internal market" .
Minimum wage
At the beginning of May the minimum monthly wage was almost doubled, to 1,000 roubles (1 rouble=US$0.5708 at the official rate as at May 1, 1992).
However, it was recognized that prices would have to be raised to supply the necessary funds.
EUROPE
MOLDOVA
Continued conflict in Dnestr Republic
Despite quadrilateral negotiations between Moldova, Ukraine, Russia and Romania in April [see pp. 38877-78]skirmishes between Moldovan forces and the self-proclaimed ethnic Russian and Ukrainian "Dnestr Republic" continued during May.
Moldova demanded the withdrawal of the ex-Soviet 14th Army stationed in the republic (transferred to Russian jurisdiction in April).
Dnestr and Moldovan leaders traded accusations over receiving military aid from Russia and Romania respectively.
However, by the end of May, the Russian government had decided to pull out the troops.
The Guardian of May 23 said that the fighting, previously "confined to sporadic small arms skirmishes" , was intensifying with the use of heavy weaponry and organized military formations.
Moldovan President Mircea Snegur on May 24 ordered the formation of reserve units and increased Defence Ministry funding.
Conciliation commission meetings between the two sides continued to be held on a regular basis in the Dnestr town of Bendery, but with little success as local ceasfires were repeatedly disregarded.
International negotiations — Romanian involvement
On May 24, a quadrilateral Foreign Ministers' meeting during the Lisbon summit [see p. 38923]issued a statement on measures to calm the situation.
The Romanian side accused the 14th Army of being an active participant in the conflict.
Romanian President Ion Iliescu in an interview with the Russian ITAR-TASS news agency on May 26 admitted that Romania was providing Moldova with conventional arms and specialists.
On May 27, the Romanian Senate passed a law on allowing tax-free contributions to aid for Moldova, and the government donated some 150,000,000 lei (about US$660,000).
Moldovan and Romanian contacts, including a presidential meeting on May 18-19, continued during May.
Moldovan response
Meeting in emergency session on May 25, the Moldovan Supreme Soviet heard a call from Snegur "either to halt combat operations in the Dnestr region…or to declare Moldova to be in a state of war with Russia" .
However, although the parliament on May 26 called on foreign states to support the demand for the withdrawal of the 14th Army, it hesitated to back Snegur's demand.
On May 26 the Moldovan Supreme Soviet adopted a law allowing Moldova's "entry into political and state formations" only if confirmed by referendum.
This was intended to reassure sections of the population worried about unification with Romania.
Military issues
According to Izvestiya of May 29, Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev had announced that the withdrawal of the 14th Army had been agreed; the timescale and conditions were to be discussed at the quadrilateral Foreign and Defence Ministers' meeting, postponed from May 29.
Members of the monitoring commission established in April [see p. 38877]began to arrive in May.
Russian radio reported that the first group of 14th Army troops had left Moldova on May 26, and that airborne units stationed in Kishinev would withdraw between June 15 and Sept. 1.
EUROPE
UKRAINE
Dispute over Crimea
On May 5 the Crimean Supreme Soviet declared the Crimea's independence from Ukraine, pending negotiations with Ukraine and a referendum scheduled for Aug. 2.
In apparent contradiction to this, reportedly as a concession to Ukraine, the Crimean Supreme Soviet adopted a Constitution the following day, describing Crimea as "within" (vkhodit v) Ukraine.
The Ukrainian parliament voted by 340 votes to six on May 13 to annul the independence declaration as against the Constitution.
Apparently giving way to Ukrainian pressure, the Crimean Supreme Soviet on May 20 (the deadline set by Ukraine) voted by 98 out of 157 to repeal the independence declaration.
The Ukrainian parliament (Supreme Rada) on April 29 had passed a bill, already ratified by the Crimean Supreme Soviet, delineating Crimea's rights, including control over natural resources, land and economic reform.
Sufficient signatures had been collected to hold a referendum in the Crimea on independence from Ukraine.
The Crimea had been administratively part of Ukraine since 1954, before which it had belonged to Russia.
The representative body of the original Crimean population, the Crimean Tatars' Majlis [see p. 38302], issued a statement on May 12 denouncing the Crimean vote but also criticizing the autonomy granted by Ukraine to the Crimea, as all existing structures excluded the Tatar nation.
The Tatars had been deported from the Crimea to Central Asia under Stalin.
In an escalation of the confrontation, the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet voted in closed session on May 21 to rescind the 1954 decree ceding the Crimea from Russia to Ukraine [see p. 13507].
The transfer, a "gift" of the then Communist Party general secretary Nikita Khrushchev, was deemed to contradict the Russian Constitution.
Russian government members, including Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev, had opposed holding the debate, fearing the possible intensification of the dispute.
The reaction of Ukraine to the Russian parliamentary decision came in a Foreign Ministry statement, reported on May 25, which said that "the status of the Crimea is an internal Ukrainian matter which cannot be the subject of negotiations with another state" .
Status of Black Sea Fleet
At a press conference on May 26, Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, the C.-in-C. of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) armed forces, announced that the Fleet would be removed from CIS command.
The Fleet, it was decided at a meeting of CIS Defence Ministers (excluding Azerbaijan and Moldova), would not form part of the CIS strategic forces.
Controversy over the status of the Fleet had begun in January 1992 [see p. 38732].
The talks beginning at the end of April [see p. 38878]were described as "useful" .
A second round of talks was held on May 15-18 in Dagomys (Russia), preceded by working visits by Russian and Ukrainian parliamentary delegations to the Black Sea.
Negotiations were still in progress over the division of the Fleet, with Ukraine, Russia and Georgia all demanding a share.
Reduction of term of service in armed forces
A law came into force on May 12, specifying the length of service in the Ukrainian armed forces.
Alternative service was now permitted, and the ex-Soviet term of 24 months was reduced to 18.
Regulations for the Ukrainian army were being drafted, following criticism from the Supreme Soviet in a statement in April over the slow formation of Ukrainian armed forces.
Treaty with Poland
Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk while on an official visit to Poland on May 18-19 signed a friendship and co-operation treaty.
Other agreements were concluded concerning border crossings, agricultural, scientific and cultural co-operation, recognition of educational qualifications and road transport.
The position of national minorities was also discussed.
Kravchuk's visit to USA
Kravchuk paid an official visit to the USA on May 5-7 when he opened the Ukrainian embassy in Washington.
Talks with US President Bush covered arms reductions and trade and foreign investments.
The US Export-Import Bank was reported to have offered Ukraine US$140 million in credits for purchasing US goods.
[For nuclear weapons agreement see p. 38922.]
Church controversy
A conflict within the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (UOC) escalated during May.
The UOC had begun a campaign, reportedly opposed by some of its hierarchy, for independence from Moscow.
On May 7, Aleksii II, Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia, announced that the Holy Synod had decided that the head of the UOC, Metropolitan Filaret, could face trial by the hierarchs of the Russian Orthodox Church (ROC) if he failed to honour his resignation announcement of April 2.
This announcement had been made at a council of the ROC, but was retracted in Kiev on April 14 on the grounds that it had been made under pressure.
On May 26 it was announced that Vladimir, Metropolitan of Rostov and Novocherkassk had been elected new head of the UOC.
The decision was approved by Patriarch Aleksii.
EUROPE
ARMENIA/AZERBAIJAN
Armenian advances in Nagorny Karabakh
On the evening of May 8, following continued intensive shelling of Stepanakert, Armenian forces began a massive assault on Shusha — the last remaining Azerbaijani stronghold within Nagorny Karabakh — which ended in victory on May 9 and left the Armenians with overall control of the disputed enclave for the first time.
The attack was in breach of a ceasefire agreed at a meeting in Tehran on May 8 between Armenian President Levon Ter-Petrosyan and the then acting President of Azerbaijan Yagub Mamedov.
It provoked accusations from the Azerbaijani side that the talks had been used as a cover for an intensification of military action.
Armenian officials responded by claiming that military units active in the enclave were outside Armenian control.
Armenian efforts were then directed towards an attack on the city of Lachin — situated outside Karabakh to the south-west — in an attempt to capitalize on their victory against Shusha by breaking a corridor through Azerbaijani territory to connect Nagorny Karabakh with Armenia proper.
Azerbaijani attempts to open a new front in the east through attacks on the Askeran region of the enclave from Agdam could not prevent their loss of control over Lachin on May 17.
On May 18 Isa Kambarov, deputy leader of the Azerbaijani Popular Front, conceded that "we have lost the first stage of the war" .
Threat of Turkish intervention
On May 18, Armenian troops launched a full-scale attack on hills surrounding the city of Sadarak in Nakhichevan, a strip of Azerbaijani land separated from the rest of the country by Armenian territory.
Hikmet Cetin, Foreign Minister of Turkey, which according to the Kars treaty of 1921 was joint guarantor with Russia of the status of Nakhichevan and which shared a small section of its border, expressed his country's disapproval on May 19.
If Armenia did not halt its "aggression" , he warned, it would be responsible for the consequences.
On the same day, Turkish President Turgut Özal called for troops to be sent into Nakhichevan and for the return of Lachin and Shusha to Azerbaijani control.
According to the terms of a collective agreement signed by Russia and five other Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) member states in Tashkent on May 15, Russia would be obliged to come to the aid of Armenia in the event of a threat to that country's security.
Azerbaijan was not among the signatories.
The prospect of Turkish involvement against Armenia in support of Azerbaijan, pitting Turkey against Russia in the conflict, prompted C.-in-C. of CIS forces Yevgeny Shaposhnikov to warn on May 20 that the crisis "could lead to World War Three" .
In a veiled warning to Turkey, President Boris Yeltsin of Russia dispatched his State Secretary Gennady Burbulis and Defence Minister Gen. Pavel Grachev to Armenia for talks on the future role of the 7th Army, now under exclusive Russian control but stationed on Armenian territory.
Burbulis gave his assurance that, while a partial and phased withdrawal of troops was envisaged despite the security agreement, Russia would not leave Armenia "in the lurch" .
On May 20 Turkish Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel ruled out the use of force in Nakhichevan, claiming that Turkish involvement would lead to a wider conflict between Christians and Moslems in the region.
Demirel repeated his assurances to Yeltsin during two days of talks held in Moscow from May 25 [see also p. 38924].
Power struggle in Azerbaijan
The loss of Shusha precipitated a political crisis in Azerbaijan.
On May 14, an emergency session of the Supreme Soviet blamed acting President Mamedov for recent setbacks and reinstated ex-President Ayaz Mutalibov, ousted in March after an earlier military defeat [see p. 38827].
Mutalibov immediately declared a state of emergency in Baku, and cancelled presidential elections, due to be held on June 7 and widely expected to bring to power the Popular Front candidate, Abulfaz Elchibey.
The Popular Front described Mutalibov's installation as a "coup" and called for widespread civil disobedience.
On May 15 a crowd of 20,000 gathered outside the Front's headquarters and from there marched on the parliament building and the presidential palace.
A combination of army support and neutrality enabled the demonstrators to overrun both buildings with minimal losses.
By the end of the day Mutalibov had fled and the Front had established effective control throughout the capital.
A special session of the National Council gave the Popular Front a number of ministerial positions in a new coalition government, and on May 18 Kambarov was appointed acting President pending new elections.
EUROPE
GEORGIA
South Ossetia crisis
The withdrawal of Russian Interior Ministry troops from the autonomous region of South Ossetia in Georgia at the end of April was followed by intensified shelling of the capital, Tskhinvali, from Georgia.
Chair of the Georgian State Council, Eduard Shevardnadze, made the first visit from a Georgian leader to Tskhinvali in three years on May 13.
Tripartite talks with representatives of the Russian autonomous republic of North Ossetia and of South Ossetia resulted in a temporary ceasefire.
However, Georgian fighters on May 20 attacked a group of refugees travelling from South to North Ossetia, killing 36 people.
This attack was condemned by the Georgian Supreme Soviet, and in North Ossetia the Supreme Soviet voted in extraordinary session to close the Georgian military highway (the main route from Russia) from May 22 and to cut off Georgia's gas supplies from May 24.
On May 27 a meeting in Vladikavkaz (capital of North Ossetia) between Georgian Deputy Premier Aleksandr Kavsadze [see p. 38877 for his appointment], North and South Ossetian leaders and Nikolai Medvedev, Chair of the Russian Supreme Soviet Commission for National and State Structures and Interethnic Relations, agreed on a ceasefire and on lifting the blockade.
The ceasefire was broken immediately, however, with attacks from both sides.
Confederation of Mountain Peoples
The Confederation of Caucasian Mountain Peoples (a forum for Caucasus ethnic groups) met in Tskhinvali on April 26 and called for a reassessment of relations with Russia.
Security
The Georgian State Council voted to hold elections to the republican Supreme Council on Oct. 11, and to extend the curfew in the capital Tbilisi for another month, it was reported on May 1.
The State Security Ministry (KGB) was abolished by decision of the State Council on May 2.
It was to be replaced by an Information Intelligence Bureau, headed by Irakly Batiashvili, under the Presidium of the State Council.
Foreign relations
US Secretary of State James Baker made "an unofficial working visit" to Georgia on May 26, Georgian Independence Day.
Offering limited aid to Georgia, he said that further aid would depend on free elections and respect for minority rights.
A US embassy opened in Georgia at the end of April.
Georgia established diplomatic relations with Iran on May 15 and with Turkey on May 21.
EUROPE
BALTIC STATES
Troop withdrawals
Russian First Deputy Foreign Minister Fyodor Shelov-Kovedyayev toured Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania on May 4-7 accompanied by a delegation including Col.-Gen.
Valery Mironov, Commander of the North-western Group of forces.
In response to Baltic demands for immediate troop withdrawal, the Russian side repeated that the withdrawal of former Soviet forces from the Baltic states before 1997-99 would depend on material provision for the servicemen.
However, Izvestiya of May 23 reported new Russian Defence Minister Gen. Pavel Grachev as predicting troop withdrawals beginning in 1992-94.
[For February troop withdrawal negotiations see p. 38786.]
In Lithuania, Shelov-Kovedyayev criticized the proposed referendum on troop withdrawal (on June 14) as a threat to Russian and Lithuanian security.
Nevertheless, ratification documents on the bilateral (Russian-Lithuanian) relations treaty of 1991 were handed over.
The ratification of similar treaties with Latvia and Estonia could be jeopardized, according to Shelov-Kovedyayev, by language and draft citizenship laws.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin issued a decree, reported on May 21, transferring the troops of the Baltic border district to Russian Federation jurisdiction and placing them under the command of the C.-in-C. of Border Troops, financed from the Russian budget.
The Russian Federation would begin negotiations with interested parties on the troops' status and on guarding the borders of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
Talks between the Russian Federation and separate delegations from all three states appeared to be making little progress.
Lithuanian President Vytautas Landsbergis had lodged an official protest with Yeltsin on April 29 over the alleged deployment of new troops in the republic, and had banned unauthorized use of Lithuania's air space.
Baltic permanent representatives at the UN requested aid in inspecting military units as their requests to the Russian side had met with refusal.
However, Russia formally protested to the Council of Europe over the status of Russians in the Baltic states, it was reported in The Baltic Independent of May 15-21.
EUROPE
ESTONIA
New criminal code
On May 7 the Supreme Council (parliament) adopted a new criminal code, effective from June 1.
In an interview with Estonian Radio on May 7, Justice Minister Mart Rask expressed satisfaction with the new code, which, he said, would enable the government to continue with its judicial and criminal reform programme.
The death penalty was retained for two crimes: terrorism and murder in particularly aggravated circumstances.
The outgoing criminal code had provided for the death penalty for 18 kinds of crimes.
Appointment of acting Defence Minister
Uno Veering, a Minister of State, was in addition appointed acting Defence Minister on April 27.
At the same time Toomas Puura was appointed as Deputy Defence Minister.
A report on Estonian Radio on April 27 said that Veering and Puura had been given the responsibility of expediting the setting up of an Estonian Defence Ministry.
EUROPE
LATVIA
Parallel currency
The Latvian Currency Reform Committee decided on May 6 to introduce a Latvian rouble to circulate in parallel with the ex-Soviet rouble.
Public-sector wages and payments would be made in the new currency, but it would not be backed by hard currency and international recognition, unlike the future Latvian currency, the lats.
The move was forced by the currency shortage affecting all former Soviet republics [see also Byelarus].
The IMF criticized the new currency as being vulnerable to inflation.
The Currency Reform Committee comprised Prime Minister Ivars Godmanis, president of the Bank of Latvia Einars Repse and deputy Chair of the Supreme Council Economic Committee Edmunds Krastins.
Lithuania and Estonia were said to be considering the idea of transitional currencies; in May Lithuania introduced coupons in 200 and 500 denominations, paid as a percentage of wages and used for goods in short supply.
Anti-KGB law
The Supreme Council passed a resolution announced on May 6 banning former officers of the Latvian State Security Committee (KGB) from working in defence, internal affairs and security bodies.
The First Deputy Chair of the Supreme Council, Andrejs Krastins, claimed in an Interior Ministry statement reported on May 5 that accusations in the Atmoda-Atpute newspaper that he had been recruited into the KGB in 1980 for three years were an attempt to compromise the resolution.
The Supreme Council had adopted in March a resolution condemning the Communist Parties of the Soviet Union and Latvia for "crimes against humanity" .
It had also passed a law defining the Communist and National Socialist regimes within Latvia and abroad (in the Soviet Union) as criminal until Aug. 21, 1991.
EUROPE
LITHUANIA
Referendum on presidency — Government crisis
A proposal on introducing an executive presidency which was put to national referendum on May 23 was defeated.
Preliminary results indicated a turnout of about 58 per cent, of whom 69.2 per cent voted in favour and 25.6 per cent against.
Those in favour of an executive presidency thus constituted about 40 per cent of the electorate; to be accepted, the proposal had to be approved by over half of the total electorate.
Another referendum was to be held on June 7 over the new constitution.
President Vytautas Landsbergis, addressing the Supreme Council on May 26, warned of a creeping coup from the left, led by the Lithuanian Democratic Labour Party (LDLP — former independent Lithuanian Communist Party).
On May 16, Prime Minister Gediminas Vagnorius tendered his resignation, effective from May 28, accusing left-wing forces of obstructing economic change and government decisions.
Vagnorius had appeared before the Supreme Council on May 5 to explain the criticism in April of his government by 10 of his ministers [see p. 38880].
During this speech and in his resignation statement, Vagnorius criticized the Procurator's Office, the Energy Ministry (calling for the Minister, Leonas Asmantas, to resign) and the Bank of Lithuania (central bank).
By the end of May, Vagnorius, refusing to explain his resignation to the Supreme Council, was still Prime Minister, albeit in an acting capacity.
Mutual recriminations over the policy of the Lithuanian Bank and the government were made throughout May, over the printing of the new currency and over relations with the ex-Soviet banking structures.
The Supreme Council on May 12 had defeated Vagnorius's attempt to pass motions of no confidence in Asmantas and in the chair of the Bank of Lithuania, Vilius Baldisis.
EUROPE
FINLAND
Approval of treaty with Russia — Purchase of US aircraft
The Diet on May 22 approved by 153 votes to four a new treaty on good-neighbourliness and mutual co-operation with Russia to replace the 1948 Treaty of Friendship, Co-operation and Mutual Assistance with the former Soviet Union [see pp. 38444-45; 38587].
Finland on May 6 announced that it had decided to purchase 64 US F/A-18 Hornet interceptor aircraft in preference to ex-Soviet, French or Swedish models to modernize its air force by the end of the century.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Local elections — "Friendly fire" verdict — Acknowledgment of existence of MI6
Conservative gains in local elections
The Conservative Party made net gains of 308 seats in local elections held on May 7 for over 3,800 seats on 207 local district councils in England, Scotland and Wales, only one month after the general election in which it was returned to power for a fourth term [see pp. 38868-69].
The Labour Party suffered heavy net losses of 365 seats and the Liberal Democrats gained 61 seats.
Verdict in "friendly fire" inquest
The jury at an Oxford inquest into the deaths of nine British servicemen in "friendly fire" during the Gulf War decided unanimously on May 18 that they had been "unlawfully killed" .
The two US pilots involved, who had mistakenly fired missiles at British armoured personnel carriers in the Iraqi desert on Feb. 26, 1991, remained anonymous and had testified only by letter.
Documentation was passed on to the Director of Public Prosecutions but Prime minister John Major indicated in the House of Commons on May 19 that the government would take no further action, while the US Defence Department stated on May 19 that it considered the case closed.
Formal acknowledgment of MI6
The existence of the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS), commonly known as MI6, was publicly acknowledged for the first time by the government when Major announced on May 6 that the service would, like its domestic intelligence counterpart MI5 [see p. 37158], be placed on a statutory basis during the 1992-93 session of Parliament, and confirmed that its Chief was Sir Colin McColl.
Further steps towards government openness as announced by Major included the publication of the composition of Cabinet committees on May 19.
Dismissal of Jersey judge
Vernon Tomes was on May 12 dismissed as Deputy Bailiff — Jersey's second most senior judge — on the grounds that he had been too slow in delivering legal judgments.
The dismissal, by the Queen on the advice of the Home Secretary, raised questions about Jersey's constitutional status vis-à-vis the UK.
There were calls for the splitting of the Bailiff's combined functions, those of judge and of Deputy President of the island's parliament, the Assembly of the States.
Islanders also staged an unprecedented protest demonstration in St Helier on May 13, during which the Lieutenant-Governor of Jersey, Air Marshal Sir John Sutton, was shouted down as he tried to explain the decision.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Release of Judith Ward
Judith Ward, 43, serving a life sentence for Irish Republican Army (IRA) activities, was freed by the UK Court of Appeal on May 11 after the Court found her convictions to be "unsafe and unsatisfactory" .
Ward was sentenced to life imprisonment in October 1974 for the murder of 12 people, including nine soldiers, killed in an IRA bombing of a coach eight months earlier [see p. 26458], and she was also given concurrent 30-year prison terms for involvement in explosions at Euston Station in London and at a Ministry of Defence college [see pp. 26873-74].
Her case had been referred to the Court of Appeal by the United Kingdom Home Secretary in September 1991 after forensic evidence given at her trial had been called into question [see p. 38445].
During the appeal hearing, the defence emphasized that the forensic tests which had helped to form the basis of her conviction had been discredited in a series of appeal cases, most recently that of the Birmingham Six [see p. 38111].
Evidence was also given that Ward had been suffering from a personality disorder and was highly suggestible at the time of her arrest and trial.
Ward's counsel also suggested that at the time of her original trial large amounts of vital evidence had not been passed on to the defence.
He declared that prison officers, staff at the Director of Public Prosecution's office, government scientists and junior members of the prosecution team were guilty of dereliction of duty for failing to disclose evidence.
The Court formally declared Judith Ward innocent on June 4.
Coalisland violence
On May 25 Brig.
Tom Longland was relieved of his duties as commander of 3 Brigade of the Parachute Regiment,— the first time since the deployment of troops in Northern Ireland in 1969 that such action had been taken.
The replacement of Longland, who had completed only five months of his two-year posting, followed several weeks of tension between troops of 3 Brigade and the residents of Coalisland in Co.
Tyrone.
On May 12, members of the Parachute Regiment were alleged to have assaulted staff and customers in several public houses in the predominantly nationalist town, apparently in revenge for an earlier IRA bomb in the area which had injured a colleague.
A junior officer was suspended from duty following the May 12 incidents.
On May 17 three civilians were shot and injured by members of the Brigade.
UK Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind, however, insisted that the removal of Longland was unrelated to the Coalisland incidents.
All-party talks
At a meeting on May 11 of the ongoing inter-party talks on the future of Northern Ireland [see p. 38822 for March talks], the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP), anxious to move to the next stage in the negotiation process and involve the Republic of Ireland government, put forward proposals on a future government in the province which would include commissioners appointed by Dublin and the European Communities (EC).
The immediate objections of the Unionist parties to these proposals were heightened after the SDLP plans were leaked to the press.
In an effort to resolve the dispute it was agreed on May 26 that a subcommittee would consider the point at which the Irish government would take part in the talks.
Concern remained that the peace effort had been seriously undermined.
MI5
Kenneth Clarke, the UK Home Secretary, announced on May 8 that intelligence operations to uncover Irish terrorist units operating on the British mainland would henceforth be led by MI5, the UK security service.
These operations had hitherto been handled by the Special Branch of the Metropolitan Police.
Clarke told the House of Commons that "political change" — understood to mean the less active role of agents from eastern Europe — had made it possible for MI5 to devote more resources to countering IRA activities.
He emphasized however, that there would be "no conflict" with the police, who would remain responsible for the collection of evidence and arrest and prosecution of suspects.
The UK Labour Party expressed concern about the lack of parliamentary scrutiny of MI5 and called for the establishment of a select committee to supervise all the intelligence agencies.
EUROPE
IRELAND
The Bishop of Galway affair
Eamonn Casey, the Roman Catholic Bishop of Galway, announced his resignation on May 6 as details began emerging in the media of his love affair with an American woman.
Casey had been one of the most prominent Irish bishops for 23 years and was a well-known campaigner for the poor in Ireland and the Third World.
His resignation, and the subsequent revelations about his personal life, caused widespread shock in Ireland.
In a series of radio interviews on May 8 Annie Murphy revealed that she and Casey had embarked on a love affair in Ireland in 1973 and that she had given birth to his child two years later.
The affair ended with the child's birth and Murphy returned to the USA.
Casey paid a monthly sum for the child's upkeep, but in 1990 Murphy threatened to take the matter to court and Casey paid her a lump sum of US$115,000.
In his initial statement Casey said only that he was resigning for "personal reasons" .
However, in another statement issued on his behalf on May 11 he admitted that he was the father of the child, Peter Murphy, and that he had paid Murphy a lump sum in 1990 taken from the church's reserve accounts in his former diocese of Galway.
The money, he said, had been repaid with interest by "several donors" since his resignation on May 6.
Banning of newspaper over abortion advertisement
All copies of the May 21 edition of the UK newspaper the Guardian were withdrawn in Ireland because distributors believed that a full-page advertisement for an abortion referral service breached the country's strict abortion laws.
The withdrawal was raised twice in the Dail (lower house of parliament) on May 21, but ministers denied any involvement in the affair.
The following day Proinsias de Rossa, leader of the Workers' Party, read sections of the advertisement out in the Dail, thereby allowing the Irish media to publish them with impunity.
De Rossa described the withholding of the newspaper as "the latest ludicrous consequence of the Eighth Amendment to the Constitution" [the 1983 "equal right to life" clause].
EUROPE
FRANCE
Tapie's resignation
Bernard Tapie, who had been appointed Minister for Towns in April 1992 [see pp. 38870-71; 38820], resigned on May 23.
On May 27 he was summoned to appear before an examining magistrate in connection with his business dealings with Georges Tranchant, a deputy for the Gaullist Rassemblement pour la république.
The appointment of Tapie — who was not a member of the ruling Parti socialiste (PS) although as a deputy for the "presidential majority" he had voted along with it — had been controversial within the PS.
He was already under investigation in connection with his management of the Olympique Marseille football team, of which he was president, and by the Paris Bourse in connection with some share dealings.
Tranchant, who had been co-owner with Tapie of an electronics firm, Nippon Audio Video System, alleged that Tapie had fraudulantly kept him ignorant of a payment of F13,000,000 which had been made to him by the Japanese company Toshiba when Toshiba bought the company in 1985.
Tapie, who suggested that the bringing of charges against him was politically motivated, had on May 20 presented a plan for the inner cities which entailed the creation of 400 new social and sports centres in deprived areas.
Tapie was replaced by François Loncle, who was appointed as a Secretary of State attached to the Minister for National Education and Culture, Jack Lang.
Additionally Bruno Durieux (Minister-Delegate for Health under former Prime Minister Edith Cresson until April 1992) was appointed Minister-Delegate for Foreign Trade.
Corsican stadium disaster
Thirteen people died and 400 were injured on May 5 when a temporary spectators' stand collapsed shortly before the start of a football match between Bastia and Olympique Marseille at the Furiani stadium in Bastia, Corsica.
A report produced by the investigating commission and published on May 12 contained strong criticisms of the company responsible for erecting the stand, Sud-Tribune of the Bastia soccer club, which owned the football team, and of local government officials.
By May 16 six people faced charges, including the Bastia club's president, Jean-François Filippi, and the technical director of Sud-Tribune, Jean-Marie Boismond.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Ending of public-sector strike
The public-sector strike which had begun on April 27 [see p. 38872]was called off on May 7 after 11 days, and further strikes by the engineering and other private-sector unions were also avoided.
While support for the government of Chancellor Helmut Kohl had been further undermined during the period of the strike, a meeting between the three ruling coalition parties and the opposition Social Democrats (SPD) on May 27 failed to resolve differences, and both the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and SPD rejected any idea of a "grand coalition" as suggested by the media.
Progress of strike
The public-sector strike was stepped up in early May; by May 6 there were over 400,000 strikers.
Services at major western German airports and public transport and postal services were disrupted, and refuse collection and non-essential hospital services halted.
The government, having initially rejected a mediator's proposal of a 5.4 per cent rise, agreed on May 4 to return to the negotiating table on May 6.
The employers, i.e. the federal government, Länder (states) and local government, then agreed to a 5.4 per cent pay increase plus extra payments to the lower paid.
Strike action was thus called off on May 7.
The deal, which was above the April 1992 annualized inflation rate of 4.6 per cent, was described as a "political victory" by Monika Wulf-Mathies, leader of the largest public-sector union involved, the ÖTV.
Finance Minister Theo Waigel described the deal as "a disastrous development that will ultimately endanger jobs" .
It was announced on May 14 that 44.1 per cent of ÖTV members supported the deal in a ballot, rather than the majority required, but the ÖTV leadership decided on May 25 to override the vote and accept the offer.
The threat of widespread strikes in the engineering industry was averted after negotiators for the IG Metall union and the employers' federation Gesamtmetall in northern Baden-Württemberg agreed at midnight on May 17-18 on a 21-month settlement.
This deal was subsequently accepted in the other regions, which had hitherto failed to reach settlements.
It involved a 5.4 per cent rise backdated to April 1, and a further 3 per cent rise from April 1, 1993, to last until the end of 1993.
In both periods there was to be a 5 per cent increase in the Christmas bonus; the working week would be reduced from 37 to 36 hours.
Similar agreements followed in the construction and printing industries.
Government budget plans
The SPD on May 6 attacked plans presented by Waigel to reduce growth in federal government spending to 2.5 per cent a year until 1996 and to keep Land and communal spending increases to 3 per cent a year.
The SPD maintained that it was only possible to fund the reconstruction of eastern Germany by increasing taxes for the well-off.
The government, it said, was underestimating the costs of such items as compensation for east German property owners, cleaning up the environment, and assistance to central and eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
Waigel's calculations were also questioned by Jürgen Möllemann, the Economics Minister, whose department estimated that the federal government net borrowing requirement would increase to DM55,000 million by 1995 from DM52,000 million in 1992 (US$1=DM1.6414 as at May 1, 1991).
Finance Ministry estimates predicted a fall in the borrowing requirement to DM25,100 million by 1995 from DM49,900 million in 1992.
This latter figure was revised downwards to DM42,700 million when a supplementary budget was approved by the Cabinet on May 13.
Cabinet changes
On May 6 Horst Seehofer (CSU) was appointed as Health Minister, replacing Gerda Hasselfeldt [for whose resignation see p. 38872].
Hans-Dietrich Genscher's resignation as Foreign Minister formally took effect on May 18 [not May 17 as given on p. 38872]as anticipated.
In the resulting reshuffle Klaus Kinkel became Foreign Minister, while Möllemann took over Genscher's post of Vice-Chancellor in addition to the Economics portfolio, and Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger (FDP) took over from Kinkel as Justice Minister.
Berlin communal elections
On May 24 there was a turnout of 61.2 per cent in Berlin's first city-wide communal elections since 1946, marked by relatively strong showings by both the former communist party and the extreme right.
The SPD won 31.8 per cent of the vote (scoring the same percentage in the east and west of the city).
The CDU won 27.5 per cent(14.2 per cent in the east and 35 per cent in the west).
The Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS — the successor to the former East German Socialist Unity Party — SED) won 11.3 per cent overall (but came second with 29.7 per cent in the east).
The extreme-right Republicans won 8.3 per cent(5.4 per cent in the east and 9.9 per cent in the west).
No other parties succeeded in reaching the 5 per cent threshold required to win representation.
RAF release
On May 15 the former Red Army Faction (RAF) member Günter Sonnenberg, who had been seriously injured when he was arrested in 1977 [see pp. 28917; 29012], was released on probation after serving 15 years of a life sentence.
[See p. 38872 for April 1992 RAF offer to cease attacks.]
Charges against Honecker
On May 15 six former East German leaders were charged in connection with the May 1974 "shoot-to-kill" order which resulted in the death of more than 200 people seeking to escape to the West across the inter-German border.
Hitherto only border guards had been brought before the courts in connection with the "shoot-to-kill" policy [see pp. 38736-37; 38782].
Those charged were Erich Honecker, the former East German leader who sought refuge in the Chilean embassy in Moscow in December 1991 [see pp. 38687-88; 38782]; Erich Mielke, former head of the Stasi — secret police; Willi Stoph, former Prime Minister; Heinz Kessler, former Defence Minister; Fritz Streletz, Kessler's deputy; and Hans Albrecht, SED chief in the town of Suhl.
Lifting of restrictions for Bosnian refugees
It was announced on May 22 that Germany would open its borders to children, the sick and wounded from Bosnia-Hercegovina and that others would be allowed in if friends, relatives or others undertook to look after them.
Visa requirements would not be lifted.
In the first three months of 1992, some 48,000 people seeking asylum from the war in the former Yugoslavia had already been permitted to come to Germany.
Death of former President Carstens
Karl Carstens, who served as West German Federal President in 1979-84, died in Meckenheim near Bonn on May 30 at the age of 77.
EUROPE
NETHERLANDS
Lubbers' announcement of intention to resign
The Prime Minister, Ruud Lubbers, announced on May 20 that he intended to resign in 1994.
Aged only 53, he was already the country's longest-serving Prime Minister, having led successive coalition governments since 1982.
Legalization of brothels
Parliament on May 26 voted overwhelmingly to legalize brothels and sex clubs.
The aim of the new legislation was to improve control (through the introduction of a licensing system) and to counter exploitation of prostitutes by criminals and pimps.
Prostitutes' organizations, however, opposed the move, arguing that it would fail in its objective of improving the working conditions of prostitutes.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Austrian presidential elections
Percentage of vote
Presidential election
Following a first round of voting on April 26 in which no candidate won an absolute majority, Thomas Klestil, the Austrian People's Party (ÖVP) candidate, was elected President with almost 57 per cent of the vote in a second round run-off on May 24, with a majority in all nine Länder (provinces), against Rudolf Streicher, 53, the Social Democratic (SPÖ) Minister of Transport and Public Economy.
Klestil, 59, a career diplomat who had been ambassador to the USA and permanent representative at the UN, would take over the presidency from Kurt Waldheim for a six-year term beginning on July 8.
The candidates eliminated in the first round were Heide Schmidt, 43, of the Freedom Party of Austria (FPÖ), and Robert Jungk, 78, the Green Alternative candidate.
[For November 1991 nomination of candidates see p. 38590.]
The electorate numbered 5,700,000 and the turnout was 83.81 per cent in the first round and 80 per cent in the second round.
Klestil's campaign drew impetus in the second round from his promise to unite Austria under a non-partisan presidency based on honesty, decency, dialogue and co-operation, in a move to restore Austria's reputation following the lengthy controversy surrounding his predecessor's wartime record [see pp. 34690-92].
Waldheim, who had been barred from entering the USA [see p. 35528]and shunned by European governments, had announced in June 1991 that he would not stand for a second term [see p. 38298].
Prison sentence for neo-Nazi
Gerd Honsik, the neo-Nazi publisher of an extreme right-wing magazine Halt, was sentenced by a Vienna court to 18 months' imprisonment on May 5 for 14 neo-Nazi offences including the denial that the mass murder of Jewish people had taken place under the Third Reich.
Two earlier suspended sentences for similar offences also came into force, extending Honsik's prison term to a potential three years.
Austrian law treated the denial of Nazi war crimes as an offence.
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
Approval of IMF and World Bank membership — Application for EC membership
In a referendum on May 17 voters approved the government's proposal for Switzerland to join the two major international financial institutions, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank.
The vote was 55.8 per cent in favour to 44.2 per cent against; the turnout was 39 per cent.
The result was widely interpreted as marking a decisive shift within the electorate, since the end of the Cold War, away from the traditional isolationism based on neutrality.
(As recently as 1986 voters had rejected Swiss membership of the UN — see p. 34959.)
All major parties, industry, the influential banking community and trade unions supported the "yes" vote.
Groups on the left opposed it on the grounds that IMF policies had damaged developing countries, and on the right it was opposed on the grounds of cost.
In two other referendums on the same day, voters approved by wide margins (i) lowering the age of consent from 16 to 13 provided that the young person's sexual partner was no more than three years older; and (ii) introducing a civilian alternative to military service for conscientious objectors.
Decision to apply for EC membership
The positive vote on IMF and World Bank membership and polling evidence showing growing support for Swiss membership of the European Communities (EC) prompted the government to announce on May 18 that it would immediately lodge an application.
The suddenness of this move surprised many observers.
The Federal Council had decided in principle in October 1991 to make EC membership its goal in European integration, but had not given any indication of a preferred timetable.
New EVP president — New chief of staff
Otto Zwygart was elected as the new leader of the small Evangelical People's Party (EVP) on May 11, in succession to Max Dünki, who had earlier announced his retirement.
Zwygart, a teacher and a member of parliament, was described as being on the party's liberal wing.
The Federal Council (Cabinet) on May 19 appointed Arthur Liener as the new chief of staff of the armed forces.
Succeeding Heinz Häsler, he had previously been in charge of the Defence Department engineering corps.
EUROPE
SPAIN
General strike
A one-day general strike was called by the main union confederations, the CCOO and UGT, on May 28 in protest at government proposals to cut unemployment benefits.
The government linked the cuts with the need to contain public spending in order to meet the economic convergence criteria laid down for European Community economic and monetary union [see p. 38658].
The strike passed off relatively peacefully, although 50 strikers were reported to have been arrested following clashes with riot police.
Large factories and industrial estates were closed down, but the strike received less support in the commercial, banking and hotel sectors.
A minimal public transport service was in operation.
Arrest of ETA suspects
Uruguayan police on May 15 arrested 30 presumed militants of the Basque separatist organization Euzkadi ta Askatasuna (ETA) in the capital, Montevideo.
Three were wanted in connection with attacks on soldiers in Spain.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Demirel's central Asian tour
Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel, on a tour of the ex-Soviet republics of central Asia from April 27 to May 3, discounted the idea of Turkish political hegemony over those republics with majority Moslem and Turkic-speaking populations, but said afterwards at Baku, Azerbaijan, that "Turkey has accepted the responsibility of representing the Turkish world" .
[For Central Asia summit see p. 38917; for Demirel's visit to Russia see p. 38924.]
Demirel visited Uzbekistan, Kirgizstan, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan and Kazakhstan, promising credits totalling US$1,100 million for use in the purchase of Turkish-produced consumer goods and foods products as well as for industrial development.
Some 10,000 students from these republics were also to be given places in Turkish lycées and universities.
Demirel went on to visit Azerbaijan.
On April 27 Turkish national television began to be received in Tashkent in Uzbekistan, and in other central Asian republics, as well as by audiences in eastern Europe.
The broadcasts were relayed by satellite by the Avrasya television company.
On May 28 Demirel opened a new bridge between eastern Turkey and the autonomous territory of Nakhichevan (the Azeri enclave in Armenia — see also p. 38925) across the Aras river.
Demirel declared it "a bridge between Europe and Asia." 
Resignation of SDPP deputies
Two more Kurdish deputies who had been elected to parliament as members of the Social Democratic Populist Party (SHP) resigned from the party on May 29, to continue as independents.
With these resignations by Mahmut Alinak and Mahmut Uyanik the SHP now contributed only 70 seats to the ruling coalition which it had formed with the True Path Party (DYP)[see also pp. 38739; 38873].
Violence in south-east
A high level of violence continued in the predominantly Kurdish south-east as the government expressed disquiet over the elections on May 19 for an Iraqi Kurdistan National Assembly [see p. 38934].
Among the numerous incidents reported involving the guerrillas of the separatist Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK) and the Turkish army was a gun-battle near the border with Iraq on May 15 in which a total of 63 combatants from both sides were killed.
PKK members had attacked a gendarmerie post in Sirnak's Uludere district, and officials reported that surviving PKK fighters had fled back across the border into Iraq.
On May 14, 15 and 27 Turkish aircraft bombed guerrilla positions in northern Iraq.
The second raid, in which Turkish officials claimed that 10 PKK members were killed, was in retaliation for a PKK cross-border raid on May 25 near the village of Uzumlu, Hakkari province, in which 14 Turkish soldiers had been killed.
On May 11 Demirel told reporters that in the period Jan. 1-May 10, 1992, a total of 272 "terrorists" had been killed, 39 injured and almost 4,000 captured.
Among soldiers, policemen and civilians there had been 267 deaths in the same period as a result of "terrorist incidents" .
EUROPE
CENTRAL EUROPE
Visegrad Three summit —
The leaders of the Visegrad Three countries — President Havel of Czechoslovakia, Jozsef Antall, the Prime Minister of Hungary, and President Walesa of Poland — held their fourth summit in Prague, Czechoslovakia, on May 6.
They adopted a joint declaration on their countries' relations with the European Communities (EC), the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Western European Union (WEU) and other international organizations.
They stressed their intention to make a joint application for EC membership, while membership of NATO and the WEU were longer-term goals.
The three leaders also agreed to further co-operation in economic, political, security and other matters.
CEI
Following a meeting between representatives of the Central European Initiative (CEI, the former Hexagonale — see p. 38786) and Bulgarian officials on May 6, it was announced that Bulgaria would take part in four CEI working groups, on the environment, small and medium-size businesses, transport and communications.
Hungary to join Eureka
Hungary was admitted to the Eureka initiative on co-operation in high-technology projects, as the organization's 21st member (and the first from eastern Europe), at the 10th Eureka ministerial conference, held in Tampere, Finland, on May 23.
Initially Hungary would participate in seven Eureka projects.
EUROPE
COUNCIL OF EUROPE
Admission of Bulgaria — Russian application for membership
The Council of Europe on May 7 formally admitted Bulgaria as its 27th member.
Bulgaria also signed a protocol on accession to the European Human Rights Convention.
Russia, which in January 1992 had assumed the special guest status enjoyed by the former Soviet Union, on May 7 applied for full membership of the Council.
Azerbaijan, Armenia, Byelarus, Moldova and Ukraine had applied for similar status.
The application by Russia was welcomed in principle but reservations were expressed, in view of the possible further disintegration of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), as to whether other components of the former Soviet Union such as the central Asian republics could be regarded as part of Europe.
Turkey assumed the presidency of the Council of Europe for six months from May 6.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
CAP reform
On May 21, after a four-day negotiating session, Agriculture Ministers of the European Communities (EC) agreed on what the Financial Times of May 22 assessed to be "the most radical reform of the common agricultural policy [CAP]since its inception 30 years ago" .
The agreement was based on proposals put forward by the Commission in February 1991 [see pp. 38023; 38352-53].
It provided for cuts in support prices to reduce overproduction, and payment of compensation directly to farmers, on condition that all but the smallest farmers "set aside" 15 per cent of their land from production.
Central to the deal was the reduction of the intervention (buying-in) price for grain by 29 per cent to ECU110 per tonne — a price slightly above world market prices, but below average EC production costs (ECU1=US$1.26848 as at May 22, 1992).
The Commission had pressed for a 35 per cent reduction, while the latest compromise proposal by the Portuguese government (which held the presidency of the EC Council of Ministers for the first half of 1992) argued for a reduction of 27 per cent.
Grain production in 1991/92 was 180,000,000 tonnes — 20,000,000 tonnes over EC needs; a further 20,000,000 tonnes of grain were in intervention storage.
Milk production was to be reduced by 1 per cent a year over the next three years.
Sheepmeat and beef would be subject to the same quota regime as had applied to the dairy sector since 1984 [see p. 33161].
On May 22, German and French farmers protested at this move away from the price support system.
The German farmers' union, the DBV, maintained that "such a total transformation" of the system was "both wrong and disastrous" .
In French provincial cities bales of straw and tyres were set ablaze at road junctions.
Both the French government and French farming unions traditionally favoured linking farm incomes mainly to prices rather than to "social handouts" (although, according to the Financial Times of May 22, there was in late 1991 "a growing realization by farming leaders that some kind of social help was needed to enable an ageing farming population with few successors to retire peacefully" ).
The Financial Times report maintained that the deal "should all but eliminate cereal export subsidies — the real rock on which the Uruguay Round [of trade talks under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade — GATT — was]foundering" [see pp. 38888-89].
Presentation of 1993 budget
On May 6 the Commission presented a 1993 draft budget which provided for an increase in the full "appropriations" budget from ECU66,600 million in 1992 to ECU67,300 million.
This represented an increase of 1.1 per cent, as compared with increases of 11.3 per cent in 1992 and 19 per cent in 1991.
[For 1992-97 budget proposals presented in February 1992 see p. 38785.]
For the first time agricultural spending, at ECU32,150 million (compared with ECU35,350 million in 1992), would account for less than half of expenditure.
This projection was based on existing global prices and on the favourable ECU/dollar exchange rate.
It also incorporated "modest savings" anticipated from the reform of the CAP (the exact terms of which at that stage had still to be agreed), but the Financial Times of May 22 warned that "this picture could easily change" .
Expenditure on "economic and social cohesion" of the regions was to increase by 19 per cent to ECU22,000 million.
Foreign assistance was planned to increase by 13 per cent to ECU4,100 million, and research spending was to increase by a similar percentage to ECU2,800 million.
Maastricht ratification process in UK
On May 21 the United Kingdom House of Commons (lower house of parliament) approved the Maastricht Treaty on European Union by 336 votes to 92 at its second reading.
Those voting against included 61 opposition Labour MPs (who defied party instructions to abstain) and 22 Conservative rebels.
[For December 1991 agreement on Treaty and its signature in February 1992 see pp. 38657-59; 38785.]
Shortly beforehand, on May 12, Queen Elizabeth gave her first address to the European Parliament in Strasbourg.
She described the Maastricht Treaty as striking the "necessary balance" between the conflicting interests of the 12 EC members.
She declared herself to be "conscious of the differences in national parliamentary traditions across the Community" but said that "differences of style and opinion are insignificant against the background of the proven commitment of Europeans today to reconciliation and democracy" .
Former Conservative Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, speaking in The Hague on May 15, warned that "the problem of German power has again surfaced" and argued in favour of a looser, broader confederation in Europe instead of "a centralized superstate" .
In an interview in the European of May 21 she criticized the Treaty for passing "colossal powers from parliamentary governments to a central bureaucracy" .
Famine aid
On May 5 EC Development Ministers approved emergency supplementary aid for famine victims primarily in Africa [see also p. 38855]of 800,000 tonnes of cereal equivalents worth ECU220,000,000.
The aid represented an increase on the EC's existing 1992 aid budget.
Co-operation agreements with Albania and Baltic states
On May 11 the EC signed economic and trade co-operation agreements with Albania and the three Baltic states, thus establishing economic relations with all of the former communist bloc states of eastern Europe.
Under the agreements the EC reduced some import quotas and provided industrial and technological assistance.
EUROPE
EFTA
Signature of EEA agreement
The agreement on the European Economic Area (EEA) embracing the seven countries of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and the 12-member European Communities (EC) was signed on May 2 in Porto, Portugal.
The treaty was due to take effect on Jan. 1, 1993, at the same time as the introduction of the single market in the EC.
Initialled in October 1991 [see pp. 38541-42, where details of its terms are provided]after lengthy negotiations, its signature was delayed when the European Court of Justice (ECJ), the judicial arm of the EC, raised legal objections in December [see p. 38691].
A revised treaty incorporating the ECJ's objections, initialled in February 1992 [see p. 38785], had been approved by the ECJ on April 11.
EUROPE
WESTERN EUROPEAN UNION
Franco-German army corps
France and Germany on May 22 agreed to form a joint army corps.
A joint command would be established on July 1, and the corps, of at least 35,000 soldiers, would be operational by October 1995.
The force, to be known as the European Corps, was intended to operate under the umbrella of the Western European Union (WEU) and would be open to other WEU members.
Its missions would include the defence of western Europe and humanitarian and peacekeeping operations.
These details were announced by President François Mitterrand of France and Chancellor Helmut Kohl at the end of a two-day summit in La Rochelle, France.
The two leaders stressed that the European Corps "will contribute to the strengthening of the Atlantic alliance" , in particular the so-called "European pillar" of the continent's defence.
They made it clear that they saw it as the core of a European army.
It would be independent of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) structure, but Kohl said that the co-operation with France would not affect his country's commitments to NATO and Mitterrand said that the corps was not meant as a rival to NATO.
They affirmed their support for a continued US military presence in Europe.
The formation of a Franco-German military force had been under discussion for several years, and a 4,000-strong brigade had been agreed in principle in November 1987 [see p. 35665; 35913]and started operations in October 1990 [see p. 38473].
This brigade would be absorbed by the new force.
The move raised concern, notably in the USA and the United Kingdom, that it would undermine the effectiveness of NATO.
The main cause for concern was the dominant role of France, which had withdrawn from NATO's integrated command structure in 1966 and had since taken an independent line in defence matters.
There was also domestic opposition in Germany, where the Social Democratic Party (SPD) said that it would not support a constitutional amendment necessary to allow the force to operate outside NATO territory.
EUROPE
GREECE
On May 15 the Greek parliament voted by 117 to 24 that the criminal charges against the former Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou, the latest of which had concerned allegations that as Prime Minister Papandreou had illegally ordered the phones of political enemies to be bugged, should be dropped.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Multilateral peace talks
The Middle East peace talks continued during May with a series of multilateral meetings arranged at the Moscow round in January [see p. 38740; see p. 38885 for fifth round of bilateral talks held in Washington in late April].
PLO Central Council vote for continued participation
The talks were preceded by a meeting of the Central Council of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in Tunis on May 7-10.
The Council voted for continued Palestinian participation in the Middle East peace talks, despite opposition from delegates attached to the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
Both groups argued that the current Palestinian negotiating strategy should be reconsidered since it had failed to achieve its objectives.
Participants in May meetings
The talks were boycotted by Syria and Lebanon who stated that the multilateral sessions were worthless until progress had been made in the bilateral sessions.
A Jordanian delegation attended all five sessions and a Palestinian delegation all sessions except the arms control talks.
Israel boycotted the sessions on refugees and regional economic development after the USA approved Palestinian plans to appoint exiles as representatives in their delegations to the two sessions.
Israel contended that the attendance of "diaspora Palestinians" would violate the so-called Madrid formula under which all Palestinian delegates to the peace process should be residents of the West Bank or the Gaza Strip.
The talks were also attended by most Arab countries, with the exception of Iraq and Libya.
Others attending included Canada, China, India, Japan, Russia, Turkey, the USA and representatives from the European Communities.
Multilateral sessions
Regional economic co-operation talks were held in Brussels on May 11-12 and chaired by Portugal.
The session was attended by more than 35 delegations, including Palestinian and Jordanian.
Regional arms control talks were held in Washington on May 11-12 and chaired by Russia.
The talks were attended by more than 20 countries.
The delegates agreed to seek an eventual reduction of the region's arsenals.
Refugee talks were held in Ottawa on May 13-15, chaired by Canada and attended by some 35 delegations.
At the start of the talks the Jordanian and Palestinian delegations asserted Palestinian refugees' "right of return" (as embodied in UN General Assembly Resolution 194 of 1948), despite US appeals not to raise the issue.
The conference agreed to explore practical steps to improve the lives of the estimated 2,500,000 Palestinian refugees.
The "right of return" issue had arisen in controversial circumstances on May 12 when US State Department spokesperson Margaret Tutwiler responded to a reporter's question by stating that the Bush administration continued to support Resolution 194.
Tutwiler's statement caused an outcry in Israel.
On May 18, in what was officially described as a clarification, Tutwiler said that the only UN resolutions included in the terms of reference for the peace process were resolutions 242 and 338.
The following day Israel expressed satisfaction over Tutwiler's statement.
Water sharing talks were held in Vienna on May 13-14, chaired by Austria, and attended by more than 30 delegations, which agreed to meet again later in the year to discuss a number of issues including the creation of an international data-base on water, cross-border co-operation, methods of water management and ways to increase water resources.
Environmental protection talks were held in Tokyo on May 18-19, chaired by Japan and attended by more than 35 delegations.
The main topics were environmental management and marine pollution.
A meeting of the steering committee of the multilateral talks was held in Lisbon, Portugal on May 27.
An agreement was reached on the venues of future meetings: water in Washington; economic co-operation in Paris; arms control in Moscow; environment in The Hague; and refugees in Ottawa.
Palestinian divisions over Israeli election proposal
During May divisions emerged among Palestinians over the response to Israel's April offer to hold municipal elections in the occupied territories [see p. 38885].
The offer had effectively been rejected by Palestinian negotiators at the April bilateral round.
However, in early May two leading Palestinian nationalists, Riyadh al-Malki, a supporter of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, and Ali Abu Hilal, a supporter of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine, issued a joint statement supporting the holding of municipal elections.
Al-Malki and Abu Hilal both opposed Palestinian participation in the peace process.
Hamas, which also opposed participation, also supported the holding of municipal elections.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Serious unrest in Gaza
David Cohen, an Israeli livestock trader, was shot dead by unidentified gunmen in Beit Lahiya, at the northern end of the Gaza Strip, on May 17.
Cohen was the first Israeli killed in Gaza since January.
Responsibility for the killing was claimed by Al Qassam, the military arm of the Islamic Resistance Movement, Hamas.
Curfews were immediately imposed in the area and troops rounded up more than 100 people, mostly Hamas supporters.
Three Palestinians and an Israeli border policeman died in a gun battle in the Gaza Strip on May 24.
Over 30 Palestinians were wounded in subsequent unrest.
Following the killings a military order was issued closing the Strip off for three days.
Palestinians (reportedly members of Hamas) disguised as Israeli soldiers shot dead a suspected collaborator in Gaza City on May 15.
Haider Abdel-Shafi, head of the Palestinian delegation to the Middle East peace talks, condemned the killing of "collaborators" while visiting Gaza on May 21.
PLO success in Nablus chamber of commerce elections
Nationalist candidates identified with the Palestine Liberation Organization won nine out of 12 seats in elections to the Nablus chamber of commerce held on May 21; only two seats went to the Islamic list, identified with Hamas.
By contrast, in elections to the Ramallah and al-Bira chamber of commerce in March, Hamas had won 10 out of 11 seats [see p. 38836].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Fall of Karami government
Umar Karami, the Lebanese Prime Minister, announced on May 6 the resignation of his government, appointed in December 1990 [see pp. 37928-29].
The announcement came on the first day of a planned four-day general strike called by the Confederation of Trade Unions (CTU) to protest at the country's perilous economic situation [see p. 38836].
Even before the strike started, rioting erupted in Beirut and other cities, and the Tyre home of Finance Minister Ali al-Khalil was burned down by demonstrators on May 5.
New Lebanese Cabinet
*Rashid al-Solh Prime Minister Michel al-Murr Deputy Prime Minister; Minister of National Defence
*Assad Diyab Finance Faris Buwayz Foreign and Expatriate Affairs Maj.-Gen.
Sami al-Khatib Interior
*Nasri al-Maalouf Justice
**Marwan Hamadah Health and Social Affairs
**Abdullah al-Amin Labour George Saadeh Telecommunications and Posts
*Zaki Mazboudi Education and Fine Arts Mohammed Yusuf Baydun Water and Electricity Resources
*Samir al-Maqdisi Economy and Trade
*Michel Samaha Information Muhsin Dallul Agriculture
**Fakhuri Public Works and Transport
*Chahe Barsoumian Industry and Oil
**Sulayman Tony Franjiyah Housing and Co-operatives
*Brig. -Gen.
Ahmad Sami Minqarah Tourism
**Elie Hubayqah Minister of State for Refugee Affairs Nazih al-Bizri Minister of State Nabi Berri Minister of State Walid Jumblatt Minister of State As'ad Hardan Minister of State
*Samir Geagea Minister of State
*New appointment.
**Altered portfolio.
In his resignation statement broadcast on May 6, Karami blamed "external pressures" for the country's economic problems.
According to press reports Karami believed that his government had been penalized by the West for its close links with Syria and for its strong commitment at the Middle East peace talks to an Israeli withdrawal from southern Lebanon.
However, many commentators placed responsibility for the current economic crisis firmly on the Karami government's own policies.
On May 7 the CTU announced that it had suspended the general strike from May 8, and called for the formation of a new government capable of tackling "national and economic issues" .
On May 9 President Elias Hrawi and National Assembly Speaker Hussain al-Hussaini met with Syrian leaders, including President Hafez al-Assad, in Damascus to discuss the formation of a new government.
Formation of Solh government
On May 13 Rashid al-Solh accepted President Hrawi's invitation to form a new government.
Solh, a Sunni Moslem, had previously held the post of Prime Minister in 1974-75.
A new Cabinet was formally appointed on May 16.
The new government was immediately beset with problems, with Samir Geagea, leader of the Phalangist Lebanese Forces (LF), announcing his resignation as Minister of State within two hours.
The first Cabinet meeting on May 17 was boycotted by George Saadeh, chair of the Phalange Party (Kataib, by Walid Jumblatt, leader of the Druse Progressive Socialist Party, and by Brig. -Gen.
Minqarah, representative of Sunni Moslems in Tripoli.
Policy statement — Vote of confidence
Solh presented his government's policy statement to the National Assembly on May 28.
The government, he said, would "give priority to financial and economic policy" .
In order to tackle the problem of the escalating budget deficit and increasing public debts the government would pursue a policy of austerity in both public and private expenditure.
 "Strictly controlled and effective means" would be adopted to increase revenues and administrative reforms would be introduced.
Solh also announced his government's commitment to hold a general election in "the summer of 1992" .
The new government won a vote of confidence from the National Assembly on May 29 by a majority of 76.
Israel-Hezbollah clashes in southern Lebanon
The simmering confrontation in southern Lebanon, ranging Israel and its proxy South Lebanon Army (SLA) against Hezbollah forces, intensified during May.
On May 19, Hezbollah fighters attacked an SLA unit on the northern edge of Israel's self-declared "security zone" , killing one SLA member and capturing others.
Israeli and SLA forces responded initially by shelling Hezbollah-controlled villages north of the zone.
Hezbollah forces responded by shelling targets within the zone.
Meanwhile, Israel began building up its forces in the zone, forcing large numbers of Lebanese to leave their villages.
Reports also claimed that Syria had begun reinforcing its army positions in the Bekaa Valley and on the eastern front of the Syrian-Lebanese border.
On May 21 Israeli fighter aircraft attacked Hezbollah positions around Janta in the eastern Bekaa near the Syrian border, killing seven people and wounding 18 others.
Later the same day Israeli helicopters attacked targets around Jibshit, Qabrikha, Majd al-Silm abd Tulin.
Israel launched a series of air attacks on Hezbollah villages to the north and west of the zone on May 25-26, killing up to 25 people, including women and children.
There were reports that both the Lebanese and Syrian army had opened anti-aircraft fire on the attacking Israeli planes.
An Israeli soldier was killed on May 27 in an ambush near Arnun in the "security zone" .
The attack was carried out by a unit composed of fighters from the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine — General Command and the Syrian Social Nationalist Party — the Higher Council.
Israel responded by launching a fresh round of shelling into southern Lebanon and by destroying "terrorist" posts in Arnun.
The pro-Hezbollah Voice of the Oppressed radio reported on May 31 that the "Islamic Resistance" had that day shot down an Israeli aircraft over Janta in the Bekaa Valley.
Israel denied the claim.
Amnesty report on Khiam
In a report issued on May 4 the rights organization Amnesty International criticized conditions at Khiam prison situated in the "security zone" , and said that prisoners there were routinely tortured.
Some 200 Lebanese prisoners were held in Khiam, which was staffed by SLA members but under overall Israeli control.
Israel denied, however, that it was responsible for activities which had taken place in Khiam.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
Chamber of Commerce elections
Elections for the Kuwaiti Chamber of Commerce and Industry on May 25 were seen as an indicator of the likely outcome of the general election planned for the following October [see p. 38789].
Candidates reportedly supported by the government failed to dislodge the supporters of the Chamber's chairman Abdel Aziz Saqr, who won all but one of the 24 board seats.
Of the 92,000 people entitled to vote in the October elections, an estimated 20 per cent were members of the Chamber of Commerce.
There were 78 candidates representing three main lists, together with 20 independent candidates.
Saqr was a leading member of a well-known family of the traditional merchant class which owned the leading liberal newspaper, al-Qabas.
Death sentences
Two Iraqis, aged 29 and 49, were sentenced to death on May 5 for informing on and torturing Kuwaitis who had formed part of the resistance to the Iraqi occupation of 1990-91.
UK-Kuwait joint exercise
Some 250 Kuwaiti soldiers and air force pilots and some 104 United Kingdom marines took part in a joint exercise on May 2-13, in accordance with the defence pact signed between the two countries in February 1992 [see p. 38790].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SAUDI ARABIA
Final Gulf War payment to USA
In April Saudi Arabia paid the final instalment of its US$16,839 million contribution to the USA in respect of the cost of the Gulf war.
On May 5 a US Defence Department spokesperson announced that the US contribution to the war costs had been almost US$6,000 million, out of a total cost of US$61,000 million.
Most of the Saudi contribution was paid in cash, with $US4,000 million in services and fuel.
Saudi Arabia was the biggest contributor, with Germany, Japan, Kuwait, South Korea and the United Arab Emirates also major contributors.
Libel damage award to Wafiq Said
A High Court jury in London on May 21 awarded £400,000 in libel damages to Wafiq Said, a Syrian financier who was described as a friend of the former UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and also of the Saudi royal family.
The libel had arisen over letters written since late 1991 by another Syrian, Misbah Baki, to the Saudi Prince Khalid bin Sultan, alleging that Said had failed to keep earlier promises to lend him money.
Said's lawyer claimed successfully that this constituted a serious libel against his client as a man of honour.
It was understood following the verdict that Said would not attempt to extract the damages from Baki.
Said had earlier in the year been mentioned in a House of Commons select committee as an important contact in securing for British Aerospace the £20,000 million al-Yamamah arms purchase of 1985, a deal which became a focus of controversy after allegations that large sums were paid to mediators.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Kurdistan National Assembly elections
The eight parties which had come together as the Kurdistan Front took part on May 19 in elections for an executive leader and a 105-seat Iraqi Kurdistan National Assembly for the Kurds of northern Iraq.
The two main parties, the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) led by Masoud Barzani and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) led by Jalal Talabani, won 50 seats each.
None of the other parties apparently secured the 7 per cent minimum required to achieve representation, although five seats had been reserved for the two Christian Assyrian Parties.
The elections were held after attempts by Talabani and Barzani to negotiate a new autonomy agreement with the Iraqi government reached a stalemate in the autumn of 1991.
The economic embargo imposed by Baghdad in October 1991 meant that local administrators, other state employees and pensioners no longer received their remunerations and the food supply situation became critical [see also pp. 38548; 38598].
In holding the elections the Kurdistan Front claimed to be implementing clauses of the 1970 agreement in which the Iraqi government had promised "autonomy" for the 3,500,000 population of the Kurdish-controlled region — an area of some 50,000 sq km.
On May 9 the KDP and the PUK had issued a joint communiqué in which they declared that the elections should be "a factor of unity and not disunity in our ranks" , that the results of the elections should be accepted and that "all armed manifestations" , particularly on election day, should be forbidden.
Most of the area in which the elections were being held still had air cover, in the form of daily overflights by US and UK aircraft based at Incirlik in southern Turkey, which provided cover north of the 36th parallel [see pp. 38690; 38789; 38886].
Election results in detail
The results as finally announced on May 22 gave the KDP, with 45.4 per cent, a marginally higher vote than that won by the PUK (43.9 per cent ).
In the leadership contest Barzani won 44.6 per cent of the votes and Talabani 44.3.
The other participating parties were: the Kurdistan Socialist Party, led by Mahmud Othman, which in April had absorbed the Democratic Kurdistan Independence Party; the Islamic Movement, led by Othman Abd al-Aziz; the Kurdistan Popular Democratic Party, led by Sami Abdurrahman, the Communists, led by Rajim Ajina; the Assyrian Democratic Movement (allocated four assembly seats) and the Christian Union (allocated one assembly seat).
Muzaffer Aslan, leader of the Iraqi National Turkoman Party, had announced on May 8 in Ankara that his party would not participate.
On May 15 the Kurdistan Front said that it was not possible at present to issue a list allowing Turkoman inhabitants of the region to elect candidates but that "at the first available opportunity" Turkoman candidates would be elected to the National Assembly.
Some parties complained of voting irregularities, such as multiple voting, but foreign observers said that any such irregularities had not been sufficiently widespread to have influenced the result.
The poll was organized by an electoral commission under a Kurdish judge, Amir Hawsizi and international monitors.
It had been postponed from May 17 to May 19 after it was found on May 16 that a consignment of indelible ink donated by Germany — with which it was proposed to stamp voters' hands in order to prevent multiple voting in the absence of electoral registers — was in fact easily washed off.
Up to 1,500,000 people were estimated to have voted, although congestion at the polling stations meant that some 30,000 voters had been unable to vote when the polling stations closed at midnight.
A second vote for the "leader" was postponed for at least two months, since neither Barzani nor Talabani had won an overall majority.
(Two other candidates also stood in the first round: Mahmud Othman and Othman Abd al-Aziz.)
According to press reports the Front had determined that the "leader" was not to have a power of veto on legislation voted by the Assembly, but would be commander-in-chief of the "unified armed forces" and would direct any negotiations with the Iraqi government in Baghdad.
Iraqi and international reactions
The Speaker of the Iraqi National Assembly, Saadi Mehdi Saleh, said on May 12 that the elections contravened the Iraqi Constitution, which forbade the holding of elections by armed groups.
He said that an existing legislative assembly of Kurdistan still enjoyed the recognition of the Iraqi government as the representative body of Iraqi Kurds.
(Barzani said on May 24 that the legislative and executive councils of the Kurdistan autonomous region created under legislation of 1974 had not operated for over a year.
However, on May 11 Iraqi radio had broadcast a statement by these councils denouncing the forthcoming Kurdish elections.)
A US State Department spokesperson, as quoted on May 18, welcomed "public and private assurances by the Iraqi Kurdish leadership that these elections will deal only with local administrative issues and do not represent a move towards separatism" .
The Iranian, Syrian and Turkish governments were also reported to be concerned that the elections in Iraqi Kurdistan should not be seen as a first move towards the creation of an independent Kurdish state.
Talabani announced in Arbil on May 6 that he had secured an agreement with the Iranian government by which Iran would allow fuel and machine parts to be freely imported into Iraqi Kurdistan.
It was understood that in return the new Iraqi Kurdish authorities would prevent Iranian Kurdish groups from operating there [see also p. 38838].
A Turkish Foreign Ministry spokesperson on May 13 stressed that Turkey had repeatedly said that "Iraq's territorial integrity must be preserved" and said that the election document drawn up by the Kurdistan Front went beyond the 1974 autonomy agreement between the Kurds and the Iraqi government.
[See also pp. 38116; 38451].
Reports of renewed anti-Shia offensive
There were reports of a renewed offensive by government troops against rebel Shia forces and civilians in the swampland of south-eastern Iraq from mid-April and into May.
The Iranian news media reported an offensive on May 10 by "mercenary tribesmen in Amarah, Basra and Nasiriyah" against "local Arabs" .
Meanwhile on April 25 the National Assembly had unanimously approved a plan for the resettlement of 3,000-4,000 marsh Arabs in new settlements on the periphery of the marshlands, where it was said that they would have improved access to services.
No change in review of UN sanctions on Iraq
On May 27 the UN Security Council decided, in its regular bimonthly review of the sanctions against Iraq, to make no change.
The Secretary-General of the Arab League, Esmat Abdel Meguid said in Cairo only hours before this decision that the Arab nations "without exception" would like to see an easing of the suffering of the Iraqi people, and on May 28 the Yemeni Minister of Housing and Urban Planning, Muhammad Ahmad al-Sulayman, said on Iraqi television that the continuing sanctions were unjust in targeting women, children and the elderly.
On May 8 the director of operations of the UN's World Food Programme (WFP), Robert Hauser, had appeared to contradict current UN policy when he said that the food-supply situation in Iraq did not in itself warrant the continuing presence of international relief agencies; since food rationing was relatively efficient, he said, claims of widespread malnutrition were exaggerated.
Iraq's Agriculture and Irrigation Minister Abdul Wahab Mahmoud al-Sabbagh said on May 18 that 50 per cent of cereal and seed stocks had been destroyed during the Gulf war, as had 95 per cent of livestock and poultry for breeding.
UN confirmation of chemical weapons destruction
A report submitted by the eighth UN chemical weapons inspection team to the UN's Special Commission on Iraqi Disarmament on May 4 confirmed that Iraq had unilaterally destroyed large numbers of chemical munitions, as it had claimed to have done.
The four-member team had visited 20 sites on April 15-29 [see also pp. 38696; 38838].
Issue of US support for Iraq prior to Gulf War
In the US Congress the House banking committee, chaired by Henry Gonzalez, was one of a number of committees now investigating the question of why the US government's Commodity Credit Corp.
(CCC) programme, by which export credits were granted, had continued in 1989 to supply credits to Iraq in spite of mounting evidence of their misuse [see p. 38886].
In a letter to Gonzalez on May 15 the US Attorney-General William Barr described the inquiry as "harmful to national security" and said that the executive branch would provide no more classified information until specific assurances were received that the documents would not be made public.
Iraqi rejection of border demarcation with Kuwait
On May 20 the Iraqi National Assembly issued a statement rejecting the decisions of the UN's Iraq-Kuwait border demarcation committee, saying that Iraq strongly opposed the committee's structure and the method it had followed, and that Iraq had had no say in choosing the three independent experts who sat on it.
In a letter to UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros- Ghali on June 1 the Iraqi Foreign Minister, Ahmad Husayn Khudayyir al-Samarrai, warned that the commission's decisions were "illegitimate and constitute a dangerous precedent in the history of the international organization" .
The committee's decisions had not yet been ratified by the Security Council [see also pp. 38886; 38788].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Second round of elections
The fourth Iranian parliament (Majlis ash-shoura) to be elected since the 1979 revolution was inaugurated on May 28.
The second round of voting on May 8 allocated most of the 134 seats which had not been decided in the first round [see p. 38887], and confirmed the electoral victory of supporters of President Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani.
The Majlis now had 268 members, the results in two single-member constituencies having been declared invalid by the Council of Guardians; re-runs for these two seats would be held by means of mid-term by-elections.
There were 162 first-time deputies and the official media stressed that the percentage of college graduates was higher than before.
Nine of the deputies were women, compared with four previously.
Where there had been 81 clerics in the outgoing Majlis there were now 66.
In the second round 268 candidates stood in 81 constituencies and some 7,500,000 people had voted.
In the 30-member Tehran constituency all 30 members elected were pro-Rafsanjani candidates, and it was now claimed that over 70 per cent of the elected deputies supported Rafsanjani and the reformist policies of the grouping known as Jameh-ye Ruhaniyat Mobarez (Society of Combatant Clergymen).
Two prominent members of the radical Majma-ye Rouhanyoun-e Mobarez (Association of Combatant Clergymen) faction, Medhi Karrubi, the Speaker of the out-going Majlis and Ali Akbar Mohtashemi (who had lost his post of Interior Minister when Rafsanjani appointed his first Cabinet in August 1989) failed to be returned to their Tehran seats.
On June 2 Ali Akbar Nateq Nouri was elected Speaker of the Majlis for one year.
The secretary-general of the Council of Guardians, Ayatollah Rezvani, told Iranian television on May 7 that of candidates who had been disqualified in the pre-election screening, some 80 per cent had been rejected by the executive committees and some 20 per cent by the Council of Guardians itself.
Candidates had been screened to eliminate the "financially corrupt,…morally corrupt,…politically corrupt" or "troublemakers" , he said, and in no case would the Council reveal the reasons for a disqualification.
Clashes in various towns
Disturbances which broke out in the north-eastern city of Mashad on May 30 continued for several days, bringing the city to a standstill.
The disturbances began after squatters in the Koy-ye Tolab suburb attacked municipal officials who were checking construction permits.
Later that day a boy was killed and rioters left about 100 state buildings, banks and co-operative stores burned or looted.
Up to six people were killed altogether and there were 300 arrests.
On May 20-22 up to 3,000 squatters in Arak, western Iran, the second largest industrial city, had burnt similar buildings after a boy was run over and killed by a municipal truck.
Shiraz in the south-west and Khorrambad, west of Arak, had since April experienced similar disturbances.
Ruling of Hague tribunal on compensation by USA
The Iran-US claims tribunal at the International Court of Justice at The Hague ruled on May 6 that Iran was entitled to receive compensation from the USA for non-military assets in the USA which had been frozen following the 1979 seizure of the US embassy in Tehran.
The tribunal, which had been set up under the 1981 Algiers Accord, had yet to determine the exact sum of compensation to be paid.
Extradition of Bakhtiar murder suspect
On May 26 Zeyal Sarhadi was extradited from Switzerland to France, following a ruling by Switzerland's Federal Tribunal.
He was to face charges in France in connection with the murder in August 1991 of the former Iranian Prime Minister Shapour Bakhtiar [see p. 38409].
The Iranian Foreign Ministry on May 26 delivered a protest against the extradition to the French and Swiss ambassadors in Tehran.
Sarhadi, who had been arrested in December, had unsuccessfully lodged an appeal against extradition.
France was holding three other Iranian suspects in connection with the killing.
[See also pp. 38455; 38696; 38838].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
Killings of Coptic Christians
Riot police and armoured cars were sent to restore order after an attack on May 4 attributed to the Gamaat al-Islami (Islamic League), a local splinter of the fundamentalist Jihad group, against the Christian quarter of the village of Manshiet-Nasser — also known as Sanabu — some 300 km south of Cairo.
The attack left 13 dead: 11 Coptic Christians, and two Moslems reportedly killed by the gunmen for attempting to defend their Coptic neighbours.
It was regarded by the authorities as the latest stage of a blood-feud which had begun over the purchase of a house, and which had already in March resulted in three deaths [see p. 38840].
Other reports were that the killings resulted from the refusal of a Coptic resident to pay "protection money" to followers of a civil servant, Gamal Farghaly Haridi, who headed the local Gamaat.
The Moslem Brotherhood movement in Cairo on May 8 strongly condemned the killings along with "similar outbreaks in recent years" .
The attackers were described by the Grand Shaikh of al-Azhar University as having repudiated Islam.
The Copts formed about 10 per cent of Egypt's population overall and about 20 per cent of the population of Upper Egypt.
The Asyut region was noted for having been a focus for Islamic fundamentalist agitation against President Anwar Sadat prior to his assassination in October 1981.
Other violent incidents involving Islamic radicals
On April 3 four Moslem radicals had been killed and some 20 wounded during clashes with security forces in front of a mosque in Beni-Soueif in Upper Egypt.
The Egyptian press said that the armed men belonged to the Jihad and had attempted to take control of the mosque after driving out its imam.
In April 2 there had been a clash between the security forces and civilians in the Bassatine suburb of southern Cairo after the security forces had intervened to prevent the distribution of tracts hostile to the regime.
On April 29 a church was stoned in Imbabah, another working-class suburb of Cairo and one in which there had been two days of violence by Moslem extremists against Christian churches and shops on Sept. 20-22, 1991.
On May 1 a 13-year-old girl was killed as police tried to prevent fundamentalists from rallying after Friday prayers at an Imbabah mosque.
On May 3 the Interior Minister Mohammed Abdel-Halim Moussa announced that 65 "extremists and rioters" had been arrested at Imbabah, that rioting had been quelled at Isna in the Qina governorate — where in the previous week "three extremists" had killed a guard of the state security investigation department — and that he intended "to strengthen the security presence" in various governorates over the following two weeks.
Release of Israelis
On May 6 four Israeli nationals who had been detained on Feb. 3 and charged with spying for Israel were released.
They were an Israeli businessman David Ovits and three Arab Israelis, Fares Subhi Misrati, his son Majid and his daughter Fayiqah [see pp. 38792; 38840].
Fares Misrati claimed that he had been tortured by Egyptian security forces.
The Israeli Foreign Minster David Levy said that the Israeli government had secured the releases by appealing to the highest official level in Egypt.
Two Egyptians had been arrested alongside the four Israelis and had been similarly accused of "collecting information about the country's economic and political situation and some prominent Egyptian figures in order to supply this information to Israel" (according to the Middle East News Agency of May 6).
Confirmation of Shazli's sentence
The court of military justice on May 5 confirmed the sentence of three years' hard labour first passed in absentia in July 1983 against Gen. Saadeddine al-Shazli, the army chief of staff during the Arab-Israeli war of 1973.
Al-Shazli, who had been in voluntary exile since 1978, was to appeal [for his return and arrest in March see p. 38840, where his surname is erroneously given as Chazli].
The charge, of revealing information likely to harm state security, related to his memoirs, published in Algiers, in which he had criticized decisions taken by President Sadat during the 1973 war.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
Continuing dispute over UN Resolutions
The official Libyan news agency JANA issued a statement on May 14 to the effect that Libya would take three steps in order to comply with that part of UN Security Council Resolution 748 of March 1992 which had called on Libya to take concrete measure showing that it had renounced the use of "terrorism" [see pp. 38839; 38884].
Libya would (i) cut all links with organizations involved in "international terrorism" ;(ii) invite any UN representatives to verify that there were no camps training terrorist groups on Libyan territory; and (iii) undertake not to allow its territory, citizens or institutions to be used for "terrorist acts" and to punish severely anyone convicted of such acts.
The statement also said that Libya would expel anyone proved to be involved in such acts and that "Libya complies with the British demands pertaining to her previous relations with the IRA [Irish Republican Army]" .
The statement called for a meeting between a Libyan and a United Kingdom delegate to discuss this issue.
UK and US officials responded to the announcement by saying that Libya had yet to comply in full with Resolution 748, and that actions rather than words were needed.
The UN special envoy, Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Petrovsky, had paid another visit to Libya on May 10-12 [see also p. 38883], and said on May 14 that the Libyan leader Col. Moamer al Kadhafi would ask the Libyan General People's Committee to decide on the question of the extradition of the two Libyans wanted in connection with the Lockerbie bombing — a process which Petrovsky said would take four or five weeks.
UK Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd discussed the dispute during a meeting with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt in Cairo on May 17.
There was understood to be increasing UK and Egyptian concern over the supposed influence of the Libyan second-in-command, Maj. Abdel Salem Jalloud, on the Libyan stance.
The US press reported on the same day that the two men whose extradition was being sought, Abdel Baset al-Megrahi and al-Amin Khalifa Fhimah, had met for two days, earlier in May, with a leading Washington criminal defence attorney, Plato Cacheris.
Cacheris had sought to reassure them over the guarantees of civil liberties governing trials in the USA.
Death of former Crown Prince
The former Crown Prince of Libya, Al-Hassan al-Rida al-Senoussi, died of a heart attack in London on April 28, aged 65.
He was the nephew of King Idriss, who was deposed by the military coup of 1969 which eventually brought Kadhafi to power.
In 1988 the Crown Prince had been allowed to move to London, with his wife and six grown-up children, for medical treatment.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Death sentences
On May 4 a military court in the town of Ouargla, on the northern edge of the Sahara, sentenced to death 13 Islamic radicals found guilty of involvement in the attack on the border post at Guemar in December 1991 [see p. 38692].
This was the first major trial under the state of emergency introduced in February [see p. 38790].
There were 62 defendants; those sentenced to death included one sentenced in his absence, and also Aissa Messaoudi, known as Tayeb al-Afghani, an illiterate 32-year-old ex-driver and shepherd who was said to have been one of the ringleaders.
Three more people were sentenced to death by a military court at Blida, 50 km south-west of Algiers, on May 6 in connection with an attempt in mid-February to seize arms from a naval dry dock in Algiers.
This attack, in which 10 people had been killed, was mounted by the Armed Islamic movement under Mourad Hanni, known as Mourad al-Afghani.
One of those sentenced to death was sentenced in his absence and two were staff sergeants in the Algerian military.
Conviction of Gen. Belloucif
The conviction for the diversion and misuse of public funds of Gen. Mustapha Belloucif, a former chief of staff said to have been close to former President Chadli Benjedid, was interpreted as a sign that the new authorities wished to prove themselves capable of attacking corruption, even in the military.
Although no details of the fraudulent operations were provided, they were understood to have involved the diversion of public and private funds, which had been converted into foreign exchange for approved imports, into bank accounts abroad.
The judgment was pronounced by a military court at Blida on May 2.
Belloucif, who had left his post as secretary of the Minister of Defence in 1987, had already in 1989 faced a commission of inquiry of six generals, although this hearing had not been made public until now.
Repossession of FLN property
The Cabinet on May 3 decided to implement a decision taken in February by the High Committee of State (HCS) to the effect that "associations of a political nature and mass organizations" (i.e. especially those of the former ruling party, the National Liberation Front — FLN) should surrender any state properties they held.
The FLN was ordered to surrender buildings including the Zighout Youcef palace in Algiers, which was used as party headquarters.
Two daily newspapers, El Moudjahid and El-Chaab, were to be removed from FLN control, and on May 7 new editors were appointed to both.
The FLN secretary-general Abdelhamid Mehri said on May 9 that the repossessions would be challenged in the courts.
Nearly 3,000 pieces of real estate were also said to be affected, most belonging to the FLN but some belonging to the now dissolved Islamic Salvation Front (FIS).
Continuing violence
As isolated assassinations of the police and security forces continued in Algiers and elsewhere, three people were killed by a bomb which exploded at Constantine university on May 6.
In a clash between armed individuals and security forces in the Belcourt suburb of Algiers on May 19, four of the armed group were killed.
Combing operations by the army and gendarmerie on Mont Zbarbar south of Lakhdaria (80 km west of Algiers) resulted in four Islamic fundamentalist militants and a gendarme being killed on May 20.
Arms caches were found and on May 30 five army battalions were deployed; eight people including three soldiers were reported killed.
The former deputy mayor of Lakhdaria was arrested.
Some reports said that the operation had been against a training camp for Islamic fundamentalists and army deserters established by Said Mekhloufi, a former army officer said to be now allied with the FIS.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CO-OPERATION COUNCIL
The joint council of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) member states and representatives of the European Communities held its third meeting in Kuwait on May 16, and issued a statement noting that the EC's proposed carbon tax [see p. 38938]had been discussed at length, that GCC countries had expressed doubt as to its effectiveness in curbing emissions, and that negotiations on this topic would continue.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
QATAR
In mid-May Qatar and Iran were reported to have signed six agreements on areas of co-operation including air traffic, customs and the exchange of news; a study was to be made of the feasibility of Iran supplying Qatar with fresh water through a pipe across the Gulf.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
YEMEN
A bomb exploded outside the house of Prime Minister Haidar Abu Bakr al-Attas in Sana'a on May 15; on the night of May 9-10 there had been a similar explosion outside the home of Salim Salih Mohammed, a member of Yemen's provisional Presidential Council and of the Yemen Socialist Party leadership.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Former Soviet republics' signature of START protocol
Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Byelarus, the three former Soviet republics in addition to Russia with nuclear weapons on their territories, signed a protocol to the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) on May 23 in which they pledged to eliminate nuclear weapons by the end of the decade.
The agreement prepared the way for the ratification of the START treaty, which had been signed in July 1991 by the United States and the Soviet Union and provided for major cuts in the nuclear arsenals of both powers [see p. 38320].
Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991 the three republics had announced their intention in principle to become non-nuclear states.
Russia proposed that it be regarded as the successor state of the Soviet Union in respect of the START treaty, but this was finally rejected by the others in April [see p. 38890].
The impasse on how to ratify and implement the treaty was resolved in May in a series of bilateral negotiations between the USA on the one hand and Ukraine and Kazakhstan on the other, during which time the two countries' Presidents, Leonid Kravchuk and Nursultan Nazarbayev, visited Washington.
The two republics agreed to eliminate all nuclear weapons either through transfer to Russia or by means of destruction and to formalize their status as non-nuclear states by signing the Non-Proliferation Treaty in due course.
This was also accepted by Byelarus.
Chinese nuclear test
A government spokesman confirmed on May 22 that China had conducted an underground nuclear test; evidence of a major nuclear explosion had been picked up by several monitoring stations the previous day.
The yield was estimated at between one and two megatonnes, which made it China's largest-ever nuclear explosion, exceeding by far the yields for tests carried out by other nuclear powers since the 1970s.
Responding to criticism from neighbouring countries, including Russia, the Chinese authorities said that they had always exercised restraint in nuclear testing and that China was still committed to a complete ban on nuclear testing within the framework of effective nuclear disarmament.
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
Defence Ministers' meeting
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Defence Ministers held their first half-yearly meeting of 1992 in Brussels on May 26-27.
The main outcome of the discussions was the announcement that a "basic consensus" had been reached on the organization's future role in international peacekeeping operations.
A formal decision was likely to be taken at a foreign ministers' meeting in June.
The implications of the formation of the Franco-German army corps [see pp. 38931-32]were also discussed.
In a final statement the ministers expressed "deep concern" over the conflicts in Yugoslavia and in Nagorny-Karabakh and Nakhichevan, on the southern edge of the former Soviet Union and close to Turkey, a NATO member.
INTERNATIONAL
NON-ALIGNED MOVEMENT
Meeting of Foreign Ministers
The Co-ordinating Bureau meeting of Foreign Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) was held in Bali (Indonesia) on May 12-16.
On the first day Guatemala and Papua New Guinea were admitted as members and Cambodia resumed its membership.
China was admitted as an observer, but a final decision on whether to grant similar status to the former Yugoslav republics of Slovenia and Croatia was postponed until the September NAM summit in Jakarta.
Yugoslavia remained as chair of the NAM pending Indonesia's assumption of this office later in the year, despite reservations, particularly among delegates from Islamic member-states, in view of the current conflict in the partially Moslem republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
A communiqué called for the speedy withdrawal of all external forces from Bosnia-Hercegovina (i.e. including Yugoslav forces — see also pp. 38918-19]and appealed for the deployment of UN peacekeeping forces there to restore peace and security.
With regard to the world conference on human rights due to take place in 1993 it noted the "persistent side-tracking of economic, social and cultural aspects of human rights by some members of the international community, while invoking civil and political aspects of human rights as a condition for extending economic and social development assistance" .
The participants expressed determination to strengthen South-South co-operation by reactivating for example the meetings of the co-ordinating countries of the action programme for economic co-operation among NAM countries, and the ministerial standing committee for economic co-operation.
The communiqué asserted that the NAM philosophy was still relevant, but that the movement needed to respond dynamically to dramatic global changes in order to exert more active influence, and should participate more actively in efforts to restructure and revitalize the UN.
INTERNATIONAL
IMF
New members
Membership of the International Monetary Fund increased by seven to a total of 164 during May.
Those joining, by the signature of the IMF's Articles of Agreement in Washington, were Georgia (on May 5), Kirgizstan (on May 8), Latvia and Estonia (on May 19 and 26 respectively, Lithuania having already been admitted formally on April 29), Armenia (on May 26), the Marshall Islands (on May 21) and Switzerland (on May 29).
For each of the new members an initial quota of special drawing rights (SDRs) was established (69,000,000 for lithuania, 74,000,000 for Georgia, 43,000,000 for Kirgizstan, 61,000,000 for Latvia, 31,000,000 for Estonia, 45,000,000 for Armenia, 1,500,000 the Marshall Islands and 1,700 million for Switzerland).
The total of members' quotas in the IMF thus reached 93,177,050,000 or about US$129,122 million.
Outstanding applications were those from the nine other former Soviet republics (those from all except Azerbaijan having already been approved by the IMF Board of Governors in April), and the applications from Croatia, Slovenia and Bosnia-Herzegovina filed in April.
INTERNATIONAL
INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES
Ministerial meeting of G-7 and former Communist states
Trade and Economy Ministers of the Group of Seven (G-7) industrialized countries (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the USA) met in Münster (Germany) on May 9-10 together with their counterparts from seven former Communist states of eastern Europe (Byelarus, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Poland, Russia and Ukraine).
They agreed that action to attract more foreign investment to the east should include a reliable legal framework to protect investment and private property, proper banking systems, rules on responsibility for environmental damage, and clear contract laws.
A bilateral deal was also agreed between Germany and Russia providing for Russian counter-guarantees, enabling the German export credit agency Hermes to resume credit guarantees for German exporters.
The absence of such guarantees had blocked new German export contracts since the collapse of the Soviet Union.
INTERNATIONAL
OECD
Ministerial Council meeting
The Council of the Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD) held its annual meeting at ministerial level at it Paris headquarters on May 18-19.
Of the G-7 leading industrialized countries, who had held their own ministerial meeting in early May [see p. 38937 above], only France was represented at the OECD meeting at the level of Finance Minister (by Michel Sapin).
Representatives of the 24 member countries discussed the urgent need for conclusion of the Uruguay Round of the GATT talks [see pp. 38888-89].
There was concern over the prospect of continuing high unemployment through 1992 and into 1993, on which subject the OECD secretariat was charged with preparing a report for the 1993 Council meeting.
There was an apparent consensus, however, that budget deficit reduction was a central plank of the necessary stable policy framework, and that governments lacked scope for undertaking more expansive public expenditure or consumer credit policies to stimulate economic growth at a rate faster than the predicted very gradual recovery to end-1993.
The final communiqué, attempting to embrace both these concerns, stated that, for sustained non-inflationary growth, it was necessary to "keep the economic fundamentals firmly in place, and to pursue with renewed vigour structural reform across a range of areas" .
The communiqué welcomed "the worldwide move" towards pluralist democracy, respect for human rights and the creation of market economies, and acknowledged that the organization must "respond positively and effectively" as more countries sought to establish contacts and develop relations with it.
It referred to the possibility of "membership of the organization for countries which fully share OECD values and characteristics and are willing and able to meet the obligations of membership" (and specifically noted the interest of South Korea and Mexico in OECD membership).
The OECD member states were "deeply committed…to helping the process of transition succeed" in central and eastern European countries (including the three Baltic states) and the new independent states of the former Soviet Union.
Coinciding with the ministerial meeting, the OECD released figures which revised downwards the December 1991 projection of economic growth in 1992 in its member countries.
The new projection was for 1.8 per cent(rather than 2.2 per cent ) real growth in 1992, and 3.1 per cent in 1993.
Unemployment would rise to 7.5 per cent in 1992 (from 7.1. per cent the previous year) and fall back only slightly to 7.3 per cent in 1993.
For the OECD's European members as a whole, the projection was for growth of only 1.4 per cent in 1992 and 2.4 per cent in 1993, with unemployment at 9.3 per cent in both years.
Japan's current-account surplus was now projected to reach US$92,400 million in 1992 (compared with the previous OECD forecast of some $80,000 million) and to stabilize at that level in 1993.
The forecast for the US deficit, however, was revised down significantly, to $41,100 million (rather than $55,800 million) in 1992 and $49,000 million (rather than $60,600 million) in 1993.
INTERNATIONAL
OPEC
Ministerial meeting
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) held its 91st ministerial meeting in Vienna on May 21-22, and decided to "roll over" for the third quarter of 1992 the overall output ceiling of 22,982,000 barrels per day (bpd), in view of the relative firmness of prices (around US$18.50 for the representative "basket" of crudes on which the OPEC reference price, currently $21, was calculated).
Of the 13 OPEC members, only 10 formally approved the roll-over agreement.
Iraq rejected it, since it made no reference to the need to provide for a resumption of Iraqi petroleum sales (currently blocked under the UN embargo).
Iran entered reservations, on the grounds that this level of overall output was too high if the reference price target was to be achieved.
Saudi Arabia (whose Petroleum Minister Shaikh Hisham Nazer did not attend the meeting himself, on grounds of "exhaustion" ) entered reservations for the opposite reason, to keep its options open for a possible increase in Saudi production above 8,000,000 bpd (its allocation being 7,880,000).
The rolled-over ceiling figure was supposed to allow for an increase of some 300,000 bpd in Kuwaiti output by the end of the third quarter.
Actual OPEC output was currently estimated at some 23,500,000 bpd.
INTERNATIONAL
COMMODITIES
Meeting of International Natural Rubber Organization
The council of the International Natural Rubber Organization (INRO), incorporating major producers and 20 consumer countries, agreed at a three-day meeting in Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) on May 25-27 to form a working group to discuss a renegotiation of the International Natural Rubber Agreement (INRA), a final decision to be taken by the end of March 1993.
Producer countries wanted to renegotiate the INRA to increase the minimum defended price for rubber to a level above the average production cost, and to allow more active intervention by INRO's buffer stock manager to support prices, which had sunk to a five-year low by January 1992.
Major consumers such as the USA and the European Communities on the other hand preferred an extension of the agreement for the permitted further two years beyond the expiry date of December 1993.
The INRO meeting was preceded by a ministerial meeting of the Association of Natural Rubber Producing Countries, incorporating Indonesia, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Sri Lanka, Singapore and Thailand, in Chiang Mai (Thailand) on April 29.
INTERNATIONAL
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
45th World Health Assembly
More than 1,200 delegates attended the 45th annual Assembly of the World Health Organization (WHO) in Geneva, Switzerland, on May 4-14.
The Minister of Public Health of the United Arab Emirates, Ahmad bin Said al-Badi, was elected President of the Assembly.
[For 1991 Assembly see p. 38218.]
At the start of the meeting WHO Director-General Hiroshi Nakajima declared that "our goal — health for all — remains intact" .
However, the world had "changed radically in the past few years" and there was an increased demand, felt throughout the UN system, for "intervention in response to local crisis, often at the expense of long-term development" .
Nakajima called for the promotion of equitable social and economic development, including health development, which would amount to a combination of "preventive diplomacy" and "peace and security development" .
On May 14, in a concluding speech, he declared that "in a world of constant change and uncertainty, prevention, promotion and development are the key to ensuring sustainable peace and security" .
Special sessions during the assembly discussed the relationship between the world economy, health, development and the environment.
New member countries
On May 4 the former Soviet republics of Armenia, Moldova and Tajikistan joined the WHO, bringing the total number of members to 174.
Members who had joined since the last annual meeting were Latvia, on Nov. 25, 1991, Lithuania, on Dec. 4, and Kirgizstan, on April 29, 1992.
On Dec. 10, 1991, in an exchange of letters the Republic of Byelarus resumed active participation as a fully-fledged WHO member.
(The Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic had become a member on April 7, 1948, but had for many years maintained only token participation in the organization.)
On May 6, in addition to Tokelau which became an associate member in May 1991, Puerto Rico became an associate member.
Life expectancy — Main causes of death
According to estimates prepared in advance of the Assembly [see also p. 38891], the global average for life expectancy was expected to rise by four months a year over the next five years.
The current average was 65 years (62 years for developing countries, 50 for the least developed countries and 76 for the developed world).
The improvement was attributed to the fact that the number of childhood deaths had been falling by 120,000 a year globally over the last five years.
Immunization levels for the six vaccine-preventable childhood diseases had reached a global average of 80 per cent, while the access to oral rehydration therapy — the best treatment for diarrhoeal diseases — had increased to 70 per cent .
However, the WHO estimated that especially among the elderly the number of sick and disabled might "even have increased" .
Out of some 50,000,000 deaths worldwide in 1990 46,500,000 were estimated to be directly associated with disease.
Of these 17,500,000 were from infectious and parasitic diseases such as acute respiratory infections, diarrhoeal diseases, tuberculosis, malaria and hepatitis B; 11,931,000 were from cardiovascular diseases and 5,121,000 were from cancer.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Formal Hungarian abrogation of Gabcikovo treaty
The Hungarian government announced on May 19 that, with effect from May 25, it was abrogating the 1977 treaty with Czechoslovakia governing the construction of the Nagymaros-Gabcikovo dam on the Danube frontier between the two countries.
The decision followed a parliamentary vote in March [see p. 38843]; the proposed dam had attracted strong criticism from environmentalists, who claimed that it would adversely affect the water supply and destroy valuable wetlands.
The Czechoslovak government responded on May 26 by insisting that the treaty was still valid, and called on Hungary to attend mediation talks held under EC auspices.
EC approval of energy tax plan
The European Commission on May 13 approved proposals for an energy tax designed to reduce carbon dioxide emissions.
The tax would not come into force until approved by member governments, however, and was conditional on other industrialized countries, notably the USA, agreeing to similar measures.
The tax would be levied at the rate of the equivalent of US$3 per barrel of oil in 1993, rising by $1 a year to a maximum of $10 per barrel in 2000 — the EC target date for the stabilization of carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels.
The Commission estimated that the tax would result in price rises of 6 per cent in petrol and 11 per cent in diesel.
Domestic natural gas prices would rise by 14 per cent, and light fuel oil by 16 per cent .
The plan was criticized by industrialists, who warned that it could reduce Europe's competitiveness in international markets, and by the governments of a number of oil-producing countries, including Saudi Arabia and Iran.
US Clean Air Act reforms
According to US press reports on May 18, President George Bush had the previous week overruled the wishes of the Environmental Protection Agency and given industry a major concession over the implementation of the Clean Air Act as amended in November 1990 [see p. 37847].
Under the presidential ruling, industry would no longer be required to give public notice of plans to make minor changes to plant operations which might result in an increase of polluting emissions.
Agreement by Amoco to pay French government
The oil company Amoco agreed in May to pay the French government US$300 million in damages relating to the wreck of its tanker, Amoco Cadiz, and the consequent oil spill, off Brittany in 1978 [see pp. 29216-18].
Amoco had for some time contested liability.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE
Intelsat rescue
The US space shuttle Endeavour ended a nine-day mission on May 16 during which it rescued the US$175,000,000 Intelsat global communications satellite, owned and operated by a consortium of 22 countries.
During the first simultaneous space walk by three astronauts or cosmonauts, the 4.5-tonne satellite was snatched by hand and brought into the shuttle's recovery bay, where a new motor was attached.
Earlier attempts to retrieve it by means of an elaborate mechanical arm had failed.
The Intelsat consortium had paid the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) US$150 million for the rescue, set against the US$1,000 million the mission was estimated to have cost.
The satellite was expected to earn a further US$1,000 million.
Doubts over European Hermes manned shuttle programme
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced on May 26, apparently in response to financial pressures, that the manned space shuttle Hermes would not be launched until 2005, if at all.
INTERNATIONAL
WAR CRIMES
Call for extradition of Channel Islands war criminal
The Guardian of May 4 disclosed that Kurt Klebeck, the wartime deputy commander of a labour camp in the Channel Island of Alderney, was alive and living in Hamburg, contrary to earlier British intelligence claims that he had not survived the war.
Klebeck, 86, had never faced trial for his many alleged crimes in the Alderney camps because the British government had not released relevant classified documents even to the war crimes inquiry set up by the government in 1988 [see p. 36190].
He had, however, spent two years in a British prisoner of war camp in Germany in 1945-47 and had served seven years of a 10-year sentence imposed by a British military court in 1947 for lesser crimes committed in Germany.
Officials of the inquiry and MPs immediately called for the extradition of Klebeck to be considered and for the inquiry to be reconstituted to look at wartime crimes in the Channel Islands.
Sentencing of Schwammberger
At the conclusion of an 11-month trial, a Stuttgart court on May 18 sentenced Josef Schwammberger, 80, an Austrian former SS lieutenant, to life imprisonment for the murder of 25 Polish Jews and for being an accessory to the murder of several hundred other Jewish people while he was commander of two concentration camps in Poland in 1942-44 [see also p. 37899].
INTERNATIONAL
VATICAN
Beatification of Opus Dei founder
On May 5 Pope John Paul II beatified Josémaría Escrivá de Balaguer, a the Spanish priest who founded the Opus Dei ( "work of God" ) movement, as the preliminary step to possible sainthood.
Escrivá, who died in 1975, had founded Opus Dei in 1928.
His beatification aroused criticism from some Catholics not only because of the relatively short time that had elapsed since his death, but also because of what they claimed was the right-wing content of his views.
Anglican archbishop's criticism of birth-control policy
The Most Rev. George Carey, the Archbishop of Canterbury and senior cleric of the Church of England, on May 18 — in the week before he was due make an official visit to the Pope — criticized the Roman Catholic church's policy on "artificial" methods of contraception, as contained in the Humanae Vitae encyclical of 1968 [see pp. 24239-41].
Carey expressed disquiet over reports that the question of population control had been left off the agenda of the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in June due to Roman Catholic pressure.
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
A disputes panel of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ruled in May that the USA had broken GATT rules on government procurement by purchasing a US-made sonar mapping system without opening bidding to overseas tenders; the US Congress had imposed a "buy American" requirement on the purchase, the administration maintaining that the GATT code did not apply to service contracts.
INTERNATIONAL
ICAO
Croatia officially became a member of the International Civil Aviation Organization on May 9.
INTERNATIONAL
ILO
Vietnam rejoined the International Labour Organization in late May, with the government formally declaring its acceptance of the ILO constitution.
Vietnam had withdrawn from the organization in 1985 [see p. 34651]following allegations first made in 1981 that thousands of Vietnamese had been sent to work in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe to earn money for the repayment of Vietnamese government debts [see pp. 31592-93; 32675].