

EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Danish and Irish referendums — Lisbon summit
The momentum towards European Union which had been gained with the agreement in December 1991 on the Maastricht Treaty and its signature in February 1992 [see pp. 38657-59; 38785]was severely undermined by the Danish June 2 referendum result, opposing ratification of the Treaty.
A "yes" vote was returned in the June 18 Irish referendum, however, and the French parliament made progress towards ratification later in the month.
Previous referendums on European Community (EC) issues in Denmark were in 1972, when 63.3 per cent voted in favour of EC membership, and in 1986 when 56.2 per cent supported ratification of the Single European Act.
In Ireland 83 per cent of voters favoured EC membership in 1972 and 69.9 per cent approved the Single European Act in 1987.
At the Lisbon summit at the end of the month, leaders sought to stress their unity and continuing commitment to European integration, but postponed decisions on contentious issues such as the future funding of the Communities, until the next meeting of the European Council in December in Edinburgh.
Danish referendum
In an 82.3 per cent turnout, 50.7 per cent of those voting on June 2 voted to reject the Maastricht Treaty — a margin of only 46,269 votes.
The result was greeted with confusion and consternation by EC officials.
An emergency session of EC Foreign Ministers held in Oslo (where most were gathered for a NATO meeting) nevertheless ruled out any renegotiation of the Treaty while declaring that the "door remains open for the Danes to come back" .
The result prompted French President François Mitterrand to announce on June 3 that a referendum would be held in France to ratify the Treaty; both Mitterrand and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany issued a statement expressing their joint commitment to completion of the ratification process.
The European Parliament on June 10 passed a resolution by 238 votes to 55 with 10 abstentions expressing its determination "that the process of establishing European Union should proceed without delay" , and the hope that "Denmark will be in a position to return to the fold as soon as possible" .
Irish referendum
On June 18, 68.7 per cent of Irish voters, in a 57.3 per cent turnout, endorsed the ratification of the Treaty.
An Irish government campaign had emphasized the economic benefits of participating in economic and monetary union (EMU) and warned that the country could lose as much as I£6,000 million over the next five years if the Treaty were rejected and could also lose foreign industrial investment.
(For every I£1 paid into the EC budget Ireland received I£6 in return.)
On June 9, in part in reaction to polls indicating increased opposition to the Treaty after the Danish referendum, the four main parties (the governing Fianna Fáil and Progressive Democrats and the opposition Fine Gael and Labour Party) issued a joint call for a "yes" vote as "vitally important for Ireland and for Europe" .
During the campaign, however, broader EC issues were almost entirely overshadowed by the controversial issue of abortion, and whether the Irish Constitution's restrictive abortion provisions could be affected by EC rights to freedom of movement and information.
An existing protocol to the Treaty effectively excluded this, declaring: "Nothing in the Treaty…shall affect the application in Ireland of Article 40.3.3 of the Constitution of Ireland [guaranteeing the" equal right to life "of both mother and foetus]" .
However, the whole emotive issue had been complicated by the case of a 14-year-old rape victim, whom the Dublin High Court in February sought to debar from travelling to London for an abortion.
The Irish Supreme Court overruled this, allowing her to leave the country [see p. 38780; the abortion was later reported to have been performed on March 3].
Its judgment as published on March 3 stated that the matter hinged on the "real and substantial risk to the life of the mother" ; this was widely taken as referring to the possibility of suicide.
Prime Minister Albert Reynolds on March 11 asked other EC member governments to amend the protocol, while on March 24 in a provisional ruling the European Court of Human Rights found that a ban on the availability of information on abortion to Irish women was in breach of Article 10 of the European Convention of Human Rights protecting freedom of expression [see also p. 38928 for Irish ban on newspaper advertisement].
The possibility of amendment was rejected by EC Foreign Ministers on April 6, as this would open up the prospect of other countries also trying to renegotiate the terms of the Treaty.
(However, on May 1 ministers did approve a "solemn declaration" to be attached to the Treaty saying that "it was and is their intention that the protocol shall not limit freedom either to travel between member states or…to obtain or make available in Ireland, information relating to services lawfully available in member states" .)
In an effort to separate the issues Reynolds decided on April 7 to call a referendum later in the year on the right of pregnant women to travel abroad for abortions and to receive information in Ireland on the availability of abortions abroad.
French ratification process
The "congress" of the combined French National Assembly and Senate (lower and upper houses of parliament), holding a vote on June 23 for only the fourth time since the foundation of the Fifth Republic in 1958 (earlier occasions being in 1963, 1974 and 1976), approved by 592 to 73 the constitutional amendments necessary before submitting the Treaty for ratification by referendum [see also pp. 38882-83].
The law was promulgated on June 24 by President Mitterrand, who announced on July 1 that the referendum to approve the Treaty would be held on Sept. 20.
The series of parliamentary debates and votes leading to the congress session revealed deep-seated divisions among the opposition; Valéry Giscard d'Estaing's Union pour la démocratie française (UDF) eventually voted with the government, whereas Jacques Chirac's Gaullist Rassemblement pour la République (RPR) either abstained or voted against.
The amendments [ibid. for details]had been approved by the National Assembly at a first reading on May 13 by 398 votes to 77 with 99 abstentions, after the defeat of four Gaullist amendments to throw out the bill.
The Senate on June 17 approved by 192 to 117 an amended bill, requiring a second reading by the National Assembly.
The Senate amendment provided that the right of EC citizens resident in France to vote in European and local elections would be covered by a law "voted in the same terms by both assemblies" , whereas the National Assembly under Article 45 of the Constitution could be asked by the government to "rule definitively" on legislation if the two houses could not agree.
Initially Mitterrand pressed for a rejection of the Senate's amendments on the grounds that they amounted to an attempt to elevate the powers of the indirectly elected Senate to those of the directly elected National Assembly.
However, he then backed down in the face of sustained UDF opposition to such a move (the ruling Parti socialiste requiring UDF support if such a rejection were to go through).
As a result the bill as amended by the Senate was approved by the National Assembly on June 18 by 388 votes to 43 with two abstentions.
Most of the RPR delegates did not participate in this vote, and boycotted the June 23 vote in the congress.
Farmers from the militant Co-ordination rurale (formed in late 1991 by farmers opposed to the increasing moderation of existing unions) blocked routes to Paris on June 23 in protest at the changes to the EC's common agricultural policy approved in May [see p. 38931].
Interior Minister Paul Quilès said that the action "caused minor traffic disruption for four hours" .
This protest followed a month of demonstrations and road blockades by French farmers, while on June 26 French tractors blocked access to the recently opened "Eurodisney" theme park west of Paris for nine hours.
Lisbon summit
When the EC heads of state and government met in Lisbon on June 26-27 they sought to minimize their differences and maintain momentum towards European integration.
Shaken by the Danish referendum result they declared their "determination to press ahead with European construction" .
The Financial Times of June 29 wrote: "There is still a sense of illegality, or at least doubtful legality, about Denmark's 11 partners going ahead with ratifying the Maastricht Treaty on political and monetary union, when the Treaty of Rome [establishing the European Economic Community in 1957]says that constitutional revisions must carry the unanimous assent of all EC states.
But, in the final resort, EC government leaders can make the rules up as they go along."
The summit's commitment to "increase the transparency in the decision-making process of the Community" was seen as an attempt to assist ratification of the Treaty.
In the words of the Danish Foreign Minister Uffe Ellemann-Jensen this might help create "a new political landscape in which new decisions can be taken" a comment widely taken to refer to the possibility of a second referendum in Denmark on the Treaty.
On the question of the future financing of EC activities as provided for in the "Delors II" package [see p. 38785]the heads of state and government postponed until December 1992 a decision on the exact level of funding to be made available.
A compromise proposal which would have spread the package's proposed 30 per cent real increase in spending over two more years rather than over 1992-97 was rejected.
On the timing of negotiations on the prospective EC membership of those European Free Trade Association (EFTA) states which had submitted applications, the meeting stated that official negotiations should not start until ratification of the Maastricht Treaty had been completed and a decision on the Delors II package had been taken.
The UK government had pressed for an earlier start.
Among the major foreign policy issues discussed was the civil war in former Yugoslavia.
However, the EC's joint declaration [see below]was largely overshadowed by Mitterrand's solo visit to Sarajevo on June 28 [see p. 38970].
Conclusions of the presidency
Extracts from the conclusions of the presidency are given below.
On progress towards European union the European Council noted the state of the ratification procedure on the Treaty on European Union.
The European Council "underlines the importance of respecting the timetable laid down for ratification to ensure in any case the entry into force of the Treaty as of Jan. 1, 1993" .
While it "welcomes the result of the Irish referendum" it confirmed the "conclusions" of the Oslo meeting of EC ministers [see above].
On enlargement the meeting stated that the European Economic Area (EEA) agreement [see p. 38931]had "paved the way for opening enlargement negotiations with a view to an early conclusion with EFTA countries seeking membership of the European Union" .
The "Union's general negotiation framework" was to be prepared for the December summit.
 "The official negotiations will be opened immediately after the Treaty on European Union is ratified and the agreement has been achieved on the Delors II package." 
The Council considered "that if the challenges of a European Union composed of a larger number of member states are to be met successfully, parallel progress is needed as regards the internal development of the Union and in preparation for membership of other countries" .
The applications of Cyprus, Malta and Turkey were discussed, as were relations with central and eastern Europe.
On future financing of the Community, the European council welcomed "the agreement on the reform of the common agricultural policy which will control production while guaranteeing farmers' incomes" .
[EC Agriculture Ministers gave the reform formal approval on June 30.]
It reaffirmed "that economic and social cohesion represent an essential dimension of the Community" and decided "to put in place early in 1993 and in those member states where the GNP per inhabitant is less than 90 per cent of the Community average [i.e. in Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain]the cohesion fund provided for in the [Maastricht]Treaty." 
 "Equivalent treatment" was to be given to the eastern German Länder and east Berlin.
However, no agreement was reached on how much money should be allocated.
Instead it was to "be an increase appropriate to reflect the Maastricht commitments" .
Decisions "on the various components of the Delors-II package" were postponed until December.
On a union close to its citizens, the European Council agreed "that specific steps must be taken to increase the transparency in the decision making process of the Community and to reinforce the dialogue with the citizens of Europe on the Maastricht Treaty and its implementation" .
 "The European Council is convinced that harmonious development of the Union over the coming years depends to a considerable degree on the strict application to existing and future legislation of the principle of subsidiarity by all the institutions." 
The Commission was instructed to prepare for December 1993 a report re-examining "certain Community rules in order to adapt them to the principle of subsidiarity" .
On the internal market, free movement of goods, services and capital,"over 90 per cent of the measures needed to implement the single market without internal frontiers have now been adopted.
It welcomes in particular the agreements reached on insurance and public purchasing,…as well as on the final phase of air transport liberalization [see below]and on maritime cabotage".
On the free movement of persons, the European Council suggested a compromise solution to allow "signature of the convention of the member states of the European Community concerning the crossing of the external frontiers." 
Paragraphs on social affairs, the fight against drugs and Europol followed.
On external relations, the European Council welcomed "the results of the United National Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) held in Rio de Janeiro from June 3 to June 14, 1992 [see p. 38947], and in particular the acceptance by the international community at the highest level of the aim of sustainable development worldwide." 
Statements followed on the (GATT) Uruguay Round, a common foreign and security policy, the countries of central and eastern Europe, the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), nuclear safety in the central and eastern European countries and the CIS, the European energy charter, Yugoslavia, the Middle East peace process, relations with the Mediterranean countries, the European Economic Area, relations between the Community and its member states and developing countries, the CSCE, non-proliferation and arms exports, and southern Africa.
Finally, the European council agreed to renew the mandate of Jacques Delors as President of the Commission for a further two years.
He had held the post since January 1985.
Attached to the conclusions were a report "on the likely development of the common foreign and security policy" and declarations on former Yugoslavia, the Middle East peace process, and relations between Europe and the Maghreb.
On the former Yugoslavia, the summit declared that "although all parties have contributed, in their own way, to the present state of affairs, by far the greatest share of the responsibility falls on the Serbian leadership and the Yugoslav army controlled by it" .
 "While giving priority to peaceful means" , the European Council for the first time publicly declared that it did "not exclude the use of military means by the UN" .
Responding to pressure from the Greek government the European Council "expressed its readiness to recognize" Macedonia (following its earlier recognitions of Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina —see pp. 38703-04; 38848-49) "under a name which does not include the term Macedonia" .
Air transport deregulation
On June 22 in Luxembourg EC Transport Ministers approved the so-called "third aviation package" removing government restrictions on air travel within the EC and promoting competition between airline companies.
Reforms in 1987 and 1990 [see pp. 37208; 36494; 35793]had failed to cut air fares.
Under the agreement EC airlines would be free to set their own tariffs from January 1993 and to fly between any EC country.
They would operate under a single EC air licence and after a transitional period lasting until April 1, 1997, would be free to run domestic services in other EC states.
Agreement on 48-hour working week
On June 24 in Luxembourg EC Social Affairs Ministers reached agreement in principle on introducing a maximum working week of 48 hours across the EC (although the number of months over which the 48-hour limit should be averaged remained unresolved).
All EC states would be given three years to introduce the necessary legislation except for the UK, which had strongly opposed the proposal and was given 10 years to implement it [see also p. 38658 for UK option to withdraw from social policy aspects of European Union].
Formal agreement was expected before the end of 1992.
Resignation of EC Commissioners
On June 28 it was announced that Carlo Ripa De Meana, EC Commissioner responsible for the environment, nuclear safety and civil protection, was being recalled to Italy to serve as Environment Minister in the government of Giuliano Amato [see p. 38978].
It was also announced on the same day that the Greek government was to replace Vasso Papandreou as the Commissioner responsible for social affairs and employment, education and training, and human resources by Greek Finance Minister Ioannis Paleokrassas.
The Guardian of June 29 commented that this removed "at one stroke the two most radical advocates of green and social policies in the EC executive" .
Ripa De Meana had been involved in several conflicts with the UK government over such as issues as drinking water and clean beach standards and various transport projects [see pp. 38544; R132].
Most recently he had also refused to attend the UNCED summit, which he described as a "funeral wake" , arguing that the failure to agree on a carbon tax "deluded expectations and eluded responsibility" [see p. 38947].
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Elections — Moves to dismantle federation
Elections on June 5-6 to both chambers of the Czechoslovak Federal Assembly, and to the Czech and Slovak parliaments, underlined the extent of the polarization of politics as between the Czech Lands and Slovakia.
In the Czech Lands "Bohemia and Moravia" a dominant position (among a proliferation of parties) was won by the right-wing liberal Civic Democratic Party (ODS) led by federal Finance Minister Vaclav Klaus.
In Slovakia, on the other hand, the chief victor was Vladimir Meciar's Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), whose nationalist platform drew heavily on economic discontent engendered by the harsh application of Klaus's free-market principles, and favoured greater state intervention, if necessary supported by budget deficits.
In the ensuing weeks the two parties negotiated an agreement on a transitional federal coalition which would effectively oversee the dismantling of the Czechoslovak state.
Commentators frequently referred to their objective as a "velvet divorce" (to follow the "velvet revolution" of November 1989).
Slovakia, with a more rural economy which was nevertheless also heavily dependent on its armaments and mining industries, had been particularly badly affected by recession and the collapse of the Soviet market.
Unemployment stood at 12 per cent in Slovakia as compared with 4 per cent in Bohemia and Moravia.
Of total foreign investment in Czechoslovakia over the previous 2 years only 11 per cent had gone to Slovakia, and the common perception was that the industries of the Czech Lands were in general better placed to benefit from the programme of rapid privatization emphasised by Klaus.
(The first round of the "large" privatization, in which 8,500,000 people were involved through the use of special vouchers, had begun only three weeks before the election"see p. 38921.)
Election results
Among the many parties competing in the elections only the Civic Democratic Party and the extreme right-wing Republicans led by Jan Holcik stood in both parts of the country.
The two broad movements which had won the June 1990 elections, Civic Forum in the Czech Lands and Public against Violence in Slovakia, had both split into competing parties, which, apart from Klaus's Civic Democratic Party, generally failed to win the minimum of 5 per cent of votes in either part of the country needed to gain representation.
Notable casualties in the Czech Lands included (i) at federal level, the conservative Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA"chaired by Pavel Bratinka and including Federal Economics Minister Vladimir Dlouhy) and the Association for Moravia and Silesia, both of which, however, managed to win seats in the Czech National Council; and (ii) at federal and republican level, the centre-left Civic Movement (OH) chaired by Foreign Affairs Minister Jiri Dienstbier.
In Slovakia the casualties (at federal and republican level) included the Civic Democratic Union (formerly the Civic Democratic Union "Public against Violence" see p. 38831), to which the outgoing Federal Prime Minister Marian Calfa belonged, and the Social Democratic Party in Slovakia [see p. 38831], whose list was headed by Alexander Dubcek, the outgoing Federal Assembly chair who had been Prime Minister at the time of the 1968 "Prague Spring" .
Of the deputies elected at the federal election in June 1990 only 17 per cent were re-elected, not including any of the former federal deputy prime ministers except for Klaus.
Chamber of the People Chamber of Nations Czech Lands Slovakia Total MPs Czech Lands Slovakia Total MPs % MPs % MPs % MPs % MPs Civic Democratic Party-Christian Democratic Party 33.90 46+2 3.95 0 48 33.43 34+3 3.66 0 37 Movement for a Democratic Slovakia —-33.53 23+1 24 —-33.85 31+2 33
Czechoslovak Federal Assembly
*Left Bloc 14.27 17+2 —-19 14.48 13+2 —-15
**Party of the Democratic Left —-14.44 8+2 10 —-14.04 12+1 13 Czechoslovak Social Democratic Party 7.67 8+2 — 10 6.80 2+4 —-6 Association for the Republic-Czechoslovak Republican Party 6.48 5+3 0.36 0 8 6.37 3+3 0.34 0 6 Christian Democratic Union-Czechoslovak People's Party 5.98 5+2 —-7 6.08 3+3 — 6
***Liberal Social Union 5.84 3+4 —-7 6.06 3+2 —-5 Slovak National Party —-9.39 5+1 6 —-9.35 7+2 9 Christian Democratic Movement —-8.96 4+2 6 —-8.81 7+1 8
****Hungarian minority coalition —-7.36 4+1 5 —-7.39 5+2 7 Social Democratic Party in Slovakia —-4.86 0 0 —-6.09 4+1 5 Civic Democratic Alliance 4.98 0 —-0 4.08 0 —-0 Civic Movement 4.39 0 —-0 4.74 0 —-0 Association for Moravia and Silesia 4.23 0 —
0 4.90 0 —-0 Civic Democratic Union —-3.96 0 — 4.04 0 0 Others 12.26 0 13.19 0 0 13.06 0 12.43 0 0 Total 100 99 100 51 150 100 75 100 75 150 The number of MPs for each party comprises those elected directly, plus the additional MPs allocated according to a balancing proportional representation formula.
*The Left Bloc, set up in late January 1992, comprised the Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia (KSCM"led by Jiri Svoboda), the Democratic Left Movement, the Left Alliance and the Movement for Social Justice.
**The Party of the Democratic Left (SDL) was previously the Communist Party of Slovakia.
Renamed the Communist Party of Slovakia"Party of the Democratic Left in October 1990, it had become simply the SDL by the end of the year.
***The Liberal Social Union comprised the Czechoslovak Socialist Party, the Agrarian Party and the Green Party.
****The Hungarian minority coalition comprised the Hungarian Christian Democratic Movement, Coexistence (also involving other ethnic minorities) and the Hungarian People's Party.
Turnout: 85 per cent in the Czech Lands; 84 per cent in Slovakia.
Negotiations on federal government
The day after the elections federal President Vaclav Havel asked Klaus to negotiate the formation of a federal government.
Havel's move prompted Meciar to withdraw his party's support for Havel's candidacy in the presidential elections on July 3 and to reiterate his party's intention of getting a new Slovak constitution approved by the Slovak National Council.
Civic Democratic Party 29.73 76 Left Bloc 14.05 35 Czechoslovak Social Democracy 6.53 16 Liberal Social Union 6.52 16 Christian Democratic Union-Czechoslovak People's Party 6.28 15 Association for the Republic-Republican Party of Czechoslovakia 5.98 14 Civic Democratic Alliance 5.93 14 Movement for Self-administered Democracy-Society for Moravia and Silesia 5.87 14 Civic Movement 4.59 0 Others 14.52 0 Total 100 200 % of vote Seats Movement for a Democratic Slovakia 37.26 74 Party of Democratic Left 14.70 29 Christian Democratic Movement 8.88 18 Slovak National Party 7.93 15 Hungarian minority coalition 7.42 14 Civic Democratic Union 4.03 0 Social Democratic Party in Slovakia 4.00 0 Others 15.78 0 Total 100 150
Czech National Council % of vote Seats
Slovak National Council
Negotiations were begun between the Civic Democratic Party and the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia as the two largest parties.
After a first session on June 8 near Brno, Klaus declared that the two sides' views were "fundamentally different" .
After another meeting on June 11 in Prague, Klaus said on June 12 that "if we can't form a reasonable state, we shall opt for a reasonable and quiet separation" .
Further talks on June 17-20 in Bratislava left unresolved the differences over the fundamental principles of a new federation.
However, both parties agreed to form a transitional government and agreed that the Czech and Slovak regional parliaments would work out the future constitutional set-up by Sept. 30, 1992.
The Civic Democratic Party was reported as favouring a continued federal structure, while the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia argued for a confederation of two sovereign states each of which would be a separate legal entity in international law.
At this time Klaus announced that he would stand for the post of Czech (rather than federal) Prime Minister, a move described by the Independent of June 19 as the "clearest possible sign that the Czechs have finally given up on the federation which they had fought for" .
Jan Strasky (ODS), Federal Prime Minister; Foreign Trade Rudolf Filkus (HZDS), First Deputy Prime Minister;[Economic]Control Milan Cic (HZDS), Deputy Prime Minister, Economic Competition Miroslav Macek (ODS), Deputy Prime Minister; Labour and Social Affairs; Environment Antonin Baudys (Christian and Democratic Union — Czechoslovak People's Party), Deputy Prime Minister; Transport; Communications Jozef Moravcik (HZDS), Foreign Affairs Petr Cermak (ODS), Interior Jan Klak (ODS), Finance Jaroslav Kubecka (HZDS), Economy; Strategic Planning Imrich Andrejcak (independent) Defence 
Czechoslovak federal Cabinet
Constituent session of Federal Assembly
At the constituent session on June 25 of the new Federal Assembly Michal Kovac of the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia was elected unopposed as chair of the Federal Assembly (in place of Dubcek), Vaclav Benda of the Civic Democratic Party-Christian Democratic Party as chair of the Chamber of the People, and Roman Zeleney of the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia as chair of the Chamber of Nations.
Addressing the Assembly on June 25 Havel declared: "I share the view that the state of uncertainty cannot be prolonged for ever and the sooner the decision is taken the better.
Every day of delay increases the unfortunate consequences of uncertainty"moral, economic, international-legal and political.
The very agony of the common state, its gradual collapse, or an unruly break-up would turn against all citizens."
He again asserted his preference for a referendum (rather than an agreement between the regional parliaments) as the "most democratic and moral" method of resolving the constitutional crisis.
New transitional government
Calfa's federal government resigned on June 26.
The new 10-member transitional federal government, dominated by the Civic Democratic Party (ODS) and the HZDS, was announced on July 1.
Slovak National Council session
The Slovak National Council on June 23 elected Ivan Gasparovic as its chair and thus chair of the Council's presidium which acted as a republican presidency (there being no Slovak President).
[For dismissal of Gasparovic as federal prosecutor in March 1992 see p. 38831.]
Those elected as deputy chairs of the presidium were Augustin Marian Huska of the HZDS, Jozef Prokes, chair of the Slovak National Party, and Peter Weiss, chair of the Party of the Democratic Left.
There was only one member of the Hungarian Christian Democratic Movement on the presidium.
Formation of Slovak government
The pro-federalist Slovak government of Jan Carnogursky, leader of the Christian Democratic Movement, was replaced on June 24 by an HZDS-dominated coalition with Meciar as Prime Minister.
Addressing the Slovak National Council on June 23 Meciar had said that his new government would in July put forward a declaration of Slovak sovereignty (not independence) for approval by delegates.
Meciar, 49, had been a member of Public Against Violence and a minister in the Slovak government after the collapse of the Communist regime (and before his own increasing identification with Slovak nationalist causes), and had become Slovak Prime Minister after the June 1990 elections, but was dismissed in April 1991 following allegations that he had abused his access to secret police files [see pp. 38161; 38830-31].
All but one of the 14 Cabinet members were from the HZDS (including Ludovit Cernak, elected as a member of the Slovak National Party, who joined the HZDS after the election).
For the first time in many years the Hungarian minority (numbering 587,000 or 10.8 per cent of the Slovak population) was not represented.
Valdimir Meciar Prime Minister Roman Kovac Deputy Prime Minister,[Economic]Control Milan Knazko Deputy Prime Minister, International Relations Ludovit Cernak Economy; Industry; Trade and Tourism Julius Toth (independent) Finance Olga Keltosova (f) Labour and Social Affairs Lubomir Dolgos Administration and Privatization of National Property Peter Baco Agriculture and Food; Forestry and Water Economy Dusan Slobodnik Culture; Education, Youth and Sport Viliam Sobona Health Gen. Jozef Tuchyna (independent) Interior Katarina Tothova (f) Justice Roman Hofbauer Transport and Communications; Construction and Building Jozef Zlocha chair of Slovak Environment Commission
Slovak government
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Likud general election defeat
Elections to the Knesset (parliament) on June 23 resulted in victory for the Labour Party, ending 15 years of Likud domination of Israeli politics.
The Likud-led coalition, whose four-year term was not due to end for another five months, had lost its majority in January after the withdrawal of two right-wing parties, Tehiya and Moledet [see pp. 38740; 38787].
Knesset seats Left bloc 61 (55) Labour 44 (39) Meretz 12 (10) Hadash 3 (4) Arab Democratic Party 2 (1) Progressive List for Peace 0 (1) Right bloc 43 (47) Likud 32 (40) Tsomet 8 (2) Moledet 3 (2) Tehiya 0 (3) Religious parties (allied with right in last parliament) 16 (18) Shas 6 (5) National Religious Party 6 (5) United Tora Judaism 4 (8)
Israeli general election results
(Number of seats won in 1988 elections in parentheses)
Voters were asked to choose only one of the 25 parties contesting the 120 Knesset seats.
The minimum threshold for parties to win seats had been raised since the 1988 election from 1 to 1.5 per cent of the vote.
Of the approximately 3,409,000 eligible voters, 10 per cent were overseas residents and 394,000 were Israeli Arabs (although the majority of the 150,000 East Jerusalem Arabs had refused Israeli citizenship and the 1,750,000 West Bank and Gaza strip Palestinians remained unenfranchised).
More than 500,000 people were voting for the first time.
Both major parties' pre-election campaigns targeted recent immigrants, particularly those from the former Soviet Union, but tended to ignore some smaller ethnic groups, such as the 25,000 Ethiopians who were perceived as barely integrated into Israeli politics.
There had been some 400,000 arrivals since the 1988 elections (including 240,000 from the former Soviet Union), and 240,000 of them were eligible to vote, which was seen as possibly a decisive factor in what was expected to be a close electoral contest.
Much was made by Labour campaigners of the high level of unemployment among the Russian-speaking immigrants, reported as being close to 25 per cent or twice the national average, and even affecting highly qualified professionals.
Many recent immigrants perceived the government as obsessed with "the Arab threat" , while Labour had emphasised that it would shift funding from new settlements in occupied territories towards easing the plight of immigrants and the poor.
Most immigrants of oriental origin, the Sephardim, on the other hand, were thought likely to remain loyal to Likud.
In a campaign characterized by televised smears and counter-smears but which appeared not to excite the expected level of public interest, Labour managers stressed the readiness of party leader Itzhak Rabin to move ahead decisively with the Middle East peace process, while at the same time emphasising his hardline credentials.
Neither of the main parties ruled out formation of a coalition; no party in Israel had ever won the 61 seats necessary to secure a majority in the Knesset.
Rabin had been army Chief of Staff during the 1967 war, and Prime Minister from 1973 until 1977, when in April he resigned as the Labour Party's election candidate for the premiership and the Labour Party lost the ensuing general election [see pp. 28533-38].
As Defence Minister at the height of the Intifada in 1988, Rabin had again taken a hard line, and Labour was widely thought to have gained popularity after he defeated the more doveish Shimon Peres (his successor in 1977) to win back the party chairmanship in February 1992 [see p. 38787].
Rabin indicated that a Labour government would favour working out an offer of autonomy for the Palestinians and would freeze settlements in the occupied territories, although he would insist on retaining "in principle" the right to strengthen existing settlements in East Jerusalem, the Golan Heights and the Jordan Valley.
This stance, it was suggested, would enable the government to obtain from the USA US$10,000 million in housing loan guarantees to help absorb the latest wave of immigrants [see p. 38787].
The USA had been withholding agreement to the guarantees to indicate its displeasure with the absence of progress towards a peace settlement.
Labour activists had blamed Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir's intransigence over settlements for alienating the USA.
Likud was believed to have lost support because of the prospect of a post-election power struggle for the leadership, with Shamir, at 77, considered unlikely to complete another term of office.
Of the right-allied religious parties, which had won 18 seats in 1988 [see p. 36948], Agudat Israel and Degel Hatorah campaigned together under the name United Tora Judaism; with the National Religious Party (NRP) and Shas they pledged to support Likud.
The three main Likud-leaning far-right organizations, Tsomet, Moledet and Tehiya, had failed to unite.
Labour's allies, the three left-Zionist parties, Ratz, Mapam and Shinui, had joined forces to form the reformist and anti-clerical Meretz party, broadly favourable to land-for-peace concessions and even ready to consider a Palestinian state, a halt to Jewish settlement, and improved status for women.
Importance of national security considerations
Public opinion polls published on the eve of the election showed the two main parties evenly matched.
However, publication of a poll of Rabin's fellow retired generals and of senior officials of Mossad, the intelligence service, the same day, was thought to have had a decisive effect in allaying public fears over the security aspects of Labour's policies.
Of the retired officers three-quarters backed Labour's policies on the peace process, and 90 per cent agreed that the next government should negotiate with the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in return for recognition of the state of Israel and renunciation of terrorism.
Voice of Israel radio reported that the security forces had imposed "a 24-hour closure" in the occupied territories, with checkpoints being manned by soldiers in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
(A 48-hour lull in violence in the occupied territories ended on June 25 when three Palestinians and an Israeli soldier were killed in a gun battle in the West Bank, and two Jews were reported stabbed to death in the Gaza Strip.)
Announcement of outcome
On June 24, with 98 per cent of the votes counted, Voice of Israel radio announced that Labour had won 45 Knesset seats, Likud 32 and Meretz 12, and that Meretz leaders had decided to call on Rabin to create a coalition with their party.
However, the final poll, after soldiers' votes had been counted, was to show that Labour had won only 44 seats.
Even with the support of Meretz and the five Arab seats, of which Hadash took three and the Arab Democratic Party (ADP) two, this would give Labour and its supporters only a one-seat majority unless Rabin was able to gain support among the 16 religious party Knesset members.
A surge by Tsomet from two to eight seats was seen as representing a new phenomenon in Israeli politics"right-wing anti-religious sentiment.
Rabin's commitment to peace process and unity
Rabin outlined his future government's policies at a press conference on June 24, promising to move immediately to promote the peace process, repair Israel's relations with the USA, and halt large-scale government investment in settlements.
He also held out the possibility of including right-wing parties in his coalition, in return for their support for Labour policy.
The aim was to create a stable coalition which would represent the majority of the people of Israel, he said.
His government would be committed "at the first stage" to "autonomy and the five-year interim period" which had been spelled out in the 1978 Camp David accords.
He intended to underline Israel's commitment to autonomy and self-rule for Palestinians in the territories.
At a foreign press conference on June 26, Rabin said that his government would end subsidies to "political" , as opposed to "security" settlements in the occupied territories and would aim to bring about Palestinian autonomy within one year.
On June 28 President Chaim Herzog formally asked Rabin to form a government within 21 days.
There were reports that two religious parties, United Tora Judaism and the NRP, were pressing Labour to enter into a coalition with them to the exclusion of Meretz.
Shas was said to have offered to participate in a coalition which would include Meretz, provided that an accommodation could be reached between Labour and the other two religious parties.
The Likud leadership was plunged into confusion and pessimism by the result, with the Defence Minister, Moshe Arens, announcing on June 24 that he intended to withdraw from political life once the new government was formed.
Shamir indicated that he would retire soon.
Arens was quoted in an interview in the newspaper Hadashot as saying that he was resigning because Shamir had offered David Levi, the Foreign Affairs Minister, the party's deputy leadership [see pp. 38835; 38885], despite an understanding that he, Arens, was the heir.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
UNCED summit in Rio
The UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), popularly known as the "Earth Summit" , was held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, on June 3-14, 1992.
It was reported as the largest ever gathering of world leaders.
US President Bush apparently took his decision to attend the summit only after having been urged repeatedly by the head of the US Environmental Protection Agency, William Reilly.
Other influential figures such as the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, Richard Darman, had argued against giving the summit the prominence implied by Bush's attendance.
Reilly failed, however, to persuade the administration that the USA should sign the Biodiversity Convention [see below].
The EC Commissioner for the Environment, Carlo Ripa di Meana, refused to attend UNCED in protest at the Community's failure to agree a joint policy programme on the key summit issues and especially a carbon tax [see p. 38943 for his resignation on becoming Italian Environment Minister].
He had also strongly criticized the US administration for failing to agree binding targets for cuts in greenhouse gas emissions.
Opinion was divided as to how far the conference could be termed a success.
Many environmental campaigners stressed its failure to set binding targets for resolving environmental problems, and to address adequately the links between third world poverty and environmental degradation.
Others, however, including many of the heads of government who attended the conference, stressed that it should be seen as a first step towards sustainable development, and a welcome acknowledgement both of the seriousness of the problem and of the fact that global co-operation was needed to overcome it.
Rio hosted simultaneously a Global Forum of some 2,000 non-governmental organizations, together with representatives from some of the world's tribal peoples.
The historical precedent for the summit had been set with the UN Conference on Human Environment, held in Stockholm, Sweden, in June 1972 [see pp. 25476-79].
UNCED itself, however, was launched as a result of a UN General Assembly resolution passed in December 1989 [see p. 37433], which referred back to the 1987 report of the World Commission on Environment and Development chaired by the then Norwegian Prime Minister, Gro Harlem Brundtland [see pp. 35227-29].
Much detailed work was carried out at a series of four preparatory conferences, known as "prepcoms" , the most recent of which, "Prepcom 4" , was held in New York in April 1992 [see p. 38890].
Principal documents agreed at the summit
The conference's principal outcomes were a declaration, conventions on controlling climate change and preserving biological diversity, and a lengthy agenda outlining the extent of global environmental problems and the measures needed to tackle them in order to achieve the agreed goal of "sustainable development" .
Rio Declaration.
As approved by the conference, the 27-page Declaration laid down broad principles of environmentally-sound development, but was generally viewed as a somewhat unsatisfactory compromise between the widely differing wishes of various states.
Setting forth the goal of "establishing a new and equitable global partnership" , it affirmed that in order to achieve sustainable development, environmental protection should constitute an integral part of the development process, and not be considered in isolation from it.
It acknowledged that states had the sovereign right to exploit their own resources (by implication, therefore, ruling out coercive action to halt the destruction of, for example, the tropical forests), but added the rider that they should not do so in a manner which caused damage to the environment of other states.
Richer countries had a special responsibility "in view of the pressures their societies place on the global environment" .
In one of the very few official references to population control at the conference, the Declaration called on states to "promote appropriate demographic policies" .
It enshrined the so-called "precautionary principle" , agreeing that lack of scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to halt environmental degradation (this was seen as directed in part at the US administration's reluctance to agree to action to combat global warming).
Other elements covered the role of free trade, the rights of women, and the eradication of poverty, in achieving environmental security.
Agenda 21.
This 720-page document covered in some detail the measures needed to ensure sustainable development.
Described as a "blueprint for action" , its recommendations were not, however, binding.
Its core chapters covered the establishment of a framework for implementing UNCED's resolutions.
A new Sustainable Development Commission, subject to approval by the UN General Assembly, would monitor progress towards the goals set in Rio.
The present level of Third World indebtedness made the provision of additional financing essential, to help developing countries in particular meet these goals.
Such funding would be co-ordinated by a new Global Environment Facility (GEF), jointly administered by the World Bank, the UN Development Programme (UNDP) and the UN Environment Programme (UNEP).
Technology transfer was also recognized as a major issue.
The document outlined broad strategies for combating problems such as over-consumption of non-renewable resources; loss of biodiversity; air, land and marine pollution; and toxic wastes.
Biological Diversity Convention.
One of the two binding treaties agreed at the summit, this required states to take steps to preserve ecologically valuable areas and species.
In the long term, it envisaged the compilation of a list of globally protected areas.
The convention laid down provisions for Third World states to benefit from technology transfer and financial aid to help them preserve key areas, and, most controversially, it provided for compensation payments to Third World states in return for extraction of genetic resources (seen as referring in particular to the exploitation of the gene bank of tropical forests by biotechnology companies).
It stated that "the first beneficiaries of the conservation and sustainable use of wild plant and animal species should be the rural communities and indigenous people whose traditional knowledge and respect for these resources has preserved them for centuries" .
The Convention was to come into force upon ratification by 30 states.
Alone of all the nations attending Rio, the USA refused to sign the Convention, chiefly on the grounds that it would prejudice the success of the US biotechnology industry.
Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Under this binding treaty, states were required to take steps to limit the emission of "greenhouse gases" , notably carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), believed to be responsible for global warming.
At the insistence of the USA, the Convention stopped short of setting a binding target date for emission reductions, but recommended that industrialized states should aim to stabilize CO 2 emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000 (a target already agreed by the European Community "see p. 37784" and Japan).
By the end of the conference, both conventions had been signed (not ratified) by 153 states.
The conference also agreed on a Statement of Forest Principles, aimed particularly at limiting the destruction of tropical forests.
This was originally intended as a binding Convention, but concerted lobbying by a number of timber-exporting countries, led by Malaysia, which viewed it as an attack on sovereignty, resulted in its transformation into a non-binding statement of intent.
It recognized that forests were both a national resource in the sense of providing timber, food and fuel, for the country concerned, and a global resource, valuable both as a "bank" of genetic diversity (particularly plant-derived medicines), and as a "carbon sink" , absorbing CO2 which would otherwise contribute to the greenhouse effect.
The Statement urged the development of sustainable forest management policies, due compensation to host nations for access to the forests' genetic resources, and technical and financial aid to help developing countries preserve their forests.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Suspension of constitutional talks following Boipatong massacre
On June 23, amid accusations of government complicity in violence against its supporters, the African National Congress (ANC) announced that it was withdrawing from the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA), the main forum for constitutional negotiations.
The announcement came as State President F. W. de Klerk was hinting that he was prepared to reintroduce a state of emergency, lifted in part in June 1990 [see p. 37522].
The ANC's decision was taken after a series of events beginning on June 17 when at least 45 people were killed in Boipatong, a black township 65 km south of Johannesburg.
The assailants, wielding axes, knives, spears and automatic weapons, were later identified by residents as supporters of the Inkatha Freedom Party from a nearby hostel housing migrant workers.
Inkatha, however, denied any link with the massacre.
After touring Boipatong, Cyril Ramaphosa, the ANC secretary-general, accused the National Party government of "complicity in this slaughter" .
This claim was based on the perception that (i) no police had been deployed to counter the attack, despite warnings that it was expected;(ii) police had dispersed residents from barricades which they had erected to protect themselves; and (ii) several of the attackers had arrived in police armoured vehicles and had later been escorted back to the hostel by police.
This evidence was corroborated by an independent peace monitor as well as a by policeman resident in Boipatong who said "the police brought the Inkatha people here and then stayed all night as this happened" .
Ramaphosa said that the killings were the government's response to the launch on June 16 of an ANC mass action campaign designed to force majority rule.
Capt. Craig Kotze, spokesman for the Ministry of Law and Order, however, placed the blame on the ANC.
He said that "the political temperature had been pushed unacceptably high" by the ANC campaign which had created a climate making "incidents such as these easier to happen" .
On June 20 President de Klerk attempted to visit Boipatong but was forced away by angry residents.
Within minutes of the State President's departure, police opened fire without warning and at close range on a crowd which had gathered.
According to journalists who witnessed the incident, up to eight people were killed and 20 others seriously injured.
The ANC's first warning that it was prepared to pull out of the CODESA talks came on June 21, when the organization's president, Nelson Mandela, declared that the negotiations process was "in tatters" .
Addressing a crowd of 25,000 in a black township near Johannesburg, Mandela said that he could "no longer explain to our people why we want to talk to a regime which is murdering our people" .
In a ferocious attack on President de Klerk, he said that the Boipatong killings had been the work of "faceless murderers who work closely with Mr de Klerk" .
Mandela announced that a series of bilateral discussions with the government, held in parallel with the multiparty CODESA talks, had been suspended indefinitely.
Reacting to de Klerk's suggestion that he was prepared to "look beyond present measures to maintain law and order" , Mandela warned that he would personally lead a defiance campaign should the government impose a state of emergency.
ANC demands
The decision to withdraw from CODESA was taken at an emergency meeting of the national executive committee (NEC) of the ANC on June 23.
Ramaphosa said his organization had had "no option" , but emphasized that the ANC remained committed to the negotiations process.
He issued a detailed list of demands and said that the government's response would determine the speed with which genuine negotiations could resume.
The demands included (i) an end to all covert operations including hit squad activity;(ii) the disarming of special forces;(iii) the suspension and prosecution of all security force personnel involved in township violence;(iv) the surveillance and eventual closure of migrant worker hostels; and (v) an international inquiry into the Boipatong massacre and the international monitoring of the violence.
The ANC's decision to pull out of constitutional talks was supported by several other CODESA participants who also withdrew.
They included the South African Communist Party (SACP), representatives of the Indian and Coloured communities, the leader of the Transkei bantustan (homeland), Maj.-Gen Bantu Holomisa, and the delegations from the Lebowa, KwaNdebele and KaNgwane bantustans.
Government reaction
After an emergency Cabinet meeting, de Klerk on June 24 proposed that the ANC and government hold a two-day meeting for "fundamental discussions" ; the ANC, however, rejected the proposal on the grounds that the meeting would serve "no useful purpose" .
De Klerk did not significantly address the ANC's demands, but described as defamatory and false the claim that he was conducting a campaign of political murder, and defended the security forces, which, he declared, operated with impartiality.
He was also critical of the ANC's mass action campaign which he described as an obstacle to negotiations.
Although he indicated that he would welcome an international fact-finding mission and suggested that international legal experts join an ongoing inquiry into violence, de Klerk rejected the idea of international peacekeeping monitors.
He told a press conference that his government "reiterates its firm stand against foreign interference in South Africa's internal affairs" .
Police investigation
On June 26 the Commissioner of Police, Gen. Johan van der Merwe, said that the police had information that the Boipatong attack had indeed been carried out by 200-300 residents of the nearby Inkatha-controlled hostel.
He firmly denied, however, any police involvement.
Hundreds of the hostel residents had been questioned, the Commissioner said; six had been arrested, and he expected further arrests following the result of forensic tests of bloodstained weapons found at the hostel.
He also denied press reports alleging the involvement of members of Koevoet, the former Namibian counter-insurgency unit.
The press reports were based on the discovery of 40 Koevoet members at a private mine and the allegation of a mine security guard that one of the squad had told him they had taken part in the massacre.
Day of mourning
On June 29 more than 40,000 people converged at a sports stadium in Boipatong for the funeral of most of the victims of the killings.
Several prominent political and religious leaders spoke at the service and were united in their calls for the government to take firm and speedy action against those responsible for the deaths.
The ANC had called for the day to be one of national mourning and services and vigils were held throughout the country.
On June 25 President de Klerk had taken the unprecedented step of effectively declaring an official day of mourning, when he announced that the government would allow its employees to attend the funeral and "related mourning services" on June 29 and called on the private sector to do likewise.
Amnesty International report
Earlier in the month the human rights organization Amnesty International had warned that the prospects for a peaceful transition to democracy in South Africa would be seriously threatened if the government failed to intervene effectively and impartially to stop violence and curb the excesses of the security forces.
In a lengthy report published on June 10 Amnesty catalogued security force involvement and complicity in political killings in the period January 1990 to March 1992.
The report, South Africa —State of Fear, stated that during this period more than 7,000 people had been killed as a result of political violence.
While Amnesty recorded that ANC supporters had also committed abuses, it reserved most of its criticism for state departments.
It called on the government "to acknowledge publicly that extrajudicial executions, torture and other serious human rights violations had been committed by members of the security forces and others acting apparently on their behalf or with their acquiescence" [see p. 38663 for Amnesty visit].
Anglo American labour code
South Africa's largest company, Anglo American Corporation, signed an innovative labour relations agreement with the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) on June 24.
The code, the first of its kind in the mining industry, was aimed at eliminating violence in the mines.
The code also recognized a broad range of labour and civil rights, such as freedom of association, and committed Anglo to ensure job and skills development to correct past imbalances.
The code applied to all Anglo gold and coal mines and was the result of four years of negotiation following the 1987 miners' strike [see pp. 35622-23].
Rent boycott losses
According to Local Government Minister Leon Wessels township rent boycotts cost central government and township councils over R30,000,000 (about US$8,500,000) in lost revenue per month.
Speaking at the beginning of June the Minister reported that the debt from rent and service charge boycotts totalled R1,500 million.
Relations with Russia
A visit to Russia by de Klerk on June 1-2 was the first by a South African head of state.
De Klerk discussed with Russian President Boris Yeltsin a wide range of subjects including political and economic issues, and approved an agreement on mutual trade and economic co-operation.
They also discussed "a unique possibility of influencing the world markets of raw materials" —a reference to the gold and diamond mining industries dominated by the two countries.
During his visit de Klerk announced a "modest" credit line of R100,000,000 (US$28,400,000) for Russian purchases of South African goods [see p. 38751 for re-establishment of diplomatic relations].
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Papal visit
Pope John Paul II arrived in Luanda, the capital, on June 4 on a six-day visit, meeting President José Eduardo dos Santos and Jonas Savimbi, leader of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), and other leading political figures.
The Pope visited six Angolan cities in this predominantly Catholic country, and was welcomed by large crowds as he called for national reconciliation, 13 months after the ending of 16 years of war between UNITA and dos Santos's formerly Marxist-oriented Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-Workers' Party (MPLA-PT).
Accusations over Cabinda enclave
On the eve of the papal visit the Vatican newspaper l'Osservatore Romano accused oil companies of encouraging separatists in Angola's oil-endowed enclave of Cabinda, contiguous with Zaïre and Congo and separated from Angola proper.
The separatist Front for the Liberation of Cabinda Enclave (FLEC) claimed on June 16 that its forces had killed 118 Angolan government soldiers in an attack on June 6, two days before the Pope's visit to the territory.
On June 29, FLEC accused the government of preparing a major military operation there.
Public scepticism over elections
By the end of June only 700,000 of the estimated 4,500,000 eligible voters were reported to have registered, apparently reflecting popular mistrust of the election process.
Preparations for multiparty democratic elections, due on Sept. 29 and 30 [see p. 38851], were marred by opposition allegations that government officials in predominantly anti-MPLA-PT areas were discouraging people from participating.
Voter registration was set to continue until July 31.
Challenge to Savimbi
Miguel N'Zau Puna and Gen. Tony da Costa Fernandes, two formerly leading UNITA figures who had defected and gone to Portugal in February [see p. 38803], were reported in mid-June to have returned to Angola to challenge Savimbi's leadership.
Fernandes, the party's former shadow Foreign Minister, was quoted as saying that if Savimbi did not accept their call for reforms at the party conference to be held on June 30, their tendency would split from UNITA.
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
Expulsion of students — Trade union tension
On June 6 the University of Zimbabwe authorities took action against students protesting at the high level of fees and demanding higher grants.
All 10,000 students were expelled (and told that they would have to apply for readmission) and the Students' Representative Council was suspended.
Class boycotts and demonstrations in the preceding month had frequently degenerated into violence as students clashed with the police.
During one demonstration in Harare in late May students reportedly caused damage estimated at Z$500,000 (nearly US$100,000).
On June 13, riot police were deployed to prevent a series of nationwide demonstrations which had been banned by the government on June 10.
The demonstrations had been planned by the Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions (ZCTU) as part of its campaign for the suspension of the government's economic reform programme [see p. 38751]and the repeal of new labour legislation.
Police broke up a small gathering in Harare and arrested at least six trade unionists.
Resignation of minister
The resignation of Victoria Chitepo as Minister of Information, Posts and Telecommunications was reported on June 9; no replacement was named.
AFRICA
MALAWI
General election
Single-party elections were held on June 26-27 to the National Assembly.
The government's claim of a turnout of over 80 per cent was disputed by the exiled opposition alliance, while Western commentators and diplomats reportedly estimated a turnout as low as 40 per cent.
[For anti-government protests in May see p. 38898; for 1987 general election see pp. 35237-38.]
There were 675 candidates, all from the sole legal party, the Malawi Congress Party of President Hastings Kamuzu Banda.
The new assembly consisted of 141 constituency seats (in 45 of which a candidate was returned unopposed, but five of which remained vacant because the candidates were disqualified before the poll), and a number of additional members appointed by the President, of whom 10 were named on June 30.
AFRICA
TANZANIA
Legalization of multiparty politics
On June 17 President Ali Hassan Mwinyi endorsed a bill legalizing opposition parties.
The bill, passed in parliament in early May, followed the February decision of the ruling Chama Cha Mapinduzi (Party of the Revolution) to approve the introduction of a multiparty system [see p. 38756]after 27 years of one-party rule.
According to government officials, regulations covering the registration of parties would be announced in the near future.
At least 24 groups had expressed their intention to register as political parties.
AFRICA
KENYA
Disputes over electoral process
Opposition protests were voiced in the days before commencement of the 30-day period of voter registration, set by the government for June 8 although it had still not set a date for the elections themselves.
The main opposition grouping, the Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD), was reported on June 2 to have protested that administrative and legal obstacles were being used to prevent sections of the population registering.
In common with other opposition parties and with the support of church leaders, FORD called for a boycott of registration unless an independent electoral commission was established to replace that appointed by the government of President Daniel Arap Moi.
It demanded the release of political prisoners, an amnesty for exiles, extension of the registration period to three months, and the issuing of identity cards to the estimated 3,500,000 people who had turned 18 since the previous election in 1988, and who would not otherwise be able to register.
On June 12 the Attorney General, Amos Wako, announced that investigations had begun into allegations of intimidation and irregularities.
On June 15 a four-member Commonwealth team arrived in Nairobi to help plan the elections, led by Sir Anthony Siaguru, a Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General.
The team dealt a blow to the government's credibility with a public statement on June 19 supporting the opposition's call for an independent electoral commission.
By the end of June it was reported that 3,800,000 voters had registered, out of approximately 10,000,000 people entitled to do so.
President's appeal for famine aid
On June 9, Moi appealed for 173,000 tonnes of emergency food for 680,000 Kenyans facing starvation after 20 months of drought in North-Eastern, Eastern, Coast and Rift Valley provinces, and to help feed an estimated 260,000 recent refugees from Sudan, Somalia [see p. 38950]and Ethiopia.
Verdict in Julie Ward murder trial
Two game park rangers accused of raping, murdering and dismembering the body of a British tourist, Julie Ward, in September 1988 were cleared of all charges by a Nairobi court on June 29.
Miss Ward's father was later reported to have offered a reward of £80,000 for information leading to the conviction of her killers [for October 1989 inquest verdict see p. 37398].
AFRICA
RWANDA
Preparatory peace talks
Representatives of the transitional government formed in April [see p. 38852], and of the rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), met in Paris on June 8 and agreed that the ceasefire agreement signed in Zaïre in March 1991 [see p. 38134]should be revived, although no firm date was set for its implementation.
RPF leader Pasteur Bizimungu insisted that future political negotiations had to cover (i) the establishment of national armed forces, incorporating elements of the RPF, to replace existing government and rebel forces;(ii) the problem of political power and the relationship of the RPF with those currently wielding power in the transitional government; and (iii) guarantees of the political and physical integrity of the RPF and its members.
The government in turn stated that the RPF must bring about an atmosphere conducive to negotiations by abandoning its armed struggle.
The next round of talks was due to take place in either Zaïre or Tanzania on July 10 or 12.
The Paris meeting had been anticipated by heightened diplomatic activity.
US Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen discussed the possibilities of a ceasefire and Rwandan national reconciliation, with the RPF and the Ugandan government in Kampala, the Ugandan capital, on May 10 and with the transitional government in Kigali, the capital of Rwanda, on May 11-12.
These discussions were followed by visits by Marcel Debarge, the French Minister-Delegate for Co-operation and Development, on May 13, and Salim Ahmed Salim, Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), on May 25.
Hopes for the normalization of relations with Uganda, from where the RPF operated (see below), increased after the visit of the Foreign Minister Boniface Ngulinzaira on May 22-24.
The RPF and three member parties of the transitional government, the Republican Democratic Party (MDR), the Social Democratic Party (PSD) and the Liberal Party (PL), agreed on the need for a ceasefire in talks held in Brussels on May 29-June 3.
The peace process was on the agenda at the OAU summit which opened in Dakar, Senegal, on June 29.
Rebel attacks — Army mutiny
The government had launched an offensive on April 17, and estimated that at least 330 people had died between then and May 19, after which there was a noticeable intensification in the fighting.
Throughout June, the RPF continued to launch attacks from southern Uganda on communes within the northern prefecture of Biumba, although the government claimed that these attacks had been repulsed.
As reported on June 6, the RPF had succeeded in capturing the town of Biumba the previous day but failed to hold it; the official death toll was 24 rebels and three government soldiers killed.
A serious threat to the government's ability to prosecute the war were rumours of an imminent military coup d'etat.
Mutinies were reported to have spread throughout the army since May 28-29, when discontent in the ranks over pay and future prospects following an official threat of demobilization reached its peak.
Riots, including indiscriminate shooting and looting, were reported in Kigali and in the western towns of Gisenye and Ruhengeri, and a total of 35 people were reported dead.
A degree of order was reportedly restored on May 31.
French military reinforcements, 150 troops, had been flown in from the Central African Republic to evacuate foreign nationals in Kigali.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Power struggle
As the 2,700 delegates to the 10-month-old national conference continued their debates on the organization of a transition to a pluralist political system, the chairman, the Most Rev. Laurent Monsengwo Pasinya, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Kisangani, was quoted on June 7 as saying that everything would be ready for the establishment of a transitional government by the end of July.
Most speakers, he said, agreed that President Mobutu Sese Seko should stay in office during the transitional period but "only if he were to rule and not govern" .
On June 16 the conference, which had insisted on its sovereign status in defiance of the order of Prime Minister Jean Nguza Karl-I-Bond [see p. 38852], began debating the choice of a Prime Minister.
The same day, Mobutu warned the conference against this course, asserting in a statement read on national radio that under the present Constitution it was for him to appoint the head of government.
Mgr Monsengwo called on conference participants to show restraint.
On June 21 the plenary conference was suspended ahead of three weeks of committee-level meetings.
On television that evening Mobutu said that the conference could do no more than write the new constitution, and could not adopt it.
He himself had convened the conference, which had no popular mandate, and "the only holder of sovereignty is the people" , he declared.
In a further television appearance on June 24, he said that he had twice called the conference to order and would do so again.
Confiscation of foreign oil assets
The government announced on June 8 that it was seizing the assets of foreign oil companies in an attempt to ease chronic fuel shortages.
Officials said that the move was temporary and that the companies would be paid for supplying petroleum products.
Several companies were reported to believe, however, that their assets had effectively been nationalized, and that there were insufficient funds in the Treasury to pay them.
AFRICA
CONGO
Confusion over election process
Following the announcement of a new election timetable [see p. 38898], the caretaker Prime Minister, André Milongo, announced on June 12 that, as a result of widespread electoral fraud in the May 3 municipal and local polling, the mayors of six municipalities and the prefects of nine regions were being dismissed.
On June 15, the 13 opposition parties in the coalition Front for the Defence of Democracy (FDD) accused Milongo's government of failing to correct errors in the voter registration procedures.
The Front, including the former sole legal party, the Congolese Labour Party (PCT), alleged that 500,000 people had been given voting cards even though they were not on any electoral roll.
It called for a further postponement of the legislative elections which had already been deferred to begin on June 21.
On June 20 Milongo announced that the following day's first-round voting was being postponed until June 24.
Opposition leaders immediately called for the dismissal of Milongo and of President Denis Sassou-Nguesso for failing to organize the elections properly.
After the first-round vote, it was reported that no candidate put up by the 30 parties supporting Milongo had been elected.
More than 1,700 candidates stood, in 123 seats.
The PCT subsequently called for the election to be annulled, alleging irregularities.
Mgr Ernest Kombo, chairman of the Higher Council of the Republic (CSR —the transitional legislature), complained in a television appearance that a network of election saboteurs had been active.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Cabinet changes — Controversial trial
Finance and Economic Planning Minister Alhaji Abubakar Alhaji ( "Triple A" ), Nigeria's principal debt negotiator, architect of its IMF-backed structural adjustment programme, and also since 1991 the Sardauna of Sokoto [see p. 38563], left the government on June 6 to become high commissioner in the United Kingdom.
Also replaced in the ensuing Cabinet reshuffle was Petroleum Resources Minister Jibril Aminu, who was widely expected to be a candidate in the presidential elections scheduled for Dec. 5.
The new Minister of Finance and Economic Development was Ahmed Abubakar, hitherto director-general in the Finance Ministry, while the former National Planning Commission chair and Minister for Special Duties Chu Okongwu took over as Minister of Petroleum and Mineral Resources.
The post of national planning commission chair went to Senas Ukpanah, hitherto Minister of Establishments and Management Service, with this portfolio going to Chief Gabriel Chikulu.
At the same time Imo Isuele was appointed as chair of the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation and Edmond Danko as its new managing director.
Controversial trial of human rights activists
Beko Ransome Kuti, the president of the Nigerian Committee for the Defence of Human Rights (CDHR) and chair of the Campaign for Democracy (CD), was along with four others brought to court on June 15 in Gwagwalada, a small town 100 km from Abuja and about 400 km north of Lagos.
Their detentions had been widely criticized, and lawyers had threatened a boycott of the courts in support of demands by the Lagos High Court that the men be brought to court and that their trial be held in the city rather than in a remote location.
The case, on treason charges for alleged violation of the decree governing the transition to civilian rule, was immediately adjourned until June 29, when an Abuja magistrate granted the five men bail.
Those accused, besides Ransome Kuti and the two CD activists arrested with him on May 18 [see p. 38900], were the prominent human rights lawyer Gani Fawehinmi, arrested at his Lagos home on May 29, and the president of the banned National Association of Nigerian Students (NANS), Olusegun Mayegun, who was arrested with a NANS colleague on June 11 at Lagos University.
AFRICA
BURKINA
Principal Burkina ministers
New government
Following the unexpected victory of his Organization for Popular Democracy-Labour Movement (ODP-MT) in legislative elections in May [see p. 38898-99], President Blaise Compaore on June 16 appointed Youssouf Ouedraogo as Prime Minister.
Ouedraogo's 29-member Cabinet, named on June 29, had 13 ODP-MT members, including two ministers of state and the key portfolios of Finance and Planning, Defence, External Relations, Territorial Administration and Justice.
Other parties represented were the National Convention of Progressive Patriots-Social Democratic Party (CNPP-PSD), the African Democratic Assembly, the Alliance for Democracy and Federation, the Movement of Social Democrats, the Burkinabe Socialist Party and the Union of Independent Social Democrats.
The political affiliation of individual ministers was not specified in the official Cabinet list.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Confusion over deaths of Senegalese ECOMOG soldiers
Amid allegations in early June that rebels loyal to the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) led by Charles Taylor were obstructing the deployment of peacekeeping troops of the Economic Community of West Africa States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), six Senegalese ECOMOG soldiers were reported to have been killed in NPFL-held territory.
The deaths were the first among ECOMOG troops since the multinational force was deployed in NPFL areas under the April Geneva agreement [see p. 38853].
Three Senegalese soldiers (initially reported by an NPFL spokesman as having been killed) had been wounded on May 28 in a 10-hour gunfight involving NPFL men at Vahun, close to the Sierra Leone border.
On June 2, ECOMOG headquarters in Monrovia announced that six other Senegalese soldiers had been taken hostage by Taylor's men.
On June 5 a spokesman for the NPFL denied over the rebel radio station at Gbarnga that the Front was holding any ECOMOG troops.
The spokesman said that 10 NPFL fighters had died in the Vahun incident, and that all bodies had been buried, but it was reported the same day that Taylor had ordered that the bodies should be exhumed.
On June 9 the Senegalese army was reported to have confirmed that six of its soldiers had been killed after being captured by the NPFL.
The Senegalese Armed Forces Chief of Staff, Gen. Mamadou Mansour Seck, had gone to see Taylor about the incident, accompanied by Maj.-Gen.
Ishaya Bakut, field commander of ECOMOG, who was said to have complained that NPFL fighters were continuing to harass the ECOMOG troops.
Taylor was reported on Monrovia radio to have expressed regret over the deaths and to have pledged the NPFL's commitment to the ceasefire.
On June 14 Maj.-Gen.
Bakut announced that the Senegalese ECOMOG contingent was being withdrawn to Monrovia, the Liberian capital.
On June 22, following a meeting in Dakar, Senegal, of foreign ministers of the five countries constituting the ECOWAS committee on peace in Liberia (Côte d'Ivoire, The Gambia, Ghana, Nigeria and Senegal), the Pan-African News Agency reported that an ECOWAS special commission was being established to investigate the killings and identify those responsible.
At the same time it was reported that the ECOWAS committee was planning to impose an economic embargo on areas of Liberia controlled by Taylor's forces unless the NPFL acted in line with the Geneva agreement.
AFRICA
MALI
New Cabinet
Following his April election victory [see p. 38853], Alpha Oumar Konare, leader of the Alliance for Democracy in Mali (ADEMA), was sworn in as President on June 8.
In his inaugural address Konare warned that the country should not expect miracles; although he wished to bring hope to the country, he said, he was not a "pedlar of illusion" .
The transitional government having resigned formally on June 5, Konare named Younoussi Touré as the head of a new Cabinet.
Mohamed Lamine Traore Minister of State in charge of Territorial Administration and Security Baba Atif Aidara Minister of State for National Education Idrissa Traore Minister of State in charge of Justice and Human Rights, Keeper of the Seals Abdoulaye Sekou Sow Minister of State in charge of Defence Djonkouma Traore Civil Service, Labour and Modernization of the Administration Mohamed Aloussine Touré External Relations Mahamar Oumar Maiga Economy, Finance and Planning
Principal Mali ministers Younoussi Touré Prime Minister
An economist, Touré had been director-general of the Central Bank of Mali in 1983.
His administration was dominated by ADEMA, which had won the majority of seats in the March legislative elections [see p. 38801], but in keeping with Konare's commitment to involve other political parties, significant posts went to Baba Atif Aidara of the Sudanese Union-African Democratic Rally (US-RDA) and Idrissa Traore of the Democracy and Progress Party (PDP).
AFRICA
CHAD
Coup attempt
On June 18 the military-led government announced that it had pre-empted a coup attempt led by the Minister of Public Works and Transport, Col. Abbas Koty.
Koty was said to have been planning the insurrection through contacts with people in several towns, and had fled, taking with him a number of dissident troops.
Koty told French radio on June 24 that he would oppose the government from the territory of an unnamed neighbouring country; he demanded the departure of President Idriss Déby, who, he said, was "dictatorial, nepotist, squandering public money" .
Koty had been Defence Minister until December 1991 [see p. 38665; for February 1992 coup attempt see p. 38800].
Agreement with MDD
On June 24 an agreement was signed in Libreville, Gabon, by the Chadian government and a representative of the opposition Movement for Development and Democracy (MDD).
Hostilities between the Chadian army and the Western Armed Forces (FAO —the military wing of the MDD) were to end, and people arrested in combat or detained as a result of membership of the MDD were to be released.
The MDD was loyal to the former President Hissène Habré, who, according to some reports, was now in exile in Senegal [see also pp. 38710; 38901].
AFRICA
SUDAN
Conclusion of peace talks
On June 5, at the conclusion of peace talks in the Nigerian capital of Abuja between the Sudanese government and the two factions of the rebel Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA), a joint communiqué was agreed upon, committing all parties to "peaceful negotiations" , which would be continued through Nigerian mediation at a future date.
[For opening of talks see p. 38901.]
All parties reserved the right to "consult their mandates" in order to make sure that the will of "the population concerned" would be followed.
The "structure and character of the interim arrangement" would be determined at a future date, and the communiqué recognized "that Sudan is a multi-ethnic, multi-lingual, multi-cultural and multi-religious country" .
There was no mention of a ceasefire, and at Sudanese government insistence the two SPLA factions had dropped a demand for a referendum on "self-determination" for the south of Sudan.
The Torit and Nasir factions of the SPLA had succeeded in uniting behind this demand for regional self-determination, although a representative of John Garang's Torit faction stressed on May 31 that the "self-determination" solution remained second-best after the solution of a "secular, democratic, pluralistic and multi-party Sudan" .
The Torit faction also declared that it accepted the application of the Islamic sharia legal code in the north of the country, to the exclusion of the south.
Accusations against Saudi government
In late May the Sudanese media began to accuse Saudi Arabia of being the SPLA's main financial backer and supplier of weapons, and on June 11 it was reported that when army forces destroyed an SPLA camp at Kit (about 45 km south-west of Torit), they had found "a huge quantity of military equipment manufactured in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia" .
On May 31 Saudi officials had denied the allegations, noting the importance of continued Saudi "brotherly Islamic and Arab support" to Sudan in the forms of loans and grants.
Attack on Turabi
Hassan al-Turabi, 60, widely regarded as the chief ideologist of the National Islamic Front (NIF) regime in Khartoum, was attacked as he arrived at Ottawa airport, Canada on May 25.
A former world karate champion, Hashim Baddridine, also Sudanese, was charged with the attack, which had reportedly left Turabi badly injured from a blow to the side of his head.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Regional council elections
On June 21 elections to new regional councils (also referred to as "national local administrations" ) were held in 11 of Ethiopia's 14 regions.
Voting was postponed in three areas of Ethiopia —the Afar and Somali regions and Harer town —where the security situation was precarious.
About 33,000,000 people were eligible to vote, and some 62 "nations, nationalities and political organizations" had registered candidates.
The Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) announced on June 17, however, that it would not participate, claiming that its offices had been closed down and its officials arbitrarily arrested by forces of the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF).
Five other political groupings, including the All-Amhara People's Organization (AAPO) and the National Democratic Union (NDU), also boycotted the elections.
On June 8, 18 political organizations including the OLF had unsuccessfully petitioned the electoral commission for a postponement until irregularities and "discriminatory activities" had been resolved and all armed forces had withdrawn to their camps as agreed [see pp. 38660; 38855].
These were the first elections since the overthrow of President Mengistu Haile Mariam in May 1991 and the establishment of a transitional government in July 1991; a general election was still scheduled for 1993.
The elections did not cover Eritrea.
International observers
About 250 international observers —from 14 countries and the UN, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the European Communities (EC) —monitored the proceedings, although they were unable to visit all regions.
The Washington Post of June 24 quoted the co-chair of the observer delegation, Donald Payne, a member of the US House of Representatives, as saying that the elections could not be described as "completely free and fair" , and that he hoped that new elections might be held in disputed areas.
Differences of opinion among the observers prevented the drafting of a final report.
Eight observers had been withdrawn from the western town of Dembi-Dolo, reportedly due to the threatening behaviour of OLF fighters.
Withdrawal of OLF from Council of Representatives
The OLF announced on June 23 that it was withdrawing from the Council of Representatives; elected in July 1991 the 87-member Council contained 12 members of the OLF and 16 were from four other Oromo organizations [see p. 38322; for December 1991 agreement on autonomous regions see pp. 38564; 38660].
Appointment of Eritrea Council
On June 14 the fifth session of the central committee of the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) announced the formation of a 28-member Council to be "the executive body of the provisional government" (which was administering the region pending a referendum on independence scheduled for April 1993).
The Council replaced a provisional Cabinet appointed in the second half of 1991, and was likewise headed by EPLF secretary-general Issaias Afewerki.
The Secretary of Foreign Affairs was Mohammed Sharif, the Secretary of Internal Affairs was Ali Sayyid Abdullah and the Secretary of Finance was Estifanos Seyoum.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Bahr Dar accord
Representatives of 11 Somali factions meeting in Bahr Dar in north-western Ethiopia on June 6 reached an accord, mediated by Ethiopian government representatives, allowing for a ceasefire to be implemented with the help of the UN and other international organizations.
A "comprehensive and joint conference" would be held to "smooth the way for the establishment of the provisional government in Somalia within three months" .
Aid was to be distributed by non-governmental organizations "both local and international" , as well as by "the competent local authorities" .
The Bahr Dar meeting was held under the auspices of the standing committee on the Horn of Africa, established in April [see p. 38855].
The accord renewed the provisions for a ceasefire which had been agreed on in March but never put into effect [see p. 38755].
On June 14 Abdi Uthman Farah, the vice-chairman of the executive committee of the United Somali Congress (USC), which supported Gen. Mohammed Farah Aydid and had not attended the meeting in Ethiopia, pledged that the USC would implement the resolutions of the Bahr Dar accord.
In an address to the Somali people on June 11, interim President Ali Mahdi Mohammed said that the planned deployment of a UN peacekeeping force "was not meant to change Somali culture or advocate [foreign]occupation" .
Refugees in Yemen
On June 24 some 3,400 Somali refugees were brought ashore in Yemen after the ship in which they had left Mogadishu two weeks earlier, the Gob Wien, ran aground off the port of Aden.
The ship had spent eight days searching for a port in which to dock, and had been refused permission to dock by the Aden port authorities on June 19.
Some 140 of those on board had died either of hunger and heat exhaustion on the ship, or in attempts to swim ashore.
Accounts of some 70 of the refugees being murdered near the shore by an armed gang and of women being raped were later found to be inaccurate.
An official in the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) said that 147 people had died, most of them children.
Yemen was already housing some 50,000 Somali and Ethiopian refugees and the authorities there said that their resources, especially health care provision, were overstretched.
Yemeni Prime Minister Haider al-Attas, speaking on June 30 at the UN European headquarters in Geneva, appealed to the international community to share financial responsibility for the reception in Yemen of such refugees, whom other Gulf states were reportedly refusing to receive.
AFRICA
COMOROS
Referendum majority for new constitution
In a June 7 referendum 74.25 per cent of the republic's 213,000 electors voted in favour of a new constitution, according to official figures released on June 10.
Only 23.49 per cent followed the opposition parties' advice to vote against it.
The referendum had been postponed from May 24 [see p. 38902].
The proposed constitution allowed for the election by universal suffrage of a president for a five-year term, renewable once only, and of a legislative assembly for a four-year term, and for the formation of a senate of 15 members, five from each main island, to be chosen by an electoral college for a term of six years.
The post of prime minister was to be held by a member of the majority party in the assembly.
AFRICA
LESOTHO
On June 22 Tokonye Kotelo, hitherto high commissioner in Kenya, was named as Minister of Foreign Affairs following the resignation of Capt. Pius Molapo; on June 23 Chief Mohlalefi Bereng was sworn in as the Minister of Interior, Chieftaincy Affairs and Rural Development, replacing Kgotsi Matete; three other Cabinet changes were made on June 29.
AFRICA
MAURITIUS
Electing a President for the first time (Mauritius having become a republic in March 1992 —see p. 38804), the National Assembly on June 30 chose Cassam Uteem, hitherto Minister for Industry and Industrial Technology; Uteem's ministerial post went to Bashir Khodabux, also of the Mouvement militant mauricien (MMM).
AFRICA
UGANDA
On June 5 the Army Council announced that the country's armed forces would be reduced by an unspecified amount; the army was believed to number more than 100,000, and the World Bank and international aid donors had frequently called for reductions.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
Grain merchants doubled the price of maize meal, the national staple, at the beginning of June; the second major price increase since February, it drew criticism from the Minister of Agriculture.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Presidential election campaign
Final round of primaries
The final round of primary elections was held on June 2, with contests in Alabama, California, Montana, New Jersey, New Mexico and Ohio.
The Republican and Democratic contests were won by President George Bush and Governor Bill Clinton respectively, both of whom ended the primary season with sufficient party convention delegates to be assured of winning the presidential nomination of their respective parties.
Bush ended the primary process having won all 38 of the Republican contests, matching the record established by Richard Nixon in 1972 and Ronald Reagan in 1984, both of whom later won landslide victories in the presidential elections.
Clinton won a total of 28 of the 36 Democratic contests, including those in the 10 most populous states.
Exit polls in all six states indicated, however, that Ross Perot, a Texan billionaire who was campaigning as an undeclared independent candidate, would be preferred to either Bush or Clinton by supporters of both parties, with the exception of Republican voters in Ohio.
Quarrel between Clinton and Jackson
Having assured himself of his party's nomination, Clinton appeared to increase his efforts to seek support beyond the usual constituency of his party.
The most dramatic example of this came on June 13 when, while addressing a meeting of members of the Rev. Jesse Jackson's "Rainbow Coalition" , he defied the parameters of what was considered to be "politically correct" by criticizing all forms of racial hatred, including such expressions by blacks against whites.
This resulted in a furious argument between Clinton and Jackson which, while appearing to threaten Clinton's level of support among black voters, had the immediate effect of reinvigorating his campaign by propelling him once again on to the front pages of the country's newspapers.
The row erupted after Clinton denounced the remarks of a black rap singer, Sister Souljah, who had been an earlier guest of the Rainbow Coalition.
Comments which she had made to the Washington Post after the Los Angeles riots —including the remark that "if black people kill black people every day, why not have a week killing white people?" —were, Clinton said, "filled with a kind of hatred that you do not honour tonight" .
In the days which followed Clinton was accused by Jackson and his supporters of using the language of racism to make a clumsy and cynical bid for white support.
Other Democrats, however, welcomed Clinton's unrepentant stance as further indication of his courage and as a demonstration of his willingness to resist pressure from minorities within the Democratic Party.
Row between Bush and Perot — Clinton's revised economic programme
Simmering personal animosity between Bush and Perot also flared into life in June as a result of claims that Perot had employed a team of investigators to scrutinize the private lives of numerous public figures, including the President and members of his family.
Bush reacted to the revelation by claiming that the investigations were "beyond the pale" , and demanded that Perot should "leave my kids alone" .
This onslaught from Bush, together with intensifying questioning of Perot's attitude to, and respect for, civil liberties, saw the would-be independent candidate driven on to the defensive towards the end of the month.
While admitting that he had used private investigators in the course of his business and political activities, Perot on June 24 claimed that the recent spate of stories on the issue would have made "Hitler's propaganda chief proud" .
He dismissed Bush's outrage as "a total act" and claimed that the entire row had been manufactured by a "Republican dirty tricks committee" managed by the President.
Despite expressions of indignation by members of the Republican Party, Perot maintained his claim and promised to provide proof of the dirty tricks campaign at a later point.
Although Clinton expressed his disapproval of private investigations of public lives, he remained largely aloof from the Perot-Bush exchanges, stating that he was content to "let them play it out" .
On June 21 he returned his campaign to policy specifics, an area where he was generally perceived to be stronger than his rival candidates, with a detailed reformulation of his economic proposals.
The revised economic blueprint called for $200,000 million in new investment in cities, training and infrastructure, to be financed by spending cuts and higher taxes for the rich and for corporations.
The plan reduced the value of the middle-class tax cuts which he had earlier proposed and lengthened his timetable for balancing the federal budget.
Budgetary issues
Rejection of constitutional amendment to balance budget
The House of Representatives on June 11 rejected a proposed constitutional amendment which would have required the government and Congress to enact a balanced budget each year.
The House voted in favour by 280 to 153, nine votes short of the required two-thirds majority of those voting within the 435-member chamber.
A parallel motion in the Senate, sponsored by Paul Simon, a Democrat from Illinois, was then abandoned.
The concept of a constitutional amendment as a means of returning to fiscal probity had gathered momentum throughout the first half of 1992.
The idea had been vigorously championed by President Bush, and, with opinion polls showing the electorate strongly in favour of the move and deeply hostile to political incumbents, many legislators had also come to accept it.
At the root of the argument was the ballooning budget deficit — currently standing at around US$400,000 million —and the ineffectiveness of the numerous measures taken since 1978 to control it.
The most recently adopted scheme, the 1990 Budget Enforcement Act, had proved as vulnerable to evasion as its predecessors.
The proposed amendment was designed to become effective in fiscal 1997 or after receiving the endorsement of the required 38 states, whichever was the later.
It was denounced by many as economically dangerous and potentially unenforceable, not least because it specified the requirement of budgetary balance without providing the mechanism through which this could be achieved.
It was also criticized on the grounds that it was likely to turn unelected members of the judiciary into the final arbiters of fiscal policy.
Opponents of the amendment had proposed a bill, couched in almost identical terms, which would have compelled the President to present an annual balanced budget.
This bill was defeated on June 9 by 220 votes to 199.
There then followed two days of vigorous debate, which culminated in the presentation of the proposed constitutional amendment by Charles Stenholm, a conservative Democrat from Texas.
Stenholm's proposed amendment required the President to submit a balanced budget to Congress each year.
Congress would remain free to re-order its priorities, but the overall balance of the budget could be altered only if approved by two-thirds of both houses of Congress, other than in time of war, when the measure could be waived by a simple majority.
When it came to the vote, Democrat legislators split 115:150 against the motion, while all but two of the 166 Republicans voted for it.
Wrangle over legislation to extend unemployment benefits
Other sources of budgetary tension between Congress and the President during June included the passage by Congress of a bill to grant automatically renewable benefits to the long-term unemployed, and a confrontation over the issue of emergency urban aid.
The House voted on June 9 to grant a new extension of jobless benefits of up to 26 weeks, defying a threat by Bush to veto the bill.
The move came four days after the Labour Department announced that unemployment had increased to 7.5 per cent, the highest total in nearly eight years.
Democratic leaders said that the bill, which would cost $5,800 million over six years, would help up to 1,500,000 long-term unemployed who would otherwise exhaust their benefits.
The bill also made permanent changes in the system in order to make it easier for more people to qualify for extended jobless benefits in the future.
The President and most Republican legislators favoured a version that would have limited the extra benefits to no more than 20 weeks, and objected to the qualification changes.
The Senate also ignored threats of a veto by voting on June 19 to extend benefits for the long-term unemployed.
The package aimed to provide up to 33 extra weeks of coverage to Americans who had exhausted the standard 26 weeks of benefits.
Once again Bush endorsed a Republican alternative which would have limited extra coverage to a maximum of 20 weeks, and which included an assortment of tax incentives for businesses and individuals.
Bush threatened to veto the compromise bill which seemed likely to emerge from these two versions of the unemployment legislation.
Passage of emergency urban aid legislation
On the issue of emergency urban aid, a subject which had become an urgent priority following the Los Angeles riots at the end of April [see pp. 38856; 38894], Senate and House conferees agreed on a $2,000 million relief package on June 5.
The measure was opposed by Bush and by many Republican legislators on the grounds that it was too lavish.
Many suggested that the bill was a Democrat-inspired attempt to provoke a presidential veto.
After two weeks of intensive political manoeuvring, a compromise package of $1,100 million was passed by Congress on June 18 and signed by Bush on June 22.
In its final form the aid package replenished disaster relief funds depleted by both the disturbances in Los Angeles and by recent severe flooding in Chicago.
It included funding to employ 414,000 teenagers to work in the summer of 1992 in jobs administered through the Department of Labour.
Bush described the emergency package as "only a beginning" towards what he called the cities' urgent needs for more far-reaching reforms, including tax-free enterprise zones to lure business, welfare reforms and school choice.
Supreme Court ruling on abducting suspected criminals
The Supreme Court ruled on June 15 that the US government could legally abduct people from foreign countries in order to bring them to trial in the USA.
The ruling, by six votes to three, included circumstances where seizures were made from countries with which the US had an extradition treaty.
The ruling arose from the case of Humberto Alvarez-Marchain, who was kidnapped in 1990 from his home in Guadalajara, Mexico, flown to the USA, and handed over to the US Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) in return for a financial reward.
A doctor, Alvarez was alleged to have participated in the 1985 torture and murder of DEA agent Enrique Camarena-Salazar by helping to prolong the agent's life so that the drug-traffickers who had captured him could continue to interrogate him.
The Mexican government protested against the kidnapping of Alvarez on the grounds that it had violated the 1978 extradition treaty between the two countries, and demanded the return of the doctor so that he could be prosecuted in Mexico.
Federal appeals courts in California ordered the return of Alvarez and also overturned the conviction and 240-year prison sentence against Rene Martin Verdugo-Urquidez, another Mexican who had been abducted and tried in connection with the Camarena murder.
In both instances the government appealed; the Alvarez case was the first to reach the Supreme Court.
Chief Justice William Rehnquist explained the Supreme Court ruling on the basis that, while the abduction might be "shocking" and might have violated international law, it was not prohibited either by the extradition treaty or by the US constitution.
Therefore, reasoned Rehnquist, "the fact of forcible abduction does not…prohibit his trial in a court in the US for violations of the criminal laws of the US" .
A minority opinion, presented by Justices John Paul Stevens, Harry Blackmun and Sandra Day O'Connor, described the judgment as "monstrous" , and claimed that "most courts in the civilized world will be deeply disturbed" by it.
In a sharply worded communiqué released on Aug. 16, the Secretariat of Foreign Relations in Mexico City described the ruling as "invalid and unacceptable" .
It announced that Mexican drug enforcement agents in the USA were being ordered home immediately, and that US DEA personnel based in Mexico would have to cease their activities.
This withdrawal of co-operation was described as a suspension rather than a severance, however, and it was not made clear whether DEA agents would be ordered out of Mexico.
Although no specific timescale was announced for the duration of the suspension of co-operation, the Mexican government suggested that it would begin an immediate review of the 1978 extradition treaty with a view to modifying it in such a way as to prohibit further abductions.
Ruling on abortion — Veto of foetal research bill
The Supreme Court on June 29 delivered its long-awaited judgment in the case of Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey.
The case centred on the constitutional validity of a restrictive abortion law passed by the state of Pennsylvania and was seen as a fundamental test of the beleaguered 1973 legal precedent Roe v. Wade, the basis of legal abortion in the USA.
Although the Court upheld almost all of the provisions of the Pennsylvanian legislation, it decided by five votes to four not to overturn Roe v. Wade in its entirety.
This majority decision reflected an unexpected alliance between the two remaining liberal Justices —Harry Blackmun, the author of the 1973 judgment, and John Paul Stevens —and an emerging centrist group consisting of Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony Kennedy and David Souter.
They combined to defeat the expected attempt by conservatives —in this instance, Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justices Antonio Scalia, Byron White and Clarence Thomas —to use the case as an opportunity to overturn the Roe v. Wade precedent.
At the initiative of the centrist faction, however, the Court adopted a new test of the constitutionality of state abortion laws, by considering whether or not they constituted an "absolute obstacle or severe limitation to the abortion decision" .
Using this "undue burden" criterion, the Court then ruled by seven votes to two (with Blackmun and Stevens dissenting) in favour of upholding almost all of the restrictive provisions of the Pennsylvanian law [see pp. 38714-15], including a 24-hour waiting period which the Court had ruled as unconstitutional in 1983.
Only the provision requiring married women in most cases to inform their husbands prior to having an abortion was ruled unconstitutional by five votes to four.
Advocates on both sides of the debate voiced some disappointment over the ruling.
Given that the Court had appeared poised to destroy Roe v. Wade, however, the result was generally interpreted as a defeat for the opponents of abortion.
Souter stated after the ruling, moreover, that to have overturned Roe v. Wade would "subvert the Court's legitimacy beyond any reasonable question; if the Court were undermined the country would also be" .
This implicit acceptance of the wider consequences of removing the right to abortion —opinion surveys showed consistent majority support for retaining the 1973 precedent —together with the emergence of the three-member centrist bloc on the Court, threw doubt on the widespread assumption that it was only a matter of time before the Court eventually overturned Roe v. Wade.
The most immediate effect of the ruling was that legislation enacted in a number of states (including Alabama, Idaho, Kansas, Maine, and North Dakota) which continued similar provisions to those within the Pennsylvania law, but which had been beset by legal challenges, would almost certainly be declared constitutional.
Conversely, instances of anti-abortion legislation which went far beyond the Pennsylvania statute —particularly in Louisiana, Utah and Guam, where attempts had been made to outlaw almost all abortions — appeared doomed to failure.
The erection of further restrictions on the availability of abortions also led to renewed calls from many Democrats in Congress for the enactment of a Freedom of Choice Act to enshrine the principles of Roe v. Wade in federal law.
House of Representatives Speaker Thomas S. Foley gave an undertaking that such a measure would be produced soon.
Given that President George Bush was implacably opposed to abortion under circumstances other than rape, incest and maternal risk, the bill offered the prospect of forcing him to exercise a veto which would be unpopular among much of the electorate and among a significant portion of the Republican Party.
Presidential veto of foetal research bill
The issue of abortion had been raised earlier in the month when, on June 23, Bush vetoed legislation which would have lifted the federal ban on funding medical research which used tissue from abortions.
Bush justified the move on the grounds that the legislation was "unacceptable to me on almost every ground: ethical, fiscal, administrative, philosophical and legal" .
In his veto message to Congress Bush reiterated his opposition to abortion and stated that the veto was "important in order to prevent taxpayer funds from being used for research that many Americans find morally repugnant" , but also because of the bill's "potential for promoting and legitimatizing abortion" .
Among the most vociferous critics of the President's move was Senator Edward M. Kennedy, who stated that "once again, the administration's practice of government-by-veto has foisted a flawed and irresponsible policy on the nation" .
The veto, claimed Kennedy, denied "millions of Americans suffering from Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, diabetes or other serious illnesses the hope that only foetal tissue research can bring" .
Experts had testified in Congress that the massive expense of such research meant that it could be carried out only with government backing.
Research in other countries, and to a limited degree in the USA, had suggested that foetal tissue transplants into humans suffering from conditions such as Parkinson's disease offered significant hope for improvement not seen with other treatments.
It was the 30th veto of Bush's presidency and the sixth to have been activated by the issue of abortion.
As in the 29 other instances, an attempt by Congress to override the veto failed to muster the required two-thirds majority.
On June 24 the House voted by only 271:156 in favour of overriding the veto.
Indictment of Caspar Weinberger
Former Defence Secretary Caspar Weinberger was indicted on June 16 on charges of having lied repeatedly about his knowledge of the "Iran-contra" scandal.
In addition to two charges of perjury and two counts of making false statements, he was also charged with having obstructed the investigation by concealing the existence of extensive personal notes which were relevant to the clandestine 1985-86 operation to sell arms to Iran and to divert the profits to assist the right-wing "contra" rebels in Nicaragua.
Weinberger's stated position was that he had disapproved of the entire operation.
In testimony and published accounts he had insisted that he had argued against the proposition of selling arms to Iran and had believed that the idea had been abandoned.
He had been later surprised to learn, from reading intelligence reports, that the programme had been developed without his knowledge.
According to the recently discovered personal notes, however, Weinberger was aware of a November 1985 arms shipment of US Hawk anti-aircraft missiles from Israel to Iran before the end of the year, despite earlier claims that he had found out about it only in 1986.
The notes were also reported to show that other senior officials, including the then President Ronald Reagan, were aware of the shipment.
The indictment, which followed the discovery of Weinberger's notes in the Library of Congress in the latter part of 1991, provided a much-needed boost to the faltering five-year investigation led by independent counsel (special prosecutor) Lawrence E. Walsh.
Although the inquiry had resulted in the successful prosecution of several former Reagan administration officials, convictions against the two highest-profile defendants —former National Security Advisor John M. Poindexter and his aide, Oliver L. North —had been overturned on appeal.
Weinberger was the first member of former President Reagan's Cabinet to be charged in connection with the affair.
If convicted, he would be liable to a prison sentence of up to 25 years and a fine of up to $1,250,000.
The indictment ended months of secret negotiations between Weinberger's lawyers and the prosecution team, who had reportedly sought to persuade the former Defence Secretary to plead guilty to a misdemeanour and to provide evidence concerning Reagan's role in the cover-up of the Iran-contra scandal.
In a statement issued from his office, Reagan described Weinberger as "a man of the highest integrity" and expressed confidence that he would be "fully vindicated" .
Congressional intervention in rail strike
Congress approved legislation on June 25 to force an immediate end to a rail strike over pay and conditions which had begun on June 24, and which had severely disrupted freight and passenger services.
The legislation, which was signed by President Bush on the morning of June 26, imposed a 38-day cooling-off period and forced the participants to submit to arbitration which, in the event of it being approved by the President, would be binding.
The strike had begun as a dispute between members of the International Association of Machinists (IAM) and the CSX Corp., one of 40 freight companies involved in contract negotiations with the union.
The strike rapidly led to the closing of the entire freight sector and much of the passenger service because of the problems associated with interlocking routes.
Corruption and organized crime
Sentencing of John Gotti
The alleged head of the Gambino Mafia "family" , John Gotti, was sentenced to life imprisonment without parole on June 23, having been convicted on April 2 on murder and racketeering charges [see p. 38858].
His co-defendant, Frank "Frankie Locs" Locascio, was also sentenced to life imprisonment; both men were also fined $250,000.
The actual sentences imposed on Gotti by US District Court Judge Leo Glasser were five life terms, five 10-year sentences and two five-year sentences, all of which were to run concurrently.
Moments after sentencing, a crowd of several hundred of Gotti's supporters attempted to storm the Brooklyn courtroom.
After being repelled by police, the crowd vented its anger by damaging property and overturning police cars.
Pending his appeal, Gotti began his sentence in Marion prison, Illinois, reputed to be the country's most secure federal penitentiary.
Sentencing of Robert Garcia
Former congressman Robert Garcia was sentenced to three years in prison on June 16, having been convicted in October 1991 on one count of extortion in connection with the Wedtech scandal.
His wife, Jane, who had been convicted on two counts of extortion and conspiracy, was sentenced to three months.
Both remained free pending appeals.
The two, both of whom had taken money from Wedtech, a military contractor, in return for using their influence to obtain government contracts, had been originally convicted on related charges in October 1989.
Their convictions were overturned on a technicality by the 2nd US Circuit Court of Appeals leading to their retrial in 1991.
Retirement of Los Angeles Police Chief
Police Chief Daryl F. Gates retired on June 28 after serving for 14 years as head of the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD).
He was replaced by Willie L. Williams, a former Philadelphia police commissioner, who became the first black to head the LAPD and the first outsider to become chief for over 40 years.
Gates had been under pressure to retire since early 1990 when a group of his officers were filmed beating a black motorist Rodney King.
Attempts by the city council to force him from office had proved unsuccessful, and the process had been complicated by frequent changes of mind by Gates over when and whether he was willing to step down.
Despite intensive pressure to resign in the aftermath of the serious rioting of late April and early May —itself a product of the acquittal of those officers accused of assaulting King —and police failings which the unrest revealed [see pp. 38856; 38894], King continued to prevaricate until June 8 when he finally agreed to go at the end of the month.
The departure of Gates coincided with the release of a report by the human rights group Amnesty International which condemned the LAPD for routinely using excessive force and "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment" particularly against black and Hispanic suspects.
Californian earthquakes
California was struck by two severe earthquakes in the early hours of June 28, which left two people dead and around 170 injured.
Although the epicentres of the earthquakes were in sparsely inhabited desert regions of the state, structural damage was caused throughout a wide area, including the city of Los Angeles.
The first earthquake, which struck at 4.58 a.m. and lasted up to 40 seconds, was centred on the remote communities of Joshua Tree and Yucca Valley, 160 km east of Los Angles.
It measured 7.4 on the Richter scale, making it the third-largest to be experienced by the country in the 20th century.
Three hours later, at 8.05, there was a second earthquake centred upon Big Bear Lake, some 30 km west of the first epicentre, which measured 6.5 on the Richter scale.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Collapse of constitutional talks
It was reported on June 13 that after three months of intensive negotiations the inter-provincial talks on constitutional reform had collapsed without agreement.
The talks had been undertaken by the English-speaking provinces with a view to agreeing a package of reforms which would induce Quebec to remain within the Canadian confederation.
The government of Quebec had refused to participate in further negotiations following the collapse of the Meech Lake Accord in 1990 [see pp. 37519-20], but was planning to hold a referendum on the issue of secession in October 1992 unless a satisfactory package of constitutional reforms had been agreed [see pp. 38281-82].
Although the self-imposed deadline for the talks had passed at the end of May without agreement, the federal Minister Responsible for Constitutional Affairs, Joe Clark, expressed optimism that an agreement would soon be forthcoming.
His optimism was apparently derived from the fact that the participants had reached agreement on several divisive issues, including the recognition of Quebec as a distinct society —with a concomitant devolution of powers to the provincial government —and the recognition of the inherent right of aboriginal peoples to self-government.
Ultimately, however, the talks foundered on the issue of how to reform the Senate, the unelected upper house of the federal legislature.
Led by Alberta Premier Donald Getty, the western provinces demanded that any constitutional reform package had to include a Senate which was wholly elected and which included an equal number of representatives from each province regardless of its size.
This position was opposed by the representatives of some of the eastern provinces, particularly Ontario, which, under the current system, held a disproportionately large share of seats in the upper house.
Following the collapse of the talks, the federal government suggested that it would draw up a package of constitutional reforms to be presented to Quebec and the other provinces.
It also indicated that a referendum might well be held on the package prior to its submission to the provinces.
Ruling on St Pierre and Miquelon
An international court of arbitration ruling on June 10 ended a long-running dispute over offshore rights around the French islands of St Pierre and Miquelon, just south of Newfoundland [see pp. 35855; 35980; 36691].
The ruling allocated the islands an exclusive economic zone of 8,700 sq km(3,600 sq miles ), about a quarter of what France had sought.
Le Monde of June 12 described the zone as "a strange mushroom shape" , varying in width from 12 to 24 nautical miles around the islands and with a corridor 10.5 miles wide (i.e. the width of the islands) stretching 200 miles southwards to the high seas of the Atlantic Ocean.
France had claimed a zone extending 200 miles from the islands, while Canada had advocated a 12-mile limit.
Bilateral talks on fishing quotas off Newfoundland were scheduled for early July in Ottawa, Canada.
An offshore drilling moratorium in the area, agreed in 1967, was expected to be lifted shortly.
AMERICAS
CUBA
Foreign investment conference
Representatives of 130 foreign businesses attended a special conference on investment held in the capital, Havana, on June 10.
Companies present included such multinational companies as ICI, Philip Morris, Eastman Kodak, American Express and Proctor and Gamble; 80 of the participants were US firms, although investment in Cuba was forbidden by US law and the 30-year US trade embargo had been tightened in April [see pp. 38858-59].
President Fidel Castro Ruz in his address to the conference again ruled out a multiparty political system for Cuba and stressed that the encouragement of inward investment did not mean the end of the country's brand of state-led communism.
However, the economic crisis in the wake of the collapse of trade with the former Soviet Union, leading to an estimated drop of 25-30 per cent in gross domestic product (GDP) in 1991, had increased the urgency of attracting foreign capital.
The potential investors had been briefed in advance by Cuban officials on June 9 at the Mexican resort of Cancún, when it was made clear that almost all foreign investment was welcome, including in areas such as oil exploration, nickel, capital goods, textiles and agriculture, and that current rules limiting foreign ownership to 49 per cent of a company could be lifted.
Debt-for-equity swaps to attract foreign capital were also considered, although Cuba emphasised that new money would have to be part of any such arrangement.
Cuba was currently defaulting on US$6,500 million of its foreign debt.
New Foreign Minister
For reasons of ill-health, the long-serving Foreign Minister Isidoro Malmierca Peoli resigned on June 20 and was replaced by Ricardo Alarcón de Quesada, hitherto his deputy and permanent representative at the UN.
Alcibiades Hidalgo was named as the new UN permanent representative.
It was announced on June 17 that Castro's son, Fidel Castro Díaz Balart, had been replaced by Andres García de la Cruz as Executive Secretary for Nuclear Affairs at the Cuban Commission of Atomic Energy.
No official reason was given.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Easing of US position — New Prime Minister
According to the New York Times of June 29, a softening of the US government's previous stance against recognition of the regime set up after the September 1991 military coup in Haiti [see pp. 38430; 38522-23]was detectable after Marc Bazin was sworn into office as Prime Minister on June 19.
The new US approach fell short of outright recognition for Bazin's government, but involved urging exiled President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to meet with Bazin, whereas the earlier US position had been that Aristide should choose his own Prime Minister prior to his return to the country.
Aristide, on a visit to French Guiana, stated on June 18 that he would refuse to recognize Bazin.
Bazin, for his part, pledged his willingness to talk to Aristide while making no mention of his being restored to the presidency, a condition insisted upon by the Organization of American States (OAS) before the current US-backed trade embargo could be lifted [see p. 38905].
Bazin, 60, a former World Bank economist, had been the candidate of the right-wing Movement for the Establishment of Democracy in Haiti (MIDH) in the presidential elections of December 1990 [see pp. 37911-12], when he had come a distant second behind Aristide.
Bazin had previously attracted strong criticism from US diplomats as being one of the most vociferous opponents of the diplomatic attempts of the Organization of American States (OAS) to restore Aristide to power.
Bazin owed his nomination as Prime Minister to the May 8 tripartite agreement between the army, the provisional government, and leaders of the bicameral legislature [see p. 38905].
His nomination was approved by the Chamber of Deputies on June 10 and the Senate on June 13, despite the boycott of the sessions by the largest party, the pro-Aristide National Front for Change and Democracy (FNCD).
In return for the support of the nominally social democratic National Progressive Revolutionary Party (Panpra), which commanded a key block of votes in the Chamber, Bazin gave the party two Cabinet posts and agreed to restore all locally elected officials to office, including Evans Paul, an outspoken critic of the military and the FNCD mayor of Port-au Prince.
Formation of new Cabinet
Bazin replaced the outgoing Prime Minister of the previous army-backed government Jean Jacques Honorat.
The figurehead President, Joseph Nerette, resigned and the post was left vacant.
Cabinet posts were given to the centre-right Haitian Christian Democratic Party (PDCH) and the right-wing Mobilization for National Development (MDN) party, as well as to Panpra, to strengthen Bazin's claim that he headed a genuine coalition government.
The army retained the key post of Interior and Defence, filled by Gen. (retd) Carl Michel Nicolas, Army Chief of Staff at the time of the Army-inspired killings during the election of November 1987 [see pp. 35697-98].
Bazin's inauguration on June 19 was boycotted by local diplomats but was attended by the papal nuncio (the Vatican being the only state to have recognized the army-backed regime).
In the previous three weeks, an estimated 300 people were reported to have been murdered by troops, adding to the estimated 2,000 lives lost since September 1991.
Marc Bazin Prime Minister Gen. (retd) Carl Michel Nicolas Interior and Defence André Brutus Social Affairs Moise Senatus Justice Wilner Fort Economy and Finance Jean André Víctor Planning and Co-ordination Adrien Westerband Public Health and Population Jacques Becker Agriculture Jean Carmelo Pierre-Louis Public Works, Transport and Communications Francois Benoit Foreign Affairs André Calixte Information Jean Robert Delsoin Industry and Commerce Max Carré Education
New Haiti Cabinet
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Start of demobilization
A total of 1,681 left-wing guerrillas, representing about 20 per cent of the forces of the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN), reportedly handed over their weapons to members of the UN Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) on June 30 in return for certificates identifying them as ex-combatants eligible for bank loans and training programmes.
This marked the recommencement of the peace process which had been under serious threat in recent months as both the FMLN and the government accused each other of not abiding by the conditions laid down in the January peace treaty [see pp. 38716; 38809; 38906].
The rest of the guerrillas were to disarm by Oct. 31.
Intense negotiations between both sides and Onusal had produced a breakthrough on June 15, when the government conceded a key FMLN demand, announcing that the laws which had created the extreme right-wing paramilitary National Guard and Treasury Police would be repealed by the National Assembly.
This was accomplished on June 25 when a law was also approved creating the new National Civil Police (PNC), recruits to which would be trained in the newly established Academy of Public Security (ASP), set up with US and Spanish advice, and to which demobilized FMNL members were eligible to apply.
The same day the FMLN and the army concentrated their forces in prearranged areas in compliance with the peace treaty.
Appearance of FMLN commander before US Congress
Joaquín Villalobos, 41, a senior FMLN commander, made an historic appearance on June 17 before the US House of Representatives commission on hemispheric affairs to help explain the obstacles which had held up the peace process.
He was accompanied by a senior Salvadorean government official, Ernesto Altschul, and by opposition leader Rubén Zamora of the Popular Social Christian Movement (MPSC).
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Right-wing criticism of UNO
The government of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro came under strong public criticism in an open letter on June 5 from 12 of the 14 parties of the ruling coalition (still known as the National Opposition Union — UNO), for its "acquiescent" attitude towards the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN), the main opposition party.
The letter represented the views, already widely expressed [see p. 38906], of UNO right-wingers led by Vice-President Virgilio Godoy Reyes and Alfredo César Aguirre, the leader of the bancada (the UNO grouping in the National Assembly).
It asserted that the government's democratic image was "tarnished" by its "close, public and constant political co-ordination" with the FSLN leadership on security and economic matters.
This collaboration, it claimed, had brought the country to the brink of "collapse and disaster" , and had been the principal reason for the suspension of US$100,000,000 in US aid in late May.
Defending Chamorro's policy of national reconciliation, her chief adviser, Presidency Minister Antonio Lacayo Oyanguren, insisted in a press interview in Madrid on June 24 that what was important to the government was not the UNO but the "good of the nation" .
He also expressed confidence that US aid would be resumed "within a few months" , claiming that the suspension had been due to the disproportionate influence exercised in the US Congress by the extreme right-wing Republican Senator Jesse Helms, but that Helms's views did not represent those of the administration.
AMERICAS
PANAMA
Disruption of Bush visit
A five-hour visit by US President George Bush on June 11, intended, according to US political analysts, to demonstrate to US voters in an election year that his decision to launch the December 1989 military invasion of Panama [see pp. 37112-13]had been vindicated and that peace and democracy had returned to the country, badly backfired when thousands of demonstrators disrupted his public appearances.
Bush's prepared arrival speech on an airport runaway was drowned by hissing and booing.
He was forced to abandon another public speech in Panama City's central Porras Park, suffering from the effects of tear gas, and to flee in an armed vehicle, along with President Guillermo Endara Gallimany and both their wives, as the police struggled to contain angry crowds.
In the aftermath of the Bush visit, US troops began patrolling parts of Panama City, a move which Foreign Minister Julio Linares described as a "flagrant violation" of the bilateral Panama Canal Treaty of 1903, which accorded sovereign rights to the USA only in the Canal Zone.
Maj. Miguel Nieto, the Chief of Operations of the National Police, was dismissed on June 18 and his immediate arrest was ordered, following government investigations which held him responsible for the failure of the security forces to quell the disturbances.
Protests demanding the cancellation of the Bush visit had started over a week before his scheduled arrival.
The protestors included hundreds still homeless or living in makeshift shelters due to unfulfilled US promises to reconstruct war-torn areas [see pp. 37311; 38237].
They were joined by hundreds of the unemployed who accused the Endara government of being more concerned with US free market policies and US military objectives than the plight of most Panamanians.
Also involved were the Committee of the Families of the Dead from the US Invasion and the National Private Business Council, which delivered two lawsuits against Bush to the office of the Attorney General, charging him with war crimes which included the "massacring [of]defenceless people" , "converting Panama from an independent country to an occupied territory" , "destroying the Panamanian economy" and "imprisoning Panamanian patriots whose only crime was to take up arms to defend national independence" .
Roads were blocked and anti-US demonstrations were held outside government offices.
Hostility against US troops stationed in Panama had steadily risen in immediately preceding months, and US personnel and their families were restricted from straying beyond the precincts of military bases.
Violent incidents involving local inhabitants and US troops were reported outside the US Albrook Air Force Station in the days leading up to the Bush visit, and on June 10 one US soldier was shot dead and another wounded while driving an army vehicle near the Caribbean coastal city of Colón.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
New Colombian Cabinet
Cabinet changes
Cabinet ministers submitted their resignations verbally on June 30, allowing President César Gaviria Trujillo, of the ruling Liberal Party (PL), to realign his government to reflect the balance of parties in the Congress, whose new term was to begin on July 20.
The new Cabinet, again a coalition, included members of three opposition parties: the Social Conservative Party (PSC), the Social Conservative Party-New Democratic Force (PSC-NFD, representing the traditional right-wing faction of the PSC, and now with two Cabinet posts rather than one as previously) and the left-wing April-19 Movement Democratic Alliance (ADM-19).
The right-wing National Salvation Movement (MSN), with similar views to the PSC-NFD, failed to retain the Ministry of Mines and Energy.
The inclusion of the ADM-19, dominated by the former M-19 left-wing guerrillas who had demobilized in March 1990, effectively removed the threat of legal action being taken against the M-19 leadership for their involvement in an attack on the Palace of Justice in November 1985 [see p. 38907].
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Continued unrest
President Carlos Andres Pérez survived an attempt to cut his term of office on June 18, when the executive committee of the ruling Democratic Action party (AD) rejected internal calls and public pressure for a presidential election to be held in November, a year ahead of schedule [see also p. 38907].
In the immediately preceding weeks dozens of violent anti-government demonstrations, led by students in the capital Caracas and other major cities, had demanded Pérez's resignation and an end to economic austerity policies and police repression.
Two students were killed on June 26 in the Caricuao district of Caracas following the brutal suppression of a peaceful demonstration by riot police, bringing the total of students killed in such clashes since June 11 to four.
Withdrawal of COPEI from government — Ministerial resignations
Pressure on Pérez increased on June 11, when the main opposition Social-Christian Party (COPEI) withdrew Humberto Calderón Berti, the Foreign Affairs Minister, and José Ignacio Moreno León, a Minister of State who was president of the Venezuelan Fund for Investment, from the "national unity" Cabinet which they had both joined on March 10 [see pp. 38809-10].
The real motive for the enforced resignations remained unclear.
It was known that the COPEI leadership had opposed Pérez's plan (which in the end he had cancelled) to attend the UN "Earth Summit" in Rio de Janeiro at a time of domestic crisis.
Most analysts believed, however, that COPEI had simply decided that it had nothing to gain from being associated any longer with the deeply unpopular AD government.
Pérez on June 13 appointed a military figure as Foreign Minister, for the first time in 34 years of democratic rule, in what was seen as a gesture to the armed forces, where discontent was still high in the aftermath of the abortive military coup of Feb. 4 [see pp. 38759-60].
The new Foreign Minister, Gen. Fernando Ochoa Antich, was succeeded at Defence by Air Force Gen. Iván Jiménez Sánchez, while Carlos Hernández Delfino, a veteran external debt negotiator, was named as the new president of the Venezuelan Fund for Investment.
The government's public standing was further damaged by the resignation on June 14 of Pedro Vallenilla, the Development Minister and an independent politician, who stated that his decision was based on the COPEI withdrawals and the difficulty of implementing recommendations to alleviate the political crisis made by the Presidential Consultative Council.
On June 15 Frank de Armas was sworn in as the new Development Minister.
Finally, on June 29, Pérez accepted the resignations of six Cabinet ministers and five more junior government members.
He had requested these resignations as part of a longer term plan to reduce the number of ministries to nine and, in the short term, to provide evidence that the government was intent on achieving greater efficiency.
Those Cabinet ministers resigning were Ricardo Haussman (Co-ordination and Planning), José Antonio Abreu (Culture), Enrique Rivas (Drug Control), Víctor Gamboa (Tourism), Leopoldo Sucre-Figarella (Venezuelan Office for the Guyanan Region) and Dulce Arnao de Uzcátegui (Science and Technology).
Offer of commercial oil exploration contracts
As reported on June 22, the government announced that 20-year contracts would be offered to several companies to explore and develop marginal oil fields, the first time commercial companies had been allowed to do so since the nationalization of the oil industry in 1976.
Royal Dutch/Shell, the Teikoku Oil Co of Japan, Benton Oil and Gas of the USA, and two private Venezuelan companies, Vincler and Lingoteras, were expected to invest US$480,000,000 in the oilfields by 1996 and a total of US$720,000,000 over the following decade.
All crude oil produced, however, would have to be processed by subsidiaries of Petróleos de Venezuela, SA (PDVSA), the holding company for the national petroleum industry.
AMERICAS
SURINAM
Treaty with Netherlands
A treaty of co-operation was signed with the Netherlands government on June 18, following a three-day visit to The Hague by President Ronald Venetiaan.
The agreement released 1,300 million guilders (US$720 million) in aid which had been suspended by the Netherlands (the colonial power until 1975) after the execution of leading Surinamese opposition figures by the military in December 1982 [see pp. 31950-52].
AMERICAS
PERU
National dialogue
Prime Minister Oscar de la Puente Raygada of the "national and emergency" government, installed following the presidential coup of April 5 [see pp. 38846-47], confirmed on June 27 that opposition parties had been invited "separately" , and not as a bloc, to participate in a dialogue on the country's political future starting on June 30.
Many parties were expected to take up the offer, although Fernando Belaúnde Terry, a former President and leader of the Popular Action (AP) party, stated that unless the holding municipal elections was restored to the current year [see below], the AP would not participate in any talks.
De la Puente had rejected opposition demands that the Roman Catholic Church act as a mediator in joint talks between the combined opposition and the government, and he also claimed that areas of agreement and disagreement had yet to be established.
The "National Dialogue for Peace and Development" was formally launched by the government on June 25, when de la Puente addressed an audience estimated at between 4,000 and 5,000 people packed into the Amphitheatre Civic Centre in the capital, Lima.
Justifying the coup of President Alberto Keinya Fujimori as necessary for the political and economic regeneration of the country, de la Puente offered no agenda or guidelines for the National Dialogue as such, but stated that "working commissions" would be established to address six main issues, none of which were delineated.
The Dialogue was supposedly intended to collate the views of ordinary citizens in order to guide the constitutional deliberations of the Democratic Constituent Congress (CCD), which was now to be elected on Nov. 22, 1992 (rescheduled from Oct. 18).
Postponement of municipal elections
Local government officials on June 23 condemned as "unconstitutional" a decision by Fujimori on June 14 to postpone municipal elections set for Nov. 8 until, possibly, March 1993.
The government claimed that the decision was a procedural one and that holding local elections in November would conflict with the elections for the DCC.
It also stated that the National Elections Jury (NEJ) was still immersed in the process of reviewing the electoral register in order to guarantee a clean vote.
Opposition critics claimed, however, that the real reason for the delay was to give the government time to build up its grassroots organization.
De la Puente travelled to Washington on June 18 to present the election plans to the Organization of American States (OAS).
Asylum in Colombia for former President García
The Colombian government announced on June 1 that it had granted diplomatic asylum to the former President (in 1985-1990), Alan García Pérez, the secretary-general of Peru's American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA).
García had been in hiding since the April coup, taking refuge in the Colombian embassy in Lima from where he had made public appeals for popular resistance to Fujimori.
Allowed safe air passage, he arrived in the Colombian capital, Bogotá, on June 3.
Lima traffic curfew
A curfew on private traffic was imposed in Lima on June 11-12 from 10 p.m. to 5 a.m.
This followed bomb attacks believed to be the work of the Maoist Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrillas.
On the night of June 4-5 a large bomb had destroyed the studios of Channel 2 television in Lima, killing five civilians, one of whom was a well-known television presenter, Alejandro Pérez.
Arrest of leading guerrilla
Víctor Polay Campos (alias Commander Rolando), leader of the Tupac Amarú Revolutionary Movement (MRTA), the second-largest guerrilla group after Sendero Luminoso, was arrested in the smart suburb of San Borja, Lima, on June 9.
Polay had been captured before, in 1989, but had escaped in July 1990.
He was expected to receive life imprisonment in accordance with the government's new law on terrorism [see p. 38909].
AMERICAS
CHILE
Municipal elections
In municipal elections held on June 28, the first since the ending in March 1990 of 17 years of military rule, the ruling Coalition of Parties for Democracy (CPD) won 53.3 per cent of the vote, against 29.8 per cent for the combined right-wing opposition of the National Renewal (RN) and the Independent Democratic Union (UDI).
The populist Centre-Centre Union (UCC) received 8 per cent of the vote and the Communist Party (PCCh) 7 per cent.
President Patricio Aylwin Azócar stated that the result provided "clear and categorical" proof that the CPPD was the only choice to govern the country.
However, the opposition, which controlled the Senate, warned that the result did not give Aylwin a mandate to "steamroller the country into political reforms" and threatened to resist the government's package of proposed reforms of the 1980 Constitution (in force since 1981) presented in March with the primary purpose of further distancing the government from the previous military regime [see p. 38810].
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Peronist Senate seat defeat
In the election for a senator for Buenos Aires, the capital, on June 28 the ruling Justicialist Party (PJ-the Peronists) suffered a serious defeat when Fernando de la Rúa of the main opposition Radical Civic Union (UCR) won the seat with nearly 50 per cent of the vote.
(While the legislative bodies of the 22 provinces nominated their senators (two each), the Federal District of Buenos Aires elected its two senators by means of a special electoral college; senators served a nine-year term, with one-third of the Senate seats renewable every three years.)
The Peronist former Minister for Health and Social Action, Avelino Porto, received 31 per cent; 7.5 per cent went to Fernando Pino Solanas, a film director standing as an "authentic" Peronist; 6 per cent to Enrique Venturino, a former military officer and candidate of the Movement for Dignity and Independence (Modin —led by a former lieutenant-colonel, Aldo Rico, who had staged abortive military rebellions in 1987 and 1988 —see pp. 35560-61; 36203); and 3 per cent to Héctor Polino of Socialist Unity (US).
Although President Carlos Saúl Menem tried to minimize the scale of the defeat, it was generally seen as a severe reverse both for his government and for menemismo, a flamboyant style of administration now associated with scandal and corruption [see pp. 37959; 38144; 38674; 38719].
De la Rúa, an influential senior UCR member in the capital, although a supporter of Menem's liberal economic programme, presented a sober image more acceptable to conservatives.
Details of debt agreement
The government and its leading creditor banks announced on June 24 a detailed accord, building on the refinancing agreement drawn up in April [see p. 38861].
The agreement, subject to final confirmation by all 400 creditor banks, was expected to be signed by September and completed by the close of the year.
The new conditions offered no incentive payment to encourage banks to sign early, and gave them only two choices:(i) to exchange their loans for 30-year bonds with a discounted face value of 35 per cent; or (ii) to exchange loans for "par" bonds, denominated in either US dollars or German marks, which carried pre-set concessional interest rates.
Argentina had reportedly resisted allowing the banks the option of making new loans, as had been the case in the 1990 Mexican and Venezuelan agreements [see pp. 37243; 37313 respectively], also drawn up under the March 1989 Brady Plan [see pp. 36541-42].
AMERICAS
PARAGUAY
New Constitution
President Andrés Rodríguez calmed speculation over a possible imminent "presidential coup" when on June 22 he swore allegiance to the new Constitution in a solemn ceremony before the Congress.
The Constitution thereby took immediate effect.
Rodríguez had refused to attend the final session on June 18 of the National Constituent Assembly, which over the previous six months had drafted the Constitution, because of the Assembly's approval of a "transitory clause" on June 15 which ensured that he was included in a general constitutional ban on presidents standing for re-election.
The inclusion of this clause, Rodríguez stated, had besmirched the honour of his family as well that of the armed forces, since it implied a lack of confidence in his "word of a soldier" , given on previous occasions, that he would not seek re-election in the August 1993 elections.
Highly placed Rodríguez supporters in the military, the management of state industries and the ruling Colorado Party (ANR-PC) gathered in a crisis meeting on June 16 to demonstrate their "solidarity" with Rodríguez.
On June 17 the Colorado leadership issued a statement deploring and rejecting the Assembly's decision to debar him from a second term.
On the same day Rodríguez addressed a demonstration of 4,000 grassroots supporters.
Such activity fuelled the rumours of an imminent presidential-style coup, on the lines of that in Peru in April [see pp. 38846-47], although this was formally denied by army C.-in-C.
Gen. Humberto Garcete.
The "transitory clause" had owed its passage, by a reported 121 votes to 75, to the unexpected support of dissident Colorado delegates.
Siding with the opposition in the 198-member Assembly, the dissidents sought to ensure an end to the military's previous stranglehold on politics, which had ensured the routine re-election to the presidency of Gen. Alfredo Stroessner, dictator from 1953 until his removal by Rodríguez in a military coup in February 1989 [see p. 36458].
Dissident Colorados had also been instrumental in securing the passage, by a majority of one, of a proposal that the President should not be able to transfer his powers as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.
(A law drafted by the military in November 1991, and approved by the Congress, allowed the President to transfer these powers to a serving officer —see p. 38674.)
This new decision, however, was overruled when it was discovered that its passage would require a larger majority.
Hardline Colorados then succeeded in modifying the original motion to allow the President to "appoint and remove the commanders of the public force" —wording which was taken by analysts to give authorization, indirectly, for the President to delegate his powers to the military.
The new Constitution created the post of vice-president, to be elected with the president for a five-year term by a simple majority of votes.
The continuing use of a simple majority system was opposed by opposition parties which felt that their best chance of defeating the Colorados would be by combining forces in a run-off election.
In May the Colorado delegates in the Assembly had defeated opposition moves to allow hundreds of thousands of Paraguayans living abroad the right to vote.
AMERICAS
CENTRAL AMERICA
Presidential summit
The Presidents of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama held a summit meeting in Managua, the capital of Nicaragua, on June 4-5.
President Carlos Saúl Menem of Argentina also attended as a guest.
In the closing communiqué the leaders made an appeal to the international community for aid to support the process of democratization in the region, which faced serious economic hardship due to poor international coffee prices and the threat of the exclusion by the European Communities (EC) of crucial banana exports [see p. 38910].
They also agreed that the central American common market was urgently needed to accelerate the development of each country and of the region.
In a rare display of solidarity, a joint letter was also sent to US President George Bush urging him to unblock US$100,000,000 in aid to Nicaragua, which the US Congress had suspended in late May as a protest at the perceived influence still being exercised by the opposition Sandinistas, particularly over the army and police [see pp. 38957-58].
Tripartite agreement
As a stepping stone towards a regional common market, the Presidents of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, meeting on May 12 in Nueva Ocotepeque, Honduras, had agreed to establish a free-trade zone creating a potential market of 20,000,000 consumers and to boost annual trade between the three from the currently estimated US$600 million to US$4,500 million.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
Mercosur summit meeting
The Presidents of Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay, the members of the intended South American common market or Mercosur, met on June 26-27 in Las Lenas, Argentina, to fix a timetable to ensure that Mercosur would begin operations on Dec. 31, 1994.
The Bolivian President also attended the Las Lenas summit, raising expectations that Bolivia would eventually join Mercosur.
Precise dates were established, from the present until the end of 1994, to standardize commerce, customs, technical standards and fiscal and monetary policy related to commerce and land transport.
Dates were also set for the enforcement of measures related to maritime transport, industrial, technical, agricultural and energy policy, and for the co-ordination of macro-economic policies, labour relations and institutional matters.
Interest was also expressed in constructing a highway connecting Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay; this project, together with the Paraguay-Paraná rivers waterway, would "constitute key elements for the physical integration" of Mercosur countries.
Argentina and Brazil, in an effort to promote capital partnership and joint actions, agreed that bi-national companies should receive the same treatment as national capital companies.
The final joint communiqué stated that "full respect for democratic institutions" , the free market, growth, stability and the opening up and modernization of the member economies were essential preconditions for the implementation of Mercosur.
Contacts with EC
Mercosur Foreign Ministers attended a two-day meeting with their European Community (EC) counterparts in Guimaraes, Portugal, in early May, during which they complained about EC protectionism and agricultural subsidies; the EC repeated its offer of technical help to assist in the regional integration of the Mercosur countries [see p. 38910 for May meeting of the Group of Rio and the EC].
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Internal security issues — Debate over economic reform
Anniversary of suppression of pro-democracy movement — Imposition of new regulations on demonstrations
The third anniversary of the bloody suppression of the pro-democracy demonstration in Tiananmen Square [see pp. 36720-22]passed off quietly, amid very tight security.
A single protester attempted to unfurl a banner in the square on June 3, but was quickly arrested by police.
Several foreign journalists who tried to film the incident were themselves manhandled by security forces and briefly detained.
Beijing University, a focal point of the 1989 protests, remained sealed off by police throughout the day.
In the weeks leading up to the anniversary, police had been active throughout Beijing, and there were many reports of dissidents being beaten or detained.
The authorities also drafted regulations to circumscribe public activity in Tiananmen Square itself, which included the prohibition of any memorial activity and of "joking and playing, sitting and lying down on the ground" .
On June 17 the authorities published the text of new regulations which tightened existing restrictions on demonstrations.
The new measures related to the implementation of the "Law of Assembly, Procession and Demonstration" which had been passed in 1989 in the aftermath of the pro-democracy protests.
In addition to making it more difficult to organize a legal protest, the regulations gave the authorities the right to use "all police measures" to suppress illegal demonstrations.
Continued debate over economic reform
Indicators relating to the struggle between the hardline members of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and those in favour of economic liberalization continued to suggest that the latter group was gaining ground.
The debate showed every sign of intensifying in the run-up to the CCP's policy-setting 14th congress, due later in the year.
The current phase of the debate had been developing since January 1992 when the country's veteran leader, Deng Xiaoping, had used a tour of the special enterprise zones in southern China as an opportunity to praise the free market as a key mechanism of economic growth [see p. 38722].
This line had been subsequently, if somewhat reluctantly, endorsed by Premier Li Peng, the architect of the suppression of the Tiananmen Square demonstrations, in March, and by Chen Yen, another key hardliner, in May.
This renewed emphasis on quickening the pace of reform was in accordance with China's recent economic development which had seen a move away from self-imposed austerity measures towards the pursuit of increased levels of foreign investment and exports and more rapid industrial growth.
CCP general secretary Jiang Zemin also endorsed Deng's praise for economic reform in a speech on June 9, which was reported on Chinese television and radio on June 14.
Jiang criticized hardline leftists for trying to "confuse the people" with revolutionary slogans, and stated that "our experiment with socialism has entered a new phase of development" .
Death of Li Xiannian
Li Xiannian, President of China between 1983 and 1988, and one of a group of aged CCP leaders —including Deng —who were known as "the eight immortals" , died on June 21, aged 83.
Li, a veteran of the Long March of 1934-35 and a commander of the Red Army prior to its revolutionary victory in 1949, was a self-taught economist from a peasant family.
He served in both the Cabinet and the CCP politburo and was strongly tipped to become Premier following the death of Mao Zedong in 1976.
Although involved in the Great Leap Forward (1958-60) and the Cultural Revolution (1966-76), he later recognized that both had been disastrous for the country's economic development.
An exponent of traditional economic expansion through centralized planning, Li was attacked by Deng and his reformist allies after 1979, and eventually removed as Deputy Premier and given the largely ceremonial position of national President.
He ended his life as chairman of the ineffectual Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference.
Like the late Li, two of the seven surviving "immortals" , Chen Yen (87) and Song Renqiong (83), were known opponents of Deng's reformist policies.
Two others, Yang Shangkun (85), the country's current President, and Bo Yibo (84), were supporters of Deng.
The remaining two immortals (other than Deng himself), Peng Zhen (90) and Vice-President Whang Zhen (84), were thought to favour reform as long as it could be confined to the sphere of economics rather than politics, a position similar to Deng's own.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Visit by Chinese scientists — Abolition of "thought police" 
A group of scientists from the Chinese mainland visited Taiwan on June 8, the first such visit for more than four decades.
The seven scientists, including six members of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, toured universities and technical institutes during their eight-day visit and discussed the possibility of future scientific exchanges between the two countries.
On June 16 the Legislative Yuan approved a bill to abolish the "thought police" system, a mechanism which had involved the maintenance of special units in government offices whose function was to monitor the discipline and behaviour of civil servants, and to examine their loyalty to the ruling Kuomintang.
Justice Minister Lu You-wen stated that the "thought police" would be replaced by officials whose task would be to curb corruption, and that all information previously gathered concerning the political loyalties of civil servants would be destroyed.
Imprisonment of dissident
George Chang, chairman of the US-based World United Formosans for Independence, was sentenced to 10 years in prison on June 8 after being found guilty of sedition and attempted murder.
After imposing sentence, the Taiwan High Court commuted Chang's prison term to five years as an act of clemency.
Chang was alleged to have been responsible for a 1976 letter-bomb attack which had injured Taiwan's Governor, Shieh Tung-min.
On entering Taiwan from the USA in December 1991 he had been immediately arrested.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Resumption of repatriation of boat people
The first forcible repatriations to Vietnam under a new accord signed by the United Kingdom and Vietnamese governments on May 12 [see p. 38912]took place on June 19, when 28 Vietnamese adults and 10 children deemed to be "economic migrants" were sent back from Hong Kong.
Governor's visit to China
Outgoing governor Lord (formerly Sir David) Wilson of Tillyorn made a six-day farewell visit to China on June 7-12.
At a banquet held in his honour in the Chinese capital Beijing, his host, Lu Ping, Director of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office of China's State Council, referred to Wilson as "our old friend" who, over the years, had made unremitting efforts to promote mutual trust and co-operation between the UK and China on the Hong Kong issue, on the basis of the Sino-British Joint Declaration, and had made useful contributions to the stability and prosperity of Hong Kong.
Wilson also met Chinese Premier Li Peng on June 8.
Li stated that safeguarding the long-term stability and prosperity of Hong Kong was the common goal of both China and the UK, as well as of the inhabitants of Hong Kong and its foreign investors.
He promised that China would continue to strengthen bilateral co-operation with the UK on the basis of the Joint Declaration and the Memorandum of Understanding concerning the construction and financing of a new airport in Hong Kong, a highly sensitive issue [see p. 38340], on which more bilateral discussions were to be held in July.
The UK government reacted angrily to what it saw as an unwarranted interference in the affairs of the colony on June 18, when Guo Fengmin, the Chinese senior official on the Sino-British Joint Liaison group, said at the close of the 23rd Liaison Group meeting in Beijing that the Chinese side would find unacceptable the appointment of any members of the United Democrats of Hong Kong (UDHK) to the Executive Council.
The UDHK had won 12 of the 18 directly elected seats in the September 1991 elections to the Legislative Council [see p. 38436].
The UK government reaffirmed that all appointments in Hong Kong up to 1997 would be made by the Governor after consultation with the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary.
On June 24, however, a Chinese Foreign Ministry statement asserted that Guo had "both the right and responsibility to state China's position on matters relating to the smooth transfer of government during the transitional period in Hong Kong" .
Guo's comments, and other remarks by Chinese officials earlier in the month, were interpreted as reflecting China's intention of stepping up pressure on Chris Patten, Hong Kong's Governor-designate, in order to dissuade him from considering any major changes in the colony or attempting to amend clauses in the Basic Law which would determine Hong Kong's position under Chinese rule from 1997 [see p. 37248].
Implementation of UK Secrets Act
The UK government decided, by means of a Privy Council order on June 9, that the UK's 1989 Official Secrets Act was to be implemented in Hong Kong with effect from the end of the month.
Lawyers and liberal politicians criticized the move, stating that it contravened the colony's June 1991 Bill of Rights which guaranteed freedom of information [see p. 38291].
ASIA — PACIFIC
MACAO
Trade agreement with EC
A five-year trade and economic co-operation agreement was signed with the European Communities (EC) on June 16 as part of a broader aim of strengthening and diversifying external relations.
According to the communiqué issued after the meeting, both sides would (i) grant each other preferential treatment on tariffs and other import-export matters;(ii) expand co-operation in industry and other areas; and (iii) establish a joint committee to supervise the agreement.
EC member countries were encouraged also to develop bilateral trade and economic co-operation with Macao.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
MPRP general election victory
The ex-communist ruling Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP) inflicted a humiliating defeat on the opposition parties in a general election held on June 28.
The MPRP took 56.9 per cent of the vote, only 6 per cent less than it achieved in the first open elections in July 1990 [see pp. 37609-10], and won 70 of the 76 seats in the unicameral People's Great Hural (parliament).
A coalition of three opposition parties, made up of the Mongolian Democratic Party (MDP), the Mongolian Party of National Progress (MPNP) and the Mongolian United Party (MUP), received 17.5 per cent of the vote and only four seats.
The Social Democratic Party (SDP) with 10.1 per cent secured one seat and an MPRP candidate, standing as an independent, won the remaining seat.
According to official figures the turnout was 95.6 per cent of the 1,085,000 eligible voters.
The MPRP leader, President Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat, stated afterwards that efforts had now to be made to promote further democratization and to overcome the current economic crisis.
He declared that he wanted opposition party members to join the new Cabinet.
The MDP leader M. Ensayhan, however, insisted that the opposition forces must now unite and "never allow our representatives to be hostages to the old system" .
The opposition parties blamed the scale of their defeat on the repeat of "miscalculations" and "lack of co-ordination" which, they claimed, had cost them the 1990 elections.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Nuclear inspection issues — Agreement on exchange visit
A video recording of a visit made to North Korea in mid-May by the Director-General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Hans Blix, and a team of inspectors, was made public on June 3.
The film showed the inspection of a plant at Yongbyon which US intelligence had claimed was a nuclear reprocessing facility.
Far from being able to produce enough plutonium to make atomic weapons, however, IAEA experts agreed that the plant was "extremely primitive" and remained a long way from completion.
Despite this reassessment of the level of sophistication attained by the North Korean nuclear programme, the South Korean government increased its insistence during June that there could be no improvement in inter-Korean relations unless the North abandoned its construction of the reprocessing plant and agreed to mutual nuclear inspections.
North Korea responded by emphasising the extent of its existing co-operation with the IAEA, and demanding an early inspection of South Korea, and in particular an examination of the nuclear capability of the US forces stationed south of the 38th parallel.
In a further development during June, the North Korean government was reported to have suggested that it was prepared to abandon its efforts to produce plutonium in return for international assistance with alternative technology for nuclear power plants.
The offer was alleged to have been made to IAEA representatives in May, and repeated to US officials during talks in Beijing on June 1.
At a meeting of North and South Korean Red Cross officials on June 12 it was agreed that exchange visits of dispersed family members would be held on Aug. 25-28.
It was also agreed that the 100 or so people from each country involved in the exchange should be accompanied by 70 journalists and a 70-member art troupe from each side.
By the end of June, however, the failure to agree on all of the details, together with the lack of progress over the nuclear issue, appeared to have jeopardized the planned exchange.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Cabinet reshuffle — Developments in presidential election campaign
It was reported on June 25 that President Roh Tae Woo had reshuffled his Cabinet.
The changes included the following new appointments: Choi Young Choul —Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for National Unification, Lee Yon Taek —Minister of Labour, Lee Moon Suk — Minister for Government Administration, Lee Jai Chang —Minister for Environment, and Han Young Sok — Minister for Legislation.
Earlier in the month Son Chu Whan had replaced Choi Chang Yoon as Information Minister.
The campaign for the presidential elections —scheduled for December 1992 —continued to gather pace during June, not least because of the contribution of Chung Ju Yung, founder of South Korea's Hyundai industrial empire, who was the presidential candidate of the newly formed Unification National Party (UNP).
Fresh from his party's success in the March 1992 general election [see pp. 38798-99], Chung accelerated his national pro-business campaign.
On June 8, however, he ran into a storm of controversy by suggesting that the South Korean authorities should allow the formation of a communist party.
Such a move would be in accordance with the Constitution of the Sixth Republic which guaranteed freedom of ideology, assembly and association, argued Chung, and would be no greater threat to the democratic system or market economy than was that posed to the Japanese system by the Japan Communist Party.
Although the argument appeared innocuous, in a country which had spent its entire existence on the alert against a possible attack from communist North Korea, and which had erected a National Security Law prohibiting communist activity on pain of death or long-term imprisonment, the suggestion generated a deluge of criticism.
The ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP) condemned the remarks as a "senseless statement" which posed a direct threat to the "free democratic system" .
The main opposition Democratic Party (DP) also denounced Chung's "shocking statement" which, it alleged, went "against the feelings of a majority of the people" .
The reaction of the DP was of particular significance.
It suggested that, despite its choice on May 26 of veteran left-wing dissident leader Kim Dae Jung as its presidential candidate, both party and leader were keen to move from the left to the political centre in a bid to garner sufficient votes to win the presidency.
A further campaign development occurred on June 28 when Lee Jong Chan announced that he had abandoned his plan to contest the presidential elections as an independent candidate.
Having lost the campaign for the DLP presidential nomination to Kim Young Sam in controversial circumstances [see pp. 38911], Lee Jong Chan's possible intervention as an independent had threatened to split further the centre-right vote which was already being sought by both the DLP and the UNP campaigns.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Legislative approval of overseas peacekeeping bill
A controversial bill empowering the Japanese government to send members of the country's Self Defence Forces (SDF) overseas to assist in UN peacekeeping operations was finally approved by the Diet on June 15.
By opening the way for military forces to serve overseas for the first time since 1945, the Peace Keeping Operations (PKO) bill marked a significant shift in Japanese foreign policy.
Its approval, which was achieved in the face of determined resistance by much of the opposition, was greeted with reservations from many neighbouring countries.
The PKO bill originated from a bill introduced in 1990 which was designed to allow Japanese forces to participate as non-combatants in support of the UN-authorized multinational force assembled to expel Iraqi forces from Kuwait.
That proposal had perished in the face of determined opposition from the Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ) which was vehemently opposed to any symptom of incipient Japanese militarism, and which had traditionally disputed the constitutional legitimacy of the very existence of the SDF.
In September 1991 the then Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu, introduced the current PKO bill, which limited SDF participation to UN peacekeeping forces, as the successor to the measure which had failed to win legislative approval in 1990.
The SDPJ claimed that the bill, like its predecessor, was an attempt to nullify Article 9 of Japan's Constitution which stated that the Japanese people "forever renounce war as a sovereign right of the nation and the threat or use of force as a means of settling international disputes" .
The government of Kaifu's successor, Kiichi Miyazawa, was strongly committed to the bill, and steered it through the House of Representatives (the lower chamber of the Diet) in December 1991.
The lack of an overall majority in the 252-member House of Councillors (the upper chamber) for the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), however, meant that the bill's approval could be achieved only with the co-operation of some of the opposition parties.
After tortuous negotiations an arrangement was eventually reached whereby the second-largest opposition party, Komeito (Clean Government Party), and the fourth-largest, the Democratic Socialist Party (DSP), agreed to support the bill.
In part the support of the two centrist parties for the bill was a function of their wish to avoid provoking the government into calling an early election in the lower chamber to coincide with the partial elections for the upper house which were scheduled for July 26.
It was also a result of the government's willingness to accept significant amendments to the bill.
Among these safeguards were prior Diet approval for each contribution to a UN peacekeeping mission, a temporary freeze on SDF participation in peacekeeping operations which might involve military action, and a review of the legislation after three years.
Approval for PKO bill in both houses of Diet
The PKO bill was finally approved by the upper house in the early hours of June 9 by 137 votes to 102 following a major filibustering effort by the SDPJ and the Japan Communist Party (JCP) which lasted for almost four days and nights.
The filibuster deployed a variety of procedural delays —including the filing of successive censure motions against the government —and employed the delaying tactic of "ox-walking" when voting on them.
The ox walk involved each individual proceeding to the podium to cast a vote by taking agonizingly slow, inch-by-inch steps.
One of the censure votes took an unprecedented 13 hours to complete.
With several censure motions still to be debated, the ox walk was abandoned on the grounds that it was placing an undue strain on the health of older legislators, and was undermining the SDPJ's image among the electorate.
After approval by the upper house the PKO bill was returned to the lower chamber where, on June 15, it received its final endorsement.
Frantic last-minute attempts to destroy the bill culminated in the attempted resignation of all 137 lower house members of the SDPJ.
Under Japanese law, a Diet member's signature did not become effective until endorsed by the Diet as a whole, however, and on this occasion House Speaker Yoshio Sakurauchi ruled that the resignations would not be considered until the political situation had "normalized" .
Nevertheless, the SDPJ members boycotted the final vote, and the bill was carried by 329 votes to 17.
In the form in which it was eventually approved, the legislation allowed up to 2,000 Japanese personnel to participate in UN operations, but only in non-combatant support roles and carrying no more than small arms.
They were required to withdraw in the event of hostilities.
SDF participation in peacekeeping operations which might require military action was frozen until authorized by separate legislation.
Foreign response
Concern over Japan's enactment of the PKO legislation was expressed by senior political figures in many east Asian and south-east Asian states, including China, North Korea, South Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Taiwan.
Foreign relations
Citation of unfair trading practices
The Japanese Ministry of Trade and Industry (Miti) published a 212-page Report on Unfair Trade Policies on June 8, which criticized almost all of the country's major economic partners for employing unfair trading practices.
The brunt of the assault was directed at the USA, but also singled out for criticism were the European Communities (EC), Australia, Canada, Hong Kong, Indonesia, South Korea, Singapore and Thailand.
The document rejected the concept that Japan's large trade surplus —expected to exceed US$110,000 million in 1992 —was the result of restricted access to its domestic market.
Instead it argued that "bilateral imbalances are rooted in such factors as industrial structure,[and in]fiscal and monetary policy" .
Miti also claimed that in the past five years Japan's imports from its 10 largest trading partners had increased by 96 per cent, while exports had risen by only 45 per cent .
Furthermore, it was stated, on a per capita basis the volume of Japanese imports was roughly comparable to that of the USA or the EC.
Using a definition of unfair trade based on "internationally accepted rules, as set out in GATT [General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade], and in comparable international agreements" , the report indicted the USA for employing unfair trade practices in nine out of the 10 areas where offences were deemed to be most internationally common.
The EC was cited in six areas, Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia in four, Australia and Canada in three, and Hong Kong and Singapore in one area only.
Defending the report, Japan's Minister of International Trade and Industry, Kozo Watanabe, stated that his department had done no more than publish the "bare facts" , and that henceforth Japan would "say what it has to say and do what it has to do in international affairs" .
Relations with Russia
Japanese and Russian officials in charge of diplomatic and defence policies held their first bilateral policy planning meeting on June 14-15 at the Russian Foreign Ministry in Moscow.
The meeting was the first to have involved uniformed Japanese and Russian military personnel, and was unprecedented in Japan's relationship with Russia or the Soviet Union.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Border negotiations — Rebel attacks
An agreement on Lao-Chinese border demarcation was signed in Vientiane, the Laotian capital, on June 10.
The agreement resulted from the third meeting of the Lao-Chinese Joint Border Committee.
It was reported that Laotian rebels on June 14 captured three government military positions after heavy fighting in the north-east of the country.
The 300 or so rebels, who were thought to be members of the "Free Democratic Lao National Salvation Force" , launched simultaneous attacks on the three positions.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Freeing of detainees — Announcement of legislative elections — Foreign relations
The government announced on June 4 that it had freed all remaining former South Vietnamese officials held in re-education camps, thereby fulfilling a key condition for the normalization of relations with the USA.
According to the Foreign Ministry statement, the former officials were released on April 30, the 17th anniversary of the fall of Saigon to the communist forces.
Some 100,000 former South Vietnamese soldiers and officials were estimated to have passed through the camps since 1975 but, according to official sources, only around 25 were still in detention at the end of April.
It was also announced that elections would take place on July 19 for the ninth National Assembly.
European tour by Foreign Minister
Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Manh Cam, visited the United Kingdom on June 4-6 for talks with government leaders and representatives of the business community.
The visit was part of a European tour undertaken by Nguyen in late May and early June, which also included visits to Belgium, France, Germany and the Netherlands.
The UK visit was reported to be the first official visit by a Vietnamese Foreign Minister since the end of the Vietnam War, and the talks were reported to have been held in an atmosphere of frankness and goodwill, with both sides keen to improve economic and diplomatic links and to co-operate fully on the issue of the repatriation of "boat people" from Hong Kong.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Threat to peace process from renewed fighting — Tokyo aid conference
Government forces and Khmer Rouge guerrillas clashed in northern Cambodia in mid-June, in the most serious fighting since the signing of the Paris peace accords in October 1991.
The fighting followed the refusal of the Khmers Rouges to abide by phase two of the peace process, due to begin on June 13, which involved the demobilization of the country's four warring factions and the surrender of weapons to representatives of the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC).
Prior to the June 13 deadline there had been increasing reports of ceasefire violations by Khmer Rouge fighters, leading UNTAC chief co-ordinator Yasushi Akashi to condemn the party's behaviour as "extremely unacceptable" .
Beginning on June 13 the estimated 200,000 troops and 250,000 militiamen belonging to the three guerrilla factions —of which the Khmers Rouges was the largest —and the Vietnamese-backed Phnom Pehn government were due to begin assembling at 95 UN-controlled regroupment areas.
The Khmers Rouges refused to abide by the plan on the grounds that the UN had failed to verify adequately the withdrawal of all Vietnamese troops from Cambodia.
It also objected to the legitimacy which UNTAC had allegedly bestowed upon the Phnom Pehn government.
As the Khmer Rouge attacks intensified, there was particularly heavy fighting north of the provincial capital of Kompong Thom as government units sought to repel the rebels and to reopen a main access road for UNTAC representatives stationed in the north of the country.
The obstruction of the peace process by the Khmers Rouges was repeatedly condemned at a Ministerial Conference on the Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of Cambodia which met in Tokyo on June 22.
Nevertheless, the conference, which was attended by representatives from 33 countries, the European Communities (EC) and 12 international organizations, exceeded all expectations by pledging aid worth US$880 million to assist in Cambodia's reconstruction.
The sum, the largest single components of which came from Japan and the USA, exceeded the $600,000,000 which earlier UN estimates had suggested would be necessary to fund the peace process through to the scheduled elections in 1993.
The conference adopted two statements: the Tokyo Declaration on Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of Cambodia and the Tokyo Declaration on Cambodian Peace Process.
The former noted the importance of external aid to Cambodia and established an "International Committee on Reconstruction of Cambodia" to supervise the disbursement of aid.
The latter declaration called on all parties to the Paris accords to renew their commitment to the peace process, and expressed concern over "the refusal of one party" to co-operate with UNTAC.
Despite earlier threats to boycott the event, the conference was attended by the nominal leader of the Khmers Rouges, Khieu Samphan.
However, a special session of the Cambodian Supreme National Council (SNC)— the interim body established by the Paris accords to represent all four Cambodian factions —which had met on June 21, failed in its attempt to extract a pledge from the Khmers Rouges that it would abide by the second stage of the peace plan.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Official results of Philippines presidential elections
Results of presidential and legislative elections
Gen. Fidel Ramos, the candidate of the Lakas ng Edsa-National Union of Christian Democrats (Lakas-NUCD) coalition and the preferred choice of outgoing President Corazon Aquino, was sworn in as President of the Philippines on June 30.
After a convoluted counting process, the final tally of returns in the Presidential elections of May 11 was published on June 17, giving Ramos a lead of more than 874,000 votes over his nearest rival, Miriam Defensor Santiago.
A joint session of the Philippine Congress on June 22 formally proclaimed Ramos as winner of the elections and dismissed protests, particularly from Santiago, that the poll should be declared void because of widespread corruption.
The vote in the House of Representatives was 106 in favour of proclamation, two against and 21 abstentions; in the Senate it was 15 in favour, two against and one abstention.
On the same day the Congress also proclaimed Joseph Estrada as the winner of the vice-presidential contest.
The victory of Ramos, a former Defence Secretary and chief of the armed forces, was achieved with only 23.5 per cent of the vote, the slimmest margin ever attained by a winning presidential candidate in the Philippines.
He was also the first Protestant to become President of the overwhelmingly Catholic country.
In an attempt to reduce reservations concerning his election, Ramos adopted a conciliatory approach during June and held talks with church leaders and politicians.
Among the latter was Imelda Marcos whom he had defeated in the election, and who, together with her husband President Ferdinand Marcos, had been forced from office in 1986 by a popular campaign in which Ramos had played a key role.
In the vice-presidential contest the 20,412,740 votes were cast as follows: Joseph Estrada 6,737,215 votes (33.0 per cent); Marcelo Fernan 4,437,364 (21.7); Emilio Osmena 3,361,140 (16.5); Ramon Magsaysay Jr 2,899,473 (14.2); Aquilino Pimentel 2,022,319 (9.9); Vicente Magsaysay 699,562 (3.4); Eva Estrada-Kalaw 255,667 (1.3).
Although the final results of the legislative elections, also held on May 11, were not available at the end of June, it appeared that the Lakas-NUCD coalition had won only two of the 24 Senate seats, and around 50 seats in the 200-member House of Representatives.
The Laban ng Demokratikong Pilipino (LDP), the country's largest political party, was reported to have won 17 Senate seats, and around 85 seats in the House, but remained highly unstable following the divisions which had been exposed in the run-up to the elections.
Nationalist Party supporters of Cojuangco appeared to have won 48 seats in the House, and the Liberal Party was thought to have won 15.
Both groups were reported to have expressed their willingness to support the Lakas-NUCD coalition in the new legislature.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
General election
President Suharto's ruling Golkar (Sekretariat Bersama Golongan Karya) alliance retained power with a slightly reduced majority in elections to 400 seats in the Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat (House of Representatives) held on June 9.
Although Golkar won all 27 provinces, including the disputed territory of East Timor, its share of the vote fell from 73 per cent in 1987 to 68 per cent[for 1987 elections see p. 35326].
Diplomats and analysts disagreed as to whether this represented a clear mandate for continuity or reflected a growing, if tentative, desire for change.
The two legal opposition parties, the Moslem-based United Development Party (PPP) with 17.5 per cent of the vote and the populist Democratic Party of Indonesia (PDI) with 15 per cent, both improved on previous showings.
The campaign was generally agreed to have been the most open in the 25 years of Suharto's "New Order" , but the discussion of topics deemed harmful to national unity was officially banned.
Such topics included the economic dominance of the small ethnic Chinese community and religious issues (which seriously compromised the electoral prospects of the PPP).
Golkar, presenting itself as the guarantor of stability and economic growth, was backed by the country's 4,000,000 civil servants and by the business community, and also polled strongly in rural areas, especially in those regions which had benefited from government development programmes.
The PDI, which staged the largest rallies, managed to stretch the limits of official tolerance by attacking "nepotism" in high places, a reference to the business dealings of Suharto's family [see also below], and by calling for the presidential term to be limited to two years, an implicit criticism of Suharto's years in power.
In addition to the 400 elected members of the Dewan, 100 members were nominated by the President.
Military personnel were constitutionally debarred from voting, but members of the armed forces belonging to Golkar were among the 500 additional appointees to make up the 1,000-member Majelis Permusyawaratan Rakyat (People's Consultative Assembly), which would elect the President and Vice-President in March 1993.
Having kept an unusually low profile throughout the Dewan election campaign, it was now felt that the military might press hard for the election of their choice of Vice-President, while Gen. (retd) Suharto, 71, was expected to seek a fifth consecutive term of office as President.
World Bank criticisms
A confidential World Bank report, released in early June, stated that clove and orange dealing monopolies run by Suharto's two sons should be closed down because they were inefficient and went against the government's deregulation programme.
The clove monopoly, dependent on US$375,000,000 in government soft loans, had benefited a consortium of traders at the expense of farmers, consumers and the central bank before collapsing in near bankruptcy.
The orange monopoly had also failed to stabilize prices.
Dili trials — Imprisonment of former NII leader — Killing of rebel leader
The Australian government on June 16 expressed its concern at the discrepancies between the sentences imposed on civilian protesters and those given to soldiers in the wake of the November 1991 army massacre of pro-independence demonstrators in Dili, the capital of East Timor [see pp.38579-80; 38677; 38769-70; 38867-68].
Two civilians found guilty of instigating protests in Dili were given prison sentences of six years and 15 years on June 15 and June 22 respectively.
By contrast, two soldiers and a Timorese policeman had on June 1 received prison sentences ranging from eight to 17 months, while on June 6 two army officers, the last of 10 charged for their direct involvement in the massacre, had received sentences of one year and eight months respectively.
Abdul Fatah, a former leader of the NII movement to make Indonesia an Islamic country, was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment on June 1 convicted of "activities undermining the state ideology, Pancasila, and the 1945 Constitution" .
On May 31, Indonesian troops shot dead M. L. Prawar, a leader of the Papua Independent Organization (OPM).
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
General election
Papua New Guinea held its fourth general election since independence with polling taking place between June 13 and June 27.
Official results were not due until mid-July, but unofficial returns suggested that the distribution of seats in the 109-member National Parliament would be as follows: Pangu Pati (PP) 22 seats, People's Democratic Movement (PDM) 15, People's Action Party (PAP) 13, People's Progress Party (PPP) 10, Melanesian Alliance nine, League of National Advancement (LNA) five, National Party two, Melanesian United Front (MUF) one, others one, and independents 30; one seat would remain vacant because voting was delayed by the death of a candidate.
The National Parliament was due to vote to elect a Prime Minister on July 22.
The final composition of a governing coalition was almost impossible to predict in advance, however, in view of the high turnover rate of legislators —about one half of incumbent MPs had lost their seats in previous elections —and of the byzantine negotiating process which tended to characterize the post-election period.
Both the five-party governing coalition led by Prime Minister Rabbie Namaliu (PP), and the three-party opposition coalition led by Paias Wingti (PDM), negotiated the campaign without showing signs of undue factional stress, and both leaders pledged to maintain their respective groupings.
When nominations closed on April 24, a total of 1,653 candidates (40 more than in 1987) had been put forward to contest the 109 seats.
The largest number standing in a single constituency was 40, in Sinasina-Youngumgi in the Highlands.
The election campaign was dominated by allegations of corruption.
During the term of the previous Parliament, no fewer than 10 MPs had been prosecuted for corruption; the most celebrated case involved former Deputy Prime Minister Ted Diro in September 1991 [see pp. 38534-35].
There were also persistent rumours that both Namaliu and his Finance and Planning Minister, Paul Pora, had improperly approved large amounts of public money for private use by MPs.
Wingti vowed, if elected, to initiate a thorough investigation of all charges and to prosecute and imprison all senior officials found to have engaged in corrupt practices.
At least four ministers had reportedly lost their seats in the election, and Namaliu himself secured re-election in his Kokopo constituency by a margin of only 358 votes.
Opposition leaders called for an investigation after Namaliu, who had been trailing 1,600 votes behind rival candidate Oscar Tammur at an early stage of the count, secured victory following an unexplained power blackout while the final ballot boxes were being processed.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Corruption cases — Aboriginal lands claims precedent
Resignation of Premier of New South Wales
Nick Greiner, the leader of New South Wales's ruling Liberal Party, resigned as party leader and state Premier on June 24.
The move came five days after a finding against him by the Independent Commission Against Corruption, a body which had been established in 1988 by Greiner in order to investigate alleged instances of corruption by previous Australian Labor Party (ALP) administrations.
Greiner was replaced by his former Industrial Relations Minister, John Fahey.
The Commission found that Greiner had acted improperly in sanctioning the appointment of Terry Metherell, an independent member of the state legislature, to a well-paid public service position in the Environmental Protection Authority, a post which required him to resign his seat in the legislature.
The Greiner administration, which had lost its tiny majority because of Metherell's earlier decision to leave the Liberal Party and sit as an independent, then recovered its position when the Liberal candidate won the by-election in Metherell's former seat.
The deal caused sufficient outcry to force Greiner to refer it to the anti-corruption Commission.
Initially Greiner refused to accept the Commission's June 19 ruling that the move had constituted reasonable grounds for his dismissal, and began a legal challenge to clear his name.
He was forced to resign, however, when the three independents who held the balance of power in the state legislature threatened to join the ALP opposition in a vote of no confidence against him.
Arrest of former state Premier
Brian Burke, the former ALP Premier of Western Australia, was arrested on June 16 for allegedly obtaining more than A$17,000 (about US$12,800) through the misuse of parliamentary expenses.
As state Premier between 1983 and 1988, Burke had established a strategy known as Western Australia Incorporated —a partnership between the state government and some of the country's leading entrepreneurs, which had resulted in the loss of hundreds of millions of dollars of public money and the establishment of a Royal Commission to investigate the affair.
After giving up the Premiership, Burke was appointed as the Australian ambassador to Ireland, until forced to resign because of emerging allegations of corruption against his former administration.
The arrest of Burke followed recent charges against his former Deputy Premier, David Parker, and came only three weeks after the imprisonment of another of his associates, bankrupt Western Australian tycoon Alan Bond [see p. 38917].
Legal precedent on Aboriginal land claim
The Australian High Court delivered a key ruling on June 3 on the issue of Aboriginal land rights, by effectively overturning the notion of terra nullius —the concept that had deemed the Australian continent to be unoccupied at the time of European settlement in the 18th century.
The existence of terra nullius was widely considered by Aboriginal groups to be a huge obstacle in the pursuit of land claims.
The High Court ruling, by six votes to one, found that the Miriam people of the Murray Islands (part of the Torres Strait group) had retained ownership of their land under common law.
The Court restricted its judgment to the Murrays, and also ruled that the concept of "native title" could exist only where such rights had not been extinguished by the government.
Nevertheless, the Court's recognition of a pre-1788 land claim was widely believed to be of immense symbolic significance.
Galarrwuy Yunupingu, chairman of the aboriginal Northern Lands Council, welcomed the decision and predicted that the federal government would face a "barrage of litigation" unless it moved quickly to negotiate a treaty with the aborigines.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
New Thai Cabinet
Dissolution of parliament — New interim Prime Minister
The House of Representatives was dissolved on June 29 by royal decree, paving the way for fresh parliamentary elections on Sept. 13.
The main parties in the pro-military ruling coalition government had initially offered resistance to the dissolution moves but this had gradually weakened after one of the five, the Social Action Party, left the coalition on June 12.
The four main opposition parties announced on June 30 that they had formed the National Democratic Front to co-ordinate their election campaign.
The prospect of fresh elections marked a dramatic turnaround in political events following the military crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrations in May [see pp. 38894-95].
The change was facilitated by the reappointment of Anand Panyarachun, 59, as Prime Minister on June 10 with the approval of King Bhumibol Adulyadej.
A businessman and former diplomat, Anand had been the leader of the successful caretaker government in power following the military coup of February 1991 until the elections of March 1992 [see pp. 38099; 38816].
He was nominated for the post of Prime Minister by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Arthit Urairat.
Anand was chosen despite the passage by the House of Representatives on June 10 of amendments to the Constitution, the chief among which, intended to reduce the role of the military, stipulated that a future Prime Minister had to be an elected member of parliament.
The main architect of the May crackdown, Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon, had been appointed Prime Minister in March 1992.
Suchinda had resigned on May 24 and had subsequently sought sanctuary in a military barracks in Bangkok, the capital.
Anand, who claimed that he would not seek re-election, announced that his objectives in his allotted time in government were to increase the participation of the public and business sector in politics, to begin the demilitarization of the political process, and to disengage from commercial practices the armed forces, many of whose leaders headed major companies.
He stressed, however, that he was not seeking confrontation with the military.
New Cabinet
Anand's new Cabinet, unveiled on June 14, contained many members who had served in his February 1991-March 1992 government and who were still perceived as being politically non-aligned technocrats.
The highly sensitive post of Interior Minister was given to Police Gen. Pow Sarasin, a General in the Police and well-known and respected for his role in the fight against drug trafficking.
The new Defence Minister was Gen. (retd) Banchop Bunnak, an uncontroversial figure with a reportedly clean record.
Massacre inquiry
Armed Forces Supreme Commander Air Chief Marshal Kaset Rojanani, acting Army C.-in-C.
Gen. Issarapong Noonpakdi and Air Chief Marshal Anan Kalintha (Issarapong's successor as Interior Minister in the caretaker government appointed on May 24) on June 16 refused to testify before a House of Representatives committee inquiring into the deaths resulting from the May military crackdown.
Instead they submitted written evidence claiming that the action of the armed forces against pro-democracy demonstrators on May 17-20 had been "lawful" and "justified" .
Contained in their submissions, whether inadvertently or otherwise, was evidence that the military had decided to crush pro-democracy demonstrations 10 days in advance of the May 17-20 events.
The committee, established on June 9, claimed, however, that its brief was to "determine the facts of the event" and "not to make a case out against anyone" .
The opposition had asked for the nullification of an amnesty decree passed by the former government on those who had committed offences during the May protests, including Suchinda.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Leasing of Tin Bigha corridor
A 999-year lease by India to Bangladesh of the 1.5 hectare Tin Bigha corridor began on June 26.
Bangladesh thereby gained direct access to its Moslem-populated enclaves of Dahagram-Angarpota, within the Indian state of West Bengal in Cooch Behar district.
The leasing agreement, ending a border dispute dating back to the partition of Bengal into Indian and Pakistani sections in 1947, had been formally concluded between India and Bangladesh in 1974 [see p. 26572].
However, the actual transfer of the Tin Bigha corridor resulted in the creation of a pocket of about 50,000 Hindus in an Indian enclave at Kuchlibari, which was now no longer contiguous with the rest of West Bengal.
The lease did guarantee the rights of these Hindu residents to cross Tin Bigha into India, but the transfer had nevertheless generated widespread opposition among local Hindus, and attempts to block it through a series of court cases, until in 1990 the Indian Supreme Court ruled the transfer constitutional.
Violent clashes between police and anti-accord activists in the weeks preceding the transfer culminated in the shooting on June 26 of five Hindu protesters by Indian paramilitary forces.
1992/93 budget
Details of the 1992/93 budget were presented by Finance Minister Saifur Rahman on June 18.
Gross domestic product (GDP) growth in the coming year was forecast to be 5 per cent.
The budget proposed total expenditure of taka182,900 million (US$4,700 million).
Development spending was to rise by 21 per cent to taka86,500 million, exceeding the total for recurrent expenditure (up 8 per cent at taka85,500 million) for the first time for five years.
With anticipated revenue of taka105,500 million, the budget deficit would be taka77,300 million.
Wealth creation measures included the scrapping of a 30 per cent tax on money repatriated from abroad.
The biggest current expenditure allocation was for education, up 15 per cent from the previous year, at taka15,900 million.
Defence spending rose by 6 per cent to taka13,800 million.
Nationwide strikes
Four people were killed and at least 200 injured in Dhaka and Chittagong during nationwide strikes on June 20 and 21 called to press for the trial of Gholam Azam, leader of the Jamaat-i-Islami Bangladesh, on charges of crimes committed during the country's 1971 war of independence.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Local elections
In local elections held in May and June, the ruling Nepali Congress Party won 77 per cent of seats in 56 of the 75 Nepali council districts, according to Agence France-Presse news agency reports on June 28.
Congress would control the executive posts of president and vice-president in 39 districts.
District councils controlled 73 per cent of government funds allocated to rural development.
Political unrest and opposition-organized strikes in April had been provoked by economic hardship, for which the opposition had blamed the Nepali Congress Party.
Parliamentary delegation to China
A multiparty parliamentary delegation returned to Nepal on June 13 after an 11-day visit to China which participants described as "successful" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Lok Sabha and state assembly by-elections
By-elections for two Lok Sabha (lower house of parliament) and 19 state assembly seats were held on June 8 amid sporadic incidents of violence.
The prestigious New Delhi Lok Sabha seat was won by the Congress (I) candidate Rajesh Khanna.
A former film star, Khanna had contested New Delhi in the 1991 general election [for which see pp. 38286-88], losing to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader L. K. Advani.
However, Advani chose to take up another seat, which he had won simultaneously in the state of Gujarat.
In the resulting by-election, Khanna defeated the BJP candidate Shatrugan Sinha.
The Giridih (Bihar) Lok Sabha seat was retained by the Jharkand Mukti Morcha.
In state assembly by-elections Congress (I) suffered losses in Kerala and Goa, but made some gains in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.
The BJP gained three seats in Madhya Pradesh and Orissa.
Elections to Rajya Sabha
On June 25 the BJP won 10 out of 22 contested seats in biennial elections to the Rajya Sabha (upper house of parliament); six went to Congress (I), two to the Janata Dal (B), and one each to the Samajwadi Janata Party, the Janata Dal (A), the Shiv Sena and an independent candidate.
Government switch to Congress (I) in Gujarat
The Congress (I) came to power in Gujarat on June 7 after the Chief Minister, Chimanbhai Patel, led all 65 of his Janata Dal (G) deputies, and one other, to join the party, swelling its representation in the 182-seat state assembly from 32 to 98.
Report on financial scandal
A preliminary report by the country's central bank, the Reserve Bank of India, issued on June 2, estimated that total losses resulting from India's worst financial scandal [see p. 38913]would amount to Rs31,000 million (US$1,200 million).
The report claimed that funds had been diverted from the banking system through "massive collusion" between banks and brokers, and that the country's largest commercial bank, the State Bank of India, had allowed Harshad Mehta, the financier at the centre of the scandal, to use the bank's securities account "as if it is [his]investment account" .
The head of the State Bank, M. N. Goiporia who was not named in the report, had reportedly been advised by the Reserve Bank to go on holiday.
The report prompted opposition parties to call for the immediate resignation of the Finance Minister, Manmohan Singh, and the governor of the Reserve Bank.
Meanwhile, allegations of a government cover-up intensified after some opposition MPs claimed that four ministers, including three of Cabinet rank, had been involved.
Related arrests
The government brought criminal charges against 19 people, including Mehta, who was arrested on June 4, and senior officials from both the State Bank of India and the UK-based Standard Chartered Bank.
Mehta's assets, as well as those of 30 other individuals and companies implicated in the case, were seized on June 8; on June 14 the government announced that it had frozen the assets of three senior bank officials of the State Bank of India.
Standard Chartered said on June 12 that it was launching criminal proceedings in India to recover an estimated US$299,800,000 lost in the securities scandal.
Compensation for Bhopal disaster victims
The government ended seven years of legal wrangling over compensation by announcing on June 21 that it had fixed payments for relatives of those killed and injured in the Bhopal gas disaster of December 1984 [see pp. 33647-48].
Economy
Increased aid from Western donors
The Aid-to-India consortium of Western donor countries agreed in Paris on June 26 to approve an enhanced aid package worth US$7,200 million for 1992-93, including $3,400 million in fast-disbursing assistance as balance-of-payments support.
The package, which represented an increase of 7 per cent in nominal terms over the previous year's allocation [see p. 38439], was regarded as an endorsement of the government's economic reform programme.
Domestic opposition to the government's economic policies continued.
On June 16 left-wing unions representing an estimated 15,000,000 workers called a one-day general strike, the first since November 1991 [see p. 38682], to protest against the proposed closure of some public-sector operations.
An official spokesman said on June 20 that the government did not intend to suspend work on the Narmada River irrigation projects despite the recommendations of a World Bank-commissioned study, released on June 19, which highlighted the project's extensive damage to the environment and threat to the way of life of the local tribal population.
Foreign relations
Prime Minister's visit to Japan
Prime Minister Narasimha Rao held talks with the Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa and other government ministers during an official visit to Japan on June 22-26.
Despite reports that Japan intended to withhold aid pending India's adherence to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)[see p. 38727], Rao secured pledges of Japanese economic assistance worth US$850 million —a 6 per cent increase over the previous year's allocation —and a further US$500,000 in cultural aid.
Talks with USA on nuclear non-proliferation
Indo-US talks on non-proliferation issues in South Asia were held in Delhi on June 18-19.
Although no details were released, the talks were believed also to have touched upon the US ban on space-related exports to India [see p. 38914], and a US decision on June 16 restricting the transfer of missile technology to some Third World countries, including India.
India's second testing from Orissa on May 29 of its Agni intermediate range ballistic missile (IRBM) had resulted in a terse expression of "regret" by the US government.
[For first test see p. 36674.]
Plans for an Indo-Russian venture to manufacture and export tanks and aircraft to the Third World, anticipated during a recent visit by the Russian State Secretary Gennady Burbulis [see p. 38914], were confirmed on June 16 by Russia's ambassador to India, Anatoly Drukov.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Army operation in Sind
A total of 600 people were arrested and 33 killed in Sind during the first two weeks of an intensive army operation begun in early June, aimed at controlling the wave of rural banditry and urban violence which had swept the province since April.
The opposition Pakistan People's Party (PPP) raised the fear that the central government's endorsement of large-scale military intervention in the province (for the first time since 1983) signalled a renewed offensive against its supporters, more than 1,000 of whom had been arrested in May [see p. 38914].
By late June, however, close political aides of the PPP leader Benazir Bhutto were quoted as saying that the party was willing to co-operate with the army in putting an end to a "reign of terror" by its political rival, the Sind-based Mohajir Qaumi Mahaz (MQM).
The military intervention had followed a formal request by the Sind government on May 28 for the deployment of troops to maintain law and order under Article 147 of the Constitution, which guaranteed civilian supremacy.
The request for a deployment under this article ended weeks of political wrangling, during which the army had urged that it should be given wide martial law powers to act in Sind under Article 245 of the Constitution.
The eventual decision not to accede to the army's request was reportedly due to an effective campaign by the MQM, a crucial ally of the beleaguered federal government of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif.
The MQM was allegedly a major source of endemic ethnic violence in the province.
Misgivings that the military campaign was directed against the government's political opponents in Sind had grown after the death in military custody on June 8 of a Sindhi opposition politician, Mohammad Yusuf Jakhrani.
Allegations of an anti-Sindhi crusade intensified further following the replacement on June 14 of three senior army commanders, and the unconfirmed arrest of one other, for their part in the reported massacre on June 5 of nine Sindhi villagers.
The army's intention of extending its campaign to urban areas, traditionally the MQM's own stronghold, was confirmed on June 19 after gun battles between rival armed factions of the MQM led to the imposition of a 24-hour curfew in Karachi, the capital of Sind.
The measure was followed by the arrest of more than 50 members of the MQM, including its vice-president Salim Shahzad, the seizure of illegal arms caches, and the uncovering of "chambers" allegedly used by the MQM to torture its opponents.
The federal Minister of Production, Islam Nabi, a member of the MQM, was reported by the Pakistan Times to have tendered his resignation on June 25.
More than 13 people were reported killed in sectarian violence between militant Shias and members of the extremist Sunni organization, the Sipah-i-Sabahah-i-Pakistan (SSP) in Lahore, Gilgit, Jhang and Karachi during May and June.
Amnesty report
The human rights organization Amnesty International said in a report released on June 3 that the government was "relentlessly harassing" its opponents in Sind through mass police round-ups, detentions and widespread torture.
It claimed that more than 600 opposition party members had been detained without trial since the dismissal of the PPP government in August 1990 [see pp. 37652-53].
A report issued on June 20 by the New York-based human rights group, Human Rights Watch, documented what it called "state sanctioned violence" against women and claimed that more than 70 per cent of women in custody had been subjected to physical and sexual abuse by police.
Foreign relations
Sharif's visit to UK
Prime Minister Sharif held talks with his United Kingdom counterpart John Major during a visit to the UK on June 16-20.
Reports said that the discussions had centred mainly on issues relating to the Kashmir dispute and nuclear non-proliferation in south Asia.
The UK government was said also to have agreed to provide aid for the repatriation of Afghan refugees in Pakistan.
Defence pact with France
The signing in Paris of a defence pact between Pakistan and France was reported by Radio Pakistan on June 27.
The agreement committed both sides to co-operate "in the fields of research and development, production and acquisition of defence systems and material" .
A Foreign Ministry spokesman said on June 10 that the supply of a French nuclear plant to Pakistan [see pp. 38631; 38726]was a "very, very remote possibility" as Pakistan was only prepared to accept nuclear safeguards "provided India also does so" .
Relations with China and India
The government was reported on June 2 to have paid US$27,000,000 to China towards the purchase of a 300-megawatt nuclear power plant agreed between the two countries in December 1991 [see pp. 38684; 38726].
Pakistan on June 3 submitted to India a code of conduct for the treatment of accredited officials and diplomats in each other 's country.
The move followed a diplomatic row precipitated by the reported abduction in May of a senior Indian diplomat based in Islamabad [see p. 38914].
The Indian consul-general in Karachi, Dinkar Shristava, was reportedly attacked by armed persons on June 7 and 16.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Transfer of Presidency
Burhanuddin Rabbani, leader of the moderate Sunni Moslem Jamiat-i-Islami, took over the presidency of the interim government on June 28 from Seghbatullah Mujjaddedi, despite earlier suggestions that Mujjaddedi was seeking to go back on the April 24 Peshawar power-sharing accord reached by seven Sunni Moslem mujaheddin groups in Pakistan following the overthrow of the Soviet-backed Najibullah regime [see pp. 38847; 38915].
The government of Pakistan, which still exerted great influence on Afghan affairs, had endorsed the terms of the Peshawar Accord during a visit by Rabbani on June 24.
Mujjaddedi had on June 21 threatened not to hand over power (as required by the Peshawar accord) to Rabbani, whom he branded as a Khomeini-like Islamic radical.
Rabbani, he said, had violated the Peshawar Accord by using the smaller Leadership Council [see p. 38915], made up of mujaheddin leaders, as a personal power base.
According to Mujjaddedi, the Jamiat-i-Islami had censored the announcements and interviews given by members of the interim government, and the senior Jamiat-i-Islami commander, Defence Minister Ahmed Shah Masud, had been controlling his "activities, actions and instructions" .
Mujjaddedi had proposed instead to transfer power to the interim Islamic Jihad Council (IJC), made up of representatives of mujaheddin groups and headed by Mujjaddedi himself.
Many mujaheddin leaders were reported to be abroad and it was thought that Mujjaddedi, leader of the smallest mujaheddin group as well as of an influential Sufi brotherhood, was trying to delay stepping down in the hope that on their return they would support his continuation in office.
Broadening of IJC
The composition of the Sunni-dominated IJC had been broadened on June 18 when the predominantly Shia Moslem Wahdat-i-Islami, a coalition of eight Iranian-backed parties previously excluded from power, was given eight seats and control of three government ministries, including that of National Security.
Five seats were also given to the Ittehad-i-Islami, a Saudi-backed fundamentalist Wahhabi Sunni group led by Abdur Rab Rasool Sayyaf, whose fighters had been involved in fierce street battles with Wahdat in Kabul on June 2-6.
A tentative peace agreement signed on June 7 had ended this latest bout of fighting, in which an estimated 100 people had been killed and 400-500 others wounded in rocket and mortar attacks on densely populated areas.
In addition, upwards of 1,500 civilians had been imprisoned as both sides added ethnic hatred to factional rivalry by seizing civilians, singled out by personal identity cards denoting their ethnic origin.
(Ittehad consisted of Pashtuns, the largest ethnic group, whereas Wahdat consisted mainly of Hazaras, an ethnic minority, many of whom had migrated to Kabul to escape poverty.)
Many detainees were reported to have been badly beaten.
The interim government had tried unsuccessfully to separate the factions, by using loyal militia and neutral mujaheddin groups.
Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostam, the ethnic Uzbek leader who had fought for the Najibullah regime until switching allegiance to Masud in March [see p. 38847]and who still commanded the most powerful militia in the country, on June 25 called on all mujaheddin factions in Kabul to cease hostilities.
However his bitter opponent Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, leader of the Saudi-backed Sunni hardline Hezb-i-Islami faction, despite signing a peace agreement with Masud in May [see p. 38915], continued to demand the removal of Dostam's forces from Kabul.
Hekmatyar had refused to join the interim government, and his forces and artillery still threatened Kabul from the south.
Mujjaddedi had told media correspondents on May 31 that Hekmatyar's men might have been responsible for the rocket attack on his aircraft on May 30 [see p. 38915].
ASIA — PACIFIC
KAZAKHSTAN
Constitution
On June 2 a draft constitution was adopted by the Supreme Soviet after a two-day debate which Kazakh Radio described as "energetic and interested" .
The draft would be circulated for public discussion.
Drawn up by the constitution commission under Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev, the draft constitution called for the President to head the government and stipulated a smaller parliament with full-time members.
The clause on state language provoked heated discussion.
The final compromise position was based on the September 1989 law, denoting Russian as the language of inter-ethnic communication [see p. 36898].
Opposition demonstrations
On the opening of the Supreme Soviet session on June 17, 5,000 protesters demonstrated outside the parliament building, forcing the postponement of the planned session, which was replaced by a closed debate on the situation.
The demonstrators, from the opposition Azat, Jeltoksan and Republican parties, demanded a new government and expropriation of the former Communist Party's assets for the benefit of other parties.
On June 18 and 23 the news agency Interfax reported attempts by special police (OMON) to clear the area.
Opposition party leaders, in talks with Vice-President Yerik Asanbayev on June 15, had demanded the formation of a coalition government and the resignation of 85 deputies elected to reserved seats in the 1990 Supreme Soviet elections [see p. 37323].
Economy — Miners' strike
From June 1, energy prices were raised to equate with Russian prices.
Kazakhstan was said to have been losing 150,000,000 roubles daily since May because of the difference between its fuel prices and those of Russia [see also p. 38923].
Price controls on basic foods were lifted on June 1.
A 32-day strike in the Karaganda coal fields involving 20,000 miners ended on June 6 with agreement that 15 per cent of production would in future become the property of miners' work collectives.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAJIKISTAN
Fighting in south
Fighting in Tajikistan's Kurgan-Tyube oblast (region) in the south of the country claimed 35 lives and left 56 wounded, according to official figures published in Izvestiya of June 29.
The fighting, eventually suppressed with the aid of Interior Ministry troops (OMON), appeared to be between supporters and opponents of the new coalition government which President Rakhmon Nabiyev had been compelled to accept in May (and which had been refused recognition by Kurgan-Tyube's neighbouring Kulyab oblast and by Khodjent oblast in the north —see also p. 38916).
Rallies began in Dushanbe, the capital, organized by the "united bloc of democratic forces" (the opposition parties now included in the government coalition), demanding Nabiyev's resignation because of his poor control over the situation.
The opposition parties accused Nabiyev of holding talks in Khodjent and Kulyab with former Vice-President Narzullo Dustov and former Supreme Soviet chair Sarafali Kenjayev, both deposed in May and opposed to co-operating with the opposition.
Nabiyev, however, claimed that he had been touring the region to meet the population after recent mudslide disasters.
A short-lived National Guard established by Nabiyev to suppress anti-government demonstrations in early May [see p. 38916]had been staffed largely by men from the regions now resisting the coalition and refusing to surrender their weapons.
A presidential decree of June 12 instructed the Defence Committee to implement measures establishing a republican National Guard —the third attempt to create such a force, according to an article in Moskovskiye novosti of June 26.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TURKMENISTAN
Presidential elections
On June 21 the electorate voted in presidential elections in which the sole candidate was the incumbent, Saparmurad Niyazov.
Initial results put the vote at 99.5 per cent for Niyazov, who was sworn in on June 26 and assumed leadership of the Cabinet of Ministers.
Niyazov had been leader of the republican Communist Party until it was dissolved at its 25th Congress on Dec. 16, 1991, and then became leader of the ruling Democratic Party of Turkmenistan.
He had won the republic's first direct presidential elections on Oct. 27, 1990 [see p. 37788], having previously been Chair of the Supreme Soviet since January 1990 [see p. 37195].
Joint forces declaration with Russia
Niyazov and Russian Defence Minister Gen. Pavel Grachev on June 8 in Ashkhabad signed a protocol on joint armed forces.
Turkmenistan was to set up national armed forces, formed out of former Soviet units stationed in the republic, but under joint Turkmen and Russian command.
Maintenance and financing arrangements were set out, dividing the expense between the two parties.
Air force units of the former Soviet Union stationed in Turkmenistan would become part of the Russian Federation armed forces.
After a previous round of talks, held in Moscow earlier in the month, Niyazov decreed on May 26 that conscripts in the Turkmen armed forces should serve for 18 months (but for two years with the navy and for one year by those with higher education).
He also appointed a Turkmen from the National Security Committee (former KGB) to be first deputy commander of the Central Asian Border District.
Trade deal with Iran
On May 12, following a visit by Iranian President Rafsanjani to Turkmenistan for the Central Asian summit [see p. 38917], agreements were announced (i) to construct a gas pipeline to Europe via Iran and Turkey (existing pipelines ran to Russia and Ukraine); and (ii) on transport, banking and trade.
Iran had announced a $50,000,000 import credit to Turkmenistan in April and an annual import of 150,000 tonnes of diesel oil from Turkmenistan.
Iran was also to co-operate on oil exploration and refining with Turkmenistan, whose offshore oil extraction in the Caspian sea was suffering disruption because of shortages of hitherto centrally supplied materials.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KIRGIZSTAN
A programme of economic reforms developed with IMF advice was approved by a joint session of the presidential State Council and the government on June 25; The programme included lower budget expenditure, tighter credit policy, co-ordinated monetary policy with Russia, formation of a banking system and accelerated privatization.
EUROPE
FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
Diplomatic activity relating to civil war
International efforts to end the continuing civil war in the former Yugoslavia centred in June on the rapidly deteriorating situation in Bosnia-Hercegovina, and in particular on efforts to secure a ceasefire between Serb and Bosnian forces in the capital, Sarajevo, in order to open the airport to humanitarian aid for the city, which had been under siege since April.
On June 20, the Bosnian Presidency [for membership see below]declared a state of war, and a general mobilization in Bosnia-Hercegovina, where, it said, 7,200 people had been killed since the start of fighting, more than 30,000 were missing presumed dead, and there were 1,303,469 refugees.
Hopes were raised on June 28 when French President François Mitterrand, immediately after the EC summit in Lisbon [see pp. 38942-43], unexpectedly paid a six-hour visit to Sarajevo, where he met Bosnian President Alija Izetbegovic and Radovan Karadzic, leader of the Bosnian Serbian Democratic Party (SDS).
By June 29 the UN had achieved a sufficient lull in the fighting to allow in five flights with relief supplies, but on June 30, as artillery attacks intensified, the airport closed again.
UN-sponsored talks had begun on June 2, when the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) leadership called for Bosnian Serb leaders to stop the bombardment of Sarajevo and to hand over the airport to UN control.
On June 6, Serb forces reportedly agreed to cede control of the airport, apparently in return for Bosnian forces having lifted on June 5 the blockade of the Marshal Tito barracks in Sarajevo, under siege for a month.
However, a UNPROFOR (UN Protection Force in Yugoslavia —see p. 38849) convoy from Belgrade was attacked in its attempt to reach Sarajevo to prepare the opening of the airport.
The Serbian government called on June 8 for Bosnian Serbs to stop the fighting.
Bosnian leaders, however, accused the FRY of attempting to deny responsibility for Serb attacks, such as the June 23 shelling which killed at least 14 people in Sarajevo city centre, which was crowded with people after an apparent lull in the fighting.
(There were short-lived ceasefires declared from June 15 and again from June 21.)
UNPROFOR deployment
The UN Security Council on June 29 mandated 1,000 Canadian troops of UNPROFOR currently in Croatia to redeploy in an effort to secure control of Sarajevo airport.
In Croatia UNPROFOR had been completely deployed by June 9 and was supposed to take full control of the self-proclaimed "Republic of Serbian Krajina" (RSK —comprising Serb areas in Croatia) by June 25, deployed along the demarcation line between the two sides.
The EC Monitor Mission (ECMM) had decided to base itself in the RSK town of Knin, having withdrawn from Sarajevo in May.
EC negotiations
Lord Carrington, chair of the European Communities conference on Yugoslavia, declared himself "disappointed" and "concerned" , after separate talks with the Croatian and Serbian Presidents and the Bosnian Foreign Minister on June 25 in Strasbourg failed to restart the negotiations.
CSCE
At the meeting of senior officials of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) on June 29 in Helsinki, Yugoslav ambassador Vladimir Pavicevic announced that the FRY would not be participating in the summit, scheduled for July 9, complaining of a "one-sided and arbitrary approach" by the CSCE.
ICO meeting
At an emergency meeting of the Islamic Conference Organization (ICO) convened on June 17 to discuss the situation of the Moslem population in Bosnia-Hercegovina [see p. 38987], Bosnian Foreign Minister Haris Siladzic called for military intervention and asked ICO member states to sever diplomatic links with Yugoslavia.
Turkey and Egypt expressed readiness to participate in a UN peacekeeping force.
Developments in FRY, Serbia and Montenegro
Following its formation in April and the holding of elections in May, the FRY proceeded with the election of its President by its new Assembly in mid-June.
The situation in Kosovo, however, remained confrontational, while international sanctions against the FRY prompted new austerity measures.
FRY election results — Serbian action against assembly in Kosovo
Results of the May 31 elections to the bicameral FRY Assembly, held separately in the constituent republics of Serbia and Montenegro alongside republican assembly elections [see p. 38919], were as follows.
In the 138-member Chamber of Citizens (108 seats for Serbian representatives, half of them elected on a majority system by constituencies and half on a proportional system by party lists, plus 30 for Montenegrin representatives, six by constituency and 24 proportionally) the Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS) gained 73 seats; Democratic Party of Socialists of Montenegro 23; Serbian Radical Party (SRS) 33; League of Communists-Movement for Yugoslavia two; Democratic Community of Vojvodina Magyars (DZVM) two; independents three; two seats for Serbia went to a second round of voting, held on June 14 (together with two second-round polls for the republican assembly).
On June 11 the Chamber of Citizens elected Jugoslav Kostic (representing Vojvodina on the Yugoslav Presidency) as its chair.
In the 40-member Chamber of Republics (20 seats each for Serbia and Montenegro) deputies were chosen on the basis of party representation in their republican Assemblies.
On June 11 the Chamber of Republics elected Milos Radulovic as its chair.
The SPS took 93 out of 120 seats in elections to the Assembly of Vojvodina.
In Kosovo, which like Vojvodina was officially administered as an autonomous province within Serbia, and where elections to a 130-member "constituent Republican Assembly" on May 24 [see p. 38919]had been declared illegal by the Serbian authorities, the assembly was prevented from proceeding because on June 23 Serbian authorities surrounded the building and arrested several deputies.
Kosovo leaders refused negotiations with Serbia, claiming that no dialogue could be guaranteed.
(Seats in the illegal Assembly, as announced on June 7, were distributed as follows: Democratic Alliance of Kosovo 96; Parliamentary Party 13; Albanian Christian Democratic Party seven; Peasant Party seven; Moslem Party four; Party of Democratic Action one; independents two.)
Election of FRY President
Dobrica Cosic, a writer, was elected as FRY President by the Federal Assembly (i.e. both houses) on June 15.
As a Serb, Cosic was constitutionally obliged to offer the premiership to a Montenegrin [see p. 38848].
No formal offer of the premiership had been made, however, as of the end of June.
Impact of sanctions in FRY
UN-imposed sanctions on the FRY, in which the former Yugoslav republics also joined, came into force on June 1 [see p. 38918].
Petrol was rationed from June (40 per cent of Serbia's energy was imported), and from July 1 austerity measures aimed at limiting consumption and controlling monetary policy were introduced.
These included a 40 per cent reduction in public expenditure, and measures intended to reduce inflation from 120 per cent per month to 20 per cent.
The FRY government on June 30 announced an 85 per cent devaluation of the currency, to be known as the new dinar; as at July 1 US$1.00=200 new dinars.
New banknotes would be introduced immediately.
Opposition activity in Serbia
On June 9 the Serbian Democratic Movement (Depos) called on Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic to resign.
Depos had been formed in late May by two opposition parliamentary parties — the Serbian Renaissance Movement (SPO) and the Democratic Party (DS)— and the Serbian Liberal Party and the New Democracy-Movement for Serbia.
Protests continued in June in Belgrade as students staged anti-Milosevic marches.
Students of Belgrade University went on strike on June 14, supported in their demands by the teaching staff.
The ruling SPS faced a split on June 24 when 10 SPS deputies threatened to form their own parliamentary group.
However, on June 25 the Serbian government won a vote of confidence in the Serbian Assembly by 102 votes to 24 with six abstentions.
Crown Prince Aleksandar Karadjordjevic, on his first visit to Serbia, attended an opposition "St Vitus Day Assembly" in front of the Federal Assembly on June 28.
Talks between him and Milosevic on June 29 did not prevent a demonstration estimated at 100,000 in Belgrade.
Macedonia
Talks between Macedonian Foreign Minister Denko Malevski and Greek Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis were held under EC auspices on June 16, but their disagreements remained unresolved.
The EC Lisbon summit [see pp. 38942-43]reiterated its readiness to recognize Macedonia under a different name, to satisfy Greece's demands, but Macedonia again refused.
On June 28, Malevski resigned.
(Meanwhile, Mitsotakis was reported on June 26 to have rejected a proposal from Milosevic for a "Yugoslav-Greek confederation" .)
Bosnia-Hercegovina
An agreement on the formation of a new government was reached on June 6.
Jure Pelivan was appointed Prime Minister-designate.
The resignation of the outgoing government, also headed by Pelivan, was accepted.
The new government was formed after consultations with seven parliamentary parties, but not with the Serbian Democratic Party (SDS), which was banned on June 24 after a Sarajevo court found that it had developed into a "classic terrorist organization" , nor with the Serbian Renaissance Movement (SPO).
It was reported on June 2 that Izetbegovic had temporarily brought Nenad Kecmanovic and Mirko Pejanovic, representing the Serb nation, into the Bosnian Presidency.
Bosnian co-operation with Croatia
The Croatian and Bosnian Presidents issued a joint statement on June 15, which envisaged, among other forms of co-operation, joint military efforts "against the common enemy" .
Izetbegovic at a press conference said that Croatia was "so far" not considered an aggressor in Bosnia-Hercegovina, although Croatian forces were reportedly fighting for control of the Bosnian town of Mostar, near the Croatian coast.
(The Croatian port of — Dubrovnik had meanwhile come under renewed shelling from Serbian forces since May 29.)
Mate Boban, leader of the Bosnian Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), declared on June 21 that the Croatian Defence Council (HVO —Bosnian Croats' military body) controlled all Croat-inhabited areas of Bosnia-Hercegovina, and that a canton system had been established.
Delay on new Bosnian currency
The introduction of Bosnia-Hercegovina's currency would not proceed as planned on July 1, it was announced on June 30.
The Yugoslav National Bank denied Bosnia-Hercegovina a supply of dinars in June.
In Croatian-controlled areas of Bosnia-Hercegovina, the Croatian dinar [see p. 38685]was in use.
Jure Pelivan Prime Minister Hakija Turajlic Deputy Prime Minister for Economy Miodrag Simovic Deputy Prime Minister for Interior Zlatko Lagumdzija Deputy Prime Minister for Social Affairs Jerko Doko Defence Haris Silajdzic Foreign Affairs Jusuf Pusina Interior Zarko Primorac Finance
Principal members of Bosnia-Hercegovina government
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Berisha's visit to USA
President Sali Berisha visited the USA on June 15-21 and returned with a promise of over US$60,000,000 in aid, in addition to $35,000,000 already promised on April 29.
Berisha met with President George Bush and told him that Albania fully supported economic sanctions against Serbia, in spite of their high cost to Albania.
The April aid package was principally for agricultural development, plus food and humanitarian aid, while in June the USA also promised deliveries of cotton as a raw material for Albania's textile industry, and technical assistance in the development of its financial sector.
Public hangings
Two brothers aged 20 and 24 were hanged in the main square of the industrial town of Fier, southern Albania, on June 25.
They had been found guilty of five murders, having entered a house of some neighbouring villagers earlier in the month and clubbed to death five members of one family.
The most recent public execution in Albania had been in 1986.
EUROPE
ESTONIA
Constitutional referendum — Currency reform
A referendum on June 28 endorsed the draft constitution elaborated by the Constituent Assembly [see pp. 38420; 38585], which provided for a parliamentary system with a strong presidency.
The first president would be directly elected, and presidents thereafter would be elected by the Riigikogu (parliament).
The constitution was to take effect in early July, when a general election date would be set.
Eligibility to vote remained controversial.
For the referendum, the Supreme Council had decided on June 18 that all Estonian citizens over 18 were eligible, regardless of their place of residence.
It had also added a second referendum proposal (which was rejected by a 53 per cent majority, according to Estonian radio on June 29) allowing participation in the forthcoming election by all those who had applied for citizenship by June 5 [for citizenship issue see also p. 38880].
Currency reform
From June 20, the kroon became the sole legal tender in Estonia.
The new currency was pegged to within 3 per cent of a rate of DM1=8 kroon.
Estonia's residents were able initially to convert roubles to kroon at the rate of 10 roubles=1 kroon.
On June 20, Prime Minister Tiit Vahi signed an agreement in Moscow with Russian Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Economic Relations Minister Aleksandr Shokhin, including trade and payments clearing and a protocol on the national banks.
The kroon would be backed by gold retrieved from eastern European governments.
Rouble zone banking officials met in Tallinn on June 5-6, when a clearing agreement was signed with Ukraine.
Ministerial changes
Olari Taal, hitherto Construction Minister, became acting Economics Minister on June 8, replacing Heido Vitsur.
Jaan Kabin took Taal's former post on June 18.
Ulo Uluots's appointment as Defence Minister was approved in the Supreme Council on the same day.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Party issues
On June 11, Jozsef Torgyan was suspended as chair of the Independent Smallholders' Party (FKgP) and from party membership by his deputy, general secretary Bela Nemeth, who thus assumed party leadership.
Torgyan alerted the media to the takeover, which had involved his being physically excluded from party headquarters.
The 35-member faction expelled from the FKgP in February [see also p. 38777]denied involvement, admitting nevertheless their rejection of Torgyan's leadership.
Both sides began criminal proceedings.
Both factions held meetings at the end of June at which they elected new leaders: Geza Gimoti as general secretary of the Torgyan-led FKgP (which had suspended Bela Nemeth) and Laszlo Horvath as Chair of the breakaway FKgP Historical Section.
The formation of a new left-wing party, the Social Democratic People's Party, was announced by Zoltan Kiraly on June 23.
Kiraly had been sitting as an independent member of the Országgyülés (National Assembly), having first been elected in 1985 as a radical member of the then ruling Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party (HSWP).
He had been re-elected as a candidate of the successful Hungarian Democratic Forum (MDF) in 1990 but subsequently left the MDF.
Media dispute
The Constitutional Court on June 8 ruled unconstitutional a 1974 Council of Ministers decree permitting government supervision of radio and television, but gave the government until Nov. 30, 1992, to enact media legislation, suspending the decree's annulment until then.
The issue had precipitated a political dispute between Prime Minister Jozsef Antall and President Arpad Göncz.
On July 1, Göncz again refused to dismiss Hungarian Radio and Television Chairs, Csaba Gombar and Elemer Hankiss, as requested by Antall.
On June 19, Hankiss announced his intention to resign following a recommendation by the parliamentary cultural committee.
Ministerial appointments
Tibor Fuezessy of the Christian Democratic People's Party (KDNP) was appointed Minister without Portfolio in charge of the intelligence services, it was reported on June 22.
The post had been vacant since February [see p. 38777].
By-election
The successful result of the eighth attempt to elect a deputy to the seat of Kisber (Komarom-Esztergom county), vacant since December 1990, was reported on June 21, despite a low turnout of 35 per cent.
The seat was won by the Hungarian Socialist Party candidate, Gyoergy Keleti, with 68.5 per cent of the votes.
The MDF candidate came second with 17.3 per cent.
EUROPE
LITHUANIA
Referendum
In a referendum on June 14 on the status of ex-Soviet troops in Lithuania, voting was reported as being some 90 per cent in favour of their immediate withdrawal (i.e. in 1992), in a 75 per cent turnout.
Lithuanian President Vytautas Landsbergis had declared himself "satisfied" with his negotiations with Russian President Boris Yeltsin on June 5 in Moscow, when it was agreed to draw up a timetable for the withdrawal.
Parliamentary impasse and boycott
Any firm decisions on holding early elections to a new legislature (the Seimas) were blocked in June by the political split which had repeatedly left the current legislature, the Supreme Council, inquorate as a result of boycotts.
Only the deputies from the left-wing opposition groups were present for a June 2 session, boycotted by factions loyal to President Landsbergis and Prime Minister Gediminas Vagnorius (the Sajudis Coalition for a Democratic Lithuania).
There was no quorum on June 9 for a vote on whether to accept Vagnorius's resignation, tendered on May 16 [see p. 38927].
At a plenary session convened on June 18, those present favoured holding Seimas elections on Oct. 25, with a mixed system of proportional representation and majority vote.
(This poll date was subsequently confirmed by a decision on July 9.)
Removal of head of state security department
Deputy Premier Zigmas Vaisvila, who had been in opposition to Vagnorius since April, was removed from his post as head of the State Security Department on May 28.
It was reported on June 17 that he had been given responsibility for local government, while other responsibilities were redistributed between deputy premiers.
EUROPE
POLAND
Fall of Olszewski government
On the night of June 4-5 the Sejm (lower house of parliament) passed a motion of no confidence in the government of Prime Minister Jan Olszewski.
In a notably high turnout the voting was 273 to 119 with 33 abstentions.
The motion had been proposed by President Lech Walesa, whose conflict with the minority Olszewski government, formed in December 1991 [see pp. 38685-86], had increased in intensity over the areas of defence and national security [see pp. 38880-81; 38921-22]and over an attempted last-minute government amendment to the Russian-Polish treaty [see p. 38922].
During the first five months of 1992, Olszewski had held unsuccessful negotiations with various parliamentary parties to broaden his support base [see p. 38881], the latest of which —discussions with the Confederation for an Independent Poland (KPN) —broke down on June 2.
New Prime Minister — Interim government appointments
Walesa's nominee for Prime Minister, Waldemar Pawlak, was approved by 261 to 149 votes with seven abstentions on June 6.
Pawlak, a farmer born in 1959, had been the leader since June 1991 of the Polish Peasant Party (PSL), successor to the United Peasant Party (an ally of the former ruling Communist Party).
He was the first Polish Prime Minister since the end of communist rule to have no connection with the Solidarity movement.
The parties which voted for Pawlak were the three which had proposed the no confidence motion against Olszewski [see p. 38921], namely the Democratic Union (UD)(except its Democratic Right faction), the Liberal Democratic Congress (KLD) and the Polish Economic Programme (PPG), plus his own PSL, the KPN, and the Democratic Left Alliance (SLD).
Voting against were the Christian National Union (ZChN), the Centre Alliance (PC), Solidarity, the Peasant Accord (or Party —PL), the Christian Democrat Party (PChD), Christian Democracy (ChD) and the Union of Realpolitik (UPR).
On June 6 Pawlak appointed Andrzej Milczanowski and Janusz Onyszkiewicz as interim Interior and Defence Ministers respectively, and deprived former Interior Minister Antoni Macierewicz of access to ministry documents.
On June 12, in the midst of rumours of an attempted coup by the outgoing government —an accusation made by Walesa at the Solidarity congress [see below]— Milczanowski ascertained that Piotr Naimski, head of the State Security Office, had ordered Interior Ministry troops on to alert on June 4.
Naimski, who denied the coup accusations, was dismissed.
Wojciech Wlodarczyk, former head of the Office of the Council of Ministers, was replaced by Pawlak's advisor, Aleksander Luczak (PL), it was reported on June 8.
However, Wlodarczyk claimed on June 13 that he still held the mandate for this post.
Pawlak also dismissed the head of Polish radio and television, Zbigniew Romaszewski, and reinstated his predecessor, Janusz Zaorski, whom Olszewski had dismissed on May 19.
Passage of budget
The IMF-approved budget was passed by the Sejm on June 6 (after the appointment of Pawlak) by 230 votes to 90 with seven abstentions.
On June 16, the Senate (the upper house) approved the budget as adopted by the Sejm.
Controversy over exposure of collaborators
The fall of the Olszewski government was complicated by its actions to expose alleged communist collaborators.
On June 4 Macierewicz (as Interior Minister) distributed to the chairmen of parliamentary parties and to the Speakers and Deputy Speakers of both houses sealed envelopes containing the names of 64 deputies, senators, present and former ministers and Presidential Chancellery officials who had allegedly collaborated with the Polish security services under the communist regime.
The President, the Speakers of both houses, the Prime Minister and the Chairmen of the Supreme Court and Constitutional Tribunal had been sent further lists.
The names were rumoured to include President Walesa.
The Sejm had passed a resolution on May 28 calling for the exposure by June 20 of former security service agents in positions of authority, but its early implementation was widely seen as an attempt by the government to retain power.
Disclosure of the contents of the sealed envelopes carried the risk of a five-year prison sentence.
The heads of the UD and KLD refused to accept the documents.
A spokesperson for President Walesa said on June 4 that the files had been selective and that the material was "to a large degree fabricated" .
The Interior Ministry issued a denial that the documents were lists of collaborators, calling them instead "informative documents concerning the archival collections and the preparations of the method of implementing the Sejm's resolution" .
Split in PC
On June 7 Olszewski met with a group of 14 parliamentarians mostly representing a faction of the PC and joined by Wlodarczyk and Roman Bartoszcze, leader of the Polish Peasant Christian Forum.
On June 13-14 this group held the founding congress of a new Christian Democratic Forum (FChD), electing Olszewski as honorary chairman of the new movement.
On June 19 the FChD's parliamentary faction, the Movement for the Republic, was inaugurated.
The second congress of the PC on June 12-14 voted to expel the FChD members, including Olszewski.
Jaroslaw Kaczynski (the sole candidate) was re-elected as PC chair.
The PC called for the formation of a broad resistance to the "recommunization government of Waldemar Pawlak" .
Solidarity congress
The trade union Solidarity's fourth congress opened in Gdansk on June 11.
Marian Krzaklewski, president since Walesa's election to the Polish presidency in 1991, was re-elected.
On June 13, having heard speeches from both Walesa and ex-Prime Minister Olszewski, delegates adopted a resolution "expressing indignation at recent events in Poland and the role played by the President in them" and calling for the exposure of secret service agents.
The second round of the congress in Lodz on June 27 resolved to demand the withdrawal of a government decision to raise energy prices from July 1.
Trial of Popieluszko murderers
The trial of Gen. Wladyslaw Ciaston, ex-head of the Security Service, and Gen. Zenon Platek, ex-head of the Interior Ministry religious affairs department, opened in Warsaw on June 15.
Both men, arrested in October 1990, denied planning the murder of the pro-Solidarity priest, Fr Jerzy Popieluszko, in 1984 [see p. 33292].
In 1985, four soldiers had been convicted of the murder.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Election date — Privatization
On June 15 the Senate (upper house) voted to hold presidential and parliamentary elections on Sept. 27, 1992.
The following day, the Chamber of Deputies approved the date.
On June 8 both chambers had narrowly rejected a motion to hold elections on July 26, as advocated by President Ion Iliescu and his supporters in the Democratic National Salvation Front (DNSF).
The DNSF did win the vote, however, on simultaneous legislative and presidential elections, whereas Petre Roman's rival National Salvation Front had called for separate election dates.
On June 17 Roman announced his intention not to stand for President.
Voucher privatization scheme — IMF agreement
On June 1 a mass privatization scheme began in Romania with the distribution to the public of vouchers representing 30 per cent of capital in 6,000 state-owned enterprises identified for privatization.
Under this "large privatization" scheme, five "private ownership funds" would manage the shares allocated to the public by the voucher distribution.
The remaining 70 per cent equity stake would be held initially by a "state ownership fund" , which would be required to sell off 10 per cent per year, with advantageous terms for the employees of the enterprise in question.
Neither the private ownership funds nor the state ownership fund were yet functioning.
The IMF on June 1 approved a standby credit authorizing drawings up to the equivalent of SDR314,040,000 (about US$440,000,000).
Intended to support economic reforms over a 10-month period, the credit would be issued in four tranches.
In addition, SDR76,800,000 were made available under the compensatory and contingency financing facility (CCFF) to offset the increased cost of Romania's oil imports.
In tandem with the IMF credit, Romania was granted a structural adjustment loan worth $400,000,000 from the World Bank.
EUROPE
CIS
Minsk and Bishkek meetings
Inconclusive talks on currency issues were held at a meeting in Minsk on June 26 between representatives of the 11 Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) states (including heads of government of Byelarus, Russia and Tajikistan only, and with Moldova and Azerbaijan present only as observers).
Russia, planning to unify its internal rouble exchange rates from July 1, needed specific agreements on whether states would stay within the rouble zone, and on procedures for the introduction of separate currencies by different republic [see below for agreement with Ukraine].
Russia, which controlled rouble printing, was currently forced to extend credit to other republics.
Estonia (not a CIS member) had become the first ex-Soviet republic to replace the rouble by its own currency [see p. 38971].
Other republics within the CIS were planning rouble substitutes including Kazakhstan (the tanga), Ukraine (the hrivna), Azerbaijan (the manat) and Armenia [see p. 38976].
Ukraine and Byelarus already had parallel currencies [see pp. 38732; 38924].
Also discussed in Minsk were the issue of a joint interstate television company (the ex-Soviet Ostankino company being sharply criticized for failing to draft a charter, as had been agreed at the May Tashkent summit — see p. 38922), transport, health, the environment and division of ex-Soviet property.
Bishkek meeting — Trade and customs agreements
Trade Ministers from all 15 former Soviet republics meeting in Bishkek (Kirgizstan) on June 17-18 signed a protocol stipulating that by Sept. 1 states should agree on volumes of trade for 1993 based on free-market prices.
A report of June 16 noted that Armenia, Azerbaijan, Byelarus, Moldova, Kazakhstan, Russia, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan had at a meeting in Minsk decided to introduce standardized customs tariffs and categorization of goods for foreign trade [for customs agreement see p. 38874].
Russian negotiations with Ukraine and Georgia
Russian President Yeltsin and Ukrainian President Kravchuk, meeting in Dagomys (on the Russian Black Sea coast) on June 23, agreed to draw up a comprehensive political treaty "reflecting the new quality of their relationship" .
Other items in their 18-point agreement included transferring to Ukraine a part of the ex-Soviet property abroad, and a mechanism for the introduction of Ukrainian currency.
Regarding the longstanding dispute over ownership of the Black Sea Fleet, it was decided to form Russian and Ukrainian naval forces on the basis of this Fleet.
Ukraine insisted on retaining joint command of CIS strategic forces.
The issue of the Crimea was excluded from the discussion.
On June 24, Georgian President Shevardnadze met Yeltsin in Dagomys.
They agreed a ceasefire from June 29 in the dispute in the Georgian autonomous region of South Ossetia, where heavy fighting had continued throughout June.
Russo-Georgian diplomatic relations would commence on July 1.
Russia would withdraw its military units from around Tskhinvali (South Ossetia) within 20 days, and a monitoring commission would oversee the peace.
Gas supplies via North Ossetia, blocked since May [see p. 38926], would resume.
The ceasefire negotiations were attended by representatives of North and South Ossetia.
Bilateral treaties between Russia and other republics
Uzbekistan and Russia on May 29 signed a bilateral treaty of friendship, co-operation and mutual aid.
Byelarus and Russia established diplomatic relations on June 25.
A 25-year friendship, co-operation and mutual assistance treaty between Kazakhstan and Russia was signed in Moscow on May 25.
Among its provisions were Russian aid in establishing Kazakh armed forces, joint use of space and military facilities, and reciprocal MFN status.
A friendship treaty was signed on June 10 with Kirgizstan, to which Russia had offered a 10-year 1,000 million rouble loan in May when earthquakes caused damage worth an estimated 2,500 million roubles.
EUROPE
RUSSIA
Progress of economic reform
Important steps in reforming the structure of the economy during June included the launch of a mass privatization scheme, while the position of Yegor Gaidar, who was closely associated with the reform programme, was apparently strengthened when President Boris Yeltsin named him as Prime Minister on June 15.
Privatization
On June 11 the Supreme Soviet passed mass privatization legislation under which vouchers worth between 5,000 and 10,000 roubles would be distributed to all citizens to enable them to purchase shares in state property.
The scheme, which required the passage of enabling legislation and which was scheduled for July 25, was expected to generate revenue of some 91,000 million roubles for the government.
The privatization programme envisaged that 25 per cent of state enterprises would be sold by the end of 1992; about 25 categories of assets were to remain in state ownership, however, including natural resources and strategic enterprises.
Through the voucher sales component, employees would be able to buy a controlling share in their enterprises; there would be further voucher issues in 1993 and 1994; and voucher sales would in all account for 35 per cent of state enterprises slated for privatization.
A further presidential decree issued on June 14 and published in Rossiskaya gazeta of June 18 allowed the sale of land to private owners during the privatization of enterprises, and also permitted the sale of land for "entrepreneurial activity" .
Of the proceeds 80 per cent would be allocated to local soviets, with the rest divided between the budgets of regional administrations and the Russian Federation.
Import tariffs, suspended from Jan. 15 [see p. 38731], were reintroduced as of July 1 by a decree reported on June 17.
Bankruptcy decree
A presidential decree, reported in full in Rossiskaya gazeta of June 18, allowed state enterprises which failed to pay their debts to the state and to private creditors within three months to be declared bankrupt and either liquidated or auctioned off to the highest bidder for a limited period of time for independent management (the new managers to be treated as owners, but debarred from dismissing more than 30 per cent of the work force).
Bankruptcy regulations, although an essential plank of reform policy, had been repeatedly rejected by the Supreme Soviet, largely because of the fear of mass unemployment.
Appointment of Gaidar as Prime Minister — Other appointments
Gaidar, head of Russia's economic reform programme, was "entrusted with the responsibilities" of Prime Minister by a presidential decree of June 15.
A presidential spokesman said the same day that the appointment was permanent.
President Boris Yeltsin had taken on the premiership in October [see p. 38537].
Gaidar had served as joint First Deputy Prime Minister since May, having formerly been Finance Minister.
The promotion of Gaidar was seen as reassuring the West, prior to the Russian-US summit and the July G-7 meeting, that the Russian leadership was committed to its market economic reforms, notwithstanding the inclusion of ex-Soviet industrialists in the government in May [see p. 38923].
A presidential decree reported on June 4 made Boris Saltykov, Minister for Science and Technology Policy, a Deputy Prime Minister.
Aleksandr Shokhin was relieved of his post as Employment Minister on June 14, in order to concentrate on new responsibilities for foreign economic relations.
Gennady Melikyan's appointment as Labour Minister was reported on June 15 and the Labour and Employment Ministry transformed into the Labour Ministry.
Vladimir Lopukhin, dismissed as Energy Minister in May, was appointed government adviser on international economic co-operation and fuel and power questions, according to the Interfax news agency on June 18.
Dispute over central bank
Russian Central Bank (RCB) chair Georgy Matiukhin offered his resignation on June 1, but it was rejected in the Supreme Soviet on June 4 by 88 votes to 58 with 53 abstentions.
In his annual report to the Supreme Soviet Matiukhin said that he had resigned because (i) the government had taken no effective steps to solve the cash shortage;(ii) inter-enterprise debt stood at 2,000,000 million roubles for which the Bank was criticized although it was following government policy; and (iii) the Supreme Soviet was demanding a reduction of the 80 per cent interest rate to 50 per cent.
The dispute over the RCB was symptomatic of the power struggle between legislature, government and president.
Matiukhin sharply criticized Gaidar's team and expressed disagreement with the government's budget commission.
Approval of a proposal to introduce a five-year tenure for the post of RCB chair, from which the incumbent could be removed only on his own request or if incapacitated, was postponed.
Gaidar announced on television on May 31 that the issue of cash in June would reach 142,000 million roubles, a 250 per cent increase compared with May.
He also announced that wages unpaid because of cash shortages would be credited with interest at an annual rate of 80 per cent for at least May and June.
Workers in several regions had threatened strikes because of non-payment of wages.
Inter-enterprise debt
A government resolution which would transform the mutual debts of state enterprises into "transferable long-term bonds" , to circulate for a year until their conversion into shares, was put to the Supreme Soviet on June 26 together with the budget statement.
Discussion was postponed.
The freezing of enterprise accounts from July 1 was also proposed.
Political developments
A number of new political groups included pro-Yeltsin formations and an opposition "Civic Union" associated with Vice-President Aleksandr Rutskoi.
Literaturnaya gazeta of June 3 carried a report of the formation of the Association in Support of Democracy and Reforms, which took place on May 25.
The Association, intended as a moderate pro-Yeltsin group, combined deputies, ministers and political parties including the Republican Party and the Movement for Democratic Reforms.
Gavriil Popov, a leading campaigner for democratic reform, who had been popularly elected as mayor of Moscow in June 1991 and who had threatened to resign in December 1991, resigned on June 5, saying that he wished to devote himself to leading the Russian Movement for Democratic Reforms (an offshoot of the Movement for Democratic Reforms).
A pro-Yeltsin group established on June 6, the People's Patriotic Party of Russia, was based on the Union of Afghan Veterans (soldiers in the Afghan war 1979-1989) and chaired by Aleksandr Kotenev, leader of the Union of Afghan Veterans and Russian government adviser on links with informal organizations.
The constituent congress of the opposition "Civic Union" was held on June 21.
The main participants were the People's Party of Free Russia led by Rutskoi, the Democratic Party of Russia (which thus withdrew support from the government) and the Union of Renewal (based on the Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs).
New Moscow mayor
The appointment of Popov's former deputy Yury Luzhkov as mayor of Moscow was approved by President Boris Yeltsin on June 6.
Despite a Moscow City Soviet vote of no confidence in Luzhkov, reported on June 25, the new mayor and the city government remained in post.
Opposition demonstrations
On June 22, OMON (special Interior Ministry forces) and militia numbering 10,000 dispersed a mass "anti-fascist rally" at the Ostankino television centre in Moscow and in the city centre.
Thirteen police were injured and 14 demonstrators arrested, of whom two were injured.
On June 20 the area outside the television centre had been declared by the demonstrators to be the "inviolable territory of the USSR" .
Demonstrators said to number between 15,000 and 50,000 from nationalist and neo-communist groups had begun a protest outside the "Ostankino" on June 11, demanding access to air-time.
The demonstrations continued intermittently for some 10 days.
Marked by anti-Semitic slogans, they became an anti-government rally, provoking the Moscow City government on June 16 into warning that the demonstration was illegal.
The demonstration's organizers had called for a mass "anti-fascist" rally on June 22 (the anniversary of the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union in the Second World War).
Following the demonstration's dispersal, the nationalist Sovietskaya Rossiya newspaper was cautioned by Press and Mass Media Minister Nikolai Poltoranin for "disseminating false information" by reporting as fact the rumours of fatalities among the demonstrators.
The Interfax news agency reported demonstrations in St Petersburg on June 22 over access to television broadcasting.
A 7,000-strong demonstration, organized by pro-reform groups, was held on June 29 at the Ostankino centre.
The rally's organizers claimed that the recent demonstrations by "red-brown" forces had attempted to destabilize the country in order to influence the forthcoming decision of the Constitutional Court on the Communist Party [see p. 38923].
Amnesty
On June 18 the Supreme Soviet approved an amnesty for 20,000 prisoners including women, the handicapped, the elderly, teenagers, war veterans and men nearing the end of short sentences.
An additional 40,000 male prisoners had their sentences reduced.
Formation of Ingush Republic — Border controls
The Supreme Soviet passed a law on June 4 "on the formation of the Ingush Republic (part of Chechen-Ingushetia) within the Russian Federation" .
The split of Chechen-Ingushetia had been forced by Chechnia's November 1991 secession declaration and refusal to sign the Russian Federation Treaty.
A transitional period to establish the new republic would last until March 1994.
Ingushetia's governing bodies would provisionally be appointed by the Russian leadership.
Russian troops completed their withdrawal from the Chechen Republic on June 8.
On June 16 Chechnia announced the first intake of soldiers into its army.
Strengthening of border controls
On June 2 Yeltsin announced an immediate strengthening of Russia's borders with other Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) member states.
Formal border controls with Azerbaijan, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Ukraine and a customs border with Georgia would be established.
Izvestiya of June 6 explained that the introduction of visa-free regimes in some CIS states was allowing "criminals and even spies" to enter Russia because of transparent ex-Soviet internal borders [for customs services agreement see p. 38874; for collective security agreement seep. 38922].
Russian Frontier Troops were formed within the Security Ministry on June 25, under Gen. V. Shlyakhtin.
Of the CIS countries, Azerbaijan, Moldova and Ukraine had decided to establish border troops.
EUROPE
UKRAINE
Economy
On June 18, the Supreme Soviet finally adopted the state budget for 1992, which had been prepared with IMF and World Bank advice, having returned it four times to the budgetary commission for redrafting.
According to the Iszvestiya report of June 19 the deficit would stand at 27,000 million roubles and would thus be within the limit set by the IMF.
The sum delimited for military spending, 108,000 million roubles, equalled that set aside for social security.
The budgetary commission noted that the budget was not adequate to complete the necessary economic restructuring.
Price controls on dairy products were lifted on June 11.
Prime Minister Vitold Fokin had come under criticism for the slow pace of economic reforms, but survived on June 3, by 168 votes to 154, a motion calling for a vote of no confidence (brought by the Republican Party and the New Ukraine deputies, consisting of the Democratic Renewal Party, Social Democrats and other groups).
A suggestion from Rukh, that President Leonid Kravchuk should subordinate the government directly to himself, was dismissed.
Izvestiya of June 18 reported that the Supreme Soviet was being picketed by protesters demanding the government's resignation and early elections.
Kravchuk's visit to France
President Kravchuk paid an official visit to France on June 16-17, accompanied by his Foreign Affairs, Defence and Finance Ministers and other officials.
A treaty on mutual understanding and co-operation was signed with French President François Mitterrand.
At the signing ceremony, Kravchuk endorsed the arms reduction treaty between Russia and the USA, but emphasised that while Ukraine intended to become a non-nuclear power, the summit treaties applied to Russia alone and Ukraine would be an independent party to any treaties stemming from former USA-Soviet Union agreements.
Kravchuk formally signed the November 1990 Paris Charter of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) on June 16.
Expulsion of non-Ukrainian officers
It was reported on June 6 that Ukrainian Defence Minister Col.-Gen.
Konstantin Morozov had ordered the transfer out of the country of some 6,000 officers who refused to take an oath of loyalty to Ukraine.
Their relocation costs would be paid in full.
According to Radio Ukraine, 3,500 officers not taking the oath had already voluntarily left the service and settled in Ukraine.
In a speech to the Congress of Ukrainian Officers, Morozov announced that Ukrainian servicemen in so-called CIS "flashpoints" would return rapidly, and all others would return to Ukraine within three years.
Crimea
On June 2 the Ukrainian parliament issued a statement rejecting Russia's May 21 Supreme Soviet vote annulling the 1954 decree transferring the Crimea from Russia to Ukraine [see pp. 38924-25].
The statement said that the "status and fate of the Crimea as a component part of Ukraine cannot be the subject of any interstate negotiations" .
Ukraine's 1992 budget [see above]reserved 7,216,800,000 roubles for financing the return to the Crimea of exiled ethnic groups (Armenians, Germans, Greeks, Bulgarians, and, mainly, Tatars) to Crimea.
Rival demonstrations were held in Simferopol by the Crimea Republican Movement (RDK), calling for Crimean independence, and by the Crimean Tatar bodies —the Organization of Crimean Tatar National Movement and the Majlis —protesting against allegedly unrepresentative Crimean autonomy.
On June 30 the Ukrainian parliament passed, by 264 votes to four, the amendments to the Ukrainian law on the status of the Crimea as proposed by joint sittings of the presidiums of the Ukrainian and Crimean parliaments.
The proposals included Crimean economic autonomy, and re-phrased the citizenship provision as: "each citizen of the Republic of Crimea is simultaneously a citizen of Ukraine" .
The proposals had still to be approved by the Crimean parliament itself.
EUROPE
ARMENIA-AZERBAIJAN
Continued fighting over Nagorny Karabakh and Nakhichevan
Azerbaijan launched a counteroffensive on June 12 to reverse recent setbacks which had given Armenia control of the enclave of Nagorny Karabakh.
The town of Mardakert, in the north-eastern part of the enclave, came under attack and Azerbaijani forces took about 15 villages in the region.
Observers suggested that Azerbaijan's military action was taking on renewed force following the victory of nationalist leader Abulfez Elchibey in presidential elections [see p. 38976].
Armenia alleged that Azerbaijan was trying to open a corridor to the Azeri-populated Autonomous Region of Nakhichevan through Armenian territory.
Shelling had been reported on both sides in early June and Azerbaijan claimed numerous Armenian attacks on Nakhichevan and the border regions.
Withdrawal of ex-Soviet troops — Armenian call-up
Ex-Soviet troops now under Russian control [see p. 38825]began withdrawing from Armenia and Azerbaijan in June.
The 7th Army withdrew under an agreement negotiated between Russia and Armenia, and the 4th Army Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) troops in Azerbaijan were also being withdrawn, but there were accusations of their equipment being stolen for use by Azerbaijan in the Nagorny Karabakh conflict.
On June 18 it was reported that Armenia had called up reservists aged under 35, and a one-month state of emergency was declared in Nagorny Karabakh.
Lack of progress in peace negotiations
The Rome commission on Nagorny Karabakh, set up under the March 1992 decision of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE)[see p. 38828], met during June as a preliminary to an intended peace conference in Minsk, but the Minsk conference itself failed to convene.
Nagorny Karabakh leaders boycotted the meeting of the Rome commission (which included representatives from Armenia, Azerbaijan, Byelarus, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Italy, Russia, Sweden, Turkey and the USA), having been invited to attend as observers.
A planned bilateral meeting between Defence Ministers in Kazakh (Azerbaijan) on June 17 did not take place, and at the Istanbul summit of Black Sea states [see p. 38980]the Presidents refused to hold bilateral negotiations.
Turkish attitude
Turkey insisted that improved bilateral relations with Armenia depended on peace in Nagorny Karabakh and Nakhichevan.
Turkey's Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel arrived in Nakhichevan on May 28 to attend the opening of a bridge between Azerbaijan and Turkey over the river Arax.
Geydar Aliyev, leader of Nakhichevan, who had visited Turkey at the beginning of June, announced on June 15 that Turkey would provide "general assistance" for Nakhichevan.
Construction of a power station and a power line from Turkey to Nakhichevan, a particular priority in view of the Armenian blockade on energy supplies, began on June 15.
Revival of Kurdish state — Call for Lezghin state
The founding assembly of the Kurdish Liberation Movement, meeting in Lachin on June 9 with other Kurdish ex-Soviet informal organizations, announced the revival of the Kurdish state, with the former Kurdish capital of Lachin as its capital.
An autonomous Kurdish region had existed from 1923 to 1929 in the area extending west of Nagorny Karabakh up to the Armenia-Azerbaijan border.
Soviet Kurds numbered 152,952 according to the 1989 census, although this figure was believed to be substantially underestimated.
There were reports on June 26 that the Lezghin population of Daghestan (Russia) and northern Azerbaijan was threatening civil disobedience to obtain its demand for the creation of a unified Lezghin state.
On June 27, during talks in Makhachkala on the Caspian Sea [see map on p. 38925]with the leadership of Daghestan and the Lezghin national organization, Azerbaijani President Elchibey assured that efforts would be made to meet the "cultural and other needs" of the estimated 100,000 Azerbaijani Lezghin population.
EUROPE
ARMENIA
Privatization legislation
The Russian Information Agency reported on June 11 that the Armenian parliament had adopted a law on privatization and denationalization of enterprises.
The Armenian Economy Ministry, according to a June 12 report from the news agency Postfactum, believed that there were 42 active "financial groups" in the republic waiting for privatization to begin.
Armenia's plans to introduce its own currency were completing their preparatory phase, according to Vice-President and head of the government Gagik Arutyunyan on June 6.
The new currency, the dram, would be divided into 100 luma.
The reversal of military gains made against Azerbaijan in Nagorno Karabakh and Nakhichevan during May [see pp. 38925; 38975]apparently encouraged a growth in support for the Armenian Revolutionary Federation (ARF or Dashnaksutyun), which held its 25th meeting on June 30.
Founded in 1890, the ARF had ruled Armenia from 1918 to 1920, but had latterly comprised only some 40,000 members, mainly of the countries of the Armenian diaspora.
On June 29, President Levon Ter-Petrosyan accused the ARF of having co-operated with the KGB (the former Soviet state security service) and of being directed from abroad.
He ordered the expulsion of ARF leader Khrayr Marukhyan, a Greek citizen recently arrived in Armenia.
EUROPE
AZERBAIJAN
Presidential elections
Abulfez Elchibey, leader of the Azerbaijani Popular Front, was sworn in as President on June 16, after receiving 59.4 per cent of the vote in a 76 per cent turnout in elections on June 7; there were five candidates in all.
The elections had been called after the resignation in March of Ayaz Mutalibov, when an intense power struggle had ensued [see pp. 38827; 38877; 38925-26].
Elchibey was equivocal on Azerbaijan's continued membership of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), which had never been ratified by the Supreme Soviet.
EUROPE
MOLDOVA
Intensified conflict with "Dnestr Republic" 
In a speech to parliament on June 22, Moldovan President Mircea Snegur declared that "we are at war with Russia" .
On June 20 Russian Vice-President Aleksandr Rutskoi had said that Russia would not allow conflict in the "Dnestr Republic" (and in South Ossetia in Georgia) to be resolved by force.
The ex-Soviet 14th Army, subordinated to Russia and stationed in the disputed Dnestr region [see shaded area on map], was reportedly becoming increasingly involved at this time in the conflict alongside Dnestr separatist forces around Bendery [see below].
On June 3 Russian Defence Minister Gen. Pavel Grachev had threatened not to maintain military neutrality if Moldova were to begin combat actions against the 14th Army.
The Russian Federation Security Council meeting on the same day expressed concern over arms deliveries from Romania to Moldova (although on May 31 the Moldovan Foreign Ministry had denied Gen. Grachev's claims that Romania was supplying Moldova with tanks, claiming that only pontoon bridges and trucks were donated).
Negotiations on June 2 in Moscow between the Russian and Moldovan Foreign Ministers agreed to establish working groups for a negotiated settlement.
The Ukrainian and Moldovan Foreign Ministers met on June 4 in Kiev.
Conciliation commission meetings between Moldovan and Dnestr representatives had little success, however, with the Dnestr parliament on June 17 rejecting proposals on implementing a ceasefire (which had been supported by the Moldovan parliament on June 9).
Despite Russian statements in May that the 14th Army would withdraw, senior Russian military figures described this as impossible.
(Maj.-Gen.
Aleksandr Lebed, whose appointment as the new 14th Army commander was reported on June 28, announced at a press conference a policy of "armed neutrality" for the troops under his command.)
Fighting in Bendery
The town of Bendery was taken by Moldovan forces on June 20 but recaptured by Dnestr separatists the following day.
The Moldovan Defence Ministry claimed that army units had entered the town to defend Moldovan police from attack by Dnestr forces backed by the 14th Army, and denied the 1,000 deaths claimed by Dnestr sources.
A Moscow television correspondent in Bendery reported that 14th Army officers had entered the town to defend military bases, and that volunteer defenders managed to defeat the Moldovan forces with the help of a Cossack division.
Moldovan sources denied carrying out air-raids on the town on June 22.
Despite a ceasefire agreement between Moldovan, Russian and Romanian heads of state, fighting continued on June 23.
Internal issues
The Moldovan parliament convened on June 9, attended by some deputies from Dnestr.
Snegur announced the resignation of all except four of the government, the Security, Defence and Interior ministers being three of those staying on.
Despite initial confusion over whether Snegur would accept the resignations, on July 1 185 out of 244 deputies voted to appoint former Agriculture Minister, Andrei Sangheli, as Prime Minister.
Snegur decreed on June 10 that the National Security Ministry would assume responsibility for Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) border guards with immediate effect, thus anticipating the July 1 deadline after which CIS responsibility for external borders would devolve to states which had not signed the May CIS agreement on border troops [see p. 38922].
Black Sea Summit
At the Black Sea Summit on June 25 [see p. 38980], after the first presidential negotiations on the Dnestr issue between Moldova, Russia, Ukraine and Romania, a communiqué called for an immediate ceasefire.
Russia and Moldova agreed to talks on the withdrawal of the 14th Army.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Maxwell and BCCI fraud cases
On June 8 the government announced measures to assist those whose pensions were threatened by the collapse of the Maxwell media empire following the sudden death of Robert Maxwell in November 1991 [see pp. 38588; 38688].
Most significantly, temporary emergency grants totalling £2,500,000 were made available to assist pension schemes unable to maintain pension payments.
One major Maxwell company, Mirror Group Newspapers (MGN), had agreed to meet liabilities towards its 15,000 pensioners and employee members, but the position of pensioners in other Maxwell concerns was not secure; a number of these concerns had made no payments, or had made only reduced payments, to pensioners in recent months.
In a House of Commons debate on June 9 the opposition Labour Party argued that the government was responsible for the plight of Maxwell pensioners insofar as the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) had given an investment licence to two companies which Maxwell had used as a conduit for pension money and because there were flaws in the existing supervisory system.
(The House of Commons social security select committee report published on March 9 had strongly criticized supervision of pension funds by various regulatory bodies including the Investment Management Regulatory Organization (IMRO), whose chair George Nissen resigned on June 29.)
On June 18 Kevin and Ian Maxwell, two of Maxwell's sons, were arrested along with Larry Trachtenberg, a former director of Bishopsgate Investment Management, a key Maxwell company.
The three, all released on bail the same day, faced charges of conspiring (shortly after Maxwell's death) to defraud the Swiss Volksbank of $35,500,000 by falsely representing the Robert Maxwell Group as holding shares in Berlitz International.
Kevin Maxwell also faced two charges of stealing £6,939,885.46 worth of securities from Mirror Group Pension Trustees and 1,000,000 Berlitz International shares from the US Macmillan publishing company.
Kevin Maxwell and Trachtenberg also faced a charge of trying to defraud the Swiss Bank Corporation of $55,783,466.76 and four charges of stealing a total of nearly £37,000,000 in securities from the pension trustees of the Mirror Group or of the Maxwell-controlled AGB company.
BCCI settlement
On June 12 the High Court in London upheld a settlement in the case of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI) which had collapsed in July 1991 [see pp. 38355; 38545].
The settlement agreement, initialled in February, provided for payments of up to US$1,700 million from the Abu Dhabi majority shareholders [see p. 38781].
By the end of May around 15,000 former BCCI depositors had applied for compensation to the UK's Deposit Protection Board.
On March 11 a report by the House of Commons treasury and civil service select committee had criticized the Bank of England's regulatory role in supervising BCCI.
Imran Iman, a former BCCI manager, had been arrested on March 20 and charged with conspiring to account falsely for $179,400,000.
Nazmu Virani, chair and chief executive of the property concern Control Securities, was arrested on March 30 and charged with conspiring to present false accounts to the value of $4,000,000 in 1984-85 to BCCI's auditors, Price Waterhouse.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Abortion legislation
Early on June 26, after a 14-hour debate, the Bundestag (lower house of parliament) approved abortion legislation applicable to the whole country.
Women would have the right to an abortion during the first 12 weeks of their pregnancy as long as they had first received non-binding counselling.
The Bundesrat (upper house) gave its approval on July 10.
MPs were allowed a free vote on the issue.
Various proposals had been put forward by different groups, often across party lines.
The proposal eventually passed (with 357 votes in favour) was supported by the liberal Free Democrats (FDP), the opposition Social Democrats (SPD) and a minority of the Christian Democrats (CDU) led by Rita Süssmuth, the CDU president (Speaker) of the Bundestag.
There were 284 votes in favour of an alternative proposal, put forward by members of the CDU and Christian Social Union (CSU), under which the decision would rest with the physician and only "medical and psycho-social reasons" would be acceptable grounds for abortion.
East and West Germany had been unable to agree on the issue of abortion before unification in 1990.
In the east, women could have free abortion on demand during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy.
In the west, a woman could only have an abortion if this were approved by a doctor on medical, genetic or psychological grounds.
The unification treaty provided for existing arrangements to continue to apply and required parliament to agree on uniform legislation by the end of 1992 [see pp. 37661; 37833].
During 1991, 32 per cent of pregnancies in the east ended in abortions, compared with 9 per cent in the west.
Bundesbank reform
On June 17 the Bundestag gave final approval to controversial legislation reforming the structure of the federal banking system.
Some "Land central banks" were to be combined, to reduce the number from 11 to nine (rather than increasing the number to 16 on the basis of one per Land).
There would thus now be nine Land seats on the Bundesbank central council, and eight full-time directors.
The Bundesrat had opposed the reform, referring it to a conciliation commission of both houses of parliament in April, but lacked the necessary two-thirds majority to block the bill again in early June.
Baden-Württemberg government
Erwin Teufel (CDU), the outgoing Minister President of Baden-Württemberg, was sworn in on June 11 at the head of a "grand coalition" of the CDU and SPD following the Land elections in April [see pp. 38871-72].
Aid to former East German shipyards
On June 17 European Community (EC) industry ministers approved proposals allowing the German government to subsidize eastern German shipbuilding yards until December 1993 by up to 36 per cent of estimated turnover after restructuring (the usual EC maximum being 9 per cent).
Shipbuilding capacity would have to be cut by 40 per cent before the end of 1995.
[For March 1992 protests at shipyard privatizations see p. 38822.]
Acquittal of former border guards
On June 22 a Berlin court acquitted four former East German border guards accused of attempting to kill a man who had been shot and wounded when trying to escape over the Berlin Wall in 1971.
[For two previous border guard trials see pp. 38782; 38736-37.]
RAF sentences
Sigrid Sternebeck Friedrich was sentenced by a Stuttgart state court on June 22 to 8<1/2 years' imprisonment for taking part in the 1977 abduction and murder of German businessman Hanns-Martin Schleyer and the 1979 attempted assassination of Gen. Alexander Haig, the then NATO Supreme Allied Commander Europe.
Her husband, Ralf Friedrich, was convicted of participating in the attack on Haig, and given a 6 1/2-year sentence.
Both were former members of the left-wing extremist Red Army Faction (RAF).
Lifting of Turkey arms embargo
On June 3 the Bundestag foreign affairs committee approved the lifting of the embargo on arms deliveries to Turkey, imposed in March 1992 after Turkish military action against Kurds in south-east Turkey [see p. 38822].
EUROPE
FRANCE
Defeat of no confidence vote
Prime Minister Pierre Bérégovoy narrowly defeated a no confidence vote in the National Assembly on June 1, in which 25 deputies of the French Communist Party (PCF) abandoned their passive support for the ruling Socialist Party (PS) to join the opposition parties tabling the motion —the Gaullist Rally for the Republic (RPR) and the centrist Union for French Democracy (UDF).
The motion, which fell three votes short of the necessary 289 votes, was proposed by Philippe Vasseur (UDF) in protest against the government's support for reform of the European Communities' common agricultural policy [see p. 38931].
New MRG leader
The Mouvement des radicaux de gauche (MRG —Left Radical Movement) at a congress in Lyon on June 13-14 elected Jean-Francois Hory as its president by 505 votes to 230 to succeed Emile Zuccarelli, appointed Minister for Posts and Telecommunications in the new government in April [see p. 38870].
Zuccarelli had served as MRG president since Nov. 21, 1989.
Resignation of Léotard
Francois Léotard resigned from his posts as National Assembly deputy, mayor of Fréjus and honorary president of the Republican Party on June 29, charged with corruption by a Lyon court for under-paying the value of a house.
Opening of HIV-infected blood trial
The trial of four former senior Health Service officials over the alleged use of HIV-infected blood in transfusions opened on June 22.
Michel Garretta and Jean-Pierre Allain were charged under fraud laws for "misrepresenting the quality of a product" .
Jacques Roux and Robert Netter were accused of "non-assistance to persons in danger" .
About 1,300 haemophiliacs were believed to have been infected by the HIV virus from transfusions of contaminated blood in 1985.
Charges against the officials, who, if found guilty, faced prison terms of up to five years, were brought on behalf of 27 affected haemophiliacs, some of whom had already died from AIDS.
Roux, Garretta and Netter were charged in October 1991 [see p. 38544].
The prosecution alleged that the defendants had knowingly allowed contaminated stocks of blood to be exhausted before the government introduced the mandatory use of heated products to eliminate the HIV virus from Oct. 1, 1985.
On June 18, a Senate commission of inquiry issued its report on the transfusion system, noting delay in implementing a screening process, a fragmented decision-making process and a system in which "the logic of industry allowed the professional code of ethics to be disregarded" .
Sentencing of "Carlos" 
The Paris court of assizes on June 1 condemned Illich Rámirez-Sánchez, alias "Carlos the Jackal" , to life imprisonment for the murder of two counterespionage officers from the DST (Direction de la surveillance du territoire) and the attempted murder of a third.
Rámirez-Sánchez, tried in absentia, had evaded capture since the murders in Paris on June 27, 1975.
The agents had been investigating two terrorist attacks on the Israeli airline, El Al, at Orly airport.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Appointment of Foreign Minister
The resignation on account of long-term health problems of Foreign Minister Francisco Fernández Ordoñez, 62, was formally announced on June 12.
He was succeeded on June 22 by Javier Solana Madariaga, 50, who had been Minister of Education and Science since 1988 and was regarded as a close associate of Prime Minister Felipe González.
Solana, a physicist, was from 1982-88 Minister of Culture, and from 1985 also official government spokesperson.
He was replaced as Minister of Education by Alfredo Perez Rubalcaba, hitherto secretary of state for education.
EUROPE
ITALY
New Italian Cabinet
Appointment of Amato as Prime Minister — New Cabinet
Giuliano Amato of the Socialist Unity Party (still generally referred to as the PSI) became Prime Minister on June 18, and a new 25-member government was appointed on June 28 —Italy's 51st administration since 1945.
The PSI leader Bettino Craxi, whose reputation had suffered indirectly from corruption scandals in Milan [see p. 38896], had announced on June 17 that he was no longer presenting himself as a candidate for Prime Minister, but had given President Oscar Scalfaro a list of three PSI candidates —Amato, outgoing Foreign Minister Gianni De Michelis, and outgoing Deputy Prime Minister and Justice Minister Claudio Martelli.
Amato, 54, was a professor of constitutional law, originally from Turin.
Nicknamed the Dottore sottile ( "subtle doctor" ), he had become reconciled in the 1980s with Craxi, whom he had previously criticized for what he regarded as his autocratic attitudes.
Amato first held government office in the government formed by Craxi in 1983, and was Treasury Minister in 1987-89.
In May 1992 he succeeded Craxi's son Bobo Craxi as secretary of the local PSI federation in Milan [see p. 38896]after the revelations of corruption there.
Amato, having been invited by Scalfaro to try to form a government, took on June 24 the unusual step of presenting a document to the 16 parties in parliament which outlined his proposed government policy.
It included measures aimed at reducing the public-sector deficit and the numbers of employees in the state sector, and steps to improve the functioning of local government.
The leader of the Republican Party (PRI), Giorgio La Malfa, had said on June 23 that his party might support government reforms on a case-by-case basis.
On June 25 the leadership of the Democratic Party of the Left (PDS), the former communist party, voted unanimously not to join the governing coalition.
A PDS statement said that Amato's draft programme did not go far enough towards creating a "government of innovation" and did not give sufficient weight to the elimination of corrupt practices.
Amato's coalition government in the end comprised the same four parties as the outgoing one.
Since the April 1992 elections [see p. 38869]these parties together commanded a slim majority of 16, with 331 seats in the new Chamber of Deputies.
Amato's Cabinet was predominantly composed of members of the PSI and the Christian Democrat (DC) party, with some posts going to the Social Democrats (PSDI) and the Liberals (PLI).
The number of ministries had been slimmed down from 32 to 24 and a number of non-party "technicians" were included.
Election of new Speaker — Resignation of PDS leader
A PDS deputy, Giorgio Napolitano, was elected as Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies on June 3 —an important preliminary to the appointment of a Prime Minister and a new government.
Napolitano replaced Scalfaro, who had served briefly as Speaker before his election as President on May 25.
In addition to the votes of PDS deputies, Napolitano had also secured the votes of deputies from all four parties which were subsequently included in the government.
The appointment of a PDS member was interpreted as creating a balance between the three leading parties —a DC President, a Prime Minister from the PSI and a PDS Speaker.
On June 2 Stefano Rodota, president of the PDS and former Deputy Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies, resigned from both posts after he was unsuccessful in the first four ballots for Speaker.
The PSI deputies had declared that Rodota would not receive their votes.
Anti-Mafia legislation and arrests
On June 8-9 some 1,300 suspected mafiosi were arrested in Sicily, Campania, Calabria and Puglia in the south of Italy, A few hours after the adoption by the outgoing government of a comprehensive plan to combat the activities of the Sicilian Mafia and other criminal organizations.
Most of those arrested were reported to have been previously convicted of drug and arms trafficking and violent crimes.
The new government plan included a system of protection for witnesses turning state evidence, a toughening of bail conditions, and provisions for the police to hold suspects for up to 48 hours without charge and to suspend for 12 months any financial operation suspected of involving Mafia assets.
Rules limiting the use of evidence in trials were eased for cases in which the defendants were suspected members of organized criminal gangs.
The measures attracted criticism from the National Magistrates' Association which on June 12 issued a document arguing that a more wide-ranging "cleaning-up of politics and the administration" was needed.
The PDS had meanwhile argued for the importance of blocking the Mafia's international business dealings and networks for the recycling of profits from commerce in drugs.
On June 27 some 50,000 Sicilians and other Italians protesting against the activities of the Mafia joined a march through Palermo to commemorate Judge Giovanni Falcone [For whose assassination in May see p. 38895-96].
Trade unionist and the Cardinal Archbishop of Palermo addressed the rally.
Investigation of Prandini
The Minister for Public Works in the outgoing government, Giovanni Prandini, a Christian Democrat, was on June 12 warned by Rome magistrates that he was under investigation in connection with the allocation of public funds for the construction of a motorway in the Puglian province of Táranto.
He was the second outgoing minister to come under investigation for corruption [for investigation of outgoing Tourism Minister Carlo Tognoli see p. 38896].
PCI funding by CPSU
The Russian Procurator General, Gen. G. V. Stepankov, arrived in Rome on June 17 with documents which were said to prove that the former Communist Party of the Soviet Union had, by drawing on the state budget, funded the former Italian Communist Party (PCI-renamed the PDS) as late as 1987.
Reports of the funding, which had been illicit according to the law of the former Soviet Union, had begun to emerge in recent months, and the Russian government hoped that some of the money might be recoverable.
The Russian media reported on June 20 that it had been agreed by Presidents Cossiga and Yeltsin in December 1991 that Soviet documents relating to financial relations between the CPSU and the PCI should be made available to the Italian law enforcement bodies.
Settlement of South Tyrol question
Differences between Austria and Italy were formally resolved on June 19 over the status of the German-speaking minority (and the small minority speaking the Romansch dialect of Ladin) in the Italian autonomous region of Trentino-Alto Adige.
The Austrian and Italian permanent representatives at the UN deposited documents with the UN declaring that they considered the issue closed.
Austria had ceded the South Tyrol (i.e. the province of Bolzano in Trentino-Alto Adige) to Italy in 1919.
An Austro-Italian agreement of 1946 was designed to protect the position of the German-speaking minority [see pp. 8159; 8467].
A 1969 agreement provided for the region's increased autonomy [see pp. 23845-48]; in May 1988 an autonomy package was approved by the Italian government [see p. 35989]and in January 1992 Giulio Andreotti, the then Prime Minister, announced that the whole "package" of 137 measures had finally been implemented.
On May 30 a special congress of the South Tyrol People's Party (SVP), representing the German-speaking minority, accepted the "package" and on June 5 the members of the Austrian Nationalrat (lower house of parliament) except for the right-wing Austrian Freedom Party (FPÖ) also accepted the agreement.
EUROPE
GREECE
Amnesty report
The Minister of Public Order Theodore Anagnostopoulos repudiated allegations of human rights abuses contained in a report published by the human rights organization Amnesty International on June 23.
The Amnesty report detailed 35 cases of torture of detainees in police stations and prisons since 1986 and claimed that the practice was tolerated by magistrates.
Anagnostopoulos announced on July 1 that a speedy investigation into the allegations had been completed and had found most of them to be completely unfounded.
He said that one police officer found guilty of abuses had been discharged, three had been punished and five were under investigation.
Student arrests
Five members of a small left-wing organization, the OSE, were committed for trial in early June under the treason section of the penal code, on charges of inciting citizens to discord and exposing Greece's foreign relations to risk.
The five had distributed material arguing for recognition of a Macedonian nation and language, and they faced sentences of up to five years.
In January and May 1992, 10 other leftists had received sentences of up to 19 months for similar activities.
The conviction of four students in May had prompted a protest by 169 prominent intellectuals.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Renewal of state of emergency
As a high level of violence continued in the south, the National Security Council (NSC) on June 23 renewed for a further four months from July 19 the state of emergency in force since 1987 in certain areas of the south (subject to formal approval by the National Assembly).
The state of emergency covered the provinces of Batman, Bingol, Diyarbakir, Elazig, Hakkari, Mardin, Siirt, Sirnak, Tunceli and Van.
The NSC lifted, however, those state of emergency provisions which had banned the publication and distribution of newspapers and the entry into the region of "persons or groups that may appear potentially disruptive to the public" [see also pp. 38593; 38834].
The State of Emergency Governor for the south-eastern region, Unal Erkan, told other regional governors meeting in Batman on June 17 that in the last 40 days 60 soldiers and some 180 civilians had been killed in clashes.
By June 23 a further 44 people had been killed.
Erkan said it was planned to employ 2,000 local people in pro-government militias or as "village guards" .
Interior Minister Ismet Sezgin said on June 15 that 6,796 members of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) had been "captured alive" in the previous seven months.
Protest by Iran
The Iranian government demanded compensation from Turkey, alleging negligence on the part of its security forces, after a six-year-old Iranian boy was killed, and six Iranians wounded, by PKK guerrillas who attacked a train in Mus province, eastern Turkey, on June 11.
Meanwhile in the dispute with Iran over the ship Cape Maleas and its cargo of arms, the Court of Appeal in Ankara on June 3 overturned an earlier decision by the Istanbul State Security Court which had authorized the seizure of the ship and the confiscation of its cargo [see pp. 38740; 38834].
Formation of new Kurdish party
On June 25 a number of Kurdish deputies announced that they had formed the Freedom and Labour Party (OZEP).
Its leader, Mahmut Alinak, who in May had resigned from the Social Democratic Populist Party (SHP —the junior party in the governing coalition) said that he hoped that the OZEP would absorb the former Kurdish nationalist People's Labour Party (HEP).
Eighteen of the 22 former HEP members elected to parliament in October 1991 joined the OZEP, leaving the SHP with 70 seats [compared with 88 following the October general election —see also pp. 38739; 38873; 38930].
Local elections
In local elections held on June 7-8 in 341 municipalities throughout the country the two partners in the ruling coalition, the True Path Party (DYP) and the Social Democratic Populist Party (SHP), won 35 and 23 per cent of the vote respectively (their combined total having been only 47 per cent in the October 1992 general election).
Extension of allied forces' mandate
On June 26 the National Assembly approved the extension for six months from June 30 of the mandate for French, United Kingdom and US aircraft to operate from Incirlik near Adana and the Mediterranean coast of southern Turkey.
The extension was unsuccessfully opposed in parliament by deputies both to the left and right of the ruling coalition.
The international operation, which involved overflights of Iraqi territory, was referred to variously as operation "Poised Hammer" or "Provide Comfort" [see also pp. 38690; 38789; 38886].
On June 25 the Foreign Ministry announced that the USA would withdraw its military personnel from a joint US-Turkish base near the Black Sea town of Sinop by the end of 1993.
EUROPE
CYPRUS
Meeting between Vassiliou and Denktash
In a series of talks in New York on June 18-23 the UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali and representatives of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council met separately with the President of Cyprus Georgios Vassiliou and with the president of the self-proclaimed Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, Rauf Denktash.
The talks culminated on June 23 with a brief "courtesy" meeting between Vassiliou and Denktash in Boutros-Ghali's office.
The two had not met since the breakdown of the UN-sponsored talks in New York in March 1990 [see p. 37331].
Talks were to resume on July 15.
Vassiliou told Cyprus' National Council (the senior Greek Cypriot advisory body, which included leaders of the four main parties) on June 29 that Boutros-Ghali had used in the discussions an "informal map" , showing possible territorial allocations within a bizonal state.
He said that the map put Famagusta and the area of Morphou within the Greek Cypriot zone.
Extension of UN mandate
On June 12 the UN Security Council renewed for a further six months, until Dec. 15, 1992, the mandate of the UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP).
It also asked Boutros-Ghali to formulate by Sept. 1 concrete proposals for an eventual reduction in the number of UN troops stationed there.
The force, which dated from 1964 and was consolidated in 1974, currently numbered 2,141 personnel from eight countries (Australia, Austria, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Sweden and the United Kingdom; of these Australia, Canada, Denmark and the UK contributed troops).
On March 10 Boutros-Ghali had appealed to all UN member states for voluntary contributions to cover UNFICYP's US$196,000,000 cost; he had pointed out that it was not right that the force should be funded as at present by voluntary contributions from the eight personnel -contributing states [see also p. 38873].
EUROPE
EUROPE
Asylum policy changes
During June several western European countries amended their policies on granting asylum.
In Austria the government introduced from June 1 a distinction between those asking for political asylum and other immigrants.
The processing of asylum applications was to be accelerated.
Those rejected could be expelled from Austria; they could appeal, but without the right to remain pending the outcome of such an appeal.
There were currently some 30,000 asylum seekers in Austria, mostly from eastern Europe.
In 1991, 12.6 per cent of political asylum requests were granted.
In Germany on June 5 the Bundestag (lower house of parliament) approved an asylum bill reducing the investigation period for asylum seekers from an average of nine months to six weeks if applicants were not clearly political refugees.
Asylum seekers would be fingerprinted and would have to remain in "reception centres" until their case was decided.
If their application were turned down they would in future have only one appeal rather than two.
The law, which increased the powers of the federation at the expense of the states, was to come into effect on July 1.
Germany, which took some 60 per cent of all refugees in the European Communities (EC), had received 256,000 applications for political asylum in 1991 [see p.
R108], with a further 156,000 in the first five months of 1992.
In Denmark, the Folketing (parliament) approved tightened existing asylum legislation on June 18.
Refugees were prohibited from bringing their parents to Denmark if there were other offspring in the home country, and were obliged to guarantee to support family members joining them.
Immigrants with residence permits would have to live in Denmark for five years before their spouses could acquire a residence permit.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN DEFENCE COLLABORATION
German withdrawal from EFA project
The German government, citing cost and changed security needs following the end of the Cold War, confirmed on June 30 that it was to withdraw from the multinational European Fighter Aircraft (EFA) project.
The highly sophisticated and expensive fighter was conceived in the late 1980s as a joint project by Germany, the United Kingdom, Italy and Spain [see pp. 33880; 35289; 36106; 36429-30].
It was now criticized as anachronistic, and the German government had signalled for some time its concern over rising costs and their justifiability at a time when German unification put great strains on the public finances [see also pp. 37212; 38508].
The decision to withdraw (despite the implication for jobs in the defence industry) was taken within the context of planned cuts in defence spending of DM20,000 million (US$12,500 million) over the next 12 years.
The United Kingdom government strongly urged reconsideration of the decision, invoking Germany's long-standing commitment to European defence collaboration.
Representatives of the defence industries of the four countries also lobbied for the continuation of the project.
EUROPE
WEU
Agreement on joint force
Defence and foreign ministers of the nine member countries of the Western European Union (WEU), meeting in Bonn, Germany, on June 19, agreed to set up a joint military force which could be deployed for peacekeeping, humanitarian and other missions, including the deployment of "combat forces in crisis management" , in Europe and elsewhere.
The force could be activated in response to requests from the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) or from the UN.
According to the WEU Secretary-General, Willem van Eekelen, as many as 50,000 troops might be assigned to the new force, most of them from existing units, including an Anglo-Dutch amphibious division, a planned multinational North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) division and the recently formed Franco-German corps [see pp. 38931-32].
The decision on the joint force did not end the continuing debate on the future of the WEU.
The United Kingdom in particular regarded the organization as complementary and subsidiary to NATO, and accordingly stressed the strictly peacekeeping functions of the new force.
France, Germany and several other members, stressing its (more active) peacemaking potential, saw this as the first major concrete step towards developing the WEU as the "defence component of the European union" as outlined in the Maastricht treaty [see p. 38658].
EUROPE
BLACK SEA STATES
Istanbul summit
A conference of heads of state of 11 Black Sea countries was held in Istanbul, Turkey, on June 25.
Delegates signed an economic co-operation pact, first discussed at a meeting in February [see p. 38785], which covered energy, transport, communications, the environment, information and the creation of a joint investment bank.
The group comprised Albania (accepted as a founding member), Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Georgia, Greece (hitherto with only observer status), Moldova, Romania, Russia, Turkey and Ukraine; Yugoslavia was not invited to the meeting because of the civil war in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Georgian President Eduard Shevardnadze's call for a permanent secretariat in Istanbul and the creation of regional security bodies was dismissed by Russian and Turkish leaders.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA-GERMANY
On June 26 the German Bundesrat (upper house of parliament) ratified the Czechoslovak-German friendship treaty signed in February, with only Bavarian members voting against; the Bundestag (lower house) had approved the treaty in May [see p. 38777; 38879; 38921].
EUROPE
GEORGIA:
National Guard government troops retook the television centre in Tbilisi on June 24 after a brief occupation by rebel forces (numbering 100-300) who were attempting a coup in favour of deposed President Zviad Gamsakhurdia.
Casualties were put at three deaths and 26 injured.
EUROPE
ICELAND
Vigdís Finnbogadóttir, President since 1980, was returned to office unopposed when no other nominations were received for the presidential election scheduled for June 26; she was to begin her fourth four-year term on Aug. 1, 1992.
EUROPE
LIECHTENSTEIN
In a referendum on the weekend of June 27-28, 56.3 per cent of voters rejected proposals to lower the voting age from 20 to 18 years; the turnout was 36.5 per cent.
EUROPE
WORLD CONGRESS OF TATARS
The first World Congress of Tatars was held in Kazan (Tatarstan) on June 19-21, attended by 1,200 delegates from Tatarstan and the Tatar diaspora.
Negotiations with Russia over Tatarstan's status after the autonomous republic's referendum on sovereignty in March 1992 [see p. 38826]were continuing.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Assassination of Boudiaf
Mohammed Boudiaf, president of the High Committee of State (HCS), was assassinated on June 29 while addressing an audience at the Arts and Culture Club in Annaba, eastern Algeria.
On July 2 another HCS member, Ali Kafi, was named as Boudiaf's replacement following consultations between the HCS and the six-member High Security Council.
Redha Malek, head of the new National Consultative Council since April [see p. 38884], joined the HCS on July 2, restoring its membership to five.
An influential figure in selecting Boudiaf's successor appeared to be Maj.-Gen.
Khaled Nezzar, the Defence Minister and head of the armed forces and a member of both the HCS and the High Security Council [see also p. 38702].
Boudiaf, 73, had become president of the HCS on its creation in January 1992 [for biographical information see p. 38702].
His funeral in Algiers on July 1 was the scene of demonstrations of public grief by a crowd of at least 10,000.
Celebrations planned to commemorate the 30th anniversary of independence, on July 5, were cancelled.
Conflicting official versions of the circumstances of the assassination fed doubts as to where ultimate responsibility lay.
The authorities confirmed that the assassin was a member of a "special intervention unit" which had been charged with Boudiaf's security at the event in Annaba.
Eye-witnesses said that there had been an explosion near the stage where Boudiaf was speaking, at about 11.30 a.m., and another explosion seconds later, from a grenade tossed near the podium.
This provided cover for a uniformed gunman who opened fire with a sub-machine gun, hitting Boudiaf in the back and the head.
A second gunman was reported to have fired into the front row of the audience.
Forty-one people were injured, including the Minister for Mines and Industry, Abdennour Keramane.
Boudiaf had gone to Annaba to promote his new National Patriotic Rally [see below].
Film shown on Algerian television that same evening recorded that he had been speaking for some minutes.
As recorded by British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) monitoring, he had made the observation that we humans have a short life, and tomorrow we are all going to die, but his last words touched on the need for a return to democracyand for Islam to keep pace with modernization: We see the states that have overtaken us: what did they overtake us with?
They overtook us with science, and [sound of explosion]Islam…[burst of gunfire and sound lost].
Some official sources on June 30 said that one gunman had been killed in the exchange of fire but that a second was under interrogation.
The authorities subsequently declared, however, that there had been a single assassin, who had been captured on June 29 but not at the scene of the crime.
He was named on July 4 as Lembarek Boumaraaf, a 26-year-old sub-lieutenant in the special unit.
He was reported to have acted on individual initiative, in expression of his radical Islamic sympathies.
Some speculation in the local press discussed the possibility that the killing was inspired by a so-called political mafiaintersecting both the military and the former ruling party, the National Liberation Front (FLN).
On July 2 a commission of inquiry was announced, composed of six lawyers and human rights activists, including Kamel Rezzak Bara, chairman of the National Human Rights Monitoring Group, and Yousef Fethallah, head of the Algerian League of Human Rights.
Events prior to Boudiaf's assassination — Trial of Madani and Belhadj
The two hardline leaders of the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) Abassi Madani, 61, and Ali Belhadj, 35, went on trial on June 27 in Blida.
The trial was suspended the same day after the 19 defence lawyers walked out, and then postponed until July 12.
The defence lawyers had walked out on the grounds that the trial lacked procedural guarantees, and that the court, as a military one, had no jurisdiction.
They also demanded that foreign observers and journalists be allowed to witness the trial.
[For imprisonment of Madani and Belhadj and subsequent demands for political prisoner status see pp. 38312; 38364; 38456; 38598-99.]
Five other FIS officials were to face charges at the trial, one of them in his absence, for threatening the functioning of the national economy.
On June 26 the military tribunal had announced that it would be seeking two death penalties against Madani for conspiracy against the authority of the state.
Against Belhaj a third death penalty would be sought on charges of kidnapping and torture.
Since March 1992, 26 death sentences against Islamic fundamentalists had already been handed down, including seven delivered by a criminal court in Bouira on June 3 and 4 [see also pp. 38840; 38936].
There were no reports so far of any executions.
Releases of detainees
The government let it be known in late May that it was planning to close the three Saharan detention camps of Reggane, Ain Salah and Ain M'guel, releasing many of those detained for their radical Islamic sympathies, and moving the others further north.
On June 10 the Interior Ministry announced that 2,000 detainees had been recently released, in addition to those released gradually since March.
By late June the total number detained had dropped to 4,214 out of a total of approximately 7,000 detained since January.
A team from the human rights organization Amnesty International (AI) had visited the Saharan camps in April.
On May 26 AI criticized "violations of human rights" , the holding of 6,000 detainees without trial, and the ill-treatment of detainees.
On June 2, in accordance with a decree of Feb. 9, 1992, six regional appeal councils had begun hearings to examine requests for appeals and releases.
All 641 detainees at Bourdj Omar Driss were released by June 8.
The three southernmost camps and at least four other camps on the northern edge of Algeria's Sahara region apparently remained open.
Creation of Patriotic Rally
On June 8 and 22 Boudiaf gave details of a new National Patriotic Rally (Rassemblement Patriotique National) as the foundation on which support for the work of the HCS would be based.
Political parties who chose not to join the Patriotic Rally, he said, could continue to operate "within the framework of the Constitution" .
The Patriotic Rally, he emphasized, would not be a political party itself, still less a new single party to replace the FLN, but the "result of voluntary initiatives from the citizens and the cadres" aimed at "national mobilization under the banner of" Algeria first and foremost "" .
It would work towards the development of a "pluralistic democracy" , a modernized market economy and a solution to problems of unemployment and housing shortages.
Proposal for national unity government
On June 4 Ahmed Ben Bella, a former President of Algeria and leader of the Movement for Democracy in Algerian (MDA), formulated a common position with seven other parties, including the Algerian Movement for Justice and Development (MAJD) led by former Prime Minister Kasdi Merbah and the Party of Algerian Renewal (PRA) led by Noureddine Boukrouh.
This group joined with Hocine Ait Ahmed of the Socialist Forces Front (FFS) in calling for the establishment of a transitional government of national unity and an end to trials before military courts.
By June 6 the FLN secretary-general Abdelhamid Mehri and the leader of the Islamic Hamas party, Shaikh Mahfoud Nahnah, had also aligned themselves with this broad platform, which rejected affiliation to the proposed Patriotic Rally.
Resignation of Education Minister
Education Minister Ali Benmohamed resigned on June 15, one day after the Cabinet had cancelled the science baccalaureat examination throughout the country.
The Cabinet noted that the examination papers appeared to have been deliberately leaked in an attempt to shake the educational system and society at large.
Djilali Liabes, the Minister for Universities and Research, became acting Education Minster on June 16.
Removal of subsidies
On June 20 the government removed most price subsidies, in accordance with the June 1991 agreement with the International Monetary Fund [see p. 38312].
The measure had been postponed since April due to political uncertainties.
Subsidies remained (at reduced levels) only for bread and flour, dried milk and semolina, but price controls remained in effect for all basic commodities [see also p. 38840].
In February 1992 the government had introduced minimal safety-net welfare payments, for which some 7,400,000 people were estimated to be eligible.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
Creation of electoral commissions
King Hassan announced on June 9 the creation of a central electoral commission and provincial commissions which together would ensure the safety of the elections at all their stages, from registration of the electoral lists to the declaration of the results of the vote.
The announcement represented a compromise after weeks of tension between the government and the parliamentary opposition.
The opposition parties [see below]had presented minimum demands for electoral reform, in preparation for the forthcoming referendum on constitutional changes and ensuing legislative elections.
These were planned for later in the year, although dates had yet to be announced.
In a short, unexpected speech the King announced that the central commission would be chaired by a judge and would have an Interior Ministry representative and representatives chosen by each of the eight political parties represented in the Chamber of Representatives.
On the provincial commissions the provincial governor or his deputy would take the place of the Interior Ministry official.
Official funding would be made available for party political broadcasts and electoral rolls were to be updated.
Two laws approved by Parliament on June 4 lowered the minimum age for candidates from 25 to 23 and the voting age from 21 to 20 years.
Opposition deputies had sought to have the minimum voting age lowered to 18 and all of them left the chamber in protest prior to the vote.
Formation of Democratic Bloc
The five main parties of the legal opposition had on May 18 formed a Democratic Bloc, which they emphasized was a unified position on common demands, but not an electoral platform.
The parties were the Istiqlal, the Socialist Union of Popular Forces (USFP), the Party for Progress and Socialism (PPS, communist-inclined), and the Organization for Democratic Popular Action (OADP); the Union Nationale des Forces Populaires (UNFP —led by Abdallah Ibrahim), which had consistently boycotted elections, had also joined this platform.
A "national charter" published by the Democratic Bloc on May 26 listed among its demands fundamental constitutional reform to allow the installation of a "healthy democracy within the framework of a constitutional monarchy" , economic measures to tackle problems such as unemployment, judicial and administrative controls to guarantee transparency in elections, followed by "the formation of a government that is representative of the popular majority" , and freedom for all those detained for "political or trade-union activity" .
The bloc also sought the return of political exiles and the securing of the Saharan provinces (of the Western Sahara) under Moroccan sovereignty.
Sentencing of trade unionist
Driss Laghnimi, regional secretary of the General Union of Moroccan Workers (UGTM) in Sidi Slimane, north-east of Rabat, was jailed on May 18 after being convicted of making insulting remarks in public about King Hassan.
The Istiqlal party described his imprisonment as "a premeditated, repressive and provocative act" .
The Istiqlal and the USFP, together with lawyers and labour leaders, had similarly criticized the sentencing, on April 17, of Noubir al-Amaoui, secretary-general of the Democratic Confederation of Labour (CDT).
Amaoui had been sentenced to two years' imprisonment for defamation of the government in an interview published in El País on March 11 in which he had described members of the government as thieves [see also p. 38888].
Drowning of emigrants
A boat carrying would-be Moroccan illegal emigrants to Spain sank in the Strait of Gibraltar on June 8.
At least four of the Moroccans drowned and 15 were reported missing.
In May at least 20 were reported drowned in a similar incident in heavy seas.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
WESTERN SAHARA
UN Security Council request
On June 3 the UN Security Council asked the UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to present as soon as possible "a new report concerning progress made in the application of the plan" for a referendum on the future of the Western Sahara.
This was interpreted as constituting an indirect rejection of one passage in a report on the Western Sahara presented by Boutros-Ghali at the beginning of June in which the parties were given until Aug. 30 to reach an accord, failing which, it said, the Security Council might look for a different approach.
Indirect talks between the representatives of Morocco and the Polisario Front resumed on June 9-10 in Geneva under UN auspices.
On June 21 the Polisario Front reacted strongly —with a threat of future resumption of hostilities —to an announcement by the Moroccan government that Morocco's forthcoming local and general elections would be held also in the Western Sahara.
It had earlier been expected that the UN referendum there would be held before the Moroccan elections.
The Moroccan Interior Minister Driss Basri declared that the Sahrawi people were part of Morocco and that their inclusion in elections would in no way prejudice the later holding of a referendum on the future of the Western Sahara.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
Cabinet reshuffle
Among seven Cabinet changes announced on June 9 was the appointment of Sadok Chaabane as Minister of Justice.
Chaabane had in June 1991 been appointed "first adviser to the President on human rights" [see p. 38363]and had been responsible for explaining abroad the government's policy towards the Islamic movement and on electoral reform.
Mohammed Ghannouchi, hitherto Finance Minister, was moved to head the new Ministry of International Co-operation and Development.
He was replaced by Nouri Zorgati, who had been Agriculture Minister until 1991.
Closure of human rights league
The Tunisian League of Human Rights (LTDH), which had been founded in 1977, ceased operation in mid-June, having failed to comply with a new law which required that all such associations should open up their membership to members of all political parties and which also banned office-holders in political parties from belonging to such private associations.
The law, adopted in March, came into force on June 13.
The LTDH, under its president Moncef Marzouki, had included members of various opposition parties among its members, especially from the Movement of Social Democrats (MDS).
It had lodged a legal appeal against its dissolution.
[For establishment of government human rights unit see p. 38840].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
Assassination of Fudah
The writer Farag Fudah died on June 8 from gunshot wounds inflicted by two Islamic fundamentalist gunmen who attacked him as he left his office in the Heliopolis, Cairo.
It was the first time that fundamentalists had killed a secularist commentator unconnected with the government.
Fudah's 15-year-old son Ahmed and an assistant were wounded in the attack.
Fudah, 47, was a professor of agriculture who had unsuccessfully stood as a candidate in legislative elections, most recently in 1990.
He had been a member of the New Wafd until 1984, when he had left the party in protest at its electoral alliance with the Moslem Brotherhood.
On May 31 he had urged President Hosni Mubarak to submit to parliament legislation better targeted at combating Islamic fundamentalism than the emergency legislation in force since late 1981.
The assailants made off on motor-cycles, but one of the two was captured and identified as Abd al-Shafi Ramadan, a 25 year-old fishmonger and reportedly a member of a Cairo cell of the al-Jihad organization which had been responsible for the assassination of President Anwar Sadat in 1981 and the killing of the Speaker of the People's Assembly, Rifaat al-Mahgoub, in October 1990.
He was reported to have said that the killing was ordered from prison by a Jihad leader Sawfat Abdel Ghani, who had been convicted of involvement in the killing of al-Mahgoub.
Abdel-Ghani, in an interview with the London-based al-Hiyat newspaper, confirmed this version; on June 17 his lawyer was arrested in connection with Fudah's killing.
As an immediate response to the killing the police detained more than 200 people in the Zawiya al-Hamra district of Cairo.
Egyptian liberals noted with disapproval that a group of clerics at the Al-Azhar Islamic university on the previous week that had issued a public criticism of Fudah for hostility to Islam.
A representative of the illegal but tolerated Moslem Brotherhood said on June 9 that although the Brotherhood did not support political assassinations "the government and the media" shared responsibility for Fudah's death since they had given space to "writers dedicated to attacking Islam" .
Military operation in Upper Egypt
On June 1 the government launched a round-up of Moslem militants in Dayrut, Sanabu and other towns and villages in the governorate of Asyut in the south (Upper Egypt).
This was the region where Coptic Christian villagers had been killed, apparently by Islamic militants of the Jamaat Islami in May [see p. 38935].
Some 5,000 troops under Interior Ministry command were deployed and members of the paramilitary Central Security Forces were reported to have ransacked about five villages in night raids, as roadblocks were set up and access to the area restricted.
Three people had been killed in the operation by June 4.
Machine-guns and explosives were found and 41 people were to face charges.
On June 19 security forces clashed with some 200 Islamic militants who were reported to have attacked up to 20 shops and homes of Christians in Sanabu.
Two men were shot by the police, triggering an escalation of violence on the following day in which four people, including a Christian and a policeman, were killed in Dayrut.
In a further six-hour operation by security forces in five villages on June 24, 300 people were held for questioning, and two people were shot dead on June 26.
On June 24 the Interior Minister Mohammed Abdel-Halim Moussa announced that he had instructed "security commanders in Asyut…not to leave the area until the sedition and the leaders involved in recent incidents in Sanabu and Dayrut have been uprooted" .
On June 29, 11 people described as prominent members of al-Jihad were captured in raids on Manshiet-Nasser and other villages.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
New Cabinet
The Syrian Prime Minister Mahmoud Zubi resigned along with his Cabinet on June 24; however, President Hafez al-Assad asked him to form a new Cabinet, which was announced on June 29.
In the new 37-member Cabinet 15 ministries, including most of the key ones, remained in the same hands as before.
Zubi, who had been Prime Minister since 1987 [see pp. 36178-79], was reported to have selected his new Cabinet after consultations with the leaderships of the five parties (including the Ba'ath Party) which were components of the National Progressive Front.
While Damascus observers commented that most of the changes were within the context of a regular rotation of minor posts, one of the more significant changes was the appointment of Nadir Nabulsi, the chairman of Al-Furat Petroleum Company which accounted for more than 60 per cent of Syria's crude oil production, as Oil and Mineral Resources Minister in place of Antonios Habib.
Rashid Akhtarini became Deputy Prime Minister for Service Affairs in place of Mahmud Qaddur, who had been Deputy Prime minister for Public Affairs.
At the Justice Ministry Abdullah Tulbah took over as minister from Khalid Ansari.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Release of German hostages
Two German relief workers who had been held hostage in Beirut since May 17, 1989, were released on June 17.
The release was believed to have come about after the new Lebanese Prime Minister Rashid al-Solh persuaded the Iranian government to put pressure on the Lebanese Hezbollah group.
Heinrich Strübig, 51, and Thomas Kemptner, 30, had been held by a group led by Abdel-Hadi Hamadei, a member of the Hezbollah leadership.
UN Assistant Secretary-General Giandomenico Picco and German Minister of State at the Chancellery Bernd Schmidbauer had also been involved in negotiations for the releases.
The German authorities denied that they promised any of payments or leniency towards the two Hamadei brothers held in a German prison [see pp. 38455; 38695].
Since 1982, 92 foreigners had been held hostage in Lebanon and at least 10 had died in captivity.
The release of the Germans meant that there were no more Europeans or north Americans remaining as hostages, although a number of Lebanese and other Middle Eastern nationals, and one woman of joint Canadian and Lebanese nationality, were still held hostage.
Visits of Vellayati and EC delegation
The Iranian Foreign Affairs Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati visited Damascus on June 1 and Beirut on June 2-3.
While he declared that the Lebanese, Syrian and Iranian governments were to continue to support resistance to Israel, he was believed to have given some undertakings to the Lebanese government on restraining Hezbollah activity in southern Lebanon.
On June 25 Iran, reportedly at the request of the leadership council of Lebanese Hezbollahreleased 40 Lebanese taken as prisoners of war during the Iran-Iraq war.
The release of the two Germans opened the way for the unfreezing of European Community (EC) aid to Lebanon which had been withheld at the insistence of the German government.
The amount of aid was approximately ECU166,000,000 (US$212,000,000) under the third and fourth protocols [see also p. 38836].
An EC delegation visited Beirut in mid-June to co-ordinate the resumption of economic aid.
Resignation of Housing Minister
The Minister of Housing and Co-operatives, Sulayman Tony Franjiyah, resigned on June 16.
He had been appointed by al-Solh one month earlier [see p. 38933], but had been angered by an invitation extended to Samir Geaga, leader of the (Christian) Lebanese Forces militia, to an official lunch given by President Elias Hrawi.
Franjiyah claimed that Geaga had been responsible for the assassination in 1978 of his father Tony Franjiyah — something which Geaga denied.
Re-election of Phalange party leader
Geaga stood unsuccessfully on June 8 against the incumbent leader of the Phalangist Party (also called the Ktaeb), George Saadeh, who was returned for a third term as party president.
Saadeh, who was also Minister of Telecommunications and Posts, was regarded as more moderate than Geaga.
Israeli raids
Four civilians were killed when Israeli artillery on June 28 shelled the Kfar-Roumann area, within the "security zone" which Israel had defined in southern Lebanon.
Air raids (on June 1-5 and June 10), artillery attacks and shelling from Israeli gunboats were reported throughout June, with a number of casualties and damage to buildings.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Assassination of Bseisou
Atef Bseisou, the director of external security for the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), was killed as he returned to the Hotel Meridien in Montparnasse, Paris, in the early hours of June 8.
The two gunmen succeeded in making a getaway on foot.
A statement sent to the Tunis bureau of the Agence France-Presse news agency on June 9 claimed responsibility for the killing on behalf of the Fatah Revolutionary Council, the Palestinian faction led by Abu Nidal.
This statement was disowned some hours later by a Fatah Revolutionary Council spokesperson in Beirut, Walid Khalid.
The PLO itself published a communiqué in Tunis on June 8 attributing responsibility for the killing to the Israeli secret service, Mossad — a charge which was in turn dismissed by the Israeli authorities as not meriting a response.
The head of Israeli military intelligence, Gen. Uri Saguy, said on Israeli radio that Bseisou had been a member of the Black September group which had killed 11 Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics of 1972 [see pp. 25493-96].
PLO-Hamas agreement
First reports of an agreement between the Fatah, the core group of the PLO, and the Islamic organization Hamas, originated from a leaflet distributed in the West Bank and Gaza on June 7, which announced that the two groups had resolved to form a joint steering committee.
A PLO spokesperson in Tunis said on June 12 that the talks which had produced the "covenant of honour recently reached between Fatah and Hamas" had been supervised by PLO chair Yassir Arafat.
He said that the covenant called for the resolution of disputes through democratic dialogue and for "the strengthening of the internal front and its protection from confusion" .
A statement issued by Hamas on June 10 expressed surprise at the fact that Fatah had published this accord unilaterallywhile negotiations between the two groups were still in progress.
Negotiators' meeting with Arafat
A meeting between members of the Palestinian delegation to the Middle East peace talks and Arafat on June 18 caused them to be threatened with possible arrest by the Israeli authorities on their return to the occupied territories.
On June 21 the Israeli Ministry of the Police said instead that they would be "interrogated" .
Members of the delegation, including three of its leading figures —Faisal al-Husseini, Hannan Ashrawi and Haidar Abdel-Shafi —embraced Arafat during their first televised encounter.
Arafat met with King Hussein of Jordan for talks on June 11 and again on June 21.
On June 1 he had undergone surgery at the King Hussein medical centre in Amman for blood clots on his brain, resulting from injuries suffered in the April plane crash [see p. 38884].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAELI-OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
Gaza unrest and clampdown
Tensions in the Gaza Strip, which had been subject to a clampdown by the Israeli authorities since the fatal stabbing on May 25 of a 15-year-old Jewish schoolgirl by a Palestinian youth in the Bat Yam suburb of Tel Aviv, rose on June 25 when two Jewish vegetable merchants were stabbed to death.
Under the clampdown all Palestinians, including 50,000 day workers employed in Israel, had been prevented from leaving the Strip for 14 days, the longest quarantine period since the 40-day closure of the Israeli-occupied territories during the Gulf war in early 1991.
The UN had begun issuing emergency food supplies to the Gaza population on June 3.
On June 8, restrictions were eased somewhat, to allow employees over 28 to leave the Gaza Strip if their workplaces employed 10 or more people from there (and provided that the individuals qualified for an additional special permit).
This affected only a few thousand people, however, and on June 9 there were protests over the restrictions by Israeli employers whose businesses were threatened, forcing the authorities to lower the age limit to 25 and drop the 10-employee rule.
A demonstration on June 14 by more than 2,000 Palestinians, demanding the lifting of all restrictions, was dispersed by Israeli troops.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Executions of rioters
Disturbances which resulted in deaths and damage to property in a number of cities and town were attributed by the authorities in early June to the manipulation of "hooligans,…offenders or" vagrants"by outside agitators.
Ayatollah Khamenei, Iran's spiritual leader, in a speech on June 10 said that there had been disorder in three towns (Mashad, Shiraz and Arak) where a small and subversive counter-revolutionhad taken advantage of the authorities' leniency; he warned municipal institutions not to provide pretexts for the stirring up of further disturbances.
The news media of the opposition Mojahedin-e Khalq based in Iraq, meanwhile claimed that the "heroic people of Mashad" and other cities were about to topple the regime.
Some of the mainstream Iranian press attributed the unrest to the economic situation.
On June 10 four men described as "ringleaders" were hanged for involvement in events in Mashad on May 30-June 2 [see p. 38935].
On June 11 it was announced that nine death sentences had been decreed in the southern town of Shiraz, where there had been disturbances after security forces acted against disabled war veterans holding a rally on April 15.
Four of those sentenced to death in Shiraz were reported to have been executed.
On June 12 in Arak 29 people received sentences ranging from one to 10 years in connection with rioting in the city on May 20-22.
Disturbances were also reported in Khorramabad, Tabriz, Shush, Shushtar and Dezful.
In mid-June reports emerged that 17 people had been killed or injured in unrest on June 8 in Bukan in the north-west.
In both Mashad and Arak the disturbances appeared to have begun when the municipal authorities attempted to enforce the law on the erection of new buildings.
In other towns also, shops and municipal buildings were attacked.
There were conflicting claims as to the numbers of dead and executed in the various towns.
It was generally reported that the events in Mashad —Iran's holiest city, close to the border with Turkmenistan and Afghanistan — had involved some 2,000 rioters acting with a degree of organization.
Opposition sources claimed that at least 30 had been killed in Mashad, and more than 500 arrested; the authorities reported one death and local residents six.
Floods on the following weekend, June 6-7, killed about 30 people in the town.
By June 17 the police chief responsible for the Tehran section of the Guardians of the Islamic Revolution (Pasdaran) force announced that special squads had been formed for rapid mobilization as necessary to control urban unrest.
Bassij paramilitary volunteers, similarly under Pasdaran command, held rallies as a show of strength in Tehran (on June 8), Mashad (June 16), and elsewhere.
Election of Majlis Speaker
On June 2 Ali Akbar Nateq Nuri was elected as Speaker of the new Majlis which had been elected in April and May.
The first and second deputy Speakers were Hassan Rohani and Akbar Pavaresh respectively.
Renewal of Rushdie death threat
On June 17 Ayatollah Hassan Sanei, who headed the private Foundation of 15th Khordad (June 5), declared that his organization, which had already offered a reward of $US2,000,000 for the killing of the Indian-born British writer Salman Rushdie, would also reimburse all costs incurred in such an act.
[For original February 1989 fatwa against Rushdie over his novel The Satanic Verses see pp. 36450-51.]
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Continuing concern over nuclear capability
Inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) witnessed on May 30 the total destruction of the Al-Atheer nuclear complex on the grounds that its technical core was held to have been designed for weapons development [see pp. 38838; 38886].
The team also supervised the initial stages of dismantling uranium enrichment installations at Ash-Sharqat and Tarmiyah [for map see p. 38886], removing the remaining highly enriched but unradiated uranium (400 grammes).
The Iraqi government submitted a 300-page report which it claimed gave full details of its arms of mass destruction.
However, at the start of the IAEA visit on May 27, the government informed the inspectors that it would not provide names of foreign suppliers of equipment and materials —a key UN demand —and the IAEA inspectors left Baghdad on June 5 concerned that the potential remained for the government to rebuild its nuclear programme.
At the end of June a UN spokesman stated that the Iraqi report contained new information but no details of foreign suppliers or of the number of ballistic weapons Iraq had used.
The number of Scud missile mobile launchers still operational was also uncertain as UN experts considered that Iraq had under-reported the total number before the Gulf war.
Chemical weapons destruction
UN inspectors arrived in Baghdad on June 26 to supervise the destruction at Muthana, 130 km north-west of the capital, of 60 items of equipment used to make casings for chemical bombs.
The 16-member team led by Karen Jansen also searched for hidden equipment at various sites during its eight-day mission (see also pp. 38696; 38838; 38935).
Lack of agreement on oil sales
UN and Iraqi representatives meeting in Vienna on June 19-22 made progress on unblocking US$1,600 million of oil exports [see also pp. 38742; 38788-89; 38838], but ended talks without agreement on administering the proceeds — to pay for imports of essential food and medicines but also for 1,100 UN personnel in Iraq and for part of the cost of the UN special commission on Iraqi weapons of mass destruction.
The government claimed on June 21 that nearly 41,000 people, including 14,000 children, had died in the first four months of 1992 as a result of shortages of food and medicines caused by UN sanctions [see pp. 38696; 38742; 38789; 38838].
Proposal to tighten sanctions monitoring
The USA proposed in mid-June that 20-30 UN officials should monitor trade through the Jordanian port of Aqaba and on the Jordanian-Iraqi border to counter breaches of sanctions.
The multinational naval force policing sea trade to Aqaba would then be dismantled.
Jordan objected that this would violate its sovereignty.
The US proposal followed an intelligence assessment indicating that President Saddam Hussein had strengthened his position internally since the introduction of sanctions and that Iraq had been able to rebuild its infrastructure, including suspected arms production, through trade with Jordan and the illicit use of foreign bank reserves and gold sales.
Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz discussed international sanctions against Iraq and bilateral relations with political leaders in Algeria and Morocco in mid-June.
Suspension of domestic flights
On June 16 the Iraqi government suspended the twice-daily flights between Baghdad and Basra, the last remaining domestic flights, on account of the lack of spare parts.
Iraqi Airways urged Iran, Jordan and Tunisia to return the 33 civil aircraft stranded in those countries before the Gulf war.
New cohesion between opposition groups
Over 30 Iraqi opposition groups (out of a total of more than 70), meeting in Vienna on June 16-19, launched a programme for democracy and economic reform.
The conference was organized by the London-based Iraqi National Congress.
Kurdish leader Jalal Talabani of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) and two senior representatives of the Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP) attended.
However, opposition groups from Iran, Saudi Arabia and Syria boycotted the meeting.
Delegates elected a 91-member general committee, including four women, and a 17-member executive committee; places were reserved to allow for the boycotting groups to join later.
The conference agreed to set up a base in Kurdistan, including a broadcasting station.
Delegates adopted a bill of human rights and agreed on self-determination for Kurdistan within the Iraqi state.
They approved an economic programme based on free market principles, including privatization except for oil (although foreign and domestic private investors could participate in refining and marketing), the conversion of the military-industrial complex to civilian use, and self-sufficiency in food production from private farms.
Kurdish National Assembly inauguration
The Kurdish National Assembly held its inaugural meeting at Arbil on June 4, electing the oldest council member, Hasan Kanabi, as chairman, and Jawhar Namiq Salim of the KDP as speaker, with Muhammad Tawfiq as his deputy.
Fuad Masum, a member of the political bureau of the PUK, was asked to form the first government.
In mid-June the executive council was renamed the ministerial council and 15 policy committees were set up.
A delegation was formed to visit European capitals to gain support and raise funds.
[For extension of international force presence in Turkey to end-1992, see p. 38980.]
The Kurdistan Socialist Party, the Kurdistan People's Democratic Party and the Kurdistan Democratic Independence Party (Pasok) agreed to merge in June with the goal of establishing an independent Kurdish state.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GCC
Meetings of foreign and finance ministers
The 43rd session of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) Ministerial Council (the foreign ministers of member states) was held on June 3 at the headquarters of the GCC Secretariat in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
The meeting condemned the Iraqi regimefor procrastinating and avoidingthe implementation of UN Security Council resolutions.
The council reiterated its "strong desire for the unity and regional safety of Iraq…and stresses Iraq's total responsibility for any other human suffering imposed on the brotherly people of Iraq as a result of the regime's refusal to implement [the UN resolutions]which deal with the provision of food and medicinal needs" .
There was also criticism of Israeli "obstinacy and lack of seriousness" in the Middle East peace negotiations, and of continuing Israeli actions in Lebanon.
The Foreign Ministers condemned Serbia's and Montenegro's "crimes of annihilation and deportation…which contravene human values and international laws" in Bosnia-Hercegovina and urged the international community to observe UN sanctions.
The GCC development fund for Arab and Moslem countries, inaugurated in December 1991 [see p. 38697], was reported to have attracted so far contributions of only US$6,500,000, from Saudia Arabia, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates (UAE).
At an earlier meeting in Riyadh, GCC trade and finance ministers on May 31 agreed on a goal of a common market by the year 2000.
A single customs tariff (set as a pre-condition by the European Communities for reaching a commercial accord with the GCC) would come into effect by 1993 and there would eventually be monetary unification.
Damascus Declaration
On May 25 the GCC Secretary-General, Abdullah Bishara, had said that the proposal for joint Gulf defence arrangements, to include also Egypt and Syria, which was formulated in the Damascus Declaration of March 1991 [see pp. 38116-17]was still under study by GCC committees.
After an unscheduled meeting with President Hafez al-Assad of Syria on June 3, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak said that they had discussed the Damascus Declaration and Iran's attitude to it.
Foreign ministers of the GCC, Egypt and Syria attending the meeting in Istanbul of the Islamic Conference Organization [see p. 38987]agreed on June 18 that the much-postponed foreign ministers' meeting on the implementation of the Damascus Declaration would be held in Doha, Qatar, on Sept. 9 [see also below, this page].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
QATAR
On June 23 it was announced that Qatar had signed a defence pact with the USA, becoming the third state in the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) to do so after Kuwait and Bahrain; an official said that the agreement ruled out any intervention in Qatar's internal affairs and was in line with GCC policy.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
YEMEN
Hasim al-Attas, brother of Prime Minister Haidar Abu Bakr al-Attas, was killed on June 15 in Shir in Hadramat province by "elements hostile to the unity of Yemen" , according to the local news media [see also p. 38936].
INTERNATIONAL
SUMMIT
Bush-Yeltsin summit — Agreement on nuclear cuts — Russian appeal for economic aid
At their first summit, in Washington on June 16-17, President George Bush of the United States and President Boris Yeltsin of Russia signed a range of far-reaching agreements covering nuclear disarmament and political, scientific and economic co-operation and other issues.
Strategic forces reductions
The two leaders on June 17 signed an unprecedented arms reduction agreement which would eventually cut the two powers' nuclear arsenals by two-thirds, going far beyond the START treaty signed by President Bush and President Gorbachev of the Soviet Union in July 1991 [see p. 38320].
The new package, due to be formalized in a START II treaty, involved an initial reduction of strategic nuclear warheads to between 3,800 and 4,250 for each side; further reductions by the year 2003 to between 3,000 and 3,500 warheads; and the elimination of all multiple independently targeted re-entry vehicle (MIRV) intercontinental missiles.
Bush said that the agreement "brings us to the threshold of a new world, a world of hope and opportunity" , while Yeltsin said that it would make the world "more attractive, more human, kinder" .
Describing nuclear weapons as "obsolete and unnecessary" , he announced that he had ordered Russia's SS-18 missiles (the key land-based intercontinental missiles) to be taken off alert.
Other joint statements and memorandums included a charter on American-Russian partnership and friendship (in which both sides committed themselves to settle disputes peacefully), and agreements on co-operation in space research, on an early warning system for nuclear missile launches, on the elimination of chemical weapons, and on investment in Russia.
The Bush administration also granted "most favoured nation" status to Russia, thereby according it the lowest tariffs available to US trading partners.
Yeltsin's speech to Congress
Yeltsin told an enthusiastic joint session of Congress on June 17 that "communism is dead" , inviting the people of the USA "to join us in partnership in the name of the worldwide triumph of democracy" and appealing for massive economic aid.
Urging Congress to approve the package of economic aid to the republics of the former Soviet Union totalling US$24,000 million, proposed by the Bush administration in April, he described this aid as essential to revive the Russian economy.
Warning that without it and a massive programme of private investment the reform movement could fail, he cautioned that "there will be no second try" .
Much US media interest in the summit was taken up by the issue of whether there were still US prisoners of war alive in the former Soviet Union and whether information was available on US soldiers declared missing in action (MIA).
Acknowledging that Soviet leaders in the past had failed to tell the truth on the issue, Yeltsin pledged his government's commitment to finding any US citizens detained in his country.
He said that old Soviet archives contained precise information about many US citizens who were held, including what war they fought in, and where they died and were buried.
Documents supplied to Congress on the eve of the summit initially failed to provide a clear picture, however, and were privately described by US officials as "ambiguous" .
A joint US-Russian commission had been set up in March to research the prisoner of war issue.
Meeting with Clinton
Yeltsin met the prospective Democratic presidential candidate Bill Clinton on June 18.
His itinerary also included an official visit to Canada.
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
Foreign ministers' and NACC meetings
Formalizing a consensus which had emerged in the previous month [see p. 38937], the foreign ministers of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), meeting in Oslo, Norway, on June 4, reached agreement on the alliance's future role in international peacekeeping operations, notably in support of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
A statement issued at the end of the meeting declared that the NATO countries would be prepared "to support on a case-by-case basis…peacekeeping activities under the responsibility of CSCE, including by making available alliance resources and expertise" .
Missions would have to approved unanimously and any member state could opt out of participation.
This was a major departure for NATO, which had been based since its foundation in 1949 on the principles of taking joint action in defence of member states only and of restricting operations to a clearly designated area covering the member states' territories.
The 52-member CSCE, which had no military capability of its own, included all European countries, the former Soviet republics, and the USA and Canada.
The wording of the statement indicated a compromise between the US position, which had urged a stronger NATO commitment involving not only peacekeeping but also peacemaking (through, for instance, the deployment of ground troops to stop fighting in conflict areas), and on the other the French position, generally opposing an enhancement of NATO's role.
[For June agreement on a joint force for the Western European Union, see p. 38980.]
Concerning current problems, the ministers declared themselves "profoundly disturbed by the violence and destruction which continues in various areas of the Euro-Atlantic region" .
They specifically condemned the continued fighting in the former Yugoslav republics, expressed their "strongest support" for the UN sanctions imposed on Serbia and Montenegro (the new "rump" Yugoslavia), and called for a peaceful solution to the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh.
NACC meeting
The North Atlantic Co-operation Council (NACC), comprising the members of NATO and the former Warsaw Pact (including the successor states to the Soviet Union), held its third meeting in Oslo on June 5 [for earlier meetings see pp. 38698-99; 38841), discussing security issues including nuclear and conventional arms and regional conflicts.
Participants also signed the revised Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE)[see this page].
Georgia attended an NACC meeting for the first time, Albania was also admitted as a member, and Finland attended as an observer.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Draft chemical weapons ban
The UN Conference on Disarmament on June 22 tabled a complete draft text for a treaty banning the production, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons as well as ordering the destruction of all existing stocks.
The completion of the draft marked the first substantive development on the issue, under negotiation by the 39 participating countries since 1968.
Despite various unresolved aspects, there was optimism that agreement could be reached by August, in time for submission of the treaty to the UN General Assembly.
It could then be opened for signature later in 1992 or early in 1993, to enter into force once ratified by 65 countries.
At the core of the treaty was a detailed procedure for "challenge inspections" , under which at 108 hours' notice international inspectors could investigate sites suspected of being used for making or storing chemical weapons.
Offending countries would ultimately be subject to action by the UN Security Council.
Issues still to be resolved included the role of the planned regulatory body (to be based in The Hague, Netherlands) in initiating challenge inspections, and provisions on the use of chemical anti-riot agents and the peaceful use of chemicals.
Signature of revised CFE treaty
Twenty-nine countries —members of the North Atlantic Treaty organization (NATO) and the former Warsaw Pact, including the successor states to the Soviet Union —on June 5 signed a revised Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE), which provided for sharp reductions in conventional weaponry and troop levels in Europe.
The CFE treaty as originally signed in Paris in November 1990 [see pp. 37838-39]could not be implemented because of the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and consequent disagreements among the successor states.
The deadlock was broken in May 1992 at the Tashkent summit of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)[see p. 38922], when participants agreed on the division of the conventional arsenal and troops of the former Soviet Union.
The Tashkent agreement was then incorporated into the terms of the CFE treaty.
French cancellation of Hades programme — Reduction of nuclear-alert status
It was announced on June 12 that the production of the French short-range nuclear missile Hades would stop.
Existing missiles would be put in storage.
Hades, a replacement for the Pluton tactical nuclear missile, was designed for use against Soviet forces advancing into Western Europe.
The French government's reluctance to cancel the project had caused concern in Germany (the only country within range of Hades missiles launched from France).
In September 1991 President Mitterrand had announced that production would be reduced from 120 to 30 missiles.
Military sources announced on June 4 that France was to "reduce the level of alert of strategic nuclear forces" .
Its new strategy would include a reduction from three to two in the number of nuclear-weapons-carrying submarines deployed at any one time, and changes in the readiness status of other nuclear weapons.
Scrapping of UK tactical nuclear missiles
United Kingdom Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind announced on June 15 that short-range nuclear weapons deployed on British surface warships and nuclear depth charges carried by aircraft and helicopters would be scrapped.
The UK would thus eliminate a whole category of weapons in its nuclear arsenal.
INTERNATIONAL
ARMS TRADE
SIPRI annual report
The annual survey of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), published on June 18, showed that world arms trade in large conventional weapons had dropped in 1991 by 25 per cent in value to US$22,114 million.
Attributing the fall to the breakup of the Soviet Union, the report revealed that the dissolving Soviet Union had accounted for only US$3,930 million worth of arms exports in 1991.
The USA, the leading exporter, accounted for 51 per cent of deliveries in 1991 worth US$11,195 million.
Arms imports into Asia and the Pacific region showed a marked increase despite an overall reduction in the developing world.
India was the largest arms importer (US$2,009 million), followed by Israel (US$1,676 million), Turkey (US$1,559 million) and Afghanistan (US$1,220 million).
Seizure of smuggled Soviet nuclear material
On June 3 and June 12, Austrian police seized consignments of weapons-grade uranium in Vienna.
Both were believed to have originated from the Soviet Union and had been smuggled through Czechoslovakia.
According to police sources, the suspects arrested in connection with the seizures (five Czechoslovak citizens, four Hungarians and an Austrian) were believed to be seeking buyers in Arab countries.
INTERNATIONAL
NUCLEAR ENERGY
Plutonium shipment from France to Japan
Final preparations for the shipment from France to Japan of the first of an estimated 30-40 tonnes of plutonium were reported on June 30.
The planned shipment, officially for commercial nuclear use, was understood to have received informal US approval.
Under agreements with France, the United Kingdom, the USA and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Japan had acquired rights to reprocess spent uranium fuel from its atomic power stations at nuclear processing facilities in Europe, and between 1970 and 1980 had received 13 shipments, eight by air, five by sea, of plutonium reprocessed at a UK facility from uranium fuel of UK origin.
In late May two environmental groups, Greenpeace International and the Washington-based Nuclear Control Institute, launched a worldwide campaign to stop high-tonnage shipments of plutonium from Europe to Japan, warning of its potential dangers in the event of spillage and of its vulnerability to seizure by terrorists.
Suspension of French fast breeder reactor — Austrian arrests
France suspended its fast breeder Superphoenix reactor on June 30.
Austrian police on June 3 arrested seven people in Vienna on charges of carrying radioactive material consisting of 55 grammes of feebly enriched uranium concealed in metallic discs.
INTERNATIONAL
ICO
Foreign Ministers' meeting
Foreign Ministers from the Islamic Conference Organization (ICO) held an emergency meeting in Istanbul on June 17-18, principally to discuss the crisis in the former Yugoslav republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina; Turkey's Foreign Minister and current ICO chairman Hikmet Cetin also highlighted, as key issues, the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan and the need for a solution to the Cyprus issue.
Foreign Ministers ended their session on June 18 by issuing three resolutions.
The resolution on Bosnia-Hercegovina condemned the Serbian leadership in Belgrade and called on the UN Security Council to co-ordinate action by land, sea and air to restore international peace.
Resolutions on Palestine and on Lebanon expressed concern about the continued transfer of Jews to Israeli-occupied territories and about the Israeli occupation of parts of southern Lebanon, calling for Israeli withdrawal.
Among the Foreign Ministers' first actions on June 17 was the unanimous approval of Turkmenistan's application for full membership of the ICO.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
US-Russia agreement
The US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) signed an historic commercial agreement with the Russian Space Agency on June 18, the basis for which had been established at the June summit between US President George Bush and Russian President Boris Yeltsin [see pp. 38985-86].
Under the agreement (i) NASA would pay US$10,000,000 to the Russian aerospace organization NPO Energia for detailed technical studies of Russian hardware, particularly the Soyuz-TM spacecraft, for possible use as an "emergency" lifeboat for the planned US Freedom space station;(ii) NPO Energia would provide information on the automated docking system used with the orbiting Russian Mir space station, the Progress cargo transport spacecraft for possible use with Freedom, and Mir's potential to perform long-term life science experiments.
Yeltsin and Bush had also agreed in principle that Russian cosmonauts should fly aboard a US space shuttle and conduct joint space walks with US astronauts in October 1993, and agreed to (i) a possible rendezvous and docking mission between the Mir and the US space shuttle in 1994 or 1995;(ii) possible US participation in a Russian robot mission to Mars;(iii) joint exchange visits by US and Russian aerospace companies to investigate joint ventures and procurement opportunities; and (iv) US support for the first launch of a US-built satellite aboard a Russian Proton rocket.
INTERNATIONAL
COCOM
The 17-member Co-Ordinating Committee on Multilateral Export Controls (COCOM), the body whose main role had been to regulate the sale of Western technology to communist countries, agreed in Paris on June 1-2 to invite the former Soviet republics to join its newly established COCOM Co-Operation Forum on Export Controls.
INTERNATIONAL
IMF
The admission of Russia on June 1 increased total membership of the International Monetary Fund to 165 [see p. 38937 for May admissions].
The initial quota of the Russian Federation in the IMF was established at SDR2,876 million (about US$3,986 million).
INTERNATIONAL
WHO
On June 11 Croatia joined the World Health Organization as its 178th member; other countries which had acceded in recent weeks [see p. 38938 for position as of May 4]were Georgia, Slovenia and Uzbekistan.