

INTERNATIONAL
G-7 SUMMIT
The 18th annual economic summit of leaders from the Group of Seven (G-7) industrialized countries was held in Munich on July 6-8 [for 1991 summit see pp. 38321-22].
Attending the summit were Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, French President François Mitterrand, German Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl, Italian Prime Minister Giuliano Amato, Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, United Kingdom Prime Minister John Major and US President George Bush; the European Communities (EC) were represented by European Commission President Jacques Delors.
In a move reminiscent of the 1991 summit which had ended with meetings between G-7 leaders and former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev, G-7 leaders held post-summit talks with Russian President Boris Yeltsin who had been formally invited in June.
(A US proposal to consider Russia's formal entry into the G-7 had reportedly met with a cool reaction from other members.)
Final communiqué
G-7 leaders in their final communiqué issued on July 8 acknowledging widespread economic gloom throughout the industrialized world.
They undertook to pursue economic policies "to build confidence for investors, savers and consumers" .
Wary of premature forecasts, they stressed that "we will not take it [recovery]for granted, and will act together to assure [that it]gathers strength" .
Doubts about a rapid economic up-turn had been expressed by US Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, who at a parallel meeting of G-7 finance ministers indicated that economic growth in the US was expected to slow in the second quarter of 1992 although longer-term prospects were more hopeful.
A more optimistic assessment had come from UK Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont, who said that recent cuts in the German and Italian budget deficits would open the way to lower interest rates in Europe.
He stressed, however, that lower interest rates in the UK would continue to hinge on a policy of strict controls on public spending.
Acknowledging differences in national economic priorities, the communiqué committed G-7 leaders to "seek to take appropriate steps, recognizing our individual circumstances, to establish sound macro-economic policies to spur stronger sustainable growth" .
Differences in economic priorities had emerged soon after Germany indicated its intention not to authorize an early cut in interest rates.
The USA in particular had urged such a cut to boost economic growth [see pp. 37977-78; 38170; 38314; 38321].
In early July a half percentage point cut to a 29-year low of 3 per cent in the US discount rate had widened the gap between comparable US and German official rates to around 6.75 percentage points, and on July 16 the German Bundesbank increased its discount rate by three-quarters of a point to 8.75 per cent, triggering sharp falls in world financial markets and the value of the dollar.
In a marked change of tone from the hard-line anti-inflation communiqués of recent years, the declaration expressed concern about fast-rising unemployment in the West and pledged to adopt policies aimed at job creation.
Reports said that the depressed mood of the summit, described by President Mitterrand as "morose" , had been compounded by predictions, subsequently confirmed by the Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD) in its annual Employment Outlook released on July 21, of a rise in unemployment in the industrialized countries to around 30,000,000 in 1992, its highest level since 1983.
Drawing special attention to the Uruguay Round of trade talks, summit leaders expressed "regret" over the slow pace of negotiations since the London summit, but said that they were "convinced that a balanced agreement is within reach" by the end of 1992.
Bilateral negotiations between summit leaders aimed at reviving trade talks stalled over the issue of agricultural subsidies [see pp. 38888-89]failed after it emerged that a breakthrough was unlikely before the French referendum in September on the Maastricht treaty or the US presidential elections in November.
Regarding the environment, G-7 leaders said that the recent Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro [see p. 38947]had heightened awareness of global environmental problems and they urged "countries, developed and developing, to direct policies and resources towards sustainable development which…safeguards present and future generations" .
The communiqué underlined the importance of guaranteeing nuclear safety in eastern Europe and endorsed the creation of a US$100,000,000 multilateral fund to "address immediate operational safety and technical safety improvement measures not covered by bilateral programmes" .
A proposal for a larger fund worth US$700,000,000 to ensure the safety of Soviet-built nuclear power stations failed to win approval reportedly because of Japanese opposition to any additional funds for Russia until its claim on the Kurile islands was resolved [see pp. 39003-04].
Summit leaders called on all countries to contribute to Third World aid by assisting victims of "the unprecedented drought in southern Africa" .
Approval of aid package for Russia and Poland
Summit leaders recommended that "most-favoured-nation treatment should be applied to trade with the new states [of the former Soviet Union]" and lent support for "a phased strategy of co-operation between the Russian government and the IMF [International Monetary Fund]" conditional upon "necessary macro-economic conditions [being]in place" .
On July 8, G-7 leaders met with Russian President Yeltsin and formally endorsed the disbursement of the first tranche of an aid package worth US$24,000 million, first approved in April [see p. 38888].
G-7 leaders reaffirmed their commitment to economic reform in eastern Europe and backed the reallocation of a US$1,000 million fund for Polish foreign currency stabilization.
Declaration on Yugoslavia — Statement by Germany
A special declaration adopted by G-7 leaders on July 7 called on all sides in the former Yugoslavia not to endanger relief workers or to deter the opening of land corridors to Sarajevo, and warned that failure to do so could lead to the UN Security Council considering "other measures, not excluding military means, to achieve its humanitarian objectives" .
A separate statement issued by Germany on July 7 said that the summit had deplored the continued fighting in Nagorno-Karabakh; condemned non-compliance by Iraq with UN Gulf war resolutions; and urged the resumption of negotiations in South Africa.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
UN Security Council debate
On July 16 the UN Security Council, responding to a call from the Organization of African Unity (OAU)[see p. 38992], asked UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali in Resolution 765 to send a special representative to South Africa.
It also called for the resumption of multiparty constitutional talks, disrupted following the Boipatong massacre in June [see p. 38948].
The resolution, supported by all 15 members of the Security Council, came after two days of debate involving more than 60 speakers including the president of the African National Congress (ANC) Nelson Mandela, the South African Foreign Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha and 10 other African foreign ministers.
In his address on July 15, Mandela blamed the government for the continuing violence in South Africa's townships, and accused it of pursuing a "cold-blooded strategy of state terrorism" .
Commenting that the Council had an "urgent obligation to intervene…to end the carnage" , he urged the rapid appointment of a special representative who would investigate the violence and help the UN decide on appropriate measures to help end it.
Those measures should, he said, include "continuous monitoring" of the situation.
On the following day in his speech to the Security Council, Botha vigorously defended his government's record since the release of Mandela in February 1990 and rejected the ANC's accusations.
He said that to "accuse to the government of fostering violence [was]an insult" and maintained that most of the violence was the result of ethnic and political conflict between ANC supporters and those of the mainly Zulu Inkatha Freedom Party.
However, the Foreign Minister did open the way for a UN mission to the country when he told the Security Council that his government was "prepared to consider" a role for the international community "in an observer or other acceptable capacity" in a monitoring group which would include the ANC and Inkatha.
This was regarded by some observers as a shift in position, with President F. W. de Klerk's government appearing to surrender a central tenet of its policy of rejecting interference in internal affairs.
However, Botha later insisted that while the government welcomed fact-finding missions from all over the world, the Security Council "could not take over the job of the government" .
Resolution 765 condemned violence, in particular the Boipatong massacre, and emphasized the responsibility of the government to protect lives, but did not suggest that the government was involved in the killings.
It called for the special representative "to recommend, after discussions with the parties, measures which would assist in bringing an effective end to violence and in creating conditions for negotiations leading towards a peaceful transition" to democracy.
On July 17 Cyrus Vance, US Secretary of State in 1977-80, was named as the UN Special Representative.
On his arrival in South Africa on July 21, Vance declared that his mission was to "listen to all parties" before formulating a constructive means to achieve peace.
He said that he hoped that there would be no need to escalate international involvement in South Africa.
During his visit, which ended on July 31, Vance had private talks with a wide range of groups, including the government, the ANC, Inkatha, the South African Communist Party (SACP), the Azanian People's Organization (Azapo), the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), the Democratic Party, the Conservative Party, and church, business and violence-monitoring groups.
He declined to comment on the progress of his mission other than to say that his visit had been "very, very useful" .
He was expected to present his recommendations to the Security Council onAug. 7.
ANC-government relations
The Security Council debate had been preceded by a series of statements by and an exchange of letters between de Klerk and Mandela in which each stated their terms for the resumption of constitutional talks.
On July 2 de Klerk accused the ANC of attempting to sabotage the negotiation process.
He denied any government involvement in the Boipatong killings and accused the ANC of "fabricating an artificial crisis" .
He asserted that while his government remained committed to a peaceful and negotiated political settlement, he would take "all steps necessary to prevent the country from sliding into anarchy" .
He restated the government's view that township violence stemmed from confrontations between ANC and Inkatha supporters and proposed that therefore he, Mandela and Inkatha leader Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi should meet urgently to consider establishing "an active full-time monitoring mechanism" on the efficacy of existing measures to combat violence".
Mandela responded formally on July 8 when he said that the government was "closing its eyes" to the seriousness of the crisis.
He expressed dismay at the fact that the State President had failed to respond to the list of demands —mostly aimed at curtailing township violence —that the ANC had said should be sufficiently met before it returned to the negotiating table [see p. 38948].
He said that there were "hardly any points of convergence between the ANC and the government" and in this context face-to-face talks were unacceptable.
With the prospects of breaking the stalemate fading, hopes rose following the announcement that the government and ANC representatives had held talks on July 28 for the first time since the ANC broke off contact on June 23.
On July 30, ANC secretary-general Cyril Ramaphosa confirmed that as a result of Vance's mediatory efforts, the two sides had met to discuss the release of remaining political prisoners, one of the ANC conditions for the resumption of constitutional talks.
A further sign of an easing of the deadlock was the announcement on July 30 that the government had "no objection" to the international monitoring of a general strike scheduled to take place on Aug. 3-4 [see below], thus partially conceding another ANC demand.
Goldstone Commission
On July 6 Judge Richard Goldstone, who had been appointed in September 1991 to head an official commission of inquiry into township violence, rebuked the government for ignoring its recommendations and thus jeopardizing efforts to halt political violence.
The recommendations had been set out in the Commission's interim report published in May.
They included the fencing and monitoring of migrant worker hostels, regarded as a source of township tension.
Also recommended was the withdrawal from the townships of the most controversial of the security forces, the former Namibian counterinsurgency unit Koevoet ( "Crowbar" ) and 32 battalion, members of which had been responsible for rape and other assaults during "peacekeeping" operations.
Goldstone noted that while there was evidence of the involvement of lower-ranking security force members in township violence, the Commission had discovered no such evidence to justify the allegations against the State President, Cabinet members or high-ranking security force officers.
He said that in the absence of such evidence such allegations were "unwise, unfair and dangerous" .
On July 14 de Klerk announced the disbandment of 31 and 32 battalions as well as Koevoet.
A report into the Boipatong massacre commissioned by the government and submitted to the Goldstone Commission was leaked to the press on July 22.
The report, by Peter Waddington, director of criminal justice studies at the University of Reading in the United Kingdom, and two Scotland Yard police officers, found that the police response to and investigation of the massacre "was and remains woefully inadequate" .
Although it noted the absence of satisfactory command structures and evidence of serious incompetence, the report did not find any evidence of police complicity in the massacre.
However, Waddington noted that "the SAP [South African Police]is an unaccountable police force" and that the "difficulties encountered" by his inquiry team "suggested [that]systems do not exist for either internal or external accountability" .
Gluckman revelations
The SAP suffered a further blow on July 26 when Jonathan Gluckman, one of the country's leading pathologists, gave details of deaths in police custody.
Gluckman said that he had performed more than 200 post-mortems on black people who had died in detention, and he was convinced that 90 per cent of these people were killed by the police.
The lower ranks of the SAP, he believed, were "totally out of control" .
He had raised his concerns with Minister of Law and Order Hernus Kriel and with Adriaan Vlok, the Minister of Correctional Services, Housing and Works, and had also written to the State President three times, but decided to publicize his fears in the Johannesburg Sunday Times after the death earlier in the month of a 19-year-old youth, whose fatal injuries were consistent with eye-witness evidence of police torture.
Kriel responded immediately, saying that he took the allegations very seriously and promising an investigation, but he dismissed the suggestion that the police were out of control.
Continuing mass action
The campaign of mass action organized by the ANC and its allies which began on June 16 [see p. 38948]continued during July with demonstrations of differing sizes almost every day.
One of the largest took place on July 13 when several thousand ANC supporters marched to Union Buildings, in Pretoria, the site of the State President's office.
The main focus of attention was, however, preparations for a general strike to be held on Aug. 3-4.
On July 28 Mandela emphasized that the aim of the strike, an initiative of the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU), was not "an insurrection" but the immediate installation of an interim government of national unity, and one-person-one-vote elections for a constitution-making body.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Deepening food supply crisis
As the food supply situation in the capital Mogadishu and in southern Somalia rapidly worsened, discussion of the crisis intensified at the United Nations and in the international news media.
There remained uncertainty as to whether the warring militias, particularly the forces led by Gen. Mohammed Farah Aydid, would respect the presence of a UN force to oversee a major relief operation, as had been proposed since April (but still not finally approved).
Some argued that the situation demanded a stronger UN presence than the proposed 500-strong unarmed force.
The UN Security Council had approved in April the creation of a UN Operation in Somalia (Unosom —see also p. 38855), with a 50-strong group of military observers in UN uniform, and UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali on June 23 announced the decision to send in this group, whose task would be to monitor a ceasefire which had been signed by the two main militias in February 1992 but never implemented.
Brig. -Gen.
Imtiaz Shaheen (Pakistan), the group's commander, and its first two members arrived in Mogadishu on July 5.
On July 23 the remaining 47 military observers arrived.
Their arrival had been delayed for a fortnight after Gen. Farah Aydid claimed on July 7 that an aircraft with UN markings bringing food aid had also carried from Nairobi military equipment and counterfeit money for his rival, Somalia's transitional President, Ali Mahdi Mohammed.
On July 9 the UN in New York announced that it was opening an inquiry into the allegations.
Boutros-Ghali's recommendations
The crisis in Somalia became one issue in strained relations between the UN Secretariat, under Boutros-Ghali, and the UN Security Council, especially its five permanent members.
In written recommendations presented on July 24 Boutros-Ghali proposed a significant strengthening of the UN operation in Somalia, with a UN presence to be established throughout the country.
He also on July 24 made remarks criticizing members of the UN Security Council for giving what he maintained was undue priority to the situation in Yugoslavia, which he described as a "war of the rich" .
Boutros-Ghali's written report announced that another UN technical mission would visit Mogadishu in order to assess what UN civilian and military personnel would be needed, to create a local police force which would both disarm the militias and to protect humanitarian agencies.
It was anticipated that the technical mission would arrive in Somalia in the first week of August [For UN technical mission in March see pp. 38800; 38855].
In his criticisms of what he claimed was UN inaction Boutros-Ghali had the support of the senior UN representative in Somalia, Mohammed Sahnoun of Algeria.
According to Le Monde of July 29, Sahnoun had criticized, in an unpublished report, the inefficiency of UN operations in Somalia, contrasting them with the work of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and other humanitarian organizations.
The UN co-ordinator for humanitarian assistance to Somalia, David Bassiouni, meanwhile urged caution in any deployment of a sizeable UN force without the clear agreement of both main militias.
UN Security Council resolution
On July 27 the UN Security Council adopted unanimously Resolution 767, thereby giving the go-ahead for many of the recommendations of Boutros Ghali's report.
The resolution approved his proposal to establish four operational zones in Somalia as part of the UN Operation in Somalia (Unosom).
The Secretary-General was asked to organize an air bridge for food aid as a matter of urgency, and all parties and factions were called on to co-operate in the deployment of UN security personnel.
In the absence of such co-operation the Council did not exclude "other measures" to deliver assistance.
The Security Council strongly approved Boutros Ghali's decision to send a technical mission to examine the possibility of monitoring ceasefire arrangements and of deploying UN military observers in south-west Somalia.
The mission would also examine the feasibility of an "arms for food" exchange programme, the need for security forces to escort and protect humanitarian aid activities, and the role of the UN in assisting the re-establishment of local police forces.
On July 30 James Kunder, director of the US Office of Disaster Assistance, criticized the two warring leaders and described the situation in Somalia as "the single worst humanitarian crisis in the world" .
Relief operations and estimates of deaths
Sahnoun said in late July that as many as 5,000 people might be dying each day across the country, 1,500,000 were on the brink of death and 4,500,000 were nearing starvation; together these figures represented almost the entire population of the country.
The ICRC estimated that in the town of Iscia Baidoa, 220 km north-west of Mogadishu, 7,000 of the town's 40,000 people had died from starvation in recent months.
The ICRC also estimated that about 30,000 inhabitants of Mogadishu had died since the fighting erupted in mid-November 1991.
Save the Children reported that 200 people were dying daily in the capital.
Only a few independent agencies, such as the Red Cross, Médecins sans Frontières, Save the Children Fund and Age Concern, were operating in towns beyond Mogadishu.
Mogadishu airport had not been used for relief supplies since June 1, when food aid had been stolen at gunpoint.
On July 9 the ICRC launched an appeal for US$68,000,000 to fund emergency relief operations to Somalia by sea, air and land over the next six months.
The ICRC was operating, under the protection of armed men paid in food, some 370 open-air kitchens in Mogadishu and other parts of the country.
Fresh UN appeal for Horn of Africa
On June 15 the UN in Geneva launched a fresh consolidated inter-agency appeal to the international community for US$541,000,000 to fund emergency assistance for populations in the Horn of Africa over the next six months.
The UN's Director for Humanitarian Affairs, Charles Lamunière, spoke of drought and the problems caused by ethnic strife, leading to mass movements of refugees, in Djibouti, Eritrea (not yet internationally recognized as independent), Ethiopia, Somalia and Kenya.
UN estimates were that 500-1,000 people were dying daily due to starvation and illnesses related to the crisis situation.
A previous such appeal had been made on Feb. 1, 1992, but had failed to meet its target of US$621,000,000.
AFRICA
OAU
Dakar summit meeting
The 28th Assembly of the heads of state or government of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) was held in Dakar, Senegal, on June 29-July 2 [for 27th summit in Abuja, Nigeria, in June 1991 see p. 38279].
Representatives from the 51 member states, including 29 Presidents and 10 Prime Ministers, discussed an agenda which had been prepared at the 55th session of the OAU Council of Ministers on June 22-27, also held in Dakar.
Morocco, which had suspended participation in 1982 in protest at the admission of the Saharan Arab Democratic Republic (SADR —Western Sahara)[see p. 31935], again did not send a representative.
The OAU Council of Ministers had discussed the possibility of the suspension of the SADR pending the UN-organized referendum on self-determination [see pp. 38692-93], but no final decision had been taken.
On June 28 President Abdou Diouf of Senegal was elected to succeed President Ibrahim Babandiga of Nigeria as OAU chair.
Among the priorities he identified were human rights in Africa, continental integration, the situations in Liberia, Somalia and South Africa, and the prevention and management of further conflicts.
In the discussion of mechanisms for conflict settlement, some delegates argued that the OAU lacked the resources to create a continent-wide peacekeeping force.
It was agreed, however, that the OAU Secretariat should present to the 1993 summit the results of a feasibility study.
This study was also to take account of the principle —enshrined in the OAU charter —of non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries.
The situation in South Africa was also high on the agenda.
The South African government was unanimously condemned for the level of violence in the country and delegates called for an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council to debate the issue [see also p. 38990].
The president of the African National Congress (ANC), Nelson Mandela, addressing the opening session of the summit, warned against any haste in re-establishing relations with South Africa before the establishment of an interim government.
The visit of South African President F. W. de Klerk to Nigeria in April had been followed by the establishment of trade or diplomatic relations with a number of African countries including Côte d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Kenya and Zambia [see pp. 38851; 38897].
On the issue of economic integration, delegates heard that only some dozen states had so far opted to adhere to the treaty instituting an African Economic Community (AEC), which had been a focus for optimism at the OAU 1991 summit.
The OAU Secretary-General, Salim Ahmed Salim, also reported with concern that as of June 1 the OAU arrears, arising from the failure of member states to pay their contributions, stood at US$30,000,000 — equivalent to the OAU's total annual budget.
OAU
Dakar summit meeting
The 28th Assembly of the heads of state or government of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) was held in Dakar, Senegal, on June 29-July 2 [for 27th summit in Abuja, Nigeria, in June 1991 see p. 38279].
Representatives from the 51 member states, including 29 Presidents and 10 Prime Ministers, discussed an agenda which had been prepared at the 55th session of the OAU Council of Ministers on June 22-27, also held in Dakar.
Morocco, which had suspended participation in 1982 in protest at the admission of the Saharan Arab Democratic Republic (SADR —Western Sahara)[see p. 31935], again did not send a representative.
The OAU Council of Ministers had discussed the possibility of the suspension of the SADR pending the UN-organized referendum on self-determination [see pp. 38692-93], but no final decision had been taken.
On June 28 President Abdou Diouf of Senegal was elected to succeed President Ibrahim Babandiga of Nigeria as OAU chair.
Among the priorities he identified were human rights in Africa, continental integration, the situations in Liberia, Somalia and South Africa, and the prevention and management of further conflicts.
In the discussion of mechanisms for conflict settlement, some delegates argued that the OAU lacked the resources to create a continent-wide peacekeeping force.
It was agreed, however, that the OAU Secretariat should present to the 1993 summit the results of a feasibility study.
This study was also to take account of the principle —enshrined in the OAU charter —of non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries.
The situation in South Africa was also high on the agenda.
The South African government was unanimously condemned for the level of violence in the country and delegates called for an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council to debate the issue [see also p. 38990].
The president of the African National Congress (ANC), Nelson Mandela, addressing the opening session of the summit, warned against any haste in re-establishing relations with South Africa before the establishment of an interim government.
The visit of South African President F. W. de Klerk to Nigeria in April had been followed by the establishment of trade or diplomatic relations with a number of African countries including Côte d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Kenya and Zambia [see pp. 38851; 38897].
On the issue of economic integration, delegates heard that only some dozen states had so far opted to adhere to the treaty instituting an African Economic Community (AEC), which had been a focus for optimism at the OAU 1991 summit.
The OAU Secretary-General, Salim Ahmed Salim, also reported with concern that as of June 1 the OAU arrears, arising from the failure of member states to pay their contributions, stood at US$30,000,000 — equivalent to the OAU's total annual budget.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Capture of Torit
The southern town of Torit fell to government forces on July 13.
Official sources claimed that John Garang, the commander of the "Torit faction" of the Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA), and other leaders had escaped from the town and set up headquarters in Kajokaji, in the border region.
As crowds in Khartoum celebrated, an SPLA spokesperson in Nairobi said that the SPLA had now laid siege to Torit.
Some 80 km from the Ugandan border, Torit was strategically placed on the land route to Kenya and since 1989 had been a stronghold of the SPLA and latterly of Garang's Torit faction.
UN airlift to Juba
UN relief flights to Juba —known as "Operation Lifeline Sudan" —were halted temporarily on July 21, after Sudanese government troops had boarded a UN plane and used it for one week to transport troops and military equipment.
The food and medical supply situation in Juba, 95 km north-west of Torit, was deteriorating as the town remained under siege by the SPLA.
Its inhabitants, including 230,000 refugees from surrounding areas, remained totally dependent on outside food supplies.
UN officials announced in a communiqué published in Nairobi on July 25 that the organization was to move the headquarters of its Sudanese relief operation from Khartoum to Entebbe, Uganda.
In the communiqué the UN said that the unblocking of international aid to the south of Sudan was a matter of urgency but could only take place if all parties to the conflict there agreed to co-operate with the UN and other humanitarian organizations.
On Aug. 20 the UN food airlift to Juba resumed, without SPLA guarantees.
On Aug. 24 aid officials said that the UN had once more suspended flights to Juba after shells landed near a plane unloading food at Juba's airport.
Radio SPLA on Aug. 26 denied that the plane had been deliberately targeted, but said that relief aircraft used the airport "at their own risk" .
Minister's resignation — Other ministerial change
The Minister of Labour and Social Security, George Kinga Logokwa, who had resigned in late July, on July 30 was replaced by Maj.-Gen.
Dominic Kassiano.
Kinga, himself a southerner, said that he had resigned in protest at the government's intention to "Islamicize" the south and also at the "persecution" of "hundreds of thousands of displaced southerners" in the region around Khartoum.
Lt.-Col. Galwak Deng replaced Natali Yanku Ambu as Minister of Local Government and Co-ordination of Provincial Affairs.
AFRICA
ECOWAS
15th annual summit
The 15th annual meeting of the heads of state and government of the 16 member countries of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) was held on July 27-29 in Dakar, Senegal [see p. 38058 for membership; p. 38327 for 1991 summit].
Much discussion centred on the draft revisions to the ECOWAS treaty submitted to the heads of state by a committee of eminent persons chaired by Gen. Yakubu Gowon, the former Nigerian head of state.
The proposals included the establishment of a regional parliament, the decisions of which would be binding on all member states, thus avoiding the need for ECOWAS resolutions to be ratified by individual governments.
Similarly, the advice and judgments of a proposed ECOWAS Court of Justice would be binding on all institutions and members.
The committee also recommended a 1 per cent tax on all imports into the ECOWAS area as a means of raising revenue for the organization rather than the existing method based on yearly contributions from members.
It was agreed that the revision of the treaty would be completed by the year's end and that it should come into force before the next summit.
The Liberian conflict was also a focus of the summit.
Capt. Valentine E. M. Strasser, head of state of Sierra Leone, reported that as a result of the conflict his country had had "no respite for the past 15 months" and had suffered as much devastation as Liberia itself.
In their final communiqué the heads of state threatened to blockade that part of Liberia controlled by Charles Taylor's National Patriotic Front of Liberia if Taylor did not implement within one month the Yamoussoukro IV peace agreement signed in October 1991 [see p. 38518].
AFRICA
GUINEA-BISSAU
Establishment of election commission
On July 10 the ruling African Party for the Independence of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde (PAIGC) agreed to the establishment of a multiparty national election commission.
The commission, which was expected to begin work immediately, was charged with the organization and supervision of the country's first pluralist presidential and legislative elections, scheduled for Nov. 15 and Dec. 13 respectively [see p. 38802].
Return of FLING leader
François Mendy Kankoila, president of the Front for the Struggle for Guinea-Bissau's National Independence (FLING), arrived in Bissau on July 24 after 40 years in exile.
Kankoila was one of the founder members of FLING, helping to establish it in the early 1950s.
After a brief spell in Senegal, from where he was deported, he spent the majority of his years in exile in The Gambia.
AFRICA
MALI
National peace pact process
As fresh Tuareg rebel activity broke out in the west of the country, the first regular session of the National Pact follow-up commission was held on July 10-12.
The commission had been established in April to monitor the implementation of the national peace pact signed between the government and the Unified Movements and Fronts of Azawad, representing the Tuareg rebels [see p. 38853].
The commission, chaired by Ahmed Humihia of Algeria, which played a mediatory role in the peace negotiations, condemned the recent rebel attacks.
Among the measures adopted during the session was the creation of two special peacekeeping units which would relieve the armed and security forces.
The commission also ordered a media campaign to raise awareness of the peace pact.
AFRICA
NIGER
Recognition of Taiwan
The decision to resume diplomatic relations with Taiwan, broken off in 1974 [see p. 26670], was confirmed on July 22 (after Prime Minister Amadou Cheiffou had survived a no confidence motion on July 7).
Relations had first been resumed on June 19, after the Taipei government had promised financial aid worth US$50,000,000, but the decision was suspended on June 28, after a storm of protest.
China, which had reportedly ofered an interest-free loan for an unspecified sum on the understanding that recognition of Taiwan would be revoked, suspended relations with Niger on July 30.
In the no confidence debate in the High Council of the Republic (HCR —the transitional legislative assembly), the principal proponent of the motion, HCR chairman André Salifou, recalled an earlier decision that "the need for ready money…[should]not in any way serve as justification for the transitional government's decisions" .
The motion was defeated, however, despite Salifou's arguments that recognition of Taiwan breached Niger's commitments to China and violated a resolution of the previous year's national conference that international commitments should be respected by the transitional government.
Student protests
Gado Boube, the Minister of Education and Research, and his permanent secretary were taken hostage by a group of students on July 14.
The two men were held for several hours by more than 100 students who occupied the Ministry of Education in protest at the non-payments of grants and university registration procedures.
Moslem disturbances
A curfew was imposed on July 17 in Zinder, nearly 800 km east of Niamey, the capital, where several weeks of Moslem protests ended in violence after Friday prayers.
Several thousand demostrators had taken to the streets, attacked "indecently dressed" women (who they claimed were responsible for a drought), set fire to the head office of the Niger Women's Association (AFN), and also attacked the residences of the local prefect and sultan.
Troops were deployed to disperse the protesters, several of whom were charged with assault.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Legislative elections
As the country proceeded towards the inauguration of the Third Republic on Jan. 2, 1993, the nominally left-of-centre Social Democratic Party (SDP) emerged as the stronger of the two legally permitted parties, winning a majority in both houses of the new National Assembly in legislative elections held on July 4.
The party, however, fell short of the two-thirds majority needed to pass laws with constitutional implications or to reverse presidential vetoes.
In the 91-seat Senate, the SDP won 52 seats, its nominally conservative opponent the National Republican Convention (NRC) won 37 seats, and two by-elections were ordered.
In the 593-member House of Representatives, the SDP won 314 seats, the NRC 275, and four seats were to be settled at by-elections.
The SDP's electoral strength was predominantly in Lagos, in the Yoruba-speaking states of the south-west, and in the middle-belt states.
The NRC won support primarily in the Moslem Hausa- and Fulani-speaking states in the north.
In Kano state in the north, however, it was the SDP which won most seats.
The turnout was reportedly low, with only 25 per cent of the electorate voting.
Party officials attributed this to antipathy to the "open ballot" system in which voters had to queue at polling booths behind the poster of their chosen candidate and were publicly counted.
Pro-democracy campaigners claimed that the poor turnout was also the result of the alienation of voters who rejected the political system which had been imposed on them.
Concern over the military government's tight control over the transition to civilian rule was heightened on July 17 when Vice-President Augustus Aikhomu announced that the new National Assembly, whose opening session had been scheduled for July 27, would not be sworn in until after the election of a civilian president.
Quoting the 1989 Constitution, Aikhomu said that only the future president had the authority to proclaim the holding of the first session of the legislature.
The Assembly would therefore not sit until after Jan. 2, 1993.
AFRICA
SIERRA LEONE
Government changes
Capt. Valentine E. M. Strasser, the 27-year-old junior officer who had become chairman of the National Provisional Ruling Council (NPRC) after leading an April coup [see pp. 38853-4; 38900], made a series of changes in July to both the composition and structure of the government.
On July 7 all civilian Cabinet ministers were removed from the NPRC.
At the same time three military figures in the Cabinet were replaced with civilians.
Lt.-Col. Charles Emile Mbayo was replaced as Minister of Transport, Communications and Tourism by Frank Kargbo, Lt. Julius Maada Bio relinquished responsibility for the Ministry of Information, Broadcasting and Culture to Oreh Awoonor-Renner, and Lt. Samuel Komba Kambo at the Ministry of Labour, Energy and Power was replaced by Alex R. E. Browne.
Strasser said that the changes would give "a civilian face to the government, while the NPRC [would]be concerned with matters of nation-building" .
On July 14 Strasser announced that the NPRC would become the Supreme Council of State (SCS) and that the Cabinet would be transformed into a Council of State Secretaries which would be in charge of "day to day administration" and would be directly responsible to the SCS.
He also announced the appointment of the three outgoing ministers, Mbayo, Bio and Kambo, as "main liaison officers" with direct responsibility for the work of several government departments.
Mbayo was assigned responsibility for transport, mineral resources and public works, Bio for finance, foreign affairs and information and Kambo for labour, commerce and land matters.
Abdulai Conteh affair
Abdulai Conteh, Vice-President under Joseph Momoh> until the April coup, was denied refuge in the United Kingdom K after the UK Home Secretary decided on July 24 that Conteh bore some responsibility for governmental corruption.
AFRICA
TOGO
Olympio inquiry
An independent inquiry into the assassination attempt on Gilchrist Olympio, chairman of the opposition alliance Union of the Forces of Change (UFC), on May 5 [see p. 38901]concluded that the attack was "apparently prepared and executed by military men" .
The preliminary findings of the inquiry by the International Federation of Human Rights (FIDH) were published on July 9.
The FIDH report said that the nature of military equipment used in the attack indicated the "complicity" of the armed forces general staff and named an officer in a commando regiment based close to the scene of the attack, as a probable accomplice.
The report also implicated Capt. Ernest Gnassingbe, the son of President Gnassingbe Eyadema.
Although no evidence had been found that Gnassingbe had been present during the attack, the report said he had been at the scene of the attack "immediately beforehand" .
Both officers denied any involvement in the attack.
Continuing attacks on opposition
On July 29 Tavio Amorin, a member of the High Council of the Republic (HCR —the transitional legislature), died of gunshot wounds sustained in an attack on July 24.
Amorin, leader of the Pan-Africanist Socialist Party and known for "radical stances" against the military and againsy President Eyadema, had in June warned that his life was threatened.
His death sparked demonstrations in Lomé, the capital, on July 30 by youths who claimed that the killing was part of a plot to eliminate critics of the President.
Up to three grenades exploded in the House of Representatives on July 10, two hours before a memorial service for opposition leader Marc Atti Depe, who had been killed during the attack on Olympio.
There were no casualties.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Registration of presidential election candidates
By July 30, 12 candidates had registered for the presidential elections due to be held simultaneously with legislative elections on September 29-30.
They included the incumbent President, Jose Eduardo dos Santos, for the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-Workers' Party (MPLA-PT), Jonas Savimbi, leader of the National Union for the Total Liberation of Angola (UNITA), Holden Roberto, leader of the National Front for the Liberation of Angola (FNLA), and Daniel Chipenda, who was proposed by the Angolan National Democratic Party (PNDA).
Chipenda had earlier resigned as election organizer for the MPLA [see p. 38949 for his election to MPLA central committee and political bureau], saying that he had not been given sufficient funds for the campaign and citing a "lack of the necessary trust and openness" in the party.
He also said that he wanted to be "a bridge between the leadership of MPLA and UNITA" .
Several candidates spoke of the need for a coalition, and senior FNLA officials said that their party would be likely to form an alliance with other parties, including the MPLA, in a possible run-off if no single candidate won outright in the first round.
A total of 4,300,000 Angolans had been registered to vote by the July 31 deadline, but in the expectation of the registration of a further 1,000,000 voters, the UN team extended the deadline by another 10 days.
The UN Secretary-General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, urged the USA and other Western countries to provide more logistic support to ensure the success of the elections.
President dos Santos appealed for the UN to stay on for two or three months after the elections.
All the factions comprising the Front for the Liberation of the Cabinda Enclave (FLEC) agreed during July to boycott the elections.
A delegation travelled to Lisbon to present their case; FLEC-Renewal president José Tiburcio Luemba called on Portugal to revise the agreements which had brought about the independence of Angola in 1975, and said that his movement would carry on an armed struggle until independence for Cabinda had been achieved.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
Accusations of corruption
President Frederick Chiluba faced a growing crisis when two Cabinet ministers who had resigned earlier in the month took part in launching on July 25 of a new party, the Caucus for National Unity (CNU).
The caucus had first emerged in Februry as a pressure group within the ruling Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD).
Baldwin Munakumabu Nkumbula (Minister of Youth, Sport and Child Development), who resigned on July 10, and Akashambacwa Mbikusita-Lewanika (Minister of Technical Education and Training), who resigned on July 20, ascribed their resignations to a lack of democracy within the government and to its failure to curb corruption.
Nkumbula's departure came the day after parliament refused to accept the report of a committee which had investigated the abuse of public funds by Cabinet ministers.
The report revealed a number of financial irregularities and implicated officials from various ministries including those of Commerce, Trade and Industry and of Works and Supply.
Another issue highlighted in the report was the alleged importation of toxic maize as part of a drought relief effort.
The CNU joined calls for the dismissal of Guy Scott, the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries, over this widely criticized purchase.
Economic progress
On July 23, representatives of Zambia's creditor countries, meeting in Paris, agreed in outline on a 50 per cent debt reduction scheme, the details of which were yet to be decided.
Earlier, on July 4, President Chiluba had announced that the country's foreign debt, which had stood at US$8,000 million early in the year [see p. 38752], had been reduced to US$6,500 million.
He also disclosed that the annual inflation rate, which had been over 400 per cent before his government took office, had been reduced to 78 per cent.
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
Principal members of Zimbabwe Cabinet
Cabinet changes
Under pressure from the IMF and donor country governments to cut expenditure, President Robert Mugabe on July 3 announced a reshuffle which reduced his Cabinet to 19 members.
Among the ministries to be closed were Local Government, Rural and Urban Development; Construction and National Housing; and Community Development and Co-operatives.
Several aspects of the reshuffle, which had been expected for several weeks, were attacked by opposition groups who demanded greater reductions.
Considerable criticism was levelled at the creation of a new ministry of National Affairs, Employment Creation and Co-operatives, allocated to Didymus Mutasa, who had headed the Ministry of Political Affairs until its early closure on June 26.
Opposition alliance
At a meeting on July 23, politicians who had been major figures in the pre-1980 period agreed to bring their respective political parties into a united front against President Mugabe's Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF).
The meeting, chaired by Ian Smith, Prime Minister of the then Rhodesia in 1964-79, was attended by the Rev. Ndabaningi Sithole of the Zimbabwe African National Union (Ndonga)(ZANU Ndonga) as well as by representatives from the United African National Council (UANC —the party which Bishop Abel Muzorewa had headed as Prime Minister of the "internal settlement" Zimbabwe-Rhodesia regime in 1979-80) and the Conservative Alliance of Zimbabwe (formed in 1984 and directly descended from Smith's former whites-only Rhodesian Front).
According to Sithole the aim of the front was the removal of the Mugabe government which, he said, was guilty of "unscrupulous corruption, nepotism, fraud and incompetence" .
Delays in land acquisition
The newly appointed Minister of Agriculture, Kumbirai Kangai, told the Commercial Farmers' Union on July 16 that the government would reconsider plans to confiscate 13 commercial farms under the terms of the controversial Land Acquisition Act approved in March [see p. 38804].
Despite government assurances that no productive farms would be seized, the plans as published earlier in the month had included the confiscation of a large dairy farm.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
Progress towards ceasefire
The prospects for a ceasefire agreement between the government and the rebels of the Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo) were significantly improved by plans for a face-to-face meeting on Aug. 4 in Rome between President Joaquim Chissano and the Renamo leader Afonso Dhlakama.
The official peace negotiations in Rome had been blocked by a succession of differences over a wide range of political and constitutional issues.
Progress was accelerated, however, by the combination of diplomatic pressures (involving among others Zimbabwe's President Mugabe and Botswana's President Masire, a visit to the USA by Chissano in early July) and the continuing drought.
On July 16 Renamo and the government signed a joint humanitarian declaration designed to allow unrestricted passage for food convoys.
Only 100,000 tonnes of an estimated 500,000 tonnes of food aid required throughout the country had been distributed by early July.
The first substantive talks on military issues began on July 6.
Renamo wanted joint armed forces of only 15,000 during a transitional phase before a general election, whereas the government proposed armed forces of 50,000.
In a Portuguese Radio broadcast on July 21 Dhlakama said that he wanted to tackle this question in his talks with Chissano, as well as the suspension of any legislation hindering democracy.
Dhlakama also demanded that members of his movement be given immunity from prosecution or official harassment.
In a broadcast on Radio Mozambique on July 29, President Chissano said that there were "strong possibilities of success" in his planned meeting with Dhlakama.
He added: "Those who do not like Dhlakama will have to tolerate and coexist with him." 
Pressure on the government and Renamo to reach a full ceasefire agreement as soon as possible was exerted by the country's only registered opposition party, the Mozambican National Union (Unamo), headed by Carlos Reis.
Other opposition parties preparing for multiparty politics included the Mozambique's People's Progressive Party (PPPM), headed by Padimbe Kamati Andrea, which held its constituent congress in Maputo in mid-July.
A mutiny over pay arrears had spread to several sections of the armed forces by the end of July, sparked off by troops of the Nyanga Battalion who erected road-blocks in the Manhica area.
The human rights group Africa Watch published a report on July 21 highlighting Renamo's recruitment of children as fighters and its gross human rights abuses against civilians.
AFRICA
LESOTHO
Return of Moshoeshoe
King Moshoeshoe II returned to Maseru, the capital, to a joyous reception on July 20 after two years of exile.
The deposed king had announced his decision to return at the end of May, when he committed himself to promoting democracy and announced that he was planning to sponsor an interim multiparty government of national consensus which would include members of the military.
The Military Council, which in 1990 had stripped Moshoeshoe of his powers and installed his son Letsie III on the throne [see pp. 37238; 37306; 37843], had made it clear, however, that it was not prepared to countenance the return of Moshoeshoe as king.
Under an agreement brokered by the Commonwealth Secretariat, the Council agreed to allow him to return as chief and as head of the royal family, but not as monarch.
AFRICA
MALAWI
Release and re-arrest of Chihana
Opposition trade unionist leader Chakufwa Chihana was on July 11 unexpectedly released on bail, along with 10 other political prisoners, following pressure from Western governments over Malawi's human rights record.
Chihana had been arrested in April [see p. 38851].
Also among those released was Aleke Banda, a former secretary-general of the ruling Malawi Congress Party (MCP) who had been detained for 12 years without charge; he was at one time considered to be the heir-apparent of the ageing President Hastings Banda.
In a speech on July 5 President Banda had announced an intention to charge and try all detainees suspected of breaking the law, saying that a special tribunal headed by a High Court judge would be set up to hear appeals from any detainees who had not been charged with any offence.
In the speech, marking the 28th anniversary of Malawi's independence, he also stated that there were "only 11 detainees remaining in our prisons today" .
As expected, Chihana was re-arrested within three days of his release, and charged with sedition.
In a BBC interview during his brief period of freedom he had promised to continue campaigning for multiparty democracy even if it meant a death sentence for sedition.
Some 200 people in possession of pamphlets calling for a multiparty political system were reported to have been arrested in recent weeks around the country; the human rights organization Amnesty International said that many people working in companies with facsimile transmission machines capable of receiving opposition literature printed abroad were among those detained.
Opposition leader Mapopa Chipeta claimed from Harare that the number of new detainees was "perhaps 2,000" .
AFRICA
BURUNDI
Death sentences for rebels
The trial of 64 people suspected of involvement in rebel attacks which had begun on Nov. 23, 1991 [see p. 38662], was concluded on July 15.
The accused, who were apparently without legal representation, faced various charges arising from the rebellion, including inciting people to take up arms, accommodating rebels and planning the rebellion.
Five people were sentenced to death, six to life imprisonment, 44 to 20 years' imprisonment and four to 15 years' imprisonment; five of the defendants were acquitted.
On July 30 Prime Minister Adrien Sibomana assured representatives from the European Communities (EC) that the death sentences would not be implemented.
AFRICA
RWANDA
Peace agreement
Following a preparatory meeting in Paris in June [see p. 38950], the transitional government and the rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front (FPR) met in Arusha, Tanzania, on July 10-14 to begin negotiations to end the rebel war which had started in October 1990 [see pp. 37765-66].
The government was represented by Boniface Ngulinzaira, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, while the FPR delegation was headed by Pasteur Bizimungu.
The talks were chaired by the Tanzanian Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Relations, Ahmed Hassan Diria, and were attended by observers from Burundi, Tanzania, Uganda and Zaïre as well as Belgium, France and the USA.
A representative of President Abdou Diouf of Senegal, the new chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), was also present.
Under the terms of an agreement, signed on July 14, the two parties committed themselves to a temporary truce from July 19 to be followed by a complete ceasefire on July 31.
The ceasefire would be monitored by a Military Observer Group (GOM) made up of representatives from the Rwandan army and the FPR and officers from Nigeria, Senegal, Zimbabwe and a fourth country to be determined by the OAU chairman.
It was agreed to establish a joint political-military commission which would also monitor the ceasefire and supervise the implementation of a future peace agreement.
Political negotiations were scheduled for Aug. 10 and were expected to last two months.
The conclusions of these negotiations would take effect as of Jan. 10, 1993.
In spite of reports from July 20 onwards of truce violations on both sides, both the government and the FPR expressed optimism about the success of the peace negotiations.
AFRICA
SEYCHELLES
Multiparty elections
Multiparty elections to a 23-member constituent commission were held on July 23-26 for the first time since the 1977 coup, when Sir James Mancham was overthrown by France-Albert René [see pp. 28485-86].
The voting followed the decision of the ruling Seychelles People's Progressive Front (SPPF) in December 1991 to legalize opposition parties [see p. 38666].
President René's SPPF won 58.4 per cent of votes cast and was expected to take 14 seats on the commission to draft a constitution in advance of presidential and legislative elections scheduled to take place in December.
The Democratic Party, led by Mancham, with 33.7 per cent of the votes was expected to occupy eight seats on the commission.
The Parti Seselwa, led by Wavel Ramkalawan, which won 4.4 per cent of votes, was expected to secure one seat under a "best losers" system.
The five other parties contesting the election failed to secure sufficient support to gain representation.
The turnout was estimated at 90 per cent.
Mancham expressed surprise at the results and called for a recount.
Although Commonwealth observers reported that voting had been free and fair, Mancham said that the poll had been rigged against the Democratic Party, claiming that there had been an "abundant use of state apparatus" in the SPPF campaign and that there had been irregularities in the establishment of the electoral lists, allowing some people to vote more than once.
Coup compensation
On July 31 the government announced the receipt of R8,000,000 from the South African government as compensation for the abortive coup by South African-back mercenaries in 1981 [see pp. 31513-15].
AFRICA
COMOROS
New transitional government
The breakdown in relations between President Said Mohammed Djohar and Mohamed Taki Abdoulkarim, who had been appointed Co-ordinator (head of government) in January [see p. 38706-07], culminated on July 4 when Mohamed Taki was dismissed.
On July 10 the President then dissolved the entire transitional government for the second time and named a third adminstration which excluded Mohamed Taki on July 16 [for earlier administrations see pp. 38706-07; 38902].
The most significant change in the government, to which most ministers were reappointed, albeit with altered responsibilities, was the replacement of Mohamed Said Abdallah Mchangama, Djohar's son-in-law, by Kandi Ali Ashtotosi, a new appointment, as Minister of Finance, Budget, Economy, Commerce and Planning.
Djohar had been under increasing pressure from opposition groups as well as from the IMF and the World Bank to dismiss Mchangama after he was implicated in a financial scandal [see p. 38902].
However, resisting demands for his removal from the government, Djohar appointed Mchangama Minister of Works, Posts and Telecommunications.
Moreover, although no prime minister or co-ordinator was named, there was speculation that Mchangama would in fact head the government despite his apparent demotion.
AFRICA
MADAGASCAR
Coup attempt <the referendum will actually take place in august, so i've left it until then>
A group of eight armed civilians who took over the radio station in Antananarivo, the capital, on July 29 surrendered to the armed forces after they failed to win popular support.
The eight gunmen broadcast a communiqué which announced the establishment of a "Committee to Save the Nation" and stated that its priority would be "to restore order to the island and to restart the economy" and bring about "moral renewal" .
The rebels also declared that Pastor Michel Fety had replaced Didier Ratsiraka as President.
According to a report from the Paris radio station France Inter, Fety was a member of "an extremist faction" aligned to the opposition Comité des forces vives.
Prime Minister Guy Razanamasy on July 30 said that he had been made aware of the imminent attempt the day before it took place and that a "foreign power" was responsible.
AFRICA
COTE D'IVOIRE
July 29 the National Assembly, responding to a request from President Félix Houphouët-Boigny, granted an amnesty to Laurent Gbagbo and other opposition activists and students imprisoned after demonstrations in February [see p. 38753].
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
Ali Aref Bourhan, the Afar politician who had been Chief Minister of the territory before independence in 1977, was on July 12 sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment along with eight other people similarly convicted of plotting to overthrow the government [for arrests following January 1991 coup attempt see p. 37946; for October 1991 hunger strike see p. 38565].
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
On July 16, 10 parties which were signatories to the national charter of July 1991 demanded the annulment, on account of voting irregularities, of the local elections held on June 21 [see p. 38952]; on July 27 the government announced the creation of a "board to correct election errors" , which would include both Ethiopian and foreign experts.
AFRICA
NAMIBIA
At a meeting with US Secretary of State James Baker on July 13, Prime Minister Hage Geingob asked the USA to use its influence with South Africa to speed up the negotiations over the port of Walvis Bay, which remained under South African jurusdiction.
AFRICA
UMOA
It was announced on July 30, at the end of a summit meeting of the heads of state or government of the members of the Union monétaire ouest-africaine (UMOA) held in Dakar, Senegal, that there would be no devaluation of the franc of the Communauté financière en Afrique centrale (CFA) despite weeks of rumours to the contrary; this was confirmed by a statement from the French Ministry of Economy and Finance that the rate of 50 francs CFA to one French franc would remain.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Presidential election campaign
The presidential election campaign moved into a new phase in July as Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton was formally chosen as the Democratic Party's presidential nominee at the party's national convention.
Clinton took a huge opinion poll lead over the incumbent President George Bush of the Republican Party.
The campaign also reverted to the traditional two-party contest with the unexpected withdrawal of undeclared independent candidate Ross Perot.
Choice of Gore as Clinton's running-mate
The month began with speculation over the choice of Clinton's running-mate for the vice-presidency.
Among those who were reported to have declined to be considered was New York Governor Mario Cuomo, one of the party's most charismatic figures, who had earlier resisted a powerful campaign to induce him to run for the presidential nomination.
The uncertainty was ended on July 9 when Clinton announced the choice of Albert Gore, a senator from Tennessee, whom Clinton described as "a leader of great strength, integrity, and stature" .
Gore, who had made an impressive if unsuccessful bid for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1988, was the product of a patrician southern family, his father having been Senator for Tennessee.
After serving in the US Army in Vietnam in 1969-71, Gore worked as a journalist before being elected to the House of Representatives in 1976 and to the Senate in 1984 and 1990.
Although not a great speaker, Gore was generally considered to be hard-working and conscientious and was renowned as an expert in arms control, defence and foreign policy matters.
He was also known for his interest in ecological and environmental issues and, although located on the centre-right of the Democratic Party, shared Clinton's belief in the right of women to choose to have an abortion.
The "ticket" of Clinton, 46, and Gore, 44, was widely hailed as ushering in a new generation of leaders.
The choice of Gore was also seen as reinforcing those areas —particularly foreign policy and environmental issues — where Clinton was seen as vulnerable.
It represented something of a risk, however, in that the choice of two white, male, centrist, southerners defied the traditional wisdom of "balancing" the presidential ticket as a means of presenting the widest possible appeal to the country's different constituent electoral groups.
The fact that it was the first time in the 20th century that either of the major parties had selected an all-southern election ticket reflected the widespread belief that only by recapturing support lost to the Republicans in the south could the Democrats hope to win the presidency.
Nevertheless, there were criticisms from the left of the party, with the Rev. Jesse Jackson complaining that the choice of Gore meant that the ticket was "too narrow." 
Democratic national convention
The Democratic national convention was held at Madison Square Gardens, New York City, on July 14-18.
It was characterized by a determined display of party unity, although this was tempered with a greater degree of realism than had been apparent in 1988.
On July 6 Cuomo had agreed to make the formal nominating speech for Clinton, apparently dispelling the ill-feeling between the two men which had been evident in the early stages of the campaign.
Clinton received another boost when, on July 8, he was publicly endorsed by Paul Tsongas whom he had defeated in the primary contests.
Even the simmering dispute between Clinton and Jackson [see p. 38953], appeared to have abated when, on July 11, Jackson endorsed the Clinton-Gore ticket, but did so with the proviso that the party must "adopt more inclusive strategies and a broader vision" if it was to win the November elections.
The only remaining threat to the carefully contrived image of party unity appeared to come from Jerry Brown, Clinton's most dogged rival in the primaries, who had won 609 convention delegates.
Brown's unpredictability and his refusal to endorse Clinton led to attempts by senior members of the party to prevent him from addressing the convention.
In the event, when Brown was allowed to speak on July 14, he reiterated his "anti-system" campaign theme and declined even to mention Clinton.
The platform adopted by the convention on July 13 was very much in Clinton's moderate image, and was devoid of many of the minority-related positions which it had included in recent years.
It concentrated upon Clinton's advocacy of a "new covenant" between the government and the governed whereby the former would provide greater resources while the latter would be expected to shoulder greater responsibilities.
It explicitly rejected "both the do-nothing government of the last 12 years and the big government theory that says we can hamstring business and tax and spend our way to prosperity" .
Although it rejected a proposal by Tsongas to cap federal spending and increase petrol taxes, the platform accepted a "no pain no gain" position in regard to the rising federal budget deficit, warning that its reduction could be achieved only through "fair and shared sacrifice of all Americans for the common good" .
The keynote speeches to the convention on July 13 —made by New Jersey Senator Bill Bradley, Georgia Governor Zed Miller, and former congresswoman Barbara Jordan —concentrated more on attacking Bush than on promoting Clinton.
On the following night Jackson gave a speech which, while endorsing Clinton, included the radical rhetoric which he had used in his past two campaigns for the presidential nomination.
On July 15 Cuomo gave an electrifying nomination address which was rapturously received by the assembled delegates.
It was followed by a roll call of state delegations which saw Clinton formally clinch the nomination with 3,372 votes compared with 596 for Brown, 209 for Tsongas and 77 for other candidates.
Clinton's acceptance speech, delivered on the evening of July 16, included a personal account of his childhood in Hope, Arkansas.
He also reiterated the main themes of his primary campaign, and in so doing maintained his reputation for providing the most detailed policy statements of any of the presidential candidates.
His speech also emphasized the "new covenant" concept and made an unabashed appeal to the middle class which, he promised, under his administration would "be forgotten no more" .
Disintegration of Perot's campaign
The other key development in the political campaign during July was the collapse of Ross Perot's independent campaign for the presidency.
Although he had never formally declared his candidacy, the Texan billionaire had been campaigning intensively since March.
Portraying himself as political outsider, Perot had become a beneficiary of the current anti-incumbent mood of the electorate, and had received some impressive opinion poll ratings.
Increasingly, however, his policies and personality had been subjected to close scrutiny by both the media and the Republican Party, causing him to complain that the latter was pursuing a smear campaign against him [see p. 38953].
His autocratic style, his disapproval of whole social groups (such as adulterers and homosexuals), and the eccentricity of some of his views —he was known to dislike men with beards and women who wore trousers —all served to dent his early showing in the polls.
Perot was also damaged by his own political naïveté, as for example on July 12 when he addressed the annual convention of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People —his first major campaign appearance before a black audience —and offended many in the audience by the insensitivity of his remarks, which included references to "you people" .
With Perot's standing in the polls declining sharply, his campaign co-manager, Edward J. Rollins, resigned on July 15.
Rollins, who had guided the 1984 Republican campaign to victory, explained his departure as a "mutual decision" arising from "irreconcilable differences" between himself and Perot over how to revive the campaign.
On the following day Perot announced that he was abandoning his campaign.
Having concluded that he could not win the presidential election in November, he said, "it would have been disruptive for us to continue" .
Clinton's lead — Bush's problems
Although Perot refused to endorse the candidacies of either Clinton or Bush, he conceded that the Democratic Party had done "a brilliant job" in reviving itself, and that this had been a key factor in his decision to withdraw.
The conventional wisdom was that the bulk of Perot's supporters were dissatisfied Republicans who would eventually return their support to the party.
However, as the Democratic nominees left their convention and plunged immediately into an eight-state overland campaign tour through the Midwest, Clinton was recording opinion poll ratings of up to 30 percentage points ahead of Bush.
Bush faced increasing pressure from within the Republican Party to revitalize his lacklustre campaign, and there were even suggestions that he might stand aside in favour of a more dynamic Republican candidate.
A low point was reached on July 24, at a convention of the National League of POW/MIA families, when he was repeatedly heckled, and then shouted down, by those within the audience who accused him of suppressing information on US servicemen missing in south-east Asia.
Although he eventually managed to finish his (televised) speech, the image remained of a President no longer in full control of events, being angrily accused of lying to the American people.
Among the Bush campaign's problems were the President's lack of domestic achievements or a clear aims for a second term; a shortage of tangible foreign policy achievements or objectives (the success of the Gulf war having been marred by the continuance in power of Saddam Hussein); the depressed state of the US economy (unemployment figures released in July showed that the total without work had risen to 7.8 per cent); continuing reservations over the choice of Dan Quayle as Vice-President; and growing rumours that the President's apparent lack of appetite for the election campaign was symptomatic of serious ill-health —although Bush sought to dispel the "crazy rumours" surrounding his campaign.
Presidential veto of voter-registration bill
President Bush on July 2 vetoed the so-called "motor-voter" bill, a piece of legislation which had sought to reform the voter-registration process on a national basis.
The measure had acquired its name because among its measures was one which would have allowed individuals to register to vote while seeking a driver's licence, a procedure already in operation in 28 states and Washington DC.
The bill also would have also allowed registration by mail and at unemployment and welfare offices.
Bush condemned the bill as "an open invitation to fraud and corruption" , and justified his action on the grounds of upholding states' rights.
In his veto message he stated that the legislation would have imposed "unnecessary, burdensome, expensive, and constitutionally questionable federal regulation on the states in an area of traditional state authority." 
The President also said that he would "support legislation that would assist the states in implementing appropriate reforms in order to make voter registration easier for the American public" .
Nevertheless, the veto was widely denounced as politically partisan, on the basis that any overall increase in registration was thought likely to favour the Democratic Party.
Figures from the Federal Elections Commission and the Census Bureau suggested that 35 per cent of the US electorate —some 65,000,000 potential voters —were unregistered, and that a high proportion of these were poor and were members of minority communities, the traditional constituents of the Democratic Party.
The bill had been passed by Congress largely on a party-line vote, winning approval in the Senate on May 20 by 61 votes to 38, and the House of Representatives on June 17 by 268 votes to 153.
The veto was the 31st of the Bush presidency, all of which had been upheld.
Report on October Surprise allegation — Progress of Iran-contra investigation
The preliminary findings of a congressional panel established to investigate the "October Surprise" allegation —the claim that members of the Reagan-Bush election campaign conspired to reap political advantage in the 1980 presidential election campaign by preventing the administration of the then (Democratic) President, Jimmy Carter, from obtaining the release of US hostages held in Iran —were released on July 1 by the panel's head, Lee H. Hamilton, a Democratic representative for Indiana.
After interviewing more than 50 witnesses and reviewing tapes and papers from the security services, Hamilton stated that "all credible evidence" suggested that George Bush had been in the USA on Oct. 18-22, 1980, when, as vice-presidential candidate, he was alleged to have flown to Paris to negotiate the deal with representatives from the revolutionary government of Iran.
Despite this finding, however, Hamilton stated that the panel would continue its general investigation into whether the Reagan-Bush campaign team conspired with Iran to delay the release of the hostages.
It was also reported that, in late July, the special prosecutor investigating the Iran-contra scandal, Lawrence Walsh, was considering bringing criminal conspiracy charges against former President Ronald Reagan and some of his advisers.
The charges related to the administration's attempt to conceal the US role in a secret arms-for-hostages shipment by Israel to Iran in 1985, an issue which had led to the filing of charges against former Defence Secretary Caspar Weinberger, in June 1992 [see p. 38955].
 "Saddamgate" scandal
The Democrat-controlled House of Representatives judiciary committee called on July 10 for the appointment of a special prosecutor (independent counsel) to investigate the possibility that senior members of the Bush administration had contravened the law in providing military assistance to Iraq in the period prior to its invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, and had then sought to conceal the evidence through a cover-up.
The move brought into the open the so-called "Saddamgate" scandal, the rumbling allegations of which centred upon the charge that the Bush government had concealed that extent of its illegal support for Saddam Hussein prior to August 1990.
The judiciary committee's preliminary examination of the affair led to accusations that members of the Bush administration had tampered with the pre-1990 export records concerning Iraq, and had impeded a federal investigation of a $4,000 million fraud at the Atlanta branch of Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL).
BNL Atlanta was used by Iraq to arrange loans in the late 1980s, some of which were allegedly converted illegally into funding for Iraq's nuclear, biological and chemical weapons programmes.
President Bush, while admitting that his administration had attempted to woo Iraq, had persistently denied claims that it had boosted Saddam's military capabilities through illegal action.
Having earlier described calls for the appointment of a special prosecutor as "a political witchhunt" , Bush reacted to the judiciary committee's July 10 decision in an uncharacteristically muted fashion, claiming that his lawyers had advised him not to comment upon the issue.
Following the formal request for a special prosecutor, Attorney General William Barr had up to 30 days to make a preliminary ruling.
If he decided to accede to the request —and precedent suggested that it would be very difficult for him to refuse it —then he would have a further 60 days to appoint a panel to decide upon a prosecutor.
According to this schedule a prosecutor would be appointed less than a month before the presidential elections of November 1992.
Appointment of Navy Secretary — Sexual assaults scandal
Sean C. O'Keefe, the Defence Department's chief financial officer, was appointed as acting Secretary of the Navy on July 7.
He replaced H. Lawrence Garrett III, who had resigned on June 26 amidst revelations concerning sexual assaults on female members of the service.
O'Keefe, 36, who had no direct military experience but was a close confidant of Defence Secretary Dick Cheney, was appointed in an acting capacity for 120 days.
The temporary nature of the appointment meant that its confirmation by the Senate was not required, although Cheney stated that a permanent appointment, which would require Senate approval, would be made in the near future.
The scandal which led to Garrett's resignation arose from reports that 26 women, including 14 officers, had been sexually molested at the annual convention of the Tailhook Association, a private group of retired and active naval aviators, held in Las Vegas in September 1991, which had been attended by Garrett.
An investigation of the assaults had been initiated by the Navy, with some reluctance, in October 1991.
In April 1992 the invest-igation revealed that 26 assaults had occurred —involving at least 70 male officers either directly or as bystanders —but that identifying the culprits had proved extremely difficult because of the "closing of ranks and obfuscation" .
In June the Navy's investigation was suspended and the matter was transferred to the Defence Department Inspector General for a thorough review.
Growing congressional concern over the matter had also been demonstrated by the decision of the Senate armed services committee to block promotion for more than 4,500 Navy and Marine Corps officers until information was forthcoming on whether or not they had been involved in the assaults.
The catalyst for Garrett's resignation was an account of the ordeal suffered by one of the victims, published in the press on June 24, which led President Bush to express his outrage over the incident and the inadequate nature of the Navy's response to it.
In his resignation letter Garrett reiterated his ignorance of what had occurred, but accepted "full responsibility" for the Navy's response and for the "leadership failure" which had allowed "the egregious conduct at Tailhook to occur in the first place" .
The scandal was particularly embarrassing to the Bush administration as it coincided with the revelation that at least 24 female members of the US Army had been raped or sexually assaulted by colleagues while serving in the Gulf region during operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm.
Details of the assaults, which were compiled by the US Army Criminal Investigation Command and reported in the press on July 21, showed that, as had been the case in the Tailhook incident, the military authorities had discouraged victims from lodging official complaints and had shown a reluctance to investigate in instances where an official complaint had been filed.
Sentencing of Noriega
A US court in Miami, Florida, sentenced former Panamanian leader Manuel Antonio Noriega to 40 years' imprisonment on July 10 on drugs and racketeering charges.
Noriega had been found guilty in April on eight charges following a seven-month trial [see p. 38857].
Prior to the passing of sentence Noriega, 58, made a two-hour address to the court in which he quoted sources as diverse as Socrates, Lao-tze, and Hillary Clinton, the wife of the Democratic Party presidential nominee.
He described himself as a victim of a US plot to turn his country into a colony, and alleged that he had not received a fair trial.
He also referred to US intelligence operations which, he said, he would have presented as evidence in his defence but which had been suppressed.
He claimed that he had been a valued ally of the US government but that President Bush had pursued a vendetta against him because he, Noriega, had refused to participate in efforts to overthrow the left-wing Sandinista government in Nicaragua.
Rejecting defence arguments that Noriega was a prisoner of war —he had been captured as a result of the December 1989 US invasion of Panama [see pp. 37112-13]— US District Judge William M. Hoeveler stated that the sentence was reflective only of the evidence presented during the trial and not of the wider aspects of the case.
Noriega was the first foreign former head of state to be convicted of criminal charges in a US court.
Speaking after the sentence had been imposed, US prosecutors confirmed that Noriega faced additional drug charges in Florida, and numerous charges — including murder —in Panama.
Rioting in New York City
Serious rioting in a Hispanic neighbourhood of New York City during the night of July 6-7 left at least one person dead and many others injured, including several police officers.
A number of buildings were damaged by looting and arson, and numerous vehicles were set ablaze.
The rioting broke out in Washington Heights, northern Manhattan, following the shooting by police on July 3 of José Garcia, an immigrant from the Dominican Republic.
The police account was that Garcia was shot while struggling with officers who were attempting to disarm him.
Some witnesses to the incident, however, claimed that Garcia was unarmed and was fired upon while being beaten on the ground.
The riot began as a peaceful protest march over the killing, but violence erupted after police prevented the marchers from approaching the precinct house of the officer who had fired the fatal shots.
It was the most serious outbreak of unrest within the city since the election of mayor David Dinkins in 1989 [see p. 37035].
Prior to the rioting the Dinkins administration had been widely congratulated on successfully avoiding the disturbances which had affected many US cities in the aftermath of the Los Angeles riots of April-May 1992.
Urban aid package
On July 1, following two months of intensive negotiations, representatives of the Bush administration and congressional leaders reached a compromise agreement on an urban aid package which included the creation of enterprise zones and provided for total spending of $2,500 million over five years.
Unemployment legislation
On July 2, one day after the government had announced that unemployment had reached an eight-year peak of 7.8 per cent, Congress approved legislation to extend unemployment benefits for a further 26 weeks [for February extension see p. 38757]; the bill was signed by President Bush on July 3.
Abortion
Progress of federal legislation to protect the right to abortion
Following the Supreme Court's decision on the abortion issue in late June [see pp. 38954-55], the Senate labour and human resources committee on July 1 voted 12 to five to approve a bill designed to enshrine the right to abortion —currently derived from the beleaguered 1973 Supreme Court decision, Roe v. Wade — into federal law.
The bill, which was likely to be considered by the full Senate after the summer recess, was similar to that which had been approved by the judiciary committee of the House of Representatives on June 30.
Bush, who had repeatedly stated his opposition to abortion under all but the most extreme circumstances, was known to oppose the bill, and was thought likely to veto it in the event of its enactment.
The Democratic Party presidential nominee, Bill Clinton, had attempted to take advantage of renewed concern over the availability of abortion by restating his support for the right to choose, and by promising that, if elected President, he would appoint to the Supreme Court only judges who supported Roe v. Wade.
Supreme Court decision on abortion pill
The Supreme Court on July 17 refused the request of a pregnant Californian woman to retain possession of a French-made abortion drug, RU-486, which had not been approved for use in the USA.
Leona Benten, 29, acting with the support of abortion-rights activists, had attempted to enter the USA with a number of the pills on July 1.
The drugs were seized by customs officers at Kennedy Airport, New York City, causing Benten to file a legal suit against the Food and Drug Administration.
The legal process which followed ended with the Supreme Court's decision on July 17.
CANADA
Agreement on draft constitutional deal
The protracted talks on the issue of constitutional reform involving the federal government and nine of the country's 10 provincial premiers produced a compromise agreement on July 7.
The Minister Responsible for Constitutional Affairs, Joe Clark, described the new compromise —popularly dubbed the Pearson accord after the building in Ottawa where it was negotiated — as the most historic agreement since Canada became a confederation in 1867.
The Pearson accord was the culmination of a two-year search by the federal government and the premiers of the English-speaking provinces for a constitutional formula to induce French-speaking Quebec to remain within the Canadian federation following the collapse of the Meech Lake Accord in June 1990 [see pp. 37519-20].
In June 1992 the talks appeared to have foundered, having overrun the deadline for an agreement without having produced a package for the consideration of Quebec [see p. 38956].
A meeting between federal Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and the provincial premiers on June 29, however, agreed to extend the negotiations into July in the hope of reaching a compromise.
The new accord contained many of the elements of the Meech Lake agreement, including the recognition of Quebec as a distinct society.
It also provided for increased powers for the provincial governments, including a veto for all provinces over future constitutional change.
The Pearson agreement also made a key concession to the less populous provinces by providing for a reform of the federal Senate into an elected chamber within which each of the 10 provinces would have eight representatives.
This issue had been a major stumbling block, as any equalization of representation almost inevitably meant a relative reduction in the current number of seats held by the country's most heavily populated provinces, Ontario and Quebec.
The Senate would have a limited veto over bills passed by an expanded 317-member House of Commons.
Among the other provisions of the Pearson agreement were the recognition of the right to self-government for Canada's native Indian and Inuit populations, and a commitment to reduce barriers to inter-provincial trade.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Agreement on draft constitutional deal
The protracted talks on the issue of constitutional reform involving the federal government and nine of the country's 10 provincial premiers produced a compromise agreement on July 7.
The Minister Responsible for Constitutional Affairs, Joe Clark, described the new compromise —popularly dubbed the Pearson accord after the building in Ottawa where it was negotiated —as the most historic agreement since Canada became a confederation in 1867.
The Pearson accord was the culmination of a two-year search by the federal government and the premiers of the English-speaking provinces for a constitutional formula to induce French-speaking Quebec to remain within the Canadian federation following the collapse of the Meech Lake Accord in June 1990 [see pp. 37519-20].
In June 1992 the talks appeared to have foundered, having overrun the deadline for an agreement without having produced a package for the consideration of Quebec [see p. 38956].
A meeting between federal Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and the provincial premiers on June 29, however, agreed to extend the negotiations into July in the hope of reaching a compromise.
The new accord contained many of the elements of the Meech Lake agreement, including the recognition of Quebec as a distinct society.
It also provided for increased powers for the provincial governments, including a veto for all provinces over future constitutional change.
The Pearson agreement also made a key concession to the less populous provinces by providing for a reform of the federal Senate into an elected chamber within which each of the 10 provinces would have eight representatives.
This issue had been a major stumbling block, as any equalization of representation almost inevitably meant a relative reduction in the current number of seats held by the country's most heavily populated provinces, Ontario and Quebec.
The Senate would have a limited veto over bills passed by an expanded 317-member House of Commons.
Among the other provisions of the Pearson agreement were the recognition of the right to self-government for Canada's native Indian and Inuit populations, and a commitment to reduce barriers to inter-provincial trade.
AMERICAS
CUBA
Changes to Constitution
Changes to Cuba's 1976 Constitution were approved by the 11th ordinary meeting of the National Assembly of Popular Power on July 11-12.
Observers noted that some changes, such as that which enabled President Fidel Castro to declare a state of emergency, and appoint himself leader of the National Defence Council in such an event, merely institutionalized already existing situations.
Elections to the National Assembly were now to take place through the direct and secret vote of the population — deputies having previously been elected by members of each of the country's 14 provincial assemblies (which were popularly elected) from among their own members.
References to the Soviet Union were deleted from the Constitution.
The "final objective of building a Communist society" remained in place, however, as did "an economic system based on the socialist ownership by all people of the basic means of production" , but observers noted the introduction of "basic" as a qualifier.
Land, the sugar industry, banks, transport and factories and cultural and sports installations built by the state were non-transferable property (as in the 1976 version) but now an exception might be made"in cases in which the property is transferred in order to be used in the economic and social development of the country…
This must be done with the prior approval of the Council of Ministers or its Executive Committee".
Foreign trade would cease to be a state monopoly, although the state would continue to "direct and control" it, and the state "recognizes the ownership of mixed enterprises" , thus allowing for joint ventures with foreign investors in the future.
 "Discrimination due to race, colour of skin, sex, national origin, religious beliefs and any other reason harmful to national dignity" was punishable by law.
On July 12 Castro congratulated the deputies on "not having made the least concession in these difficult moments" (referring to the growing economic crisis).
He also said that "we are going to show how a revolution can be enacted through democratic principles, how democracy can be practised with one party" and announced that the National Assembly would reassemble within a few months in order to approve an electoral law which would lead to the holding of direct legislative elections in 1993.
At a press conference on July 19 the president of the National Assembly Juan Escalona said that "we have never believed that socialism is only possible with one party" , adding that under the present conditions, with an economic blockade of Cuba by the USA, "the existence of a single party is a defence mechanism" .
AMERICAS
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
Freeing of coup plotters
The leaders of the black Moslem fundamentalist Jamaat al-Moslemeen, Yasin Abu Bakr and Bilal Abdullah, and 114 other members of the group were released from prison on July 1.
They had spent two years in custody on charges of treason, murder and kidnapping in connection with the attempted coup in July-August 1990 [see pp. 37606-07; 38239].
The High Court ruled on June 30, however, that a pardon conferred on the Black Moslems at the time in return for the release of hostages and signed by the President of the Senate and the then acting head of state Joseph Emmanuel Carter, absolved them of any crimes.
The Court judged that Carter had been under no duress when he authorized the amnesty and could have resorted to alternative methods to end the coup attempt.
The Moslems were awarded their legal costs and approximately US$12,000,000 in compensation.
The Privy Council in London, acting as Trinidad's final court of appeal, had allowed an appeal application in November 1991, concluding that the issue of the pardon had to be taken into account [see p. 38671].
AMERICAS
MEXICO
State elections
On July 12 almost 3,000,000 people voted to elect governors, state legislatures and town mayors in two states —Chihuahua, bordering with the USA, and Michoacán, west of Mexico City.
On July 13 the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) conceded defeat in Chihuahua, where the new governor would be Francisco Barrio Terrazas of the National Action Party (PAN).
In Michoacán, however, the PRI candidate for governor won with a large majority.
In Chihuahua, where a turnout of 63 per cent of those eligible to vote was reported, Barrio became only the third non-PRI state governor.
The PRI had been defeated in state elections in Baja California Norte in July 1989 [see pp. 36811; 37274], and the governorship of the state of Guanjuato had been ceded provisionally to the PAN in 1991 after protests of electoral fraud [see p. 38385].
Barrio had stood unsuccessfully for the governorship of Chihuahua in 1986, and claimed that Fernando Baeza Melendez of the PRI had won that election fraudulently.
In Michoacán, a poor agricultural state with a radical tradition, the PRI's principal opponent was the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD) led by Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas Solórzano.
A tense situation prevailed for the vote, as 5,000 troops and riot police stood in a state of preparedness.
Official results on July 16 showed the PRD candidate for governor, Christobal Arias, suffering a resounding defeat, with 289,000 votes, at the hands of the Eduardo Villasenor of the PRI, who had 418,000 votes.
[For 1989 reallocation of seats in Michoacán see pp. 36811; 37274].
On July 14, when a PRI victory had already been announced by Michoacán's State Electoral Commission, thousands of PRD supporters in the state capital, Morelia, protested against what they claimed had been widespread fraud.
It was claimed by PRD officials that irregularities had included the last-minute doctoring of electoral rolls, the harassment of observers at polling stations, and unexpected changes of the locations of polling stations.
Press comment highlighted the large discrepancies between the amount of money spent by the PRI on the one hand and the opposition parties on the other on their election campaigns.
In Michoacán the PRI was reported to have spent the equivalent of an almost unprecedented US$33,000,000, and in Chihuahua the equivalent of US$20,000,000.
Barrio described such expenditure as "a crime in a country with so many needy people" .
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari in an interview in the Financial Times of July 20 said that he would seek to have ceilings placed on high spending in such campaigns and to make election financing more transparent.
Priests were allowed to vote for the first time since the 1920s, due to the repeal of anti-clerical legislation in January [see p. 38758].
Refusal of US aid
The Attorney General Ignacio Morales Lechuga said in an interview in the New York Times of July 27 that henceforward Mexico would not accept US aid directed towards combating drug trafficking.
This was apparently in response to the recent US Supreme Court ruling which legalized US government-authorized abductions abroad [see p. 38954].
He said that the Mexican government would nevertheless continue in its effort to suppress the illegal drugs trade, with its own resources.
In the last fiscal year such US aid to Mexico's anti-narcotics campaigns had totalled US$48,000,000.
Salinas's meeting with Bush and visit to Europe
President Salinas met with US President George Bush together with their respective trade ministers, at San Diego, California, on July 14, discussing in particular the imminent North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the question of US abductions.
Salinas visited the United Kingdom, France, Spain and Hungary later in the month [for January 1990 European visit, see p. 37274].
The Mexico City press announced on July 14 that Mexico had agreed to open up its oil sector to performance contracts (as opposed to flat-rate service contracts) in which the drilling company would receive a premium in the event that oil was found.
This was reportedly a concession which US oil companies had been seeking for some time.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Corruption crisis
In the most serious corruption scandal to face the government of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, the Comptroller-General Guillermo Potoy made public on July 17 a report which accused a former deputy Minister of the Presidency, Antonio Ibarra, of misappropriating US$1,000,000 in foreign aid funds intended for the most disadvantaged sectors.
The report claimed that investigators had discovered evidence of money withdrawals that were both "illegal" and "without justification" , false invoicing and non-existent "front" companies.
The report also claimed that the current Presidency Minister, Antonio Lacayo Oyanguren, Chamorro's chief adviser, bore legal and administrative responsibility for the actions of his former deputy and had "permitted robbery" .
Lacayo strenuously denied any knowledge of or involvement in corruption.
The allegations against Lacayo were seen as the latest attempt by right-wing elements in the ruling 14-party ruling coalition (still known as the National Opposition Union, UNO) to discredit the government, which it claimed was collaborating on security and economic matters with the left-wing Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN), the main opposition party [see p. 38957].
Potoy was president of the Social Democrat Party (PSD), one of the UNO parties most hostile to the government; former PSD president Alfredo César Aguirre, the current President of the National Assembly and leader of the UNO bloc in the National Assembly, was Lacayo's chief critic.
One of the most damaging allegations in Potoy's report was that lbarra, who was reported to have fled to Miami, had spent approximately US$400,000 to induce five centrist members of the National Assembly to vote for legislation favouring the Sandinistas.
Charges against army C.-in-C.
The government had already been damaged when on July 12 a judge ruled that the Army Commander-in-Chief and former Sandinista leader Gen. Humberto Ortega Saavedra could face court martial on charges that he had covered up the murder of a 16-year-old youth by his bodyguards in October 1990.
Right-wing UNO parties had consistently demanded Ortega's dismissal, especially since he had become a mainstay of the government.
Social unrest
Exchanges of gunfire between the riot police and retired Sandinista soldiers reportedly left 12 people wounded in the capital, Managua, on July 20-21.
The former soldiers were demanding payment for taking early retirement under Chamorro's plan which drastically reduced the size of the army.
Tear gas was used to break up demonstrations by 300 striking bus drivers and students in Managua on July 21.
Five police officers and 10 civilians were reported to have been injured following gunfire and stone throwing outside the Transport Ministry.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
State of emergency
President César Gaviria Trujillo declared a state of emergency, or "internal disturbance" , on July 10-16, during which time he issued decrees to pre-empt the release from prison of suspected members of the Medellín cocaine cartel.
A number of prisoners detained in connection with alleged drug trafficking had been held without trial since 1991.
Since early July the Medellín judges had received more than 200 requests for releases, as lawyers sought to take advantage of a new Penal Code which allowed for the release of anyone who had been detained without trial for 180 days.
Decrees to prevent the release of prisoners issued under the six-day state of emergency would remain in effect for 90 days.
Escobar's escape
Pablo Escobar, the leader of the Medellín drug cartel, escaped from La Catedral prison in Envigado, a few kilometres from Medellín, on July 22 as an attempt was made to transfer him to an army barracks.
By July 26 Escobar's reported preconditions for his return to prison included his future confinement in Antioquia province and the presence of the country's "political forces" at his surrender.
Escobar escaped from the ranch-style prison with his brother Roberto Escobar and eight fellow prisoners.
In a shoot-out with security forces at least two people were killed after the fugitives took hostage the Deputy Justice Minister Eduardo Mendoza and Col. Hernando Navas, director-general of prisons (both eventually released unharmed).
The director of the prison was dismissed on July 24 and on the same day the Acting Commander of the Air Force, Gen. Hernando Monsalve, requested an immediate transfer, having been accused of incompetence over operations at the prison.
Mendoza was dismissed on July 28.
AMERICAS
ECUADOR
Run-off presidential elections
In run-off presidential elections held on July 5, Sixto Durán Ballén, 71, leader of the right-wing United Republican Party (PUR), won 19 of the 21 provinces with a total of 2,174,860 votes (57.9 per cent of the vote), defeating Jaime Nebot Saadi, 46, of the (also right-wing) Social Christian Party (PSC), who received 1,584,482 votes (42.1 per cent).
[For the inconclusive first round of voting in May see pp. 38907-08.]
Durán, the country's best-known politician and a veteran of two previous presidential attempts, promoted a statesman-like image in his campaign.
Policy differences between the candidates were minimal, and both promised to introduce free-market reforms in an economy currently dominated by state ownership and interventionist policies.
The contest, as in the first round, was dominated by personality clashes and regional rivalries, especially that between the highland capital of Quito, represented by Durán, and the major Pacific coast city of Guayaquil, with which Nebot was more closely identified.
Nebot was handicapped even there, however, by the hostile campaign conducted by the right-wing populist Abdalá Bucaram Ortiz, eliminated in the first round, who urged his supporters to vote for Durán.
Lacking a majority in the 77-member Congress, Durán called for "national consensus" and a "political moratorium" .
In the May congressional elections [see p. 38908]the PUR had won 12 seats and the Conservative Party (PCE) of Vice-President-elect Alberto Dahik had won six, but Durán was expected to negotiate the support of at least two more parties.
New Cabinet
Durán, due to take office on Aug. 10 in succession to Rodrigo Borja Cevallo of the Izquierda Democratica (ID —Democratic Left), completed the composition of his Cabinet on July 20, and underlined his commitment to free-market policies by including in it members of the business sector.
Roberto Dunn Barreiro Interior Mario Rivadeneira Finance Andres Barreiro Energy and Mines Mauricio Pinto Industry, Trade and Integration Pedro Lopéz Public Works and Communications Eduardo Pena Education, Culture and Sport Pedro Zambrano Information and Tourism Francisco Albornoz Urban Development and Housing Diego Paredes Foreign Affairs Gen. José Gallardo Defence Alfredo Corral Labour and Human Resources Mariano Gonzalaz Agriculture and Livestock Leonardo Vitieri Public Health Mariana Argudo Social Welfare and Public Promotion
New Ecuadorean Cabinet
AMERICAS
PERU
Shining Path offensive in Lima
On the night of July 16 in Lima 20 people died and 250 were injured when a huge car bomb exploded in a street of shops and restaurants in the mainly residential Miraflores area.
The attack was attributed to the Maoist Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) organization.
During the same night some dozens of activists —presumed to be Shining Path members —wounded 15 policemen in attacks with automatic weapons on police stations in various of the city's poorer zones.
By July 22-23 the renewed offensive mounted by the Shining Path in Lima —in the form of further car bombs in the capital, together with calls for a general strike — was sufficiently serious for President Alberto Fujimori to cancel his planned trip to Europe for the Ibero-American summit [see p. 39003].
The strike call, however, was reportedly not widely observed.
In a televised address on July 25 Fujimori announced that henceforward "terrorist criminals" , responsible for "acts of terrorism that claim human lives" would be tried by military courts.
He also announced that as of July 24 the armed forces had begun an operation intended to last several days in which searches would be made for explosives and propaganda material in various districts around the capital.
Selective searches would be made for known individuals, and "honest and peaceful citizens" were asked to show understanding during the operation.
Fujimori had on July 3 announced the capture by security forces of Luis Arana Franco, said to be the Shining Path's logistics chief.
On July 16 Fulimori presided over the inauguration of the first "urban militia" , modelled on the rural rondas campesinas or "peasant patrols" [see pp. 38188; 38284].
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
Multiparty accord
Leaders of eight of Bolivia's political parties agreed in early August on 10 proposals for constitutional, judicial and educational changes.
The United Left (IU) was the only major party not to participate.
The so-called "Accord for the Modernization of the State and the Strengthening of Democracy" was signed by the party leaders at a ceremony in the Palace of Government presided over by Vice-President Luis Ossio Sanjinés.
The proposals in the accord were for general improvements in the judicial system, alterations to the electoral system to prevent fraud, decentralization for a participative democracy, and the modernization of state institutions.
The leader of the Free Bolivia Movement (MBL), Antonio Aranibar Quiroga, said that his party had nevertheless not abandoned its demand for a constituent assembly to determine constitutional reform, and Max Fernández, leader of the Civic Solidarity Union (UCS), advocated the consultation of all Bolivians through a referendum.
Application for Mercosur membership
On July 6 Foreign Minister Ronald Maclean Abaroa confirmed that Bolivia had officially requested admission to the Southern Cone Common market, Mercosur (involving Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay —see p.
R57).
Bolivia nevertheless wanted to continue as a member of the Acuerdo de Cartagena or Andean Pact (involving Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela —ibid.).
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Debt rescheduling agreement
As part of the debt restructuring and reduction initiative launched by US Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady in 1989 [see pp. 36541-42], an agreement was reached on July 9 with an advisory steering committee representing creditor banks to reschedule US$44,000 million of Brazil's medium- and long-term commercial bank debt.
Brady stated that the agreement represented "a milestone in finally putting the Latin American debt crisis behind us" .
Local stock markets, however, reacted cautiously to the news, since each individual bank had still to approve what was a complex package, as had the Senate, then currently embroiled in congressional moves to impeach President Fernando Collor de Mello on charges of alleged corruption [see pp. 38909-10].
Under the agreement, debt could be converted into five varieties of concessionary bonds, each requiring the banks to offer discounts of 35 per cent on the face value of debt owed to them, in return for higher interest rates on the remainder.
Three of the bonds would carry collateral assuring payment in the event of a Brazilian default.
However, fears were expressed that the US$3,200 million in US Treasury bonds promised as collateral, to be placed in a special account to accrue interest, offered insufficient security.
Funds from the IMF and the World Bank, needed by the government to provide part of the collateral, would also be jeopardized if Brazil missed a second consecutive set of quarterly targets under its IMF-approved economic programme [see pp. 38719-20 for terms of January IMF agreement].
Banks willing to offer new loans equivalent to US$18.88 of new money for every US$100 of current exposure would receive market interest rates without having to accept a discount on the face value of their existing debt paper.
Cabinet appointment
Flavio Perri was named as the new Environment Minister on July 14.
Education Minister José Goldemberg had since April held the Environment portfolio in an acting capacity following the dismissal of the controversial José Lutzemberger [see p. 38810].
Goldemberg himself resigned in early August and his portfolio was taken over by Eraldo Tinoco [ministerial and other resignations taking place in the context of the widening corruption scandal will be covered in detail in the September News Digest].
AMERICAS
URUGUAY
Vote on referendum
The government of President Luis Alberto Lacalle claimed a clear mandate to proceed with its controversial programme to sell off state assets [see pp. 38286; 38528], when a special poll on July 5 failed to raise sufficient public support for a referendum.
Major share issues were now planned later in the year, including the state airline Antel, the electricity utility company, UTE, and the state railways and port services.
The left-wing Broad Left Frente Amplio and the PIT-CNT trade union confederation had in mid-February gathered the necessary signatures, as laid down in the Constitution, to call the special poll in their protracted campaign to protect state-sector employment [see p. 38761].
To compel a referendum they would have needed a minimum of 581,069 votes (a quarter of the electorate), but only 458,818 people actually voted.
Blaming the low turnout on bad weather and a lack of public awareness of the issues, they announced that they would seek another such vote in October.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Agreement with Paris Club
Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo announced on July 22 that an agreement which the government had signed with the "Paris Club" group of creditor countries would allow Argentina to restructure part of its official debt.
Argentina's debt with Paris Club countries stood at US$8,730 million, and the agreement concerned payments due over the next 10 years, with longer periods allowed for payment of U$2,800 million falling due by 2000, and a ceiling on amortization payments after March 1995.
The country's total public and private debt was estimated at some US$75,000 million [for debt agreement with creditor banks see pp. 38861; 38959].
AMERICAS
IBERO-AMERICAN SUMMIT
Madrid summit meeting
An Ibero-American summit in Madrid, Spain, on July 23-24 was attended by 17 heads of state or government of Spanish- or Portuguese-speaking American countries, the Spanish Prime Minister Felipe González and the Portuguese Prime Minister Aníbal Cavaco Silva.
The first such summit had been held in Guadalajara, Mexico in July 1991 [see p. 38336].
The holding of the summit in Madrid came in the year of official Spanish celebration of the 500th anniversary of Colombus's voyage to America.
President Mario Soares of Portugal did not attend, reportedly on account of illness.
Three leaders — President Carlos Andrés Pérez of Venezuela, President César Gaviria Trujillo of Colombia, and President Alberto Fujimori of Peru —stayed away on account of political problems at home.
On the first day of the summit González signed with President Fernando Collor de Mello of Brazil an agreement according to which Spain would made loans and investments of US$3,000 million to Brazil over the next five years, including credits to finance Spanish exports to Brazil.
Bananas —the only fruit for which there was not a unified EC import market —were discussed at ministerial level.
Spain and Portugal wanted the unified EC market of 1993 to retain measures of protection for their domestic producers (in the Canaries and the Madeiras respectively) from the cheaper Latin American product.
The leaders signed a constituent agreement for the Fund for the Development of the Indigenous Peoples of Latin America and the Caribbean [see p. 38336].
The Fund's general assembly would include two representatives from each Caribbean and Latin American country —one government representative and one representative from the indigenous communities.
In addition to examining ways to generate resources it would act as a consultative group linking potential donors and beneficiaries.
This initiative had the particular support of President Jaime Paz Zamora of Bolivia, who had noted that in most Latin American countries "the indigenous peoples make up the largest seriously poor groups" .
He reiterated his previous statements to the effect that "the traditional use of the coca leaf and its legal and beneficial by-products, as well as its social, cultural and religious contexts…should not be confused with the scourge of the illegal consumption of cocaine" .
Cuban President Fidel Castro in his opening speech denounced the continuing US embargo against Cuba as "genocide and an insult to humanity" .
He went on from Madrid to visit Galicia (his father's birthplace), Barcelona and Seville.
In the final debate of the summit, leaders expressed solidarity with the absent Colombian and Peruvian leaders, while expressing the wish that democratic institutions should be restored as soon as possible in Peru.
A final declaration favouring "representative democracy" and respect for human rights, and denouncing the use of force in resolving political conflicts was signed by all 19 leaders.
The document also said that the signatories would ask the International Court of Justice (ICJ) to deliver an opinion on the US Supreme Court ruling of June 15 which legalized US government abductions abroad [see p. 38954].
The document noted that foreign debt was a threat to social peace and the stability of democratic systems in Latin America, restricting as it did social services budgets.
It also commented with concern on the lack of progress in negotiating the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT) and the dangers of a rise in protectionism.
AMERICAS
CARICOM
Annual conference
The 13th annual conference of the 13-member Caribbean Community (CARICOM) was held in Port of Spain, the capital of Trinidad and Tobago, on June 29-July 2.
The assembled heads of government, under CARICOM's new chair, Patrick Manning, the Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago, agreed to reconvene on Oct. 28-30 to give themselves more time to study the wide-ranging recommendations of the West Indian Commission, created in November 1989, which on June 18 had released a major 600-page report on the region's future.
In anticipation of the October meeting, most proposals to the meeting were either agreed only in principle or deferred until more study had been carried out.
No firm agreement was reached, therefore, on such fundamental issues as the free movement of Caribbean citizens within the CARICOM region, a common external tariff (CET) or monetary union.
There was opposition to the existing CET tariff rates which ranged from zero to 45 per cent, with Jamaica proposing new rates ranging between 5 and 20 per cent and the seven-country Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) arguing for rates ranging from zero to 30 per cent .
However, an "approach" towards monetary union by the year 2000 was endorsed.
This was to be pursued in three phases, starting with (i) the co-ordination of monetary policies among the member states, to be initiated by the formation of a council of central bank governors and aimed at achieving desirable fiscal limits and the liberalization of wages, prices, trade, financial and commercial policies; this was to be followed by (ii) the requirement that those countries which had not yet achieved macro-economic stability maintain parities within an agreed band; there would finally take place (iii) the creation of a Caribbean monetary authority with powers to issue a single currency.
Progress between CARICOM and Venezuela (with CARICOM observer status) on an investment and trade agreement [see also p. 38336]was welcomed and its final conclusion was urged by Jan. 1, 1993.
The creation of a joint Cuban-CARICOM commission to analyse co-operation programmes was also approved but a decision on Cuba's request for observer status in some CARICOM organizations was postponed.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Upper House elections — Foreign relations
The ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) won 69 of the 127 seats contested in elections to the House of Councillors, the upper chamber of the Diet, on July 26.
Although not sufficient to restore the LDP's overall majority in the upper chamber, it was a considerable improvement on the party's disastrous performance in the 1989 election —where it had lost its majority —and was better than had been generally predicted prior to the beginning of the campaign.
As such it was widely interpreted as a personal triumph for Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, whose position as leader of the party had been less than secure since his election in October 1991.
The campaign for the upper house elections —where one half of the 252 seats were contested every three years —began formally on July 8.
Of the 127 seats at stake (one through a by-election), 77 were in 47 prefectural districts, where candidates were chosen by name, while the remaining 50 were in the national constituency and were allocated between the parties on the basis of proportional representation.
The turnout in the election was just 50.72 per cent, considerably down on the previous record low of 57 per cent in the 1983 upper house contest, and suggested that rather than registering anti-LDP votes with an alternative party, many voters had chosen to abstain from the electoral process.
The LDP was defending 75 of the seats open to election.
As the seats in question had last been contested in 1986, at the height of the popularity of the Nakasone government, the ruling party had little realistic expectation of increasing its total representation, but was aiming to avoid losing further ground to the opposition.
Prior to the election Miyazawa's position had improved through his successful enactment —with the support of the centrist Komeito (Clean Government Party) and the Democratic Socialist Party (DSP) —of the controversial Peace Keeping Operations (PKO) bill which allowed members of the Japanese Self Defence Forces to participate in overseas missions conducted under the auspices of the UN.
In addition to boosting Miyazawa's reputation by enabling him to succeed where his predecessor had tried but failed, the success of the PKO bill had damaged the main opposition party, the Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ), which had tried to prevent the bill's approval through an unpopular filibuster in the Diet [see pp. 38962-63].
Whereas the SDPJ and the Japan Communist Party (JCP) attempted to turn the upper house election into a referendum, the LDP concentrated more upon economic issues.
Prior to polling day the government announced a new package of economic stimulants including public works expenditure and tax cuts.
It also suggested that the Bank of Japan was about to cut its official discount rate from 3.75 to 3.25 per cent, a cut which was implemented on July 27.
In addition to the success of the LDP in broadly maintaining its position, its PKO allies —the DSP and Komeito —also performed well enough to ensure that they could continue to offer the LDP an overall majority in the upper house.
The opposition SDPJ failed to repeat its 1989 triumph, although it won 22 seats and maintained its pre-election strength of 69 upper house members.
The main loser in the election was Rengo-no-Kai, a loose political movement backed by Japan's largest labour organization, which, shortly after its formation in 1989, had won 11 of the 12 seats which it had contested in the upper house elections.
It then won a further two seats in by-elections in early 1992, leading to the belief that it would constitute the greatest threat to the LDP at the 1992 elections.
In the event the party won no seats, and its overall strength was reduced from 13 to 12 members.
The Japan New Party (JNP), recently formed by Morihiro Hosokawa, a former LDP governor of Kunamoto Prefecture, performed better than expected.
Although it fielded no candidates in the prefectural contests, it won four seats in the national constituency.
Relations with USA
Miyazawa made his first official visit to the USA since his election as Prime Minister on June 30-July 2.
He held cordial if inconclusive talks with President George Bush which concentrated mainly on Japan's rising trade surplus with the USA.
Speaking on July 2, Miyazawa confessed that he was "very, very embarrassed" at the size of his country's surplus — which totalled $43,000 million in 1991 —but expressed confidence that it would not return to its 1987 high-point of $60,000 million.
On July 30 it was reported that the two countries had agreed new commitments to reduce the trade imbalance in a second follow-up report to the Structural Impediments Initiative (SII) talks.
The SII negotiations, designed to remove structural barriers to free trade, had been concluded in 1990 with the signature of a detailed trade pact [see also p. 38620].
Progress of dispute with Russia
There was some progress in Japan's relationship with Russia, which remained dominated by the issue of the disputed Northern Territories.
Miyazawa was successful in persuading the G-7 meeting in Munich, on July 6-8, to recognize the importance of the dispute [see pp. 38990].
On June 30 Russian President Boris Yeltsin had made remarks suggesting that negotiations over the disputed islands could make progress only if Japan provided economic aid to Russia.
Notwithstanding the fury caused in some quarters by the tone of Yeltsin's statement (particularly the accusation that Japan was the only major country not to have provided assistance to Russia) bilateral working-level talks on the territorial dispute went ahead in Tokyo on July 15-16 as planned.
Although no specific progress was made, a statement by Miyazawa on July 16 suggested that, if Russia recognized Japanese sovereignty over the islands, the Japanese government might be flexible on the issue of their return.
LDP 69 108 114 SDPJ 22 69 69 Komeito 14 24 20 Rengo — 12 13 JCP 6 11 14 DSP 4 7 8 JNP 4 4 — Others 8 17 12 Total 127 252 250
Elections to House of Councillors
ASIA — PACIFIC
KOREA
Korean relations with Russia — Postponement of normalization talks between North Korea and Japan
On July 4 the South Korean Foreign Affairs Minister Lee Sang Ock completed an official visit to Russia, the Ukraine and Kazakhstan which had begun in late June.
In talks with Boris Yeltsin, on June 30, the Russian President confirmed the radically altered relationship between his country and communist North Korea, a former ally of the Soviet Union.
Yeltsin, who was due to make a state visit to South Korea on Sept. 16-17, stated that all ideological ties between Russia and North Korea had been severed.
As partners in pursuit of the common goals and values of democracy, freedom, human rights and the market economics, stated Yeltsin, Russia now had more in common with South Korea than with the unreformed communist North.
Yeltsin confirmed that the 1961 treaty of friendship, co-operation and mutual assistance between North Korea and the Soviet Union was no longer effective, and that Russia would not provide financial or military support for the Pyongyang regime until such time as it improved its human rights record and adopted a more co-operative stance on the issue of nuclear inspection.
This latter issue was also cited by the Japanese government as the reason for its decision to postpone the eighth round of normalization talks with North Korea, originally scheduled for July.
North-South talks concerning nuclear inspection
North Korea had allowed access to its nuclear facilities by officials from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), but talks with South Korea designed to facilitate mutual nuclear inspection had failed to produce an agreement.
Although the discussions continued in July, the talks remained deadlocked.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Imprisonment of Bao Tong
Bao Tong, a senior aide of deposed Chinese Communist Party (CCP) general secretary Zhao Ziyang, was tried and sentenced on July 21 for his role in the pro-democracy movement which had culminated in the Tiananmen Square massacre in June 1989 [see pp. 36720-22].
After a five-hour trial Bao was sentenced by the People's Intermediate Court to five years' imprisonment for "inciting" counter-revolutionary activities and to four years for "divulging state secrets" .
Although the sentences were to run consecutively, the court was reported to have reduced the total period of imprisonment by two years as a gesture of goodwill.
It also deducted from the sentence the three years which Bao had spent in detention since 1989.
Bao, the former head of the CCP central committee's office on political structural reform, had been a key participant in implementing Zhao's reformist policies, and was the most senior public figure yet to be tried in connection with the 1989 unrest.
The relatively light sentence was widely interpreted as evidence of the continuing loss of ground by the hardline conservatives within the CCP, and as confirming the view that Zhao himself —under house-arrest since May 1989 —would not be tried.
Signs of continuing conservative-reformist struggle
The struggle between the hardliners and the newly resurgent reformists, once again apparently receiving the patronage of the country's veteran statesman-leader Deng Xiaoping, was believed to be intensifying in the run-up to the 14th party congress due to be held later in the year.
CCP general secretary Jiang Zemin on July 9 used significantly reformist terminology in describing China's economic system as a "socialist market economic structure" .
The existence of rumours of a conservative-reformist struggle received official acknowledgement for the first time on July 6 when the official -People's Daily stated that they were being spread about by unnamed people "more poisonous than poisonous snakes" .
Numerous hardline candidates reportedly failed to secure election as representatives to the 14th party congress.
Among those who were defeated were Gao Dai, editor of the People's Daily, and Deng Liqun, who, as a member of the party's central advisory commission, had acquired huge influence following the Tiananmen Square massacre.
Gao Dai, whom Deng had earlier criticized for his hardline views, appeared to revise his stance by publishing in June an article which was highly critical of "leftism" .
This trend of senior hardliners revising their position following Deng's re-endorsement of reformism continued during July.
Li Ximing, a politburo member and senior CCP official for Beijing, published an article in the Beijing Daily of July 14 in which he called for an acceleration of economic reform along capitalist lines.
Li had a reputation as a hardline ideologue and was a close associate of Premier Li Peng, the chief architect of the suppression of the pro-democracy movement.
Death of Deng Yingchao
Deng Yingchao, a former member of the politburo, the widow of former Premier Zhou Enlai and the adoptive mother of Li Peng, died on July 11 aged 88.
Deng Yingchao's authority arose not only from her marriage to Zhou in 1925, but also from her status as one of only around 50 women to have completed the Long March of 1934-35.
Following her husband's death in 1976 she served on the politburo from 1978 to 1985, and remained an influential voice within the CCP even after her formal retirement from public life in 1988.
Presidential tour of African countries
President Yang Shangkun and an entourage which included Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, returned to Beijing on July 12 after completing a two-week state visit to Morocco, Tunisia, and Côte d'Ivoire.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Lifting of ban on contacts with China
A law giving the government the power to lift bans on direct links with China and to exchange representative offices was adopted by the Legislative Yuan, or parliament, on July 16 after almost two years of debate.
The 96-article "Statutes Governing Relations Between People in the Taiwan Region and People in the Mainland Region" opened the way for visits to Taiwan by Chinese communists, and set out regulations for cross-strait marriages, divorces, inheritance and employment of workers from the mainland.
According to Cabinet officials, however, its implementation would depend on concessions from China, such as renouncing the use of force against Taiwan.
The new law also empowered parliament to veto any government decision on direct links within 30 days.
Softening of stance on exiled dissidents
The National Security Law was revised on July 7 to permit dissidents on Taiwan's "black list" to return to the country unless they had resorted to violence against the state.
Only five of the 282 exiles were now barred from Taiwan, according to Interior Minister Wu Po-hsiung.
Mainland unification conference
The second conference on peaceful reunification and relations between China and Taiwan was held in Hong Kong on July 8-10.
Jointly organized by the mainland's China Council for the Promotion of Peaceful Reunification and the Taiwan-based Alliance of Reunification of China, the conference was addressed by officials of the Xinhua news agency Hong Kong branch, China's de facto embassy in Hong Kong.
Change to law on political parties
The Civic Organizations Law was revised on July 3, to transfer from the Executive Yuan to the judiciary the power to disband a political party.
New regulations for setting up political parties required them to register with the government for a year, have at least five elected office holders, and own property of more than 10,000,000 New Taiwan dollars.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Swearing-in of new Governor
Chris Patten, sworn into office as the 28th Governor of Hong Kong on July 9, pledged to represent Hong Kong's interests "courteously and firmly" while seeking "good co-operation" with China, but noted that "trust is a two-way street" .
He signalled support for preserving Hong Kong's freedoms, but stressed that government would remain "executive-led" while being "as open and accessible as possible" .
According to the Independent of July 11, Patten did not plan to increase the number of directly elected seats in the colony's legislature, a move sought by the advocates of more rapid democratization.
The risks of antagonising China, if he did support such initiatives, were apparently highlighted by the Chinese side's emphasis on "political issues" at high-level Sino-British talks on July 3-6 on Hong Kong's disputed new airport project [see p. 38340].
The talks, held in Beijing, again failed to reach agreement on financing the project.
Foreign reserves
Revealing for the first time the size of the Exchange Fund (which guaranteed the Hong Kong dollar), the Financial Secretary, Hamish Macleod, announced on July 15 that at the end of 1991 foreign reserves stood at US$29,000 million, the 12th largest in the world.
The figure exceeded most private forecasts.
The announcement was seen as a move to reassure China about the colony's finances on the eve of further talks in Hong Kong on the new airport project by the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group's Airport Committee.
ASIA — PACIFIC
ASEAN
Meeting of Foreign Ministers
Foreign Ministers from the six member states of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN — comprising Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand) held their 25th annual meeting in Manila, Philippines, on July 21-22 [for 24th annual meeting see pp. 38345-46].
Laos and Vietnam were granted observer status.
Their accession on July 22 to ASEAN's Treaty of Amity and Co-Operation signalled an end to more than a decade of hostility between them and their non-communist neighbours.
For the first time China and Russia were invited to attend the meeting.
A special declaration reflecting the meeting's key concern, adopted on July 22, urged all countries involved to settle the dispute over claims to the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea "in a peaceful manner" .
It also proposed that claimants seek "an agreement for joint exploitation of the Spratlys' natural resources" .
Vietnam announced its full support for the declaration as did ASEAN's Western dialogue partners and.
China was more reserved, expressing its support for some of the principles in the declaration.
In an earlier statement the Chinese government had warned against the involvement of outside powers in the region.
This was taken to be a response to the open call by ASEAN foreign ministers for the continued US military presence in the region.
However, Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, present as a guest, denied that China was seeking regional hegemony and offered to shelve the sovereignty issue and proceed with the "joint development" of the Spratlys.
The Spratly Islands were claimed by three ASEAN members — Brunei, Malaysia and the Philippines —and by China, Taiwan and Vietnam; the dispute had come to a head in early 1992 after China and Vietnam awarded contracts separately to Western companies to drill for oil in the disputed archipelago [see p. 38768].
In the latest incident, Vietnam demanded that China remove a marker stone erected on July 4 by a landing party of soldiers and construction workers on Nan Xun, a reef in the Spratly islands some 600 km east of Vietnam.
The Vietnamese government claimed that this was a violation of its sovereignty.
To reinforce its own claims in the region, the Vietnamese News Agency reported on July 28 that Vietnam had inaugurated a fishing port on a major island in the Spratly archipelago on July 19.
A joint communiqué on closer economic co-operation between developed and developing countries expressed "dismay" over the failure to conclude the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
A post-ministerial meeting between ASEAN and its seven "dialogue partners" , held on July 22-23, urged North Korea to accept inter-Korean nuclear inspections [see also p. 39004].
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Military report on Dili massacre
The Indonesian military presented on July 14 the results of its investigation into the November 1991 massacre of demonstrators in Dili, East Timor, by Indonesian soldiers [see pp. 38579-80; 38677; 38769-70].
The report, ordered by the Chief of the Armed Forces (ABRI), Gen. Try Sutrisno, said that of the 115 people previously reported missing, 31 had returned to their villages by June 28 while 18 graves had been discovered at Hera.
Based on information from police and village heads, some of the 66 people still missing were believed to be dead (although no other graves had been discovered), while the rest were reported to have joined a "trouble-maker group" which was said to be in hiding, according to an ABRI official.
Responding to foreign criticisms of the heavier sentences handed down to civilians as compared with those passed on soldiers following the massacre [see pp. 38769; 38965], the ABRI spokesman said that the civilians had been convicted of "subversive acts" against the Indonesian authorities, while the soldiers had been found guilty of acting beyond their authority in dealing with the demonstrators.
Aid pledge — Freeze on EC-ASEAN accord
Aid donors, including Japan, France, the USA and (for the first time) South Korea, pledged a total of US$4,940 million to Indonesia for fiscal 1992 (compared with US$4,750 million in 1991), despite human rights concerns raised by the Dili massacre.
The decision came at a meeting of the new 14-member Consultative Group on Indonesia in Paris on July 16-17, chaired by the World Bank, set up after Indonesia dissolved a Netherlands-led aid forum in March in protest at alleged Netherlands interference in its internal affairs [see p. 38868].
The Netherlands did not attend the Paris meeting.
Donors were reportedly disappointed that the government's plans for economic deregulation, while liberalizing steel imports, failed to deregulate imports of wheat, sugar and cement or to remove government control over domestic prices.
European Community (EC) foreign ministers agreed on July 20 in Brussels to defer until autumn the proposed upgrading of a co-operation accord with the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN, of which Indonesia was a member —see also p. 39005) after hearing an account of human rights abuses by the Indonesian army in East Timor from Joao de Deus Pinheiro, the Portuguese Foreign Affairs Minister.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
New Philippines Cabinet
Presidential address to Congress — Government coalition — New Cabinet
The newly-elected President of the Philippines, Fidel Ramos, made a state-of-the-nation address to the opening session of the joint houses of Congress on July 27, in which he outlined the priorities of his new administration.
The speech was conservative in tone, concentrating on the need to stimulate economic growth and to combat lawlessness rather than the campaign themes of working towards "people empowerment" and a reduction of income disparities.
The most widely reported feature of his speech was the proposal to repeal a 35-year-old law outlawing the Communist Party of the Philippines —Marxist Leninist (CPP-ML) and similar organizations, and to institute a sweeping amnesty.
Ramos proposed that the CPP-ML —which, through its military wing, the New People's Army (NPA), had been engaged in a guerrilla war with the government since 1968 —should be allowed to "compete freely, openly and peacefully in the political, economic and social arena" .
Ramos also submitted to Congress an amnesty proclamation covering 4,500 former rebels from the CPP, NPA, the Moslem separatist Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF), and right-wing military dissidents implicated in coup attempts against Corazon Aquino, Ramos's predecessor as President.
The presidential address was upstaged by struggles earlier in the day for control of the two congressional chambers wherein no single party had an overall majority.
Reports that Ramos had succeeded in forming a governing coalition in the House of Representatives were confirmed by the election of Jose de Venecia, a close political aide of the President, as Speaker of the 200-member House.
De Venecia, a member of Ramos's Lakas Edsa-National Union of Christian Democrats (Lakas-NUCD) group, defeated Jose Cojuangco, secretary-general of Laban ng Demokratikong Pilipino (LDP), by 151 votes to 42.
De Venecia was supported by the Lakas-NUCD, 48 members of the National People's Coalition (NPC), led by former Marcos crony Eduardo Cojuangco, 15 members of the Liberal Party, and 33 of the 87 lower house members of the LDP.
It was believed that the latter group had agreed to support him in return for the promise of positions on congressional committees.
A similar bid to determine the presidency of the 24-member Senate, however, was unsuccessful.
Thanks to the influence of the LDP's 16-member bloc, the post was won by LDP chairman Neptali Gonzales, defeating the Lakas-NUCD candidate Teofisto Guingona.
On July 15 it had been reported that the new Cabinet had drafted 35 pieces of legislation for immediate consideration by the new Congress.
Only two members of the Cabinet, Almonte and Parayno, had military backgrounds, but the former was known to be a particularly close confidant of Ramos.
Together with former generals Rene Cruz and Honesto Isleta —who had played a key role in the Ramos election campaign — Almonte formed part of a group of former military officers who were widely believed to constitute the unofficial power centre of the new administration.
Many members of the Cabinet, particularly those given economic portfolios, were businessmen.
Finance Secretary Ramon del Rosario was chairman of the rapidly growing Asia Bank, owned by three of the country's largest conglomerates.
Trade and Industry Secretary Navarro was the head of an accounting firm, while Agrarian Reform Secretary Garilao had been executive director of the Philippine Business for Social Progress, a business-funded foundation established to undertake community projects.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Abolition of military special powers — Removal of military personnel from state sector
Prime Minister Anand Panyarachun on July 9 adopted decisive new measures aimed at curbing the power of the military leadership in non-defence matters and removing its authority to deal with domestic unrest.
An executive order dissolved the Internal Peace-Keeping Force, established as a branch of the military in 1978 to intervene in domestic crises.
Units attached to the force under the direct control of the supreme military commander, Air Chief Marshal Kaset Rojanini, had been involved in the shooting in May of scores of unarmed pro-democracy demonstrators in Bangkok [see pp. 38894-95].
The order also disbanded the Capital Security Command, headed by the acting Army Commander in Chief Gen. Issarapong Noonpakdi which had similarly been implicated in the suppression of the pro-democracy movement.
Maintenance of order would henceforth be the responsibility of the Interior Ministry and the police.
Removal of military personnel from state sector
In further moves designed to restrict military influence in state-owned enterprises, the Cabinet on July 13 asked the board of Thai Airways International (THAI) to abrogate a clause in the carrier's constitution stipulating that the head of the Air Force be appointed chairman.
This request, approved by the board on July 23, had reportedly been made in anticipation of the imminent replacement of Kaset, whose chairmanship had coincided with the company's worst-ever financial performance and mounting accusations of corruption.
On June 23 Air Marshal Anant Kalinta had been replaced by a civil servant as chairman of the state-owned Communications Authority of Thailand.
On July 21 the Cabinet named a civilian government official to replace Gen. Issarapong as chairman of the state-owned telephone company.
Formation of new party
Former Prime Minister Maj.-Gen.
Chatichai Choonhaven on July 12 became head of the newly formed Chart Pattana (National Development) party.
Chatichai had turned down the leadership of the party to which he had formerly belonged, Chart Thai, on July 2 citing old age (he was 70) and political reasons.
Diplomatic relations with CIS republics
Diplomatic relations were established on July 7 with the former Soviet republics of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
National Assembly elections
The ninth National Assembly was elected on July 19 from 601 candidates contesting 395 seats, down from 496 seats in the 1987 election.
Candidates included 63 non-communists and seven members of the clergy, as well as more than 100 former assembly members.
A new election law passed in April [see p. 38864]allowed for independent candidates, but only two out of 40 people succeeded in winning nominations to stand.
The law required approval from voters in a candidate's neighbourhood and workplace and from the Vietnam Fatherland Front, an official mass organization in charge of the elections.
The number of military representatives in the new Assembly was reduced from 19 per cent to 7 per cent of the total.
By-elections were to be held on Aug. 9 in Hoa Binh and Thanh Hoa provinces for three undecided seats.
In pre-election meetings, voters raised concerns about unemployment, living standards, the decline in public health care and education, law and order, and the fight against corruption.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Protests against national convention plans
Reports in mid-July suggested that the government faced continued opposition to its preparations for a national convention to draft a new Constitution [see p. 38913].
On June 23 the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), the ruling military junta, had held the first of three scheduled "co-ordination meetings" (followed by further sessions on June 30 and July 10) with elected representatives from seven opposition parties, including the Khami National Solidarity Organization; La-Hu National Development Party; National League for Democracy (NLD); National Unity Party; Shan Nationalities League for Democracy; Shan State Kokang Democratic Party; and the Union Pa-O National Organization.
A "leading committee" headed by Maj.-Gen.
Myo Nyunt, SLORC member and Religious Affairs Minister, was reportedly set to conclude its deliberations within a month.
Its objective was to lay down guidelines for a national convention (comprising local administrators, professionals and elected MPs) to be held in December 1992 or January 1993.
In late June anti-government leaflets distributed in Yangon denounced the military-directed constitutional negotiations.
They called instead for the assumption of power by the NLD, which had won a landslide electoral victory in May 1990 but not been allowed to take office [see pp. 37457-58].
U Aung Shwe, leader of the NLD's 15-member delegation to the "co-ordination committee" , came under increasing pressure from within the NLD to adopt a tougher line, and to press for the release of all "persons who should be taking part in these talks" .
On June 29 the government had ordered the release of 92 political prisoners, including 17 leaders of the NLD arrested during a crackdown in April 1991 [see p. 38151].
This brought to 277 the total number of detainees released since April [see pp. 38866; 38913]; however, Aung San Suu Kyi, the country's most prominent opposition politician, remained under house arrest.
Killing of Moslem MP
Moslem opposition sources claimed on July 5 that Muhammad Ilyas, a Moslem MP representing Maungdaw, had been beaten to death by soldiers for refusing to persuade Myanman Moslems in Bangladesh to return to Myanma.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
End of parliamentary boycott
Opposition parties on July 1 ended a two-week boycott of parliament after the government agreed to the trial of Gholam Azam, leader of the Jamaat-i-Islami Bangladesh.
Calls for Azam to be tried for war crimes by a special tribunal [see p. 38967]were, however, rejected by the government which said that Azam would be tried under normal law.
More than 300 demonstrators attacked the Chinese embassy in Dhaka on July 2 after rumours that human skulls had been found in the embassy.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Conflicting casualty claims
There were conflicting claims about the number of army and rebel casualties following a renewed government offensive against the northern strongholds of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).
The offensive, involving 7,000 troops, code-named "Strike Force Two" , began on June 28.
It was believed to be a repeat of an earlier attempt in 1991 to seal off the Jaffna peninsula, the LTTE's principal base [see also pp. 38392; 38439].
According to official army estimates on July 3 more than 500 LTTE rebels had been killed, 200 in the course of a single assault, since the start of the operation.
LTTE sources, however, claimed that their total casualties did not exceed 17.
LTTE attacks on armed forces
On July 11 the LTTE attacked an army camp in Katupotha, on the border of the Mannar and Vavuniya districts in the north-west of the country, on July 11.
The death of 46 soldiers was confirmed by the government, which claimed also that the attack had been led by women cadres, that at least 25 LTTE rebels were killed in the raid, and that a further 100 were killed during a subsequent army assault on rebel camps near Iyakachchi.
The LTTE said it was responsible for shooting down a military aircraft on July 5 over Elephant Pass, at the entry to the Jaffna peninsula, killing all 19 people aboard.
Attack on train near Batticaloa
A spokesman of the People's Liberation Organization of Tamil Eelam (PLOTE) blamed the LTTE for the death of 40 people, mostly Moslems, aboard a Colombo-bound passenger train in the Batticaloa district following a grenade attack on July 21.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Renewed controversy over Ayodhya temple site — Election of President
Militant Hindus belonging to the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) agreed on July 25 temporarily to suspend construction of a temple on the disputed site of the Babri mosque at Ayodhya in the state of Uttar Pradesh [see pp. 37854; 37964; 38532; 38682; 38866].
The VHP had agreed, during talks in Delhi with Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao on July 23-24, to accept a proposal to consolidate all cases pending in different Indian courts under "one judicial authority" , and to resume all-party talks on the issue [see p. 38866].
The settlement followed three weeks of mounting tension which triggered communal rioting and disrupted government and parliamentary business.
Fears of escalating violence had grown after the VHP with the support of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) -led government in Uttar Pradesh, defied a High Court order [see p. 38532]by commencing work at the disputed site on July 9.
(In November 1991 a Supreme Court had ruled in favour of the status quo being maintained —see p. 38682].
On July 13 the Home Affairs Minister, S. B. Chavan, who had visited Ayodhya the previous day, told the Lok Sabha (lower house of parliament) that the central government's offer to provide additional security to ensure that the disputed land was not encroached upon had been turned down by Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Kalyan Singh.
Later Chavan hinted that the central government would consider the eventual dismissal of the state government if it was found to have violated the court order.
The VHP defied a fresh order issued on July 15 by the Allahabad High Court restraining parties from undertaking construction activity around the disputed site.
On July 16 the Supreme Court ordered the Uttar Pradesh government to explain the nature of a concrete platform that had been built on the disputed site, and on July 22 declared that it would refuse to adjudicate on the issue until all construction activities had ceased.
Four hundred Moslem activists belonging to the Babri Masjid Action Committee courted arrest in Faisalabad, Uttar Pradesh, in protesting against the construction of the temple.
Six people were killed on July 20 in communal rioting sparked by the dispute in the states of Kerala and Maharashtra.
On July 14 the Islamic Conference Organization (ICO), reportedly at the instigation of Pakistan, expressed concern over the threat posed to the mosque at Ayodhya.
Election of new President
Vice-President Shankar Dayal Sharma was sworn in as India's ninth president on July 26 following elections held on July 13.
Sharma, backed by the Congress (I), gained 64.78 per cent of the total votes of the electoral college (which consisted of the elected members of both houses of parliament and the state legislatures), defeating his nearest rival, G. G. Swell, the BJP-National Front candidate who polled 33.21 per cent.
The government's political standing, boosted by Sharma's election, was strengthened after it won a no confidence motion on July 17 by 267 votes to 215.
Resignation of Chidambaram — Other securities scandal developments
The Commerce Minister P. Chidambaram resigned on July 9 after admitting that he and his wife had invested Rs250,000 (about US$8,700) in Fairgrowth Financial Services, one of the companies being investigated in the recent securities scandal [see pp. 38913; 38967].
Chidambaram's resignation, the second by a member of the current Council of Ministers [see p. 38813], prompted the government to respond to calls by opposition parties for a full inquiry into the scandal by announcing the establishment on July 9 of a joint parliamentary committee.
A Reserve Bank of India report released on July 16 named four foreign banks including ANZ Grindlays, Bank of America, Citibank and Standard Chartered, claiming that controversial securities market trading had been concentrated in their hands and in those of stockbrokers arrested in June [see p. 38967].
On July 5 the Reserve Bank had ordered a detailed audit of the accounts of the banks named in the report.
Opening of Union Carbide trial
The first criminal prosecution against nine Indian officials of the United States company Union Carbide, implicated in the Bhopal gas disaster of December 1984 [see pp. 33647-48], opened in Bhopal on July 17.
The company's immunity from criminal prosecution had been lifted by the Supreme Court in October 1991 [see p. 38532].
Transport strike
The government survived a further round of protests in the economic sector [see pp. 38682; 38727; 38967]after lorry drivers agreed "unconditionally" following talks with Ministry of Transport officials on July 7 to end their week-long strike.
The strike, called in protest against local taxes imposed in seven states, had caused widespread disruption in food distribution and a sharp rise in food prices.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) on June 30 released the first tranche worth US$647,000,000 of a US$2,200 million standby credit approved in September 1991 [see p. 38439].
Relations with China
The Defence Minister Sharad Pawar held talks with Chinese officials in Beijing during a visit (the first by an Indian defence minister) on July 25-30.
Discussions centring on the border dispute between the two countries were described by Pawar as "sincere and constructive" .
Outstanding differences on the issue had failed to be resolved during a visit to India by the Chinese Premier Li Peng in December 1991 [see p. 38683].
Border trade with China was resumed after a 30-year suspension on July 16.
States developments
Thirty unarmed workers protesting against the flouting of labour laws were reported killed by police in Bhilai, Madhya Pradesh, on July 1.
Nine people died on July 4 in rioting between Hindus and Moslems in Ahmedabad, Gujarat.
The head of the Punjab-based Khalistan Liberation Force, Gujrant Singh Budhsinghwala, was shot dead by police in Chandigarh on July 30.
The Lok Sabha on July 14 passed a bill seeking to transfer law-making powers of the Jammu and Kashmir legislature to the President.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Continuing crisis in Sind
The government of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif was seriously weakened as the crisis in Sind intensified and the Sind-based Mohajir Qaumi Mahaz (MQM) pulled out of the ruling coalition, alleging "victimization" by the army [for earlier withdrawal of the Jamaat-i-Islami, announced in May, see p. 38914].
The latest development prompted widespread speculation that the army intended to supervise fresh elections which could favour the return to power of Benazir Bhutto, leader of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP).
On June 27 the MQM had announced its decision to quit the government and order the resignation of its deputies in the National and Provincial assemblies.
On July 6 the Speaker of the National Assembly confirmed the resignation of eight MQM deputies; the resignation of 10 MQM deputies in the Sind assembly was officially reported on July 26.
There was no formal announcement on the reported resignations of two MQM federal ministers (one of which was reported in June —see p. 38968).
Extension of army powers
By mid-July between 1,500 and 2,000 alleged criminals had been arrested in the army operation in rural Sind, and a further 1,600 in Karachi.
A presidential ordinance on July 19 granted the army immunity from criminal and civil liability and full powers to search, arrest and seize weapons.
This extension of army powers, regarded as a blow to the authority of the government, came amid moves by the PPP to regain the political initiative.
On July 16 Bhutto announced her intention to abandon parliamentary politics and engage in street demonstrations to press for fresh elections.
In court hearings in Lahore and Karachi in late July, she denied accusations of corruption [see pp. 37652; 37763-64; 38194], insisting that the charges had been contrived out of malice by President Ghulam Ishaq Khan.
Fourteen people were reported killed and 150 injured in renewed outbreaks of sectarian violence between Shias and Sunnis in Peshawar (North West Frontier Province) on July 11, 12 and 14 [for June violence see p. 38968].
Economy
Bank privatization difficulties
The government's bank privatization programme faced fresh difficulties [see pp. 38533; 38683; 38726]after the State Bank of Pakistan (the country's central bank) imposed restrictions on two recently privatized banks.
In June the Mehran Bank was barred from accepting deposits after allegations of financial irregularities centring on the contravention of lending and overdraft regulations.
Restrictions on cash withdrawals and expenditure imposed on the Indus Bank in May, following moves to protect its assets after a management dispute, were lifted on July 1.
Official estimates released on June 24 showed that foreign investment had increased by 48 per cent in 1992.
World Bank loan
The World Bank was reported on July 24 to have agreed to lend Pakistan US$54,200 million for an irrigation and drainage project in Punjab costing US$70,600 million.
On June 12 the Bank had approved a loan of US$29,200 million for an environmental protection and resource conservation project.
Foreign relations
Visit by Nabiyev
Agreements on trade and economic co-operation were signed with Tajikistan during a visit by Tajik President Rakhman Nabiyev on June 30-July 3.
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Uzbekistan on July 20 signed an agreement to extend and maintain road links following tripartite ministerial talks in Islamabad.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
New Prime Minister
Abdul Sabur Fareed on July 6 assumed office as Prime Minister in the interim government of President Burhanuddin Rabbani [see p. 38968].
The appointment of Fareed, 40, a Tajik and the nominee of the Hezb-i-Islami leader Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, marked an apparent end to a two-month boycott of the government by mujaheddin forces loyal to Hekmatyar.
Hekmatyar's forces had threatened to destroy the capital, Kabul, and had been involved in intensified fighting immediately prior to Fareed's arrival from Peshawar; at least 100 people were killed and 300 wounded in the worst bombardment of Kabul, the capital, for two -months.
Pro-Hekmatyar guerrillas demanded the departure from Kabul of forces led by the Uzbek Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostam (whose defection had triggered the fall of the Najibullah regime —see p. 38847).
In mid-July dozens of people in Kabul were reportedly killed in fierce fighting between the pro-Iranian Shia coalition Hezb-i-Wahdat [given on p. 38968 as Wahdat-i-Islami]and the hardline Sunni Ittehad-i-Islami backed by Saudi Arabia.
This latest outbreak of sectarian fighting, momentarily stilled by a government-mediated ceasefire on July 21, came as Sunni groups voiced opposition to the government's apparently conciliatory approach to the Shias (who accounted for about 20 per cent of the country's population).
On July 17 Fareed had announced the formal entry into government of the Hezb-i-Wahdat, and on July 25 he confirmed that the government intended to retain the Shia Gen. Khodad Hazareh who had taken over as Interior Minister under former interim President Seghbatullah Mujjaddedi on June 26.
On July 26-28 government officials held talks with an Iranian delegation led by the Iranian deputy Foreign Minister Allahedin Borujerdi in an attempt to end the fighting.
Formation of Economic Council
The formation of an Economic Council under the supervision of President Rabbani was announced on July 6.
Return of refugees
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) said on July 31 that 1,000,000 Afghan refugees had returned to their homes.
The UNHCR noted that the international community had so far provided only US$31,000,000 of the US$180,000,000 needed for the refugees' repatriation.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KAZAKHSTAN
Energy exploration deals
It was announced on July 2 that the United Kingdom group British Gas PLC, together with Agip, the oil subsidiary of the Italian state-owned energy and chemicals group ENI, had won exclusive negotiation rights over the development of the Karachaganak oil and gas field in north-west Kazakhstan.
[For April and May oil agreements see p. 38915.]
Negotiations were expected to be concluded by mid-1993.
The 40-year contract (extendable by 20 years) established a joint venture investing a total of US$6,000 million over 10 years.
The Western companies would provide training for local personnel and aid for agricultural production and distribution.
On July 14 a deal was signed by the Kazakh government with a private Turkish firm to build a 1,350 megawatt power station at Aktubinsk in the north-west, to be financed by export revenue from the joint development of oilfields in the region.
The deal, which had Turkish government backing, followed a co-operation agreement signed by Turkish Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel and Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev in Kazakhstan in April [see p. 38874].
On June 17, Oman and Kazakhstan signed an agreement in principle to build an oil pipeline.
A free economic zone to encourage international investment was created in west Kazakhstan by the Supreme Soviet on July 30.
The Atyrausk zone contained oil and gas fields.
Registration of Communist Party — Renaming of KGB
It was reported on June 24 that the Supreme Court had ordered the registration of the new Communist Party of Kazakhstan (CPK) by the Justice Ministry within 10 days.
The ruling drew protests from the Procurator's Office and from the Socialist Party of Kazakhstan (SPK —the legal successor to the Kazakh branch of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union —see p. 38418).
The Kazakh Justice Ministry had refused to register the CPK in April on the grounds that its statutes opposing the dissolution of the Soviet Union breached Kazakhstan's Constitution.
The SPK emphasised its determination to prevent a split in left-wing forces in the republic.
The Kazakhstan State Security Committee (KGB) was reorganized as the National Security Committee under a presidential decree of July 13.
The Committee would be headed by former KGB chair Lt.-Gen.
Bulat Bayekenov, and would function on "the international principles of legality and observance of human rights" .
KIRGIZSTAN
NATO visit — Formation of republican armed forces
On July 16 a delegation of North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) officers began a four-day visit to study Kirgizstan's national security policy and its defence agreements.
Reversing its earlier stance against the creation of a republican army, Kirgizstan had on June 1 announced that it was taking under its own jurisdiction the former Soviet military units stationed on the republic's territory and assuming responsibility for their upkeep.
However, as a signatory of the collective security agreement concluded in Tashkent in May [see p. 38922], Kirgizstan would continue to send recruits to the CIS armed forces.
The Chair of the State Defence Committee, -Dzhanybek Umetaliyev, announced to the Kirgiz parliament on June 29 that the planned national armed forces included a regular army of 5,000-7,000 in addition to reserve units.
Army personnel would total 18,000, and the number of troops of the former Soviet army currently stationed in the republic would therefore be reduced by 30 to 40 per cent.
Revival of Communist Party
A constituent congress of the Party of Communists of Kirgizstan was reported onJune 22.
About 250 delegates, said to include many young people, attended.
The congress was chaired by former Kirgiz Communist Party first secretary Absamat Masaliyev, dismissed in April 1991 [see p. 38159].
Two other former first secretaries of the Kirgiz branch of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), Turdakun Usubaliyev and Djumgalbek Amanbayev, had been elected as Supreme Soviet deputies in May 1992.
Media law
A law on the mass media adopted by the Supreme Soviet was criticized by the news agency Interfax on July 2 as being less liberal than its draft and than the former Soviet media law [see p. 37541].
There was no article concerning the freedom of the press and the bans on journalists' activities were broadened.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KIRGIZSTAN
NATO visit — Formation of republican armed forces
On July 16 a delegation of North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) officers began a four-day visit to study Kirgizstan's national security policy and its defence agreements.
Reversing its earlier stance against the creation of a republican army, Kirgizstan had on June 1 announced that it was taking under its own jurisdiction the former Soviet military units stationed on the republic's territory and assuming responsibility for their upkeep.
However, as a signatory of the collective security agreement concluded in Tashkent in May [see p. 38922], Kirgizstan would continue to send recruits to the CIS armed forces.
The Chair of the State Defence Committee, -Dzhanybek Umetaliyev, announced to the Kirgiz parliament on June 29 that the planned national armed forces included a regular army of 5,000-7,000 in addition to reserve units.
Army personnel would total 18,000, and the number of troops of the former Soviet army currently stationed in the republic would therefore be reduced by 30 to 40 per cent.
Revival of Communist Party
A constituent congress of the Party of Communists of Kirgizstan was reported onJune 22.
About 250 delegates, said to include many young people, attended.
The congress was chaired by former Kirgiz Communist Party first secretary Absamat Masaliyev, dismissed in April 1991 [see p. 38159].
Two other former first secretaries of the Kirgiz branch of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), Turdakun Usubaliyev and Djumgalbek Amanbayev, had been elected as Supreme Soviet deputies in May 1992.
Media law
A law on the mass media adopted by the Supreme Soviet was criticized by the news agency Interfax on July 2 as being less liberal than its draft and than the former Soviet media law [see p. 37541].
There was no article concerning the freedom of the press and the bans on journalists' activities were broadened.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAJIKISTAN
Ceasefire agreement
Izvestiya of July 28 reported that a peace agreement had been signed the previous day after two days of talks by representatives of the political parties, the official leadership, religious leaders and security service representatives.
The agreement committed signatories to exchange hostages, lift roadblocks, disband armed formations and hand over illegal weapons, under the supervision of specially formed local commissions, by Aug. 3.
The agreement also contained a provision to increase security along the Tajik-Afghan border.
President Rakhmon Nabiyev, however, did not attend the signing ceremony, which was held in the Badakhshan Autonomous Republic in Tajikistan (formerly the Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous oblast or region).
There were reports in late June of the establishment of ad hoc bodies aiming to restore order to Tajikistan in the absence of clear leadership from the President and government.
They included a Committee for National Salvation chaired by Shodmon Yusufov, chair of the Democratic Party.
A presidential amnesty was published on July 8 for participants in the rallies in April and May which had signalled the start of the unrest in Tajikistan [see pp. 38916; 38969].
Foreign relations
Nabiyev completed a two-day visit to Iran on June 30 and went on to Pakistan, returning to Tajikistan on July 4.
Agreements with Iran included a US$50,000,000 loan to purchase Iranian industrial goods.
Broadcasts of Iranian radio and television to Persian-speaking Tajikistan began on July 21.
Pakistan, with which diplomatic relations had been established on June 6, offered a five-year $500 million loan for the construction of a hydro-electric power station.
A Foreign Ministry delegation visited neighbouring Afghanistan on July 15 to discuss upgrading relations.
Diplomatic relations were established.
Tajik Prime Minister Akbar Mirzoyev headed an unofficial delegation to Kabul on July 14 to seek help in curbing the arms supply to Tajikistan from mojaheddin fighters.
ASIA — PACIFIC
UZBEKISTAN
Harassment of opposition
Increased harassment of Uzbekistan's opposition parties in recent weeks included an attack on two leaders of the Birlik (Unity) movement on June 29, which left co-chair Abdurakhim Pulatov with skull fractures.
Izvestiya of July 24 noted that the US-based human rights group Helsinki Watch, had expressed concern to Uzbek President Islam Karimov over the incident.
The news agency Interfax reported on July 5 that at a joint meeting the two opposition movements, Birlik and Erk, had decided on joint action, acknowledging that the differences in approach between them since Erk's split from Birlik in late 1989 had played into the hands of the government.
It was reported on Aug. 3 that Erk's funds of 192,000 roubles had been sequestrated by the Uzbek tax inspectorate.
Opening of Supreme Soviet session
Militia presence was increased in Tashkent on July 2 in expectation of opposition rallies planned to coincide with the opening of the Supreme Soviet session.
In the event, there were no rallies, but at the Supreme Soviet sitting Mukhammed Solikh, Erk's chair, handed in his deputy's mandate, in protest at not having been allowed to speak.
In his address to the Supreme Soviet session, Karimov said that calm was maintained in the republic thanks to opposition forces' recognition "that civil consent is the main guarantee of state independence" .
The session approved a draft Constitution which would be circulated for nationwide discussion.
Continued rehabilitation of Rashidov — Quashing of Khudayberdiyev's sentence
The Uzbek government continued its rehabilitation of former Uzbek Communist Party first secretary, Sharaf Rashidov, including renaming a Tashkent street after him.
Rashidov, who died in 1983, was a CPSU politburo member under Soviet President Leonid Brezhnev and had ruled Uzbekistan for 24 years during which several major corruption scandals, uncovered in 1988-89, were perpetrated.
The Supreme Soviet on July 3 endorsed President Karimov's proposal to give powers to the plenary sitting of the Supreme Court of Uzbekistan to re-examine sentences passed by the former Soviet Supreme Court on people in Uzbekistan "such as the sentences passed in 1985 and 1989" during the anti-corruption campaign which hit the Central Asian republics particularly hard.
The Court then quashed sentence on Narmakhonmadi Khudayberdiyev, Chair of the Council of Ministers in 1971-84, imposed in 1989 [see p. 36898].
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
New Prime Minister
Puntsagiyn Jasray was elected Prime Minister on July 21 by an overwhelming majority in the People's Great Hural (parliament), defeating former Deputy Prime Minister Choyjilsurengiyin Purevdorg.
Jasray, 60, a free-market economist and former head of a union of private co-operatives, had been nominated on July 15 by the fourth plenum of the Mongolian People's Democratic Party (MPRP) which won a landslide victory in parliamentary elections held in June [see p. 38962].
In his first interview as Prime Minister on July 25, Jasray stressed that his administration's first priority would be to implement a policy aimed at halting production decline and economic recession.
A post election-manifesto circulated by the MPRP on July 3 had reaffirmed its intention to overcome the economic crisis by effecting "a quick transition to market relations in the national economy" .
Opening of People's Great Hural
The People's Great Hural held its first session in the capital Ulan Bator on July 20.
It elected Natsagiyn Bagabandi, secretary of the central committee of the MPRP, as its Chairman.
Jambyn Gombojav was elected Vice-Chairman on July 21.
On July 7 the small Hural had been disbanded to make way for the Great Hural to act as the country's new single-chamber legislative body.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
New Prime Minister
Paias Wingti, the leader of the People's Democratic Movement (PDM), was elected Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea on July 17, at the opening session of the country's new parliament which had been elected on June 13-27 [see p. 38965].
The election for the premiership was the closest in the country's history.
Both Wingti and the outgoing Prime Minister Rabbie Namaliu polled 54 votes in the 109-member legislature, and Wingti finally prevailed through the casting vote of the new Speaker, Bill Skate, who had himself been elected earlier by the slimmest of margins by 55 votes to 54.
It was the third occasion on which Wingti had become Prime Minister.
He first achieved the office in November 1985 by ousting the coalition government in a vote of confidence.
He was narrowly returned as Prime Minister after the 1987 general election, but was ejected from office in July 1988 after being defeated in a motion of no confidence by Namaliu's supporters.
Although the PDM held fewer seats than Namaliu's Pangu Pati, Wingti successfully constructed a coalition which consisted of the PDM, the People's Progress Party (PPP), and the League for National Advancement (LNA) —which had formerly participated in the Pangu-led government of Namaliu —together with a majority of the many independent MPs.
Wingti's position was improved by the defection to his government of a further six MPs, but it was widely assumed that some of those not rewarded with Cabinet office were unlikely to remain permanently within the government coalition.
Although a recent constitutional amendment protected a new government from a motion of no confidence during the first 18 months of its existence, it appeared unlikely that Wingti's new government would be strong enough to break the country's traditional pattern of politics by becoming the first since independence to survive from one general election to the next.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
Lifting of ban on US warship visits
New Zealand's Prime Minister, Jim Bolger, announced on July 3 that his country's prohibition on the entry to its ports of non-nuclear-powered US warships no longer applied.
His statement was a consequence of an earlier announcement by US President George Bush that the USA had completed the pledged withdrawal of more than 2,400 tactical nuclear weapons located outside the USA, including those based on warships.
In a statement issued on July 2 Bush said that it would remain US policy neither to confirm nor deny the presence of nuclear weapons, but that "where we've said we don't have those weapons on board, we mean it" .
He expressed the hope that the move would lead to improved relations with New Zealand which, in 1984, had instituted a ban on the entry to its waters of vessels carrying nuclear weapons.
The ban, which also prohibited nuclear-powered ships, was first used against a US vessel in February 1985 and, thereafter, caused a freeze in relations with the USA and a suspension of New Zealand's role within the ANZUS (Australia-New Zealand-USA) defence pact.
Although the statements by Bush and Bolger appeared to open the way for improved relations, the US government indicated that formal "ally status" and the restoration of a full security relationship could be achieved only if New Zealand rescinded its legislative ban on nuclear-powered vessels.
Bolger remained uncommitted on the future relationship between the two countries.
While stating that there was now "no reason why non-nuclear-powered vessels cannot call here" , he said that he had no immediate plansfor such a visit.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NAURU
Death of DeRoburt — Ruling on compensation claim
A state of mourning was declared in Nauru following the death of former President Hammer DeRoburt on July 15 in Melbourne, Australia.
A state funeral was held on July 22.
DeRoburt, 69, who had been ill for several years, had been President of Nauru from independence in 1968 until 1989, apart from short interludes in 1976-68 (when he was Leader of the Opposition) and 1986.
He was also instrumental in the foundation of the South Pacific Forum.
DeRoburt was a key architect of Nauru's campaign for compensation for the 80 years of phosphate mining which had left 80 per cent of Nauru uninhabitable and incapable of sustaining vegetation.
In his view Australia was particularly responsible, in legal and moral terms, as the administering authority in Nauru between 1891 and independence, during which time the island's phosphates were extracted and sold at below market prices.
Following the report of a Nauru Commission of Inquiry on the issue in 1988, the findings of which Australia rejected, the Nauru government commenced proceedings against Australia in the International Court of Justice in 1989.
Despite having lost the presidency, DeRoburt travelled from his hospital bed in late 1991 to make a persuasive address to the Court in support of Nauru's claim.
He lived long enough to hear the Court announce on June 26 that it had rejected Australia's Preliminary Objections concerning the Court's jurisdiction in the case and the admissibility of Nauru's claim.
The decision meant that the case, Certain Phosphate Lands in Nauru (Nauru v. Australia), was permitted to proceed.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VANUATU
Diplomatic rift with Australia
The government of Vanuatu on July 3 accused an Australian diplomat, James Pearson, acting head of the Australian High Commission in Port Vila, of interfering in Vanuatu's internal affairs.
Pearson, who had suggested that proposed legislation on business licences was damaging to Australian interests and could affect the level of Australian aid to Vanuatu, was ordered to leave the country within 24 hours.
Australian Foreign Affairs and Trade Minister Gareth Evans defended Pearson's conduct and accused the Vanuatu government of over-reacting.
On July 4 a goodwill visit to Port Vila by two Australian navy ships (scheduled for July 9-12) was cancelled as a mark of Australian displeasure, and on July 29 it was reported that the Australian government had imposed a ban on all high-level contact with Vanuatu until Dec. 31, 1992.
Vanuatu's generous tax system meant that the country was the base for numerous offshore companies.
The controversial Business Licence Amendment Bill would empower Vanuatu's Finance Minister to refuse to grant a business licence, without giving a reason.
The controversy continued as President Fred Timakata refused to sign it into law, referring it (together with the Broadcasting and Television Bill and the Land Acquisition Bill) to the Supreme Court for adjudication on its constitutional validity.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM
Heads of government summit
The 23rd heads of government conference of the South Pacific Forum was held in Honiara, the capital of the Solomon Islands, on July 8-9.
All of the Forum's 15 member states were represented, although the uncertain political situation in Papua New Guinea (elections having been held in June —see p. 38965), meant that the country was represented by the Labour and Employment Minister, Arnold Marsipal.
In a pre-Forum meeting between Australia and New Zealand, Australia expressed concern over the continuing allegations of human rights abuses by Papua New Guinea on Bougainville, where a secessionist guerrilla war had been in progress since 1989.
The two countries finally agreed that the matter was an internal problem for the Papua New Guinea government and that it should not be raised officially at the Forum meeting.
On the first day of the conference it was apparently agreed that Taiwan should be accepted as one of the Forum's dialogue partners —those countries outside the South Pacific —currently the USA, UK, France, China, Canada, Japan and the European Communities —with which talks were held immediately after the conclusion of the heads of government conference.
Bikenibeu Paeniu, the Prime Minister of Tuvalu, said that the Forum countries had, in accepting the inclusion of Taiwan, decided that they would not be dictated to by outsiders.
This was seen as a reference to the attitude of China which indicated it might withdraw if Taiwan were admitted into the group.
When the post-Forum talks with the dialogue partners began on July 10, China registered a protest over the Taiwan issue, leading to a statement, issued by the Forum secretariat on July 15, to the effect that Taiwan had not been admitted as a full dialogue partner and that any talks in which Taiwanese representatives had participated had been held at the discretion of individual Forum members.
During the conference the leaders expressed their concern over traditional regional issues including nuclear tests, the incineration of chemical weapons on Johnston Atoll, and the threat posed by rising sea levels.
The conference also provided an opportunity for Australia and Fiji to repair the rift in their bilateral relations which dated from the two military coups in Fiji in 1987.
Australian Prime Minister Paul Keating agreed to restore Australian military assistance to Fiji, suspended since 1987, after a private meeting with the new Fijian Prime Minister Sitiveni Rabuka, the leader of the two coups.
On the final day of the conference the Forum leaders decided to make greater efforts to combat the use of their countries for drug trafficking and money laundering by agreeing a new regional law enforcement arrangement to boost co-operation among their police and customs forces.
The agreement was concluded against a background of recent interceptions of drug shipments in several island states and concern over the abuse of tax-havens.
Fiji and Papua New Guinea were the only two Forum members not to sign the agreement.
The conference also agreed to a new co-operation arrangement on fisheries surveillance allowing patrol boats to arrest illegal fishermen in the territorial waters of another member state.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SAARC
The 11th session of the Council of Ministers of the South Asian Association of Regional Co-Operation (SAARC), held in Colombo, Sri Lanka, on July 8-9, agreed to the drafting of a SAARC preferential trading agreement for submission to the SAARC summit in December 1992.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TURKMENISTAN
The Turkmen Council of Ministers decided on July 14 to establish a national guard initially numbering 1,000 and republican armed forces, although with significant involvement by Russia [see p. 38969]; it was expected that the Turkmen Defence Department would become a Ministry, to be headed by current defence chief Danatar Kopekov.
EUROPE
FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
Refugee crisis
In July the escalating refugees crisis in former Yugoslavia became a major focus of European and worldwide concern.
The fighting in Bosnia-Herzegovina, coupled with the forced expulsions of one ethnic group by another (in particular of Moslems by Serb forces) —a practice widely referred to as "ethnic cleansing" , precipitated a major increase in the numbers of people fleeing their homes in June and July.
The crisis was described as the worst of its kind in Europe since the end of the Second World War.
According to estimates from the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and local Red Cross committees, some 2,500,000 people from the former Yugoslavia were displaced by the end of July, and some 10,000 people from Bosnia were joining them every day.
The total included around 600,000 people who had been displaced during the war between Serbia and Croatia in 1991.
The majority of the refugees, 1,885,000, remained in the former Yugoslav republics: 681,000 in Bosnia-Herzegovina, 672,000 in Croatia (including the Serb-occupied zones), 383,000 in Serbia, 70,000 in Slovenia, 49,000 in Montenegro and 31,000 in Macedonia.
Among neighbouring countries, Germany had taken in around 200,000 refugees, Hungary and Austria around 50,000 each, and Sweden 44,000; smaller numbers were accepted in other European countries.
In mid-July the Croatian authorities announced that they did not have the resources to cope with any more refugees unless substantial help from abroad was forthcoming.
They proceeded to close the border with Bosnia (although refugees were allowed to pass through Croatia on their way to other countries).
Slovenia and Hungary took similar action.
Disagreement on response
Diplomatic efforts to deal with the refugee crisis were complicated by lack of consensus among the countries most directly affected.
Germany proposed the adoption by the European Community (EC) countries of a quota system for accepting refugees.
This gained the backing of Austria, Hungary, Croatia and Slovenia, but found no support among EC countries apart from Germany itself.
The United Kingdom and France in particular argued that refugees should be accommodated and given appropriate assistance as near as possible to their place of origin.
Proposals by the neighbouring countries for the establishment of so-called safe havens (similar to those set up for Kurdish civilians after the Gulf war) were not taken up either, largely because they required the deployment of ground troops, for which there was no consensus.
UNHCR conference
A UNHCR-sponsored emergency conference was held in Geneva on July 29 to formulate a response to the crisis.
The UNHCR submitted a seven-point plan to the conference which among other things called for:(i) an increased international presence in Bosnia to provide relief and to encourage people not to flee:(ii) the maintenance of open borders; and (iii) the granting of "temporary protection" to all refugees from the former Yugoslavia.
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata, declared: "If we do not act immediately and forcefully on both the political and humanitarian fronts, we may find ourselves stranded with an open-ended relief programme and a massive permanent refugee problem in the heart of Europe…
I am afraid time is running out.
It is time for the world to launch a humanitarian counteroffensive."
Participating countries pledged US$152 million as well as logistical support to build winter housing for the refugees and to maintain humanitarian road convoys inside Bosnia (to relieve beseiged cities such as Sarajevo and Gorazde).
A standing committee was set up to co-ordinate the international relief effort.
The conference failed to reach agreement, however, on the unrestricted granting of asylum to refugees.
All speakers at the conference strongly condemned the practice of "ethnic cleansing" .
Serb forces were considered the main culprits, although Croats and Moslems were not exempted from criticism.
Calls for intervention in Bosnia-Hercegovina — Continuing heavy civilian casualties — International peace efforts
The international community faced growing calls for military intervention in Bosnia-Hercegovina as more Bosnian towns came under attack, with the Moslem element of the republic's population under increasing pressure and Serbian forces apparently seeking to link the "Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina" (SRBH) to Serbia proper.
UN-sponsored humanitarian relief finally reached the beseiged capital, Sarajevo, but international peace efforts were in apparent disarray as of the end of July, with the perceived failure of the European Community (EC) -sponsored peace conference.
On July 25, however, the United Kingdom government (current holder of the EC presidency) announced an international conference on Yugoslavia in August, involving the EC, the UN, the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) and "principal governments and parties involved" .
On July 4 Mate Boban, the chair of the Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia-Hercegovina (linked to Croatia's ruling party), proclaimed the Croatian Community of Herceg-Bosna in Croat-controlled areas of Bosnia-Hercegovina (about one-third); the Bosnian government immediately declared this new formation illegal.
It was unclear whether the move was backed by the government of Croatia, since Serbo-Croat negotiations over partitioning Bosnia-Hercegovina were thought to be backed by the respective Presidents [see p. 38919].
Croatia's June defence pact with the Bosnian government [see p. 38971]was followed up by a pact, signed by the Croatian and Bosnian Presidents on July 21, to co-ordinate military efforts against aggression.
They also established diplomatic relations.
The Western European Union (WEU) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on July 10 agreed on policing UN-imposed sanctions against Yugoslavia by means of an air and sea operation in the Adriatic, although without authority to stop vessels suspected of breaking sanctions.
The EC on July 14 condemned "brutal and indiscriminate attacks on defenceless civilians" in Gorazde and other towns.
Gorazde's mostly Moslem population of 37,000 was swollen by about 40,000 Moslem refugees.
On July 29 a Croatian report cited figures from the Bosnian health centre that to date 8,018 had been killed in the fighting and 100,000 were said to be in "concentration camps" , reports of which remained unconfirmed.
EC and UN involvement
The efforts of Lord Carrington as chair of the EC-sponsored peace conference on Yugoslavia were increasingly criticized as ineffective.
He was unsuccessful in his attempt to restart peace talks when he met leaders of the three factions in Sarajevo on July 3.
The Moslem contingent had withdrawn from the EC talks on May 27 in protest at the attack on civilians in Sarajevo [see p. 38919].
On July 13, the UN Security Council unanimously endorsed a recommendation from UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to send an additional 500 troops to join the 1,100 troops already supervising Sarajevo relief operations.
Sarajevo airport had been opened under UN control for relief flights on July 2, although sporadic attacks forced several brief closures.
Canadian troops handed over to French, Egyptian and Ukrainian troops on July 28.
A land corridor was successfully opened from the Croatian port of Split to Sarajevo on July 29.
However, Gen. Lewis MacKenzie, commander of UN operations in Sarajevo said on July 21 that 40,000 UN troops were needed in Sarajevo alone to keep the peace and that all sides were breaking "the international rules of war" .
Boutros-Ghali on July 22 recommended that the UN Security Council reject a ceasefire plan negotiated on July 17 in London.
The ceasefire agreement, effectively disregarded on the ground, was drawn up in separate talks beginning on July 15 between the President of the "Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina" (SRBH), Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Foreign Minister, Haris Silajdzic, and Bosnian Croat leader Boban.
It required that heavy weapons be placed under UN supervision during a 14-day truce.
Boutros-Ghali, however, complained in a letter to the UN Security Council on July 21 that the EC had not consulted the UN over the plan's feasibility, leaving him, as Secretary-General, "in the invidious position of having to advise the [Security]Council on the implementation of a mandate behind which the Council has already thrown its political support" .
A further round of the EC negotiations held in London on July 27, co-ordinated by EC chief negotiator José Cutileiro, took a new approach in concentrating on a constitutional settlement before a ceasefire.
The talks broke down on July 28 when Silajdzic unilaterally rejected the proposed EC plan involving the cantonization of Bosnia-Hercegovina [see p. 38832].
Douglas Hurd, the UK Foreign Secretary, toured the region, beginning in Slovenia on July 16 and continuing to Croatia, Bosnia-Hercegovina, Serbia, Macedonia and Albania.
He held talks with governments and leaders of self-proclaimed republics and with opposition leaders.
The Turkish Foreign Minister, Hikmet Cetin, also visited Sarajevo on July 11, reflecting concerns about the impact of the war on the Moslem world.
Russia froze relations with Yugoslavia on July 17 and the Supreme Soviet approved the deployment of 400 more UN troops from Russia.
New Yugoslav government
The President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY), Dobrica Cosic, elected in June, nominated Serbian-born US businessman Milan Panic as Federal Prime Minister on July 1.
On July 14, Panic was elected Prime Minister by 99 to 33 votes in the Chamber of Citizens and by 35 to three (plus one invalid vote) in the Chamber of Republics.
The initial composition of Panic's "government of experts" was announced the same day.
The Serbian Foreign Minister and Montenegrin Interior Minister were nominated for the corresponding federal posts.
Bosnian President Alija Izetbegovic met Panic in Sarajevo on July 19, and on July 30, returning to Belgrade from a wide-ranging foreign tour, Panic claimed to have improved Yugoslavia's image abroad, and particularly to have obtained a positive response from France's President Mitterrand for his policy, which featured a proposed demilitarization in Bosnia-Hercegovina, observance of the UN peace plan for Croatia, restoration of links between the FRY and the other ex-Yugoslav republics, early elections, and restructuring the economic system as a market economy.
On July 29 the Federal Assembly approved a new budget, since 1992 revenue was already exhausted, in which 48 per cent of revenue would come from a loan from the National Bank.
The military share of expenditure was reduced from 80 per cent to 72.6 per cent.
EC non-acceptance of FRY as successor to Yugoslavia
An EC statement issued on July 20, following a ruling from the EC Arbitration Commission, declared that the new federation formed by Serbia and Montenegro "cannot be accepted as the sole successor" to former Yugoslavia, and that the EC would "oppose the participation of Yugoslavia in international bodies" .
Montenegro's complement of seats in the FRY Assembly was filled when the Montenegrin Assembly on July 2 elected a further five deputies to the Chamber of Republics.
Koviljko Lovre, proposed by the Serbian Socialist Party, was elected Prime Minister of Vojvodina on July 20.
Rejection of Kosovo conference
Concern that the conflict would spread to the mainly Albanian-populated Serbian province of Kosovo was not assuaged by Yugoslav and Serb leaders' rejection of Lord Carrington's proposal for an international conference on Kosovo, made in Belgrade on July 21.
Kosovo's President Ibrahim Rugova [see p. 38919]paid visits on July 14 to Albania and on July 16-17 to Greece (the latter, at the Black Sea summit on June 25 —see p. 38980-81 —having taken the view that Kosovo, as an autonomous region within Serbia and not therefore a constituent element of Yugoslavia, should not be allowed self-determination).
Croatia
On July 29 Boutros-Ghali endorsed a recommendation by the commander of the UN Protection Force in Yugoslavia (UNPROFOR —see p. 38849), Lt.-Gen.
Satish Nambiar, that his forces be authorized to exercise immigration and customs control at the borders of UN protected areas in Croatia.
The endorsement was given "with some misgiving" because such "quasi-governmental functions" were outside the remit of normal peacekeeping operations.
Milan Panic Prime Minister; Defence Minister Oskar Kovac Deputy Prime Minister; Finance Radoje Kontic Deputy Prime Minister Vladislav Jovanovic Foreign Affairs Pavle Bulatovic Internal Affairs Blagoje Lucic Foreign Economic Relations Nikola Sainovic Economy Milutin Mrkonjic Transport and Communications Branko Radovic Labour, Health and Social Policy Tibor Varadi Justice Ivan Ivic Education and Culture Vlastimir Mateic Science and Technology; Agriculture (acting) Miodrag Perisic Information Mihajlo Buric Environment Djordje Perisic Sport Momcilo Grubac Human Rights and Minority Affairs Radmila Milentijevic without portfolio Ljubisa Rakic without portfolio 
Yugoslav federal government
July 14, 1992
Macedonia
The Macedonian government offered its resignation on July 16 after a vote of no confidence was carried by 91 votes to two with seven abstentions in the Macedonian Assembly on July 7.
The government's fall was attributed to its failure to gain international recognition for an independent Macedonia.
The Assembly, in a debate on July 1-3, rejected the EC declaration adopted at Greek insistence on June 27 [see p. 38943], that Macedonia should change its name before receiving recognition.
The Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization —Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity (VMRO —DPMNE), vocal in blaming the government for failing to achieve international recognition, failed to form a coalition government despite being the most numerous party in the Assembly.
The Social Democratic Alliance of Macedonia (SDSM) on July 15 proposed Petar Gosev as Prime Minister-designate.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Group of 24 meeting
Representatives of the Group of 24 (G-24) industrialized countries, which co-ordinated aid for eastern Europe and former Soviet Asia, met in the Albanian capital, Tirana, on July 22 in order to discuss with the Albanian authorities and international financial institutions how aid to Albania might be accelerated.
The G-24 group expressed readiness to provide Albania with food aid until the 1993 harvest, and beyond if necessary.
Italy was a major donor among European countries and Greece announced that it would make available US$70,000,000 for agricultural development, which was given high priority.
The meeting was interpreted by some observers as a move by the European Communities (EC) to involve donor countries beyond Europe more closely in Albania's development.
Addressing the meeting, Prime Minister Aleksander Meksi referred to "a powerful 12-month package of stabilization measures" , recently agreed with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which had estimated that an additional US$162,000,000 was needed to support the balance of payments until June 1993 [for economic situation see also pp. 38878; 38971].
Local elections
In local elections on July 26 the Socialist Party of Albania —SPA (until June 1991 the communist Party of Labour of Albania —PLA) recovered some ground it had lost in the March legislative elections, but the Democratic Party (DP) nevertheless retained control of the cities of Tirana, Elbasan, Korce, Shkoder and Dürres.
The official results in these first multiparty local elections since the Second World War were finally announced on Aug. 13, apparently after a second round of voting on Aug. 2 to decide close-run elections in 18 of Albania's 42 municipalities and 97 of its 304 communes.
The DP (which in April had formed a government with support from the Social Democratic Party —SD —and the Republican Party-RP) retained a slight overall lead in terms of the overall vote, with 43 per cent compared with 41 per cent for the SPA.
The SDP, the Human Rights Union (HRU) and the RP each secured under 5 per cent of the vote.
SPA mayors were elected in 23 municipalities, compared with 18 for the DP.
The SPA won control of 43 per cent of municipal councils (compared with 41 per cent for the DP, which nevertheless secured marginally more of the overall vote in the municipalities).
The SPA won control of 46 per cent of communal councils (35 per cent for the DP) and 44 per cent of district councils (38 per cent for the DP).
Attempts at emigration
For the first time since August 1991 there were attempts at mass emigration, triggered by rumours that Italy had made preparations to receive refugees.
On July 2-3 some 2,000 people, from the coastal town of Vlore and surrounding villages, attempted to board an Italian-bound ship in the port.
Other reports were that numbers of people had set out on foot from Tirana for Dürres and Vlore in response to rumours.
On July 6 there were attempts at embarkation by 4,000 people at Dürres, and on the same day several hundred people gathered outside embassies in Tirana demanding the right to emigrate.
On July 8 an Albanian military transport vessel was seized by would-be emigrants as it left the port of Saseno (also called Sezan) near Vlore.
An Italian naval vessel intercepted the boat and escorted it to Brindisi.
The next day 108 Albanians from the boat, including members of the military, were forcibly repatriated.
The Albanian Cabinet announced on July 7 that "illegal strikes, attempts at exoduses" and other such illegal activities were considered "anti-democratic activities" , inspired by "communist-Labourites, burdened with responsibility for the past" .
Return of Albanians from Greece
On July 1 the Greek authorities handed over 1,100 Albanian citizens at the border post of Kakavije.
On July 7-8 some 650 Albanians who had attempted to cross without documents into the Greek districts of Ioannina and Thesprotia were likewise deported, and on July 10 some 2,800 Albanian citizens employed in Greece were sent back to southern Albania, apparently in co-ordination with the Albanian local authorities [see also pp. 38690; 38775; 38830; 38920].
Banning of "Stalinist" parties
An amendment to the law on political organizations approved by the People's Assembly on July 16 prohibited parties whose aims were "fascist, anti-national, chauvinistic, racist, totalitarian, communist, Marxist-Leninist, Stalinist" or "Enverist" (i.e. following the ideology of the country's former ruler Enver Hoxha).
The Albanian Communist Party, formed by the defeated minority in the former ruling communist PLA when party reformists renamed it in 1991, was thus outlawed.
Its chairman, Hysni Milloshi, was arrested by the Tirana police on July 22 and charged with illegally carrying a gun, since only the chairmen of existing parties were allowed to do so.
Decree on dual nationality
On July 17 it was decreed that foreigners of Albanian nationality and origin should "upon their request be granted Albanian nationality, maintaining or not the nationality of their own state" .
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Arrest of former leaders
Andrei Lukanov, Bulgaria's last Prime Minister under the communist regime, was arrested on July 9, accused of misappropriation of funds in the form of loans to communist parties in developing countries.
Lukanov, currently a Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) deputy in the Bulgarian National Assembly, was stripped of parliamentary immunity on July 7, provoking a walkout by BSP deputies.
On July 24, deputies from the Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF) voted with the ruling Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) to defeat by 130 votes to 104 a motion of no confidence in the government proposed by the BSP on July 17.
Some 60 other former high-ranking officials faced charges together with Lukanov.
They included two former Prime Ministers: Grisha Filipov (1981-86) and Georgy Atanasov (1986-90).
Todor Zhivkov, Bulgaria's President and Communist Party leader for 35 years, on trial since February 1991 for embezzlement [see p. 38017], was also accused on June 25 and 26 of creating forced labour camps and of inciting racial discrimination against Bulgarian Turks in the "assimilation" campaigns of the mid-1980s.
Also on June 25 former President and Foreign Minister Petar Mladenov was accused of violating the UN Convention on racial discrimination for his part in the assimilation programme.
In a letter to the Bulgarian news agency BTA, reported on July 20, Zhivkov took responsibility for Bulgaria's foreign and domestic policy during his period in power but denied having been responsible for allocating aid to developing countries.
Labour unrest
Faced by strikes at ports and mines, a public transport strike in Sofia, the capital, on July 16-19 and strikes by medical workers and government workers, the government on July 14 authorised a 26 per cent pay increase for all state employees.
The Podkrepa Trade Union Federation remained on strike alert from July 20, but rejected the UDF accusation that its actions were intended to bring down the government.
Dispute in Orthodox Church
The Bulgarian Orthodox Church virtually split into two during June and July over rival claims to legitimacy.
The government had removed Patriarch Maksim from his post in March [see p. 38835].
Patriarch Maksim's rivals had then elected Metropolitan Pimen as acting chair of the Church Synod in May, and refused to accept a June 11 ruling by the Constitutional Court that the removal of Maksim was unconstitutional.
(The Court found that, because religious communities were separate from the state,"the actions and decisions taken by the Directorate of Religious Faiths…constituted an inadmissible interference in the affairs of the…
Church".)
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Slovak declaration of sovereignty — Inconclusive presidential elections — Havel's resignation
The dismantling of the Czechoslovak federal state, accelerated by the federal and republican elections in June [see pp. 38944-45], gathered momentum during July.
No candidate was elected in three rounds of presidential elections held on July 3, 16 and 30.
The Slovak National Council approved a declaration of sovereignty on July 17, shortly before Vaclav Havel, leading advocate of a continued federation, announced his resignation as federal President with effect from July 20.
Three days later Vaclav Klaus, Czech Prime Minister and leader of the Civic Democratic Party (ODS), and Vladimir Meciar, Slovak Prime Minister and leader of the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), reached a political agreement on the steps to be taken towards the abolition of the federation.
Swearing-in of Czech government
Agreement on a Czech coalition dominated by the ODS was reached on July 1.
Other members were the Christian Democratic Union —Czechoslovak People's Party (KDU -CSL), the Christian Democratic Party (KDS), and the Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA).
The coalition, with control of 105 of 200 seats, was sworn in on July 2.
Inconclusive presidential elections
In the first two rounds of presidential elections held on July 3 Havel, whose candidacy was opposed by the HZDS and the Slovak National Party, failed to win the necessary majority.
Further inconclusive rounds were held on July 16 and 30.
In the first round Havel received 79 votes in the 150-member Chamber of the People (11 votes short of the 90 required) and in the 150-member Chamber of Nations (where at least 45 votes were required from each of the Czech and Slovak groups in the Chamber, which voted separately) he won 47 votes in the Czech and 22 in the Slovak part.
(Juraj Cop, the only other candidate, put forward by the Association for the Republic — Czechoslovak Republican Party, withdrew shortly before the vote was held.)
In the second round, when an absolute majority in each section would suffice, Havel won 80 votes in the Chamber of the People (above the 76 required) and 45 votes from the Czech representatives in the Chamber of Nations (above the 38 required) but only 18 from the Slovakians.
In two rounds of voting on July 16, first-round candidates were debarred from standing.
Miroslav Sladek, the leader of the Republicans and the only candidate, won a total of 58 out of 300 votes in the first poll and 60 in the second poll.
In two further rounds of voting on July 30 three candidates again failed to win sufficient support for election: Marie Kristova (for the Liberal Social Union), Zdenek Pinta (for the Republicans) and Zdenek Prochazka (for dissident Republicans).
Slovak sovereignty declaration
On July 17, the Slovak National Council approved by 113 votes to 24 with 10 abstentions a declaration on the sovereignty of the Slovak Republic, stating that "a thousand years of the Slovak nation's striving for its identity" had "reached its fulfilment" and proclaiming the sovereignty of the Slovak Republic "as the basis of a sovereign state of the Slovak nation" .
The Washington Post of July 18 described the vote as "a political gesture rather than a decisive legal act" .
All the HZDS and Slovak National Party deputies and most of those from the former communist Party of the Democratic Left voted in favour; all the Christian Democratic Movement (KDH) deputies, which had lost power in the June election, voted against.
Of the 14 Hungarian Christian Democratic Movement —Coexistence members, half voted against and half abstained.
Although Meciar pledged the same day to respect the rights of all in Slovakia, including "Hungarians, Poles, Ukrainians…not only as cohabitants but as brothers" , leaders of the 600,000-strong Hungarian minority in Slovakia expressed concern at recent attempts by Slovak leaders to enact restrictive language laws, and said that they would seek regional autonomy within independent Slovakia.
Havel's resignation
Within an hour of the Slovak declaration Havel announced his resignation as Czechoslovak President with effect from July 20.
Speaking on television he declared that he "could no longer fulfil the obligations of the oath of loyalty to the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic and its Constitution in a way which would be compatible with my nature, convictions and conscience" .
The federal government decided on July 20 that Havel's responsibilities should be exercised by Federal Prime Minister Jan Strasky until a President was elected.
Klaus-Meciar agreement
The bilateral agreement signed by Klaus and Meciar on July 23 and reached after five sessions held since the June elections, outlined the steps necessary to allow the dissolution of the Czechoslovak state by Sept. 30, 1992.
Both parties would ask the Federal Assembly to prepare the relevant legislation which would require approval by 60 per cent of votes in both houses.
The republics would prepare "treaties" covering (i) civil issues;(ii) foreign affairs;(iii) defence; and (iv) the economy.
Freedom of movement between the two countries and the rights of citizens in both countries were to be guaranteed; Czech citizens would not be considered foreigners in Slovakia and vice versa.
Existing Czechoslovak embassies would continue to represent both countries in major countries "such as the Twelve [European Community countries]" .
It was agreed that the split "should not lead to the weakening" of "the defence interests of either of the republics" .
There would be a customs union, free trade in goods and services, and free movement of labour, money and capital.
Whether there would continue to be a single currency was, however, unresolved.
Valdimir Dlouhy, Czech Trade and Tourism and Industry Minister, reportedly described retaining a common currency as "political suicide" and said that there was "no way" in which the Czech republic would commit itself through a common currency to financing Slovak budget deficits.
Although before the election Meciar had pressed for a separate currency and central bank, he acknowledged in an interview with Le Monde published on July 7 that Slovakia was "not yet ready" for this.
Various newspaper reports commented on Meciar's changed stance on certain issues since the election.
The Washington Post of July 16 reported that "before last month's elections, it was Slovak nationalist politicians who seemed determined to end the federation, while Czech leaders tried doggedly to preserve the joint state" .
Since then, however, Meciar appeared to be more reluctant and declared in the same Le Monde interview: "We don't want independence.
We are being pushed into it."
The Washington Post commented that "some politicians wonder, however, if Meciar's shift is a genuine retreat, or a tactical manoeuvre intended to buy time and lay blame for an eventual split on the Czechs" .
1968 letter inviting Warsaw Pact forces into Prague
On July 16 Havel read out a 1968 letter found in Moscow and sent to him by Russian President Boris Yeltsin, inviting Warsaw Pact forces into Prague.
The letter declared: "The very essence of socialism in our country is threatened…
It is only with your help that the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic can be snatched away from the looming danger of counter-revolution."
Of the five Czechoslovak Communist Party signatories, only Vasil Bilak, whose involvement had until then been suspected but unproven, was still alive.
Erratum: Cabinet list.
On p. 38945 Lt.-Gen.
Imrich Andrejcak, the Federal Defence Minister, was inadvertently omitted from the list of the federal government as sworn in on July 2.
Vaclav Klaus (ODS) Prime Minister Ivan Kocarnik (ODS) Deputy Prime Minister, Finance Josef Lux (KDU -CSL) Deputy Prime Minister, Agriculture Jan Kalvoda (ODA) Deputy Prime Minister (responsible for legislative affairs) Vladimir Dlouhy (ODA) Industry; Trade and Tourism Karel Dyba (ODS) Economic Policy and Development Petr Lom (ODS) Health Jan Ruml (ODS) Interior Jindrich Kabat (KDU -CSL) Culture Petr Pitha (KDS) Education, Youth and Sport Jindrich Vodicka (ODS) Labour and Social Affairs Igor Nemec (ODS) State Control Jiri Skalicky (ODA) Administration of National Property and Privatization Frantisek Benda (KDS) Environment Josef Zieleniec (ODS) Foreign Relations Jiri Novak (ODS) Justice Stanislav Belehradek (KDU -CSL) Without Portfolio (responsible for economic competition)
Czech government
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Slovak declaration of sovereignty — Inconclusive presidential elections — Havel's resignation
The dismantling of the Czechoslovak federal state, accelerated by the federal and republican elections in June [see pp. 38944-45], gathered momentum during July.
No candidate was elected in three rounds of presidential elections held on July 3, 16 and 30.
The Slovak National Council approved a declaration of sovereignty on July 17, shortly before Vaclav Havel, leading advocate of a continued federation, announced his resignation as federal President with effect from July 20.
Three days later Vaclav Klaus, Czech Prime Minister and leader of the Civic Democratic Party (ODS), and Vladimir Meciar, Slovak Prime Minister and leader of the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), reached a political agreement on the steps to be taken towards the abolition of the federation.
Swearing-in of Czech government
Agreement on a Czech coalition dominated by the ODS was reached on July 1.
Other members were the Christian Democratic Union —Czechoslovak People's Party (KDU -CSL), the Christian Democratic Party (KDS), and the Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA).
The coalition, with control of 105 of 200 seats, was sworn in on July 2.
Inconclusive presidential elections
In the first two rounds of presidential elections held on July 3 Havel, whose candidacy was opposed by the HZDS and the Slovak National Party, failed to win the necessary majority.
Further inconclusive rounds were held on July 16 and 30.
In the first round Havel received 79 votes in the 150-member Chamber of the People (11 votes short of the 90 required) and in the 150-member Chamber of Nations (where at least 45 votes were required from each of the Czech and Slovak groups in the Chamber, which voted separately) he won 47 votes in the Czech and 22 in the Slovak part.
(Juraj Cop, the only other candidate, put forward by the Association for the Republic — Czechoslovak Republican Party, withdrew shortly before the vote was held.)
In the second round, when an absolute majority in each section would suffice, Havel won 80 votes in the Chamber of the People (above the 76 required) and 45 votes from the Czech representatives in the Chamber of Nations (above the 38 required) but only 18 from the Slovakians.
In two rounds of voting on July 16, first-round candidates were debarred from standing.
Miroslav Sladek, the leader of the Republicans and the only candidate, won a total of 58 out of 300 votes in the first poll and 60 in the second poll.
In two further rounds of voting on July 30 three candidates again failed to win sufficient support for election: Marie Kristova (for the Liberal Social Union), Zdenek Pinta (for the Republicans) and Zdenek Prochazka (for dissident Republicans).
Slovak sovereignty declaration
On July 17, the Slovak National Council approved by 113 votes to 24 with 10 abstentions a declaration on the sovereignty of the Slovak Republic, stating that "a thousand years of the Slovak nation's striving for its identity" had "reached its fulfilment" and proclaiming the sovereignty of the Slovak Republic "as the basis of a sovereign state of the Slovak nation" .
The Washington Post of July 18 described the vote as "a political gesture rather than a decisive legal act" .
All the HZDS and Slovak National Party deputies and most of those from the former communist Party of the Democratic Left voted in favour; all the Christian Democratic Movement (KDH) deputies, which had lost power in the June election, voted against.
Of the 14 Hungarian Christian Democratic Movement —Coexistence members, half voted against and half abstained.
Although Meciar pledged the same day to respect the rights of all in Slovakia, including "Hungarians, Poles, Ukrainians…not only as cohabitants but as brothers" , leaders of the 600,000-strong Hungarian minority in Slovakia expressed concern at recent attempts by Slovak leaders to enact restrictive language laws, and said that they would seek regional autonomy within independent Slovakia.
Havel's resignation
Within an hour of the Slovak declaration Havel announced his resignation as Czechoslovak President with effect from July 20.
Speaking on television he declared that he "could no longer fulfil the obligations of the oath of loyalty to the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic and its Constitution in a way which would be compatible with my nature, convictions and conscience" .
The federal government decided on July 20 that Havel's responsibilities should be exercised by Federal Prime Minister Jan Strasky until a President was elected.
Klaus-Meciar agreement
The bilateral agreement signed by Klaus and Meciar on July 23 and reached after five sessions held since the June elections, outlined the steps necessary to allow the dissolution of the Czechoslovak state by Sept. 30, 1992.
Both parties would ask the Federal Assembly to prepare the relevant legislation which would require approval by 60 per cent of votes in both houses.
The republics would prepare "treaties" covering (i) civil issues;(ii) foreign affairs;(iii) defence; and (iv) the economy.
Freedom of movement between the two countries and the rights of citizens in both countries were to be guaranteed; Czech citizens would not be considered foreigners in Slovakia and vice versa.
Existing Czechoslovak embassies would continue to represent both countries in major countries "such as the Twelve [European Community countries]" .
It was agreed that the split "should not lead to the weakening" of "the defence interests of either of the republics" .
There would be a customs union, free trade in goods and services, and free movement of labour, money and capital.
Whether there would continue to be a single currency was, however, unresolved.
Valdimir Dlouhy, Czech Trade and Tourism and Industry Minister, reportedly described retaining a common currency as "political suicide" and said that there was "no way" in which the Czech republic would commit itself through a common currency to financing Slovak budget deficits.
Although before the election Meciar had pressed for a separate currency and central bank, he acknowledged in an interview with Le Monde published on July 7 that Slovakia was "not yet ready" for this.
Various newspaper reports commented on Meciar's changed stance on certain issues since the election.
The Washington Post of July 16 reported that "before last month's elections, it was Slovak nationalist politicians who seemed determined to end the federation, while Czech leaders tried doggedly to preserve the joint state" .
Since then, however, Meciar appeared to be more reluctant and declared in the same Le Monde interview: "We don't want independence.
We are being pushed into it."
The Washington Post commented that "some politicians wonder, however, if Meciar's shift is a genuine retreat, or a tactical manoeuvre intended to buy time and lay blame for an eventual split on the Czechs" .
1968 letter inviting Warsaw Pact forces into Prague
On July 16 Havel read out a 1968 letter found in Moscow and sent to him by Russian President Boris Yeltsin, inviting Warsaw Pact forces into Prague.
The letter declared: "The very essence of socialism in our country is threatened…
It is only with your help that the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic can be snatched away from the looming danger of counter-revolution."
Of the five Czechoslovak Communist Party signatories, only Vasil Bilak, whose involvement had until then been suspected but unproven, was still alive.
Erratum: Cabinet list.
On p. 38945 Lt.-Gen.
Imrich Andrejcak, the Federal Defence Minister, was inadvertently omitted from the list of the federal government as sworn in on July 2.
Vaclav Klaus (ODS) Prime Minister Ivan Kocarnik (ODS) Deputy Prime Minister, Finance Josef Lux (KDU -CSL) Deputy Prime Minister, Agriculture Jan Kalvoda (ODA) Deputy Prime Minister (responsible for legislative affairs) Vladimir Dlouhy (ODA) Industry; Trade and Tourism Karel Dyba (ODS) Economic Policy and Development Petr Lom (ODS) Health Jan Ruml (ODS) Interior Jindrich Kabat (KDU -CSL) Culture Petr Pitha (KDS) Education, Youth and Sport Jindrich Vodicka (ODS) Labour and Social Affairs Igor Nemec (ODS) State Control Jiri Skalicky (ODA) Administration of National Property and Privatization Frantisek Benda (KDS) Environment Josef Zieleniec (ODS) Foreign Relations Jiri Novak (ODS) Justice Stanislav Belehradek (KDU -CSL) Without Portfolio (responsible for economic competition)
Czech government
EUROPE
ESTONIA
Constitution — Relations with Russia
Following the referendum on June 28 [see p. 38971]the new Constitution of the Republic of Estonia automatically became effective as of July 3.
On July 9 the Estonian Supreme Council (parliament) voted to hold parliamentary and presidential elections on Sept. 20.
Only citizens of pre-1940 Estonia and their descendants would be eligible to vote.
This provoked a warning from the Russian Supreme Soviet on July 17 that inclusion in Baltic states' legislation "of articles which make discrimination on grounds of nationality the norm" could lead to temporary economic sanctions against Estonia, which had a 33.3 per cent Russian minority.
Relations with Russia worsened when Estonian defence forces were involved in a shooting incident with Russian soldiers in Tallinn, the capital, on July 27.
The Tallinn city council had banned the movement of Russian military in the city as of July 10.
It appeared that 30 Estonians had attempted to seize premises currently belonging to the Russian military, but due to be handed over to Estonia.
Twenty-four people were arrested and two people wounded.
A similar incident involving the handing over of equipment at an airfield was reported on July 29.
Several incidents of harassment against Russian soldiers in July were attributed by some reports to Estonian irregular forces or "forest brothers" linked with the Kaitseliit (Defence League).
A government statement of July 22 denied the existence of guerrilla forces and noted that recent incidents between the Kaitseliit and Russian troops involving arms were attributable to the Russians' violation of Estonian law.
However, on July 19, the Estonian Defence Council voted to bring the Kaitseliit under direct government control.
On July 31, Russian television reported that Marshal Pavel Grachev, Russia's Defence Minister, had ordered troops to shoot to kill if attacked.
[For CSCE declaration on Russian troop withdrawal see p. 39031.]
EUROPE
LATVIA
New currency — Coup investigation report
From July 20 the Latvian rouble was officially the only legal tender in Latvia when the Russian rouble became a foreign currency.
Introduced in May as an interim currency to overcome the cash shortage [see p. 38926], the Latvian rouble had the same value as the Russian.
Latvia thus became the second ex-Soviet republic (following Estonia) to replace the rouble with its own currency.
On July 9 the Supreme Council (parliament) adopted a draft resolution confirming the conclusions of the parliamentary commission investigating the Soviet attempted coup of August 1991.
In addition there had been a report on June 30 that the Supreme Council had changed the law on the status of deputies, including a provision for annulling a deputy's mandate if his or her activity tended to hinder the development of an independent democratic state.
The July 9 resolution annulled the mandates of 15 deputies, mainly from the Equal Rights (Ravnopraviye) faction, claiming that from May 1990 to August 1991 they attempted unlawfully to replace the Latvian government and eliminate the drive towards Latvian independence.
A 16th deputy's mandate was not revoked due to insufficient evidence.
The resolution left the Supreme Council with 170 deputies, and deprived the Equal Rights faction of its parliamentary leader, Sergejs Dimanis.
The ousted pro-Moscow deputies were accused of forming part of a group to protect "civic rights and constitutions of the Soviet Union and Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic [the pre-independence Latvian republic]" .
The Equal Rights faction conveyed a protest to the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) meeting in Helsinki [see pp. 39030-31]that human rights in Latvia were being violated.
EUROPE
LITHUANIA
New Prime Minister
On July 21 the Lithuanian Seimas [see below]approved the nomination of Aleksandras Abisala, formerly Minister without portfolio, to the post of Prime Minister by 67 votes to five with 22 abstentions, thus achieving the necessary majority of 50 per cent plus one of deputies present (102).
Abisala's predecessor, Gediminas Vagnorius, who had initially resigned in May [see p. 38927], was finally ousted in a no confidence vote on July 14 (by 69 votes to six with two spoiled ballots), accused of mismanaging the economy.
The no confidence motion was proposed by the National Progress faction, supported by material from parliamentary economic and budget commissions and by the General Procuracy.
Abisala pledged to retain the majority of ministers in their posts until legislative elections, scheduled for Oct. 25.
On July 23 he presented the new Cabinet which was approved by 70 votes to two with eight abstentions.
Finance Minister Elvyra Kunceviciene had resigned on July 2 (her resignation of April 18 —see p. 38880 —had not been accepted), but continued in an acting capacity until the appointment of a replacement, later named as Audrius Misevicius.
New election law — Scheduling of November polling in Polish-populated regions
On July 9 the Seimas approved an election law by 93 votes to one, under which 71 of the 141 deputies would be directly elected and 70 by proportional representation; there would be a 4 per cent threshold for gaining seats.
On July 23 the Seimas decided that elections in Polish-populated regions of Lithuania would be held on Nov. 22.
Governing bodies in these regions had been suspended in September 1991 and direct rule from Vilnius imposed [see p. 38419].
On July 7 the Lithuanian Supreme Council (Auksiausiogi Taryba) amended the provisional basic law of the republic to change the legislature's name to Seimas.
EUROPE
POLAND
Distribution of parties in Sejm Seats
Formation of new government
Waldemar Pawlak, appointed Prime Minister after the fall of the Olszewski government on June 5 [see p. 38972], offered his resignation to the Sejm on July 2 after his failure to form a government.
After a warning from President Lech Walesa on July 3 that he would name a Cabinet himself if a majority government were not immediately forthcoming, eight political parties accelerated their negotiations and proposed Hanna Suchocka as Prime Minister.
Following Walesa's agreement on July 8 the Sejm accepted Pawlak's resignation on July 10 by 286 to 11 with 107 abstentions and approved Suchocka's nomination by 233 votes to 61 with 113 abstentions.
On July 11, the composition of the Cabinet was approved by 226 votes to 124 with 28 abstentions.
Pawlak had been unable to present a Cabinet on July 2, after the three-party "small coalition" [see p. 38881]deserted his own Polish Peasant Party (PSL).
He nevertheless expounded his putative government's programme to the Sejm on July 1.
Cabinet negotiations had broken down over the balance of power in the government, with the "small coalition" demanding greater control over the economy than the PSL was prepared to concede.
Suchocka, born in 1946, was a lecturer in constitutional law and had served since 1989 on the Sejm legislation committee.
She described the new Cabinet as "a government of national accord" , referring to a common Solidarity background as its foundation.
She pledged to reduce the power of the Interior Ministry and to reform the Defence Ministry —two areas of government in which competences had caused greatest controversy in recent months [see pp. 38880; 38922; 38972].
She was supported by seven of the eight parties which had agreed to form a coalition Cabinet, although the Centre Alliance withdrew at the last minute.
The "small coalition" was thus joined by the four of the five Christian democratic and peasant parties descended from Solidarity.
Issue of alleged collaborators
On July 4 the Sejm heard the report of the Extraordinary Commission on the exposure of security service collaborators between 1945 and 1990 who were currently still in positions of authority.
The commission had been set up on June 4 to examine the implementation of the May 28 Sejm resolution on the exposure of former agents [see p. 38972; the resolution had in fact originally called for exposures by June 6, not June 20 as stated on that page].
The May 28 resolution was suspended as unconstitutional on June 19.
The Extraordinary Commission's report was accepted after a 12-hour debate on July 23 by 184 votes to 110 with 19 abstentions.
The Commission accused former Interior Minister Antoni Macierewicz, and the head of the State Protection Office, Piotr Naimski, of actions which "could have led to the destabilization of the state" .
Former Prime Minister Jan Olszewski was also criticized.
The Commission accused Macierewicz of "hypocrisy and an attempt to avoid the eventual legal consequences" in claiming that the documents were "informative" rather than lists of collaborators' names as the Sejm resolution demanded.
In addition, the Commission revealed that Macierewicz had sought to pressure the KPN leadership with information about its chair, Leszek Moczulski, linking this with an attempt to prevent the Olszewski government's fall.
On July 19, the ZChN expelled Macierewicz over the issue.
Economic unrest
Workers at coal and copper mines went on strike during late July, demanding wage rises and improved conditions.
Roadblocks on the main routes to Warsaw set up by farmers belonging to the Self-Defence Union were cleared by riot police on July 9.
A report tabled by Labour Minister Kuron to the Sejm on July 25 noted that the government was preparing proposals for the trades unions concerning the running of state enterprises.
Despite high-level negotiations between trades unions and government, the Solidarity trade union retained its threat of a general strike if the government's proposals failed to meet its demands.
Henryk Goryszewski (ZChN) Deputy Prime Minister, Economic Affairs Pawel Laczkowski (PChD) Deputy Prime Minister, Political and Social Affairs Jerzy Osiatynski (UD) Finance Jacek Kuron (UD) Labour and Social Policy
Polish Council of Ministers
July 1992 Hanna Suchocka (UD)(f) Prime Minister
*Zbigniew Dyka (ZChN) Justice Zdobyslaw Flisowski (ZChN) National Education
*Janusz Onyszkiewicz (UD) National Defence Andrzej Arendarski (KLD) Foreign Economic Co-operation
*Andrzej Milcanowski (ind.)
Internal Affairs Zygmunt Hortmanowicz (PL) Environmental Protection, Natural Resources and Forestry
*Krzysztof Skubiszewski (ind.)
Foreign Affairs Andrzej Wojtyla (SLCh) Health and Social Welfare
*Gabriel Janowski (PL) Agriculture and Food Economy Zbigniew Jaworski (ZChN) Transport Krzystof Kilian (KLD) Communications Andrzej Bratkowski (ind.)
Town and Country Planning Waclaw Niewiarowski (SLCh) Industry and Trade Janusz Lewandowski (KLD) Privatization (vacant) Culture Ministers without portfolio Jerzy Kaminski (PL) Contacts with parliament and political parties Jan Krzysztof Bielecki (KLD) Integration with European Communities Zbigniew Eysmont (PPG) Private Enterprise Jerzy Kropiwnicki (ZChN) Central Planning Office Jan Maria Rokita (UD) Council of Ministers' Office
*Members of previous Council of Ministers.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Hungarian minority issue
The replacement of Hungarian-speaking prefects by Romanian-speakers in two mainly Hungarian-speaking counties, reported on July 21, provoked protests from the Hungarian community and the decision was subsequently modified.
[For May anti-Hungarian measures see p. 38922.]
The Hungarian Democratic Union in Romania (HDUR) protested to the government over the appointments, and Hungarian demonstrators in the two counties —Covasna and Harghita —said on July 23 that they would wear a yellow star "a symbol of sad memories of civil intolerance and discrimination" if the decision were not revoked.
On Aug. 5, the government decided to appoint two Prefects to each county —one Hungarian-speaking and one Romanian-speaking.
It was reported on July 18, in an apparently unrelated development, that the president of the HDUR, Géza Domokos, had resigned from this post.
Relations with ex-Soviet republics
A series of foreign visits and treaties during July furthered Romanian relations with the newly independent states of the former Soviet Union.
President Ion Iliescu visited Estonia and Byelarus on July 11-13, signing friendship and collaboration treaties with both countries.
Between July 14 and 22, Foreign affairs Minister Adrian Nastase made official visits to Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Kirgizstan and Uzbekistan, establishing diplomatic relations with the first three.
EUROPE
CIS
Moscow summit
A summit meeting of the Council of Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) heads of state took place in Moscow on June 6, chaired by Kirgiz President Askar Akayev.
Azerbaijan did not participate.
[For May Tashkent summit see p. 38922.]
The main result was an agreement to establish joint peacemaking forces to intervene in CIS conflicts.
The first area of their deployment would be Moldova, where the Russian-speaking population was engaged in violent clashes with the Moldovan security bodies [see below; p. 39019].
Other agreements concluded at the summit covered economic and joint security issues.
The meeting also decided to establish an economic court, with headquarters in Minsk.
Akayev described this to the summit press conference as "a mechanism for the resolution of disputes concerning economic co-operation and…for executive discipline over economic obligations" .
A proposal by Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev to establish a consultative economic co-ordination council, with its headquarters in Kiev, and a military co-ordinating council were met with general approval.
Nazarbayev pointed to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) as models for the putative councils.
Three documents were signed on issues of legal succession to the Soviet Union regarding treaties, property, archives and debts and assets.
A second group of issues, on which a protocol was signed, concerned collective security, including missile early warning systems, space control, anti-aircraft defence, a collective security council, the composition of CIS strategic forces, leadership of the CIS joint armed forces and the protection of state borders.
The four states of the CIS with nuclear weapons on their territory (Byelarus, Kazakhstan, Russia and Ukraine) agreed to meet separately to discuss the removal of nuclear weapons to Russia.
The question of interim control over nuclear weapons in Ukraine had been removed from the agenda after preparatory Foreign and Defence Ministers' meetings on July 3-4 (not including Moldova's Defence Minister), as it was felt that there was no likelihood of an agreement at the summit.
Ukraine was insisting on retaining operational control over long-range nuclear weapons deployed on its territory.
The participants warned that by their next summit, scheduled for Sept. 25 in Bishkek (Kirgizstan), states which had not ratified their membership of the CIS (Azerbaijan and Moldova) should do so.
The concept of a statute for the CIS was mooted in Moscow, and met with general agreement, even from Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk who had previously fiercely opposed the creation of CIS bodies.
Tashkent meeting
Representatives of foreign, defence and border guard ministries of CIS member states met in Tashkent (Uzbekistan) on July 16 to discuss the establishment of a CIS peacekeeping force.
They signed a protocol on interim measures to establish peacekeeping forces and military observers.
According to this document, the deployment of such forces would be conditional on consensus in the Council of Heads of State and on the consent of all parties to a conflict.
Notification would be immediately passed to the UN Security Council and to the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
Byelarus refused to sign the draft treaty, which would be presented to the CIS summit in September for signing.
Some reports noted Moldova's absence and the absence of a Turkmen plenipotentiary representative.
At Ukraine's request, discussion was deferred on a draft document, signed at the July 6 summit, on the principles of restoring the rights of deported minority nationalities.
Also at the meeting Russia announced the allocation of additional military force to protect the border with Afghanistan, and suggested that Central Asian states should supplement border troops with national formations].
It was reported on July 7 that Gen. Ilya Kalininchenko, chair of the CIS border protection committee, had resigned, apparently because of the new regulations regarding Russia's borders with other ex-Soviet states [see p. 38975].
Ecological council
Ecology ministers from Armenia, Byelarus, Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan (with Ukraine attending as an observer), meeting in Minsk on July 10, established an interstate ecological council which would meet at least twice a year.
Members would give 0.5 per cent of their annual gross national product to an ecological fund with a charter capital of 60,000,000.
The most ecologically vulnerable zones on CIS territory were the Chernobyl area, Amu Darya and Dnepr river basins, Lake Balkhash, the Black Aea, Azov Sea and Caspian Sea, and the Aral Sea area.
Interstate broadcasting company
At a meeting on July 28, nine CIS states (Armenia, Azerbaijan, Byelarus, Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan) agreed to establish an Interstate Television and Radio Company (ITRC).
All 15 former Soviet republics except Latvia attended the meeting.
The agreement was to be ratified at the Bishkek summit.
Ukraine was reported to have criticized the draft agreement for not safeguarding against possible bias in the ITRC, which would use the facilities of the ex-Soviet (now Russian) Ostankino company.
EUROPE
ARMENIA/AZERBAIJAN
Azerbaijani advances — Peace negotiations
Azerbaijani forces consolidated military advances made in June by recapturing in early July the northern part of Nagorny Karabakh and its main town of Mardakert.
Russia's Radio reported a state of emergency in Mardakert, which Azerbaijan had renamed Agdere.
There were reports of anti-government demonstrations in Armenia over the defeat.
The situation remained confused, however, as Armenia claimed successful counterattacks in late July.
Stepanakert was bombed by Azerbaijani aircraft on July 20, although Baku denied such reports.
There were also reports of attacks on Russian servicemen stationed in Armenia.
Armenian resolution on Nagorny Karabakh
The Armenian Supreme Soviet passed a resolution on the status of Nagorny Karabakh on July 8, pledging consistent support for Nagorny Karabakh and for the rights of its population, and terming unacceptable any documents "referring to the Nagorny Karabakh Republic as being within the Azerbaijani structure" .
A compromise was thus reached with Armenia's National Union opposition group, which had demanded recognition of Nagorny Karabakh's independence.
However, the Azerbaijani Milli Majlis (parliament) on July 27 issued a statement describing the Armenian resolution as "an infringement of [Azerbaijan's]state sovereignty…a hostile act against the national interests of the Azerbaijani people" .
Armenia and Georgia were reported on July 17 to have established diplomatic relations.
Rome talks
The preliminary negotiations in Rome for a peace conference in Minsk under the aegis of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE)[see pp. 38828; 38975]resumed on June 28.
Armenia interrupted its participation in the talks on July 5 in protest over Azerbaijani actions in Mardakert.
However, a report of July 29 said that the Armenian delegation was returning to Rome.
The Nagorny Karabakh Supreme Soviet presidium on July 1 reversed its decision not to be represented at the Rome negotiations [see p. 38975].
Azerbaijani political parties
The Party for National Independence, Istiklal, held its constituent congress on July 3-4 and elected as its chair Etibar Mamedov, who had been its candidate in the presidential elections.
Istiklal emphasised Azerbaijan's Islamic tradition and Turkic unity.
On June 2, the Moslem Democratic Party —Musavat, originally founded in 1911, was declared to have been revived.
Isa Kambarov, chair of the Milli Majlis, would chair the party, which succeeded the existing New Musavat party.
EUROPE
GEORGIA
Developments in South Ossetia
The agreement signed on June 24 between the Georgian and Russian Presidents in Dagomys (Russia)[see p. 38973]was implemented in July with the deployment of peacekeeping forces intended to halt the conflict between Georgian irregulars and the separatist forces in South Ossetia (an autonomous republic within Georgia).
On July 4, representatives of Georgia, South Ossetia, North Ossetia (in the Russian Federation), and Russia, meeting in Vladikavkaz (North Ossetia), agreed on the withdrawal of all armed forces from South Ossetia.
A tri-ethnic 1,500-strong peacekeeping force, drawn equally from Georgia, Ossetia and Russia, was to be deployed by July 14.
The first contingent of 500 Russian and 350 Georgian troops moved into South Ossetia on schedule, to be stationed in a 15-km buffer zone.
South Ossetia's nationalist fighters were estimated to number 3,000, although they had no united command structure.
Authority in South Ossetia had passed to a joint control commission and the united military command, with local leaders represented by the Chair of the Council of Ministers, Oleg Teziyev, and Supreme Soviet Chair Torez Kulumbegov.
Although the ceasefire appeared to be holding, a political settlement remained elusive.
Russian Interior Ministry forces had been withdrawn from South Ossetia on April 26, 1992.
On June 10, Georgian President Eduard Shevardnadze had met North Ossetian Supreme Soviet chair Akhsarbek Galazov to sign a protocol on a ceasefire in the conflict zone.
Russia's Supreme Soviet had declared a state of emergency in North Ossetia on June 12.
Shevardnadze had in June accused Russian leaders of exacerbating the situation.
A warning from the Chair of the Russian Supreme Soviet, Ruslan Khasbulatov, on June 15 that Russia might consider annexing South Ossetia, and describing the fighting there as "genocide…of the South Ossetian people" was condemned as a threat to Georgia's integrity.
Russian Vice-President Aleksandr Rutskoi made a statement on June 21, accusing the Georgian (and the Moldovan) authorities of genocide against their respective Russian populations.
Sovereignty declaration in Abkhazia
On July 23 the Supreme Soviet of the autonomous republic of Abkhazia (capital Sukhumi —see map p. 38925) restored the 1925 Constitution (annulling that of 1978) to proclaim the republic's "state sovereignty" .
The 26-strong Georgian parliamentary faction, which had boycotted sittings since April, opposed the declaration.
The Georgian State Council on July 25 declared the reinstated Abkhaz Constitution null and void.
The Abkhaz Supreme Soviet chair, Vladislav Ardzinaba, denied that Abkhazia was seceding from Georgia.
On June 24 Col. Aleksandr Ankvaba had been named as Abkhaz Interior Minister, ousting the ethnic Georgian Givi Lomanidze, in defiance of a 1989 order which reserved to Georgia's interior minister the power of appointing interior ministers for Abkhazia.
Activity of pro-Gamsakhurdia elements
Supporters of deposed President Zviad Gamsakhurdia were reported still to be active in western Georgia around Zugdidi (near Abkhazia), where there were sporadic attacks and fighting between "Zviadists" and government troops.
The State Council on June 20 had sanctioned the use of the paramilitary Mkhedrioni ( "horsemen" ) militia group, supposedly dissolved by the creation of a Georgian army [see p. 38877], to restore order.
Georgian deputy Prime Minister Sandro Kavsadze was kidnapped near Zugdidi on July 9.
Shevardnadze, speaking at the CSCE conference in Helsinki [see p. 39031-32], blamed Gamsakhurdia supporters for the kidnapping, and visited the Zugdidi area on July 23, but apparently "without results" , according to Moskovskiye novosti of Aug. 2.
EUROPE
MOLDOVA
Deployment of peacekeeping forces
Joint Russian, Moldovan and Dnestr troops began deployment in Moldova on July 29 to attempt to halt fighting between the Slav population of the self-proclaimed Dnestr republic and Moldova.
Deployment followed an agreement signed between Russian President Boris Yeltsin and Moldova's Mircea Snegur on July 21 in Moscow envisaging special status for the Dnestr region and a right to self-determination in case of Moldova's reunification with Romania.
The Dnestr region leader, Igor Smirnov, attended the meetings.
Nevertheless, casualties continued to be inflicted in a conflict which according to available figures had caused about 700 deaths by the end of June.
On July 31, for instance, unidentified fighters attacked a police station in Bendery, killing two people.
The agreement followed the quadripartite meeting in Istanbul at the end of June [see p. 38976-77]which was followed by a meeting of the four Foreign Ministers on July 3, and several unsuccessful ceasefire plans.
A Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) plan for peacekeeping forces, devised at the summit in Moscow on July 6 [see p. 39017], envisaged combined Russian, Ukrainian, Byelorussian, Romanian and Bulgarian troops.
Despite Moldova's consent to this in a parliamentary vote on July 7 (by 225 to three with nine abstentions), Byelarus, Romania and Bulgaria declined to participate, calling for the use of Conference for Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) mechanisms.
Moldova thereafter rescinded its consent.
There had been fears that increasingly vociferous Russian nationalism would cause the conflict to escalate.
However, moderate ±forces in the Russian government appeared to be successful in silencing the new commander of the Russian 14th Army in the region, Gen. Aleksandr Lebed (appointed in June) who had remarked on July 4 that the conflict between Moldova and the Dnestr republic was not ethnic but involved "genocide…against one's own people" , and had labelled ±Moldova's President as "fascist" .
On July 13-14, Russia's Vice-President, Aleksandr Rutskoi, and Security Minister, Viktor Barannikov, with a mandate from Yeltsin to attempt a political settlement, visited the region to hold negotiations with Moldova and the Dnestr leaders.
Rutskoi was seen as a champion of Russian minorities in former Soviet states.
Government appointments
Snegur on July 17 appointed Maj.-Gen.
Pavel Kryanghe and Vasily Kalmoy Defence and National Security Ministers respectively.
The previous incumbents, Ion Kostash and Anatol Plugaru, among the fiercest advocates for continuing the anti-separatist conflict, had retained their posts after the government's resignation in June [see p. 38976].
Moldova's parliament approved the new "government of national accord" , said to include four portfolios for Dnestr representatives, between July 29 and Aug. 4.
Andrei Sangheli Prime Minister Nikolai Andronaki First Deputy Prime Minister Valentin Kunev Deputy Prime Minister Nikolai Oleinik Deputy Prime Minister Mikhail Koshkodan Deputy Prime Minister Maj.-Gen.
Pavel Kryanghe Defence (acting)
Moldova cabinet
*Constantin Antoci Interior
*Nicolae Tiu Foreign Affairs Vasily Kalmoy National Security Klavdiya Melnik (f) Finance
*Held same post in outgoing government.
Women are denoted by (f).
Romanian and Bulgarian statements
In July, Romania openly admitted to supplying arms to Moldova, and Romania's Parliament declared on July 10 that the conflict demanded a political solution based on the Istanbul agreements, insisting that the 14th Army as "a foreign army on the territory of an independent and sovereign state" should be neutral.
Bulgaria's National Assembly on June 25 called on Moldova to "exercise its fullest authority to guarantee the security of the Bulgarian population in the region" of whom there were an estimated 88,000.
A three-person UN team was sent to Moldova on June 27 to investigate the situation.
EUROPE
RUSSIA
Strengthening of Security Council
A presidential decree issued on July 7 strengthened the role of the Security Council (SC) set up in May [see p. 38923], giving its decisions the force of presidential decrees.
With economic reforms faltering, observers commented on the strength of conservatives on the SC and drew parallels with the situation immediately before the attempted Soviet coup of August 1991.
According to Independent on Sunday of Sept. 6, the SC Secretary Yury Skokov was creating throughout Russia local branches of the SC, answerable to him, to control the local branches of the military and the Interior and Security Ministries.
The July 7 decree stipulated that (i) a presidential decree was to accompany each SC decision taken in accordance with Article 15 of the Russian Federation (RF) Law on Security;(ii) heads of federal ministries and local administrations were to draft measures to implement SC decisions within two days of receiving them; and (iii) the SC Secretary would have special powers to implement SC decisions.
The SC had been established in June 1991 as an advisory body to the RF President.
In March 1992 the SC was formally established and given responsibility for managing individual and state security.
Article 15 of the RF Law on Security, defining its duties in very general terms, allowed it "to determine the vital interests of the individual, society and the state" .
The SC had five ex officio permanent voting members.
Potentially, the heads of some federal ministries and departments could also become members, if nominated by the President and approved by the Supreme Soviet.
The SC Secretary was appointed by the President and SC decisions were taken by simple majority.
Among the liberal Russian press, Moskovskiye novosti of July 19 commented that "the SC has been given powers which raise it above the government" ; and Kommersant also compared the newly empowered SC to the former communist party politburo, because of its potential power, its secrecy and its non-accountability.
Sergei Shakhrai, former presidential legal advisor, warned in Komsomolskaya pravda of Aug. 8 that the SC had fallen into the control of conservatives who were hoping for a return to the administrative-command system.
(Skokov had worked in the defence industry; Filatov was seen as reflecting the views of the Supreme Soviet Chair, Ruslan Khasbulatov, who was increasingly antagonistic to the government's reforms; and Rutskoi, also critical of the government, had influence among the army and led the newly formed and already influential Civic Union —see p. 38974.)
Ex officio voting members of SC
Boris Yeltsin, as RF President ex officio SC Chairman); Yury Skokov, SC Secretary; Aleksandr Rutskoi, RF Vice-President; Yegor Gaidar, RF acting Prime Minister; Sergei Filatov, First Deputy Chair of Supreme Soviet.
Constitutional Court hearing on banning of CPSU
On July 7, the Constitutional Court opened its hearings on the legality of Russian President Boris Yeltsin's August 1991 decrees banning the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) and the Russian Communist Party (RCP)[see p. 38372].
It was decided that the petition on the unconstitutionality of the CPSU itself would be heard second [see p. 38923 for May ruling].
The case was separate from the ongoing investigations into the failed August coup and the CPSU's finances.
Representing Yeltsin, the former State Councillor for legal affairs Sergei Shakhrai [see pp. 38875; 38923]emphasised that the CPSU had been a state mechanism, not a political party.
In defence of the ban, evidence was submitted of repression of dissidents, supply of arms and funds to ideological allies abroad, the origins of party funds, and CPSU involvement in the attempted coup, as well as new evidence of a State Security Committee (KGB) department to plan political murders.
On July 23 the Court voted to summon additional witnesses to the hearing, including former Soviet President and CPSU first secretary Mikhail Gorbachev (the only summoned witness who had not attended), his close aide Aleksandr Yakovlev, and other top CPSU officials.
A recess was announced on Aug. 3.
CPSU court expenses were paid by the state, since its accounts had been sequestrated.
The Court did not allow representatives elected at the "29th Congress of the CPSU" (held on July 4 outside Moscow by minority communist parties) to replace the CPSU officials called as witnesses.
Other internal political developments
Security disagreements — Coup rumours
As the first anniversary of the August 1991 coup attempt approached, allegations circulated about an impending coup.
At a press conference on July 8, defence and security ministry representatives warned that "local disturbances linked to the current situation" were possible.
They also said that reform of the security and defence departments, as demanded by Russian Foreign Affairs Minister Andrei Kozyrev, would duplicate the suggestions of US intelligence services.
Rumours of Kozyrev's imminent resignation had followed the publication of an interview in Izvestiya on June 30, in which he warned of the possibility of a coup attempt, and accused the defence and security ministries of providing deliberately misleading reports from areas of ethnic conflict in the former Soviet Union.
On Russian television on July 4, Yeltsin said that Kozyrev's remarks had been assessed at the Security Council as "harmful" , and suggested that if Kozyrev wanted to "be a prophet like [Eduard]Shevardnadze, then act like Shevardnadze" (a reference to the latter's resignation as Soviet Foreign Minister in December 1990 after warning of an impending coup —see p. 37903).
New political bloc
A meeting of more than 40 political groups in Moscow on July 4 led to a declaration on July 9 on the formation of the Democratic Choice bloc.
Democratic Choice would support Yeltsin and the government, aiming to provide an alternative to the potentially powerful moderate opposition Civic Union group and to extreme nationalist and neo-communist groups.
Member organizations included Democratic Russia, the Russian League of Businessmen, and the Republican Party of the RF (whose third congress on June 27-28 had elected Vyacheslav Shostakovsky as leader).
However, the Russian Democratic Reform Movement led by former mayor of Moscow Gavriil Popov, a participant in the July 4 meeting, did not join the bloc.
Media dispute
On July 17 the RF Supreme Soviet, as the legal successor to the USSR Supreme Soviet, voted by 136 votes to 23 (with 12 abstentions) to take control of the newspaper Izvestiya.
The decision was openly opposed by Yeltsin, and brought the executive and legislature once more into conflict.
The Supreme Soviet also adopted a resolution on the media.
However, it did not endorse the creation of a broadcasting "observation committee" to control "violations" of free speech.
This had been proposed in an earlier draft which was condemned by journalists as seeking to introduce "curbs…such as journalists did not experience even in the days when the CPSU was all-powerful" .
Before the failed coup of August 1991, Izvestiya had been the official organ of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet.
Its journalists then re-founded it as an independent paper [see p. 38372].
In the dispute with the Supreme Soviet, each side accused the other of taking over control of the paper in violation of the June 1990 USSR law on press freedom [see p. 37541].
The Press and Information Ministry, rather than re-registering Izvestiya as the Supreme Soviet newspaper, on July 20 appealed to the Constitutional Court over the legality of the Supreme Soviet resolution.
The democratic press expressed concern over the threat to freedom of expression by publishing on July 16 a second issue of Obshchaya gazeta, a joint paper published during the coup to overcome censorship.
The incident was linked to restrictions imposed in June on correspondents' access to sessions of the Supreme Soviet Presidium, permitting only official agencies and the government paper Rossiskaya gazeta.
Yeltsin's provincial tour
As part of his programme of visits to the regions of the Russian Federation, Yeltsin on July 22-24 visited the Krasnodar region, the Kalmyk Republic and Omsk.
In Krasnodar, which had not consigned its full grain quota to the state and was insisting on a higher procurement price than the current 10 roubles per kilogramme, Yeltsin warned that he would "exert pressure" on the region's leadership.
In Kalmykia on July 23 he signed an agreement allowing the republic to keep half of its foreign currency-earning production (such as oil and furs).
Economic reform programme — 1992 budget
On July 3 the Supreme Soviet approved by 155 votes to six Gaidar's report on the government's draft programme for further economic reform until 1995-96, sending it to committee before the resumption of the Supreme Soviet on Sept. 20.
The section on privatization appeared to conform with legislation passed in June [see pp. 38973-74].
However, Le Monde of July 2 said that the programme "read more as a catalogue of good intentions than an exact timetable for the pursuit of economic reforms" , implying that its approval was timed to coincide with the G-7 meeting [see p. 38990].
The Supreme Soviet approved the 1992 budget on July 17.
The budget deficit ceiling was set at 950,100 million roubles (US$1=0.5461 roubles at the official rate as at July 13, 1992), representing 12-14 per cent of the projected 1992 gross national product (for projected deficit for the first quarter see p. 38923).
Gaidar, as acting Prime Minister, justified the increased deficit "no matter how dangerous for the economy" because of growing social tensions.
Extra funds were given to agricultural production, food subsidies, and housing for armed forces personnel.
On July 16 the Supreme Soviet had approved a cut in value added tax from 28 per cent to 20 per cent from January 1993 (and to 15 per cent with immediate effect for basic foodstuffs).
The government had wanted to retain the higher rate, whereas the parliamentary tax committee had advocated more drastic reductions, to 14 per cent and 7 per cent.
Economic statistics for January-June 1992
Izvestiya reported on July 20 the conclusions of the State Statistics Committee for the first six months of 1992.
Despite falling economic indicators across the board, there were grounds for "restrained optimism" , because a "wholesale slump" had been avoided and the rouble retained as "a fairly reliable means of payment" .
In real terms, industrial production in every sector was 86.5 per cent of the comparable period in 1991.
Oil extraction was down by 13 per cent, affecting foreign exports (down by $15,400 million or 35 per cent ).
Payment of salaries and pensions was 221,600 million roubles in arrears, and half the population was said to be on or below the monthly minimum consumption level (set in June at 2,150 roubles), as prices for goods and service rose faster than wages and food production fell by 23 per cent.
Consumer goods production had fallen by 12-24 per cent, but there were more consumer goods in the shops, because a higher proportion of consumer spending was now going on food.
Nevertheless, the report said that the "process of establishing the basis for a market economy looked hopeful" .
New acting chair of central bank
Georgy Matiukhin resigned on July 16 as chair of the Russian Central Bank (RIB), citing ill health.
His resignation in June had been rejected by the Supreme Soviet [see p. 38974], which this time acceded to his request by 154 votes to 15.
The following day the Supreme Soviet's Presidium appointed as acting RIB chair the former chair of the USSR State Bank, Viktor Gerashchenko, who had been dismissed in August 1991 for alleged complicity in the coup.
Analysts saw the change in RIB chair as a factor in the fall in the value of the rouble in currency auctions, from US$1=134.80 roubles on July 2 to US$1=161.10 roubles on July 28.
The introduction of a unified rouble exchange rate, due on July 1 as a preliminary to full convertibility, appeared to have been postponed.
EUROPE
UKRAINE
Economy
The government's decision to free prices on some foodstuffs, from July 1, led to demands from parliament for a vote of no confidence [for June vote see p. 38975].
Prime Minister Vitold Fokin, however, took the offensive at the parliamentary session on July 3, condemning attempts by parliament to interfere in government affairs, threatening the resignation of the Cabinet of Ministers, and walking out with all but two of his ministers.
Fokin withdrew his threat on July 7 and the government survived the vote of no confidence, but parliament called on President Leonid Kravchuk to review the membership of his Cabinet.
On July 11, Kravchuk dismissed Economics Minister and Deputy Prime Minister Vladimir Lanovoi and replaced him with Valentin Simonenko, formerly his representative in Odessa.
Kravchuk gave as his reason for the dismissal Lanovoi's membership of the opposition New Ukraine movement.
However, Lanovoi, a proponent of radical economic reform, claimed that he had only been brought into the Cabinet four months previously [see p. 38828] "to create an impression that renovation was under way" .
Threat of strikes
On 8 July a conference of the Consultative Council of the Federation of Free Trade Unions voted to call a general strike in Ukraine for July 20.
After negotiations with the federation's leaders led by Kravchuk on July 14, and talks between Fokin and representatives of miners in the Donbass area on the following day, the strike was postponed.
Fokin agreed to set up a commission to look into union grievances.
Dispute over Black Sea Fleet
Conflict between Russia and Ukraine over control of the Black Sea Fleet intensified during July when a Russian frigate defected to Odessa.
The frigate, an SKR 815 under the command of Ukrainian Sergei Nastenko and manned by a crew which had sworn loyalty to Ukraine in January, left Donuzla on the Crimean peninsula without permission on July 21 and hoisted the Ukrainian flag.
Despite pursuit by three armed military ships, a hydrofoil and an aircraft dispatched from Sevastopol, the ship arrived safely in Odessa.
Adml.
Igor Kasatonov, Commander of the Black Sea Fleet, described the ships's flight as "close to a terrorist act" and protested against attempts by Ukraine to "snatch ships" .
Rear Adml.
Boris Kozhin, Commander of Ukrainian Naval Forces, also condemned the move as contrary to the Dagomys agreement [see p. 38925], but claimed that the sailors had acted in response to humiliation and oppression at Russian hands.
Talks held on July 23 between the deputy chairmen of the Russian and Ukrainian parliaments, Yury Yazov and Vasiliy Dudinets respectively, ended with a decision to set up a joint parliamentary commission based in Sevastopol to supervise observance of the Dagomys agreement.
Discord in Ukrainian Church
On July 14 the Ukrainian Orthodox Church called on the authorities to guarantee human rights following alleged kidnapping and beating of priests and believers by supporters of the newly founded Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church.
The new church was established at the end of June and united the Autocephalous Church in Ukraine with followers of the former head of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, Metropolitan Filaret, dismissed in May [see p. 38925].
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Maastricht ratification process
The process of ratifying the Maastricht Treaty on European Union (agreed in December 1991 and signed in February 1992 —see pp. 38657-59; 38785) continued during July.
In June the Treaty had been rejected in a Danish referendum and approved in Ireland [see p. 38942].
In Luxembourg the Chamber of Deputies approved the Treaty on July 2 by 51 votes with six against and three abstentions.
A key issue concerned the right of other European Community (EC) citizens to vote in municipal elections.
Of the Duchy's 400,000 inhabitants 113,000 were foreigners (half of whom were either Italian or Portuguese), while of the 78,000 inhabitants of Luxembourg-Ville 25,000 were from other EC countries.
Under the Treaty's Title II Article 8b, citizens of other EC countries would be able to vote in municipal elections, and to be elected to municipal councils.
However, derogations specific to Luxembourg would limit their number to 25 per cent of any council, prevent their election to a mayoral post, and set eligibility requirements of a minimum 10-year residency in Luxembourg and ability to speak Letzeburgish.
In Spain the Congress of Deputies (lower house of parliament) on July 22 and the Senate (upper house) on July 30 approved a constitutional change to allow ratification.
The amendment —the first since the Constitution was adopted in 1978 —would allow EC citizens to stand in municipal elections.
The constitutional tribunal had ruled on July 1 that such a change was necessary and could be approved by a three-fifths majority in both houses of parliament, although 10 per cent of deputies or senators could demand a referendum within two weeks of the amendment's approval.
As regards EC citizens' right to vote in municipal elections, the tribunal had ruled that such a change could be introduced through an international accord.
On July 17 the 212-member Chamber of Deputies in Belgium voted by 146 votes to 33 with three abstentions in favour of ratification.
The major parties all voted in favour; those voting against included the Flemish Volksunie, the extreme right-wing Flemish Vlaams Blok and both the Flemish and Walloon Greens; the Van Rossem list abstained.
The Treaty still required approval by the Senate and the Flemish and Walloon parliaments.
On July 31 the 300-member unicameral parliament in Greece voted by 286 votes to eight in favour of ratification.
Those in favour included both the ruling New Democracy and the opposition socialist Pasok.
Among the eight votes against were those of the communist KKE-Exterior.
Taxation agreement
At a meeting on July 27, EC finance ministers agreed in principle on a package of value added tax (VAT) and excise duty measures to come into effect from Jan. 1, 1993.
These included provision for a minimum standard VAT rate of 15 per cent across the EC until the end of 1996 and a two-tier system of excise duty on spirits.
United Kingdom Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont welcomed the deal as a crucial step in the introduction of the single internal market by January 1993.
The Financial Times of July 28 described it as "the most significant example yet of the Community's growing influence over national fiscal policy" .
[For June 1991 non-binding VAT agreement see p. 38297.]
In order to comply with the agreement VAT rates were scheduled to increase in Germany from 14 to 15 per cent from Jan. 1, 1993 [see p. 38782], and in Spain from 13 to 15 per cent from Aug. 1, 1992.
The Netherlands planned to reduce its standard rate from 18.5 to 17.5 per cent from Oct. 1, 1992.
European Court ruling on benefits
A European Court of Justice ruling on July 21 was seen as opening up the possibility of EC citizens applying for social security benefits in the United Kingdom even though they lived outside the UK.
The case concerned the wife of a civil servant who worked in Northern Ireland but lived in the Irish Republic.
She had been denied "family credit" income support on the grounds that she did not live in the UK.
The ruling meant that EC citizens who travelled to work in the UK leaving dependents behind in their home country could claim family credit on behalf of their families.
Commission appointments
Following the June departure from the Commission of Carlo Ripa De Meana [see p. 38943], it was announced on July 2 that Karel Van Miert (already an EC Commissioner —see p. 38504) would take over his responsibilities until a formal appointment was made.
EUROPE
EUROPE REGIONAL
CEI meeting on refugee crisis
At a summit meeting in Vienna on July 18, the member countries of the Central European Initiative (CEI), namely Austria, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Czechoslovakia, Croatia, Hungary, Italy, Poland and Slovenia, appealed for international help to deal with the refugees crisis caused by the war in the former Yugoslavia.
They called on the UN to bring the conflict in Yugoslavia to an "immediate end" and to defend the territorial integrity of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Bosnia itself, Croatia, Slovenia and, to a lesser extent, Austria had faced a massive influx of refugees in recent months [see also p. 39012].
EUROPE
FINLAND
Visit by Yeltsin
Russian President Boris Yeltsin paid a state visit to Finland on July 11 after the CSCE Helsinki summit [see pp. 39030-31].
Agreements were signed on cultural relations and on science and technology co-operation, and on honouring the memory of the dead from the last wars.
Ratification documents were also exchanged for the Friendship Treaty signed in January [see pp. 38737; 38927].
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Labour Party leadership change
On July 18 John Smith, 53, Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer and MP for Monklands East in Scotland, was elected leader of the Labour Party in place of Neil Kinnock, who had led the party since 1983 but had announced his resignation after the party's general election defeat in April [see p. 38869].
Smith was elected by 91.02 per cent of votes cast by 1,500 delegates at a meeting of the party's electoral college; his opponent Bryan Gould won 8.98 per cent of the vote.
The post of deputy leader went to Margaret Beckett, who won 57.3 per cent of the vote.
Lloyd's losses
In June the Lloyd's insurance market in London announced massive losses and in July two reports were published.
On July 27 David Coleridge announced that he would resign as chair of Lloyd's at the end of 1992.
On June 24 Lloyd's announced losses of £2,060 million for 1989 (under the organization's three-year accounting system).
The loss was by far the largest in Lloyd's 300-year history and compared with 1988 losses of £510,000,000.
The heaviest losses were sustained by members of so-called "excess-of-loss (LMX) spiral" syndicates which specialized in reinsuring each others' and other companies' exposure to high-level catastrophe risks.
Of the total loss, £398,000,000 occurred because of a continuing influx of pollution- and asbestos-related claims in the USA; Coleridge said that "huge uncertainty continues to surround the outcome on pollution claims" .
Many "names" (whose assets supported Lloyd's underwriting activities) criticized Lloyd's Council for a decision of June 4 to demand a levy from "names" to double to £1,000 million the market's "last resort capital fund" (which was used to meet claims if "names" were unable to do so).
A report commissioned in March [see p. 38822]published on July 2 described LMX underwriters as showing "seriously flawed" judgment in assessing the risks involved, while the repeated reinsurance risks of other Lloyd's syndicates meant that risks became concentrated rather than spread across the market.
However, the report found no evidence of fraud or conspiracy.
A second report by Sir Jeremy Morse, outgoing chairman of Lloyds Bank, also published on July 2, recommended changes to Lloyd's structure which would establish separate regulatory and market boards.
Lloyd's ruling Council would be halved under these proposals, which the Council agreed to implement by Jan. 1, 1993.
Settlement in sex discrimination case
On July 22 Assistant Chief Constable Alison Halford, 52, withdrew her allegations of sex discrimination at work as part of a settlement whereby she retired from the police force with a lump sum payment of £142,600 and an annual pension of £35,836.
Halford had made nine unsuccessful applications for promotion to deputy chief constable and had been suspended in December 1990.
She stated: "Although I have not achieved my goal of becoming chief constable,…
I believe that no woman will ever again suffer as much as I have through rank discrimination in the police force."
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Progress in talks on future status
On July 6 the leaders of all the main parties in Northern Ireland met with Irish government ministers for the first time since the partition of the island in 1922.
(Talks in 1973 which produced the short-lived Sunningdale agreement had not been attended by hard-line unionists —see pp. 26301-04.)
The meeting, held in London under the chairmanship of former Australian Governor-General Sir Ninian Stephen, marked the start of the second "strand" of inter-party talks on the future of Northern Ireland.
The United Kingdom delegation on July 6 was led by Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew and the Irish delegation by Deputy Prime Minister John Wilson.
The four Northern Ireland parties were led by the Rev. Ian Paisley (Democratic Unionist Party — DUP), James Molyneaux (Official Ulster Unionist Party —OUP), John Hume (Social and Democratic Labour Party —SDLP), and John Alderdice (Alliance Party).
Wilson described the talks as "splendid" and said that all sides had engaged in "hard, thorough and committed work" but all parties observed diplomatic silence on details.
Further discussions were held on July 15-17 in Stormont, Belfast, and on July 24 they were adjourned until Sept. 2.
Inter-party discussions had begun in June 1991 [see pp. 38300-01; 38356; 38738]but were adjourned in March [see p. 38822]until after the April UK general election.
The first "strand" of the discussions, which were between the four constitutional parties in Northern Ireland (thus excluding Sinn Féin, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army), covered proposals for devolution in Northern Ireland and had not made concrete progress.
Strand two brought in the Irish government and strand three was to be between the UK and Irish governments.
Resumption of the discussions had been preceded in June by high-level talks culminating in a June 30 agreement on a framework for further discussions.
A meeting on July 28 in Dublin between Mayhew and Irish Foreign affairs Minister David Andrews marked the opening of strand three of the talks.
UDR releases
On July 29 the Northern Ireland appeal court in Belfast released three out of four of the former Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR) members imprisoned for life in 1986 for the 1983 murder of a Catholic man [see p. 34318].
The court found that detectives had rewritten interview notes and lied during the 1986 trial.
The prosecution of police officers in connection with the case was to be considered.
Channel 4 contempt of court ruling
On July 31 the High Court fined Channel Four and Box Productions (an independent programme maker) £75,000 for refusing to name a source in a controversial television documentary on Northern Ireland broadcast in October 1991.
Channel Four and Box Productions were found in contempt of court under the Prevention of Terrorism Act, the first time such a charge had been made in an attempt to compel journalists to reveal sources.
During the hearing Michael Grade, chief executive of Channel Four, said that his company had "been placed in the invidious position of having to choose between breaking the law and putting individual lives in danger" .
EUROPE
GERMANY
1993 draft budget
The 1993 draft budget, approved by the Cabinet on July 1, provided for a nominal increase of 2.5 per cent in total expenditure to DM435,650 million.
Of this DM91,900 million was for the eastern Länder (states), an increase of 6.9 per cent over 1992 (as at July 6, 1992, US$1.00=DM1.513).
Expenditure on employment was to rise 8.8 per cent to nearly DM99,000 million and expenditure on transport was to rise 10.7 per cent to DM44,000 million.
Overall expenditure was contained by minimal increases in other areas and, in defence, by a 2.5 per cent expenditure cut to DM50,800 million [for June 30 decision to withdraw from the European Fighter Aircraft project see p. 38980].
The net borrowing requirement would be cut by DM2,500 million to DM38,000 million in 1993.
Discount rate increase
On July 16 the Bundesbank raised the discount rate by 0.75 percentage points to 8.75 per cent —its highest level since 1931.
The Financial Times of July 17 described the move as a "determined signal of [the bank's]desire to damp domestic inflation and monetary growth" .
However, it left unchanged at 9.75 per cent the more internationally sensitive Lombard rate, which set the ceiling for money market rates.
Launch of "committees for justice" 
On July 11 in Berlin a cross-party movement was launched to represent the interests of those in eastern Germany.
 "Committees for justice" were to be set up at grassroots level in an attempt to alleviate mass unemployment, de-industrialization, the destruction of agriculture and the "humiliation" of east Germans.
The movement's two leading figures were (i) Peter-Michael Diestel, the last East German Interior Minister who had been ousted as the Christian Democrat (CDU) parliamentary leader in Brandenburg earlier in the year for defending former informers of the East German "Stasi" security police against "one-sided" accusations, and (ii) Gregor Gysi, leader of the reformed communist Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS).
On July 3 Ibrahim Böhme, who briefly led the East German Social Democrats (SPD) in early 1990 [see pp. 37260; 37302], was excluded from the party in the face of "overwhelming evidence" that he had joined the Stasi in the 1970s and informed on the re-formed SPD from 1989.
Decision to send destroyer to Adriatic
The government on July 15 decided to send the destroyer Bayern and three reconnaissance aircraft to the Adriatic as part of the UN force monitoring adherence to the sanctions imposed in May on Serbia and Montenegro [see p. 38918].
Defence Minister Volker Rühe declared that, although the operation "fell far short of any question of military deployment in the sense of force being used" , the decision to participate in the force, co-ordinated by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Western European Union (WEU), was "more than a gesture, more than a symbol —it is a serious step" .
The Christian Democrat-dominated coalition had since 1991 been steadily expanding foreign operations.
Air Force helicopters had been involved in relief flights for Kurds in northern Iraq, and medical units were operating with UN forces in Cambodia.
The decision was opposed by the SPD which decided on July 21 to take the matter to the Constitutional Court.
An extraordinary parliamentary debate on July 22, however, endorsed the government's action.
Return of Honecker
After months of negotiations between the Russian, Chilean and German authorities the former East German leader, Erich Honecker, was flown on July 29 from Moscow (where he had lived in the Chilean embassy since December 1991 —see pp. 38687-88; 38782) to Berlin where he was imprisoned.
The following day he was formally charged with 49 cases of manslaughter and with misappropriation of state funds [for charges brought in absentia in May see p. 38929].
On July 31 Margot Honecker, his wife and herself a former East German Education Minister, left Moscow for Chile where one of her daughters lived.
She was being investigated in connection with East Germany's policy of forced adoption of children of politically suspect citizens.
Death of Galinski
Heinz Galinski, an Auschwitz concentration camp survivor, the leader of Berlin Jews since 1949 and chair of the Central Council of German Jews since 1988, died in Berlin on July 19, aged 79.
EUROPE
BELGIUM
Abolition of conscription — Defence cuts
The government announced plans on July 10 to end military conscription by 1994.
Expected roughly to halve the country's armed forces of 86,000, the decision was part of an overall package of massive defence cuts.
Spending would be frozen at the current level of BF99,000 million (about US$3,240 million) until 1995.
The changes were supported by all the major parties and were expected to be approved by parliament in due course.
The National Defence Minister, Leo Delcroix, said that the changes would allow Belgium to continue to honour its obligations to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and other international commitments.
It was reported in the media that this view had been questioned by the chief of staff, Gen. Jos Charlier, and by the NATO Secretary-General, Manfred Wörner.
The Prime Minister, Jean-Luc Dehaene, while refusing to comment specifically, declared that "the government's decision is clear" .
Constitutional reform talks
The latest round of discussions among the mainstream political parties on transforming Belgium into a federal state ended inconclusively on July 10.
The outcome put a question mark over the long-term survival of the centre-left coalition which took power in March [see p. 38821]with a strong commitment to constitutional reform.
The main issues outstanding were:(i) the reorganization of the national finances and the respective allocations to Flanders and Wallonia;(ii) voting rights for French-speakers living in the Flemish suburbs around Brussels;(iii) the reorganization of agricultural support mechanisms along regional lines; and (iv) the allocation of seats to the European Parliament.
Agreement was reached, however, on several minor issues, including the right of the regions to sign international treaties (subject to parliamentary approval), and the division of responsibilities between the central government and the regions on environmental and tourism matters.
EUROPE
FRANCE
PS congress — Corruption cases
The ruling Socialist Party (PS) held an extraordinary congress in Bordeaux on July 10-12 to approve a new programme before the March 1993 National Assembly elections.
[For the PS's poor showing in the March regional elections see pp. 38820-21.]
The opening of the congress coincided with reports that Henri Emmanuelli, the president of the National Assembly (lower house of parliament) since January 1992 [see p. 38736]and PS treasurer from July 1988 to January 1992, was to be indicted on corruption charges.
Le Monde of July 10 reported that Renaud Van Ruymbeke, an examining magistrate in Rennes, was to indict Emmanuelli in connection with his investigations into alleged illegal funding of the 1988 PS election campaign through the "Urba" concern [see pp. 38591; 38197].
On July 16 Emmanuelli received a summons to appear before the Rennes appeal court between Sept. 8 and Sept. 14.
The growing incidence of legal proceedings against politicians prompted Justice Minister Michel Vauzelle to warn on July 10 that France was in danger of "falling under a government of judges" .
[For Bernard Tapie's resignation from the Cabinet in May shortly before he was charged with fraud, see p. 38928.
For June resignation of François Léotard, leader of the Union pour la démocratie française, to face corruption charges, see p. 38978.
For resignation in August of Gaudin of the UDF see pp. 39065-66.]
By the end of the congress, which approved a revised party statute and electoral platform, former Prime Minister Michel Rocard emerged as the party's most likely candidate for the 1995 presidential elections.
Fiftieth anniversary of first major Jewish deportation under Vichy régime
On July 16 François Mitterrand became the first French President to attend the annual service held to commemorate the arrest and detention in 1942 of 12,884 Jews in the "Vel" d'Hiv "" cycling stadium in Paris.
The detentions marked the first major roundup of Jews by French police during the Nazi occupation of France.
Between 1940 and 1944 some 76,000 Jews were deported from France to death camps; 2,600 survived.
The occasion prompted renewed calls for Mitterrand to "recognize officially that the French Vichy state [rather than occupying German forces]was responsible for persecution of and crimes against Jews" .
[For April controversy surrounding dropping of war crimes charges against Paul Touvier see p. 38891.]
Reform of penal code
On July 2 the National Assembly and on July 7 the Senate (upper house of parliament) approved chapters I, II, III and IV of a major reform of the penal code which had been under legislative scrutiny since May 1989.
Chapter V, covering the implementation of the new code, was to be considered by the Senate in the autumn with a view to the code coming into effect on March 1, 1993.
The individual chapters covered (i) general principles;(ii) offences against individuals;(iii) offences against property; and (iv) offences against fundamental state and national interests and against public order.
Areas where changes were made included maximum prison sentences, crimes against humanity, protection of minors, rape, abortion, organized crimes such as drug trafficking, sexual harassment, violation of graves, and terrorism.
Agreement on unemployment system
On July 18, employers and a majority of trade unions agreed to raise their contributions to Unedic, the unemployment benefit body, by 0.4 per cent each until the end of 1992 and to reduce payments made to those out of work for over four months.
The deal was calculated to improve Unedic's financial position by F25,000,000 (about US$5,000,000) by end-1992 and meant that Unedic, which was funded entirely by companies and their employees, would not run out of funds by October as would otherwise have been the case.
The accord was signed on July 21.
Unemployment rose in June to 2,920,000 (10.3 per cent of the labour force).
Assistance to farmers
On July 20 the government announced support measures for farmers (following the European Communities' agreement to reform the common agricultural policy —see p. 38931).
These included a reduction in tax on farming land (worth F930 million in 1993), debt relief (worth F1,200 million in 1993-95), state assistance for investment in agriculture, and increased assistance to farmers in mountainous regions.
EUROPE
SPAIN
ETA offer of truce
The Spanish government apparently rejected an offer of a two-month truce made on July 10 by the Basque separatist organization Euzkadi ta Askatasuna (ETA).
The offer was made in a statement to the local Basque news media, two weeks before the Olympic Games were due to open in Barcelona.
ETA declared itself ready to respect a two-month "period of detente" in return for the Spanish government agreeing to "official contacts" to be held in a "neutral country to be agreed by the two parties" .
These would then be followed by "a new phase of political conversations" .
The government in response merely restated its previously declared position.
Deputy Prime Minister Narcís Serra Serra said on July 11: "The only thing that they have to do is to stop killing." 
He added that there would be no further official reaction to ETA's offer.
There had been concern that ETA might seek to strike at the Expo 92 Universal Exhibition in Seville, held from April 20 to Oct. 12, or at the Olympic Games in Barcelona (July 25-Aug. 9).
Olympics controversy
As the government of the autonomous region of Catalonia sought to use the holding of the Olympic Games in its capital, Barcelona, to publicize the cause of Catalan nationalism, there was criticism from both government and opposition politicians.
Officials of the ruling Socialist Party (PSOE) observed that central government had contributed just over 50 per cent to the cost of the Games, while the flying of the Catalan flag and the use of Catalan as one of the four official languages of the Games had been agreed at the outset.
EUROPE
ITALY
Assassination of Borsellino
Paolo Borsellino, the chief public prosecutor in the Sicilian city of Palermo, was killed on July 19 when a car bomb was detonated by remote control in a Palermo street.
Following the killing of Judge Giovanni Falcone on May 23 [see p. 38896], Borsellino had been widely tipped as the probable appointee to head a new anti-Mafia judicial body planned by the Italian government.
The killing was strongly condemned by Prime Minister Giuliano Amato and by President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, who described the bombs targeted against Falcone and Borsellino as "two aggressions filled with cowardice and blood against the democratic state" .
Borsellino, 54, was arriving at the block of flats where his mother and sister lived, when the bomb killed him and five of his bodyguards, one of whom was a woman.
The funeral of the five bodyguards on July 21 in Palermo cathedral was the scene of further angry outbursts by mourners against government figures attending, who included Scalfaro and Amato.
Borsellino, whose family had rejected a state funeral, was buried on July 24.
At least seven Palermo magistrates announced their resignations on July 21 in protest at the state's inability to protect members of the judiciary.
On July 27 Giovanni Lizzio, the head of anti-Mafia investigations in Catania, Sicily's second city, was assassinated by two gunmen on motorcycles.
Deployment of troops
On July 26 the government authorized the deployment of 7,000 troops on the island of Sicily, the first such deployment seen in post-war Italy.
The force's mandate was for six month, and could be extended for a further year at most.
Investigation of De Michelis
On July 6 Venice joined Milan as a focus for local investigations into cross-party webs of corruption.
Gianni De Michelis (Socialist Unity Party, usually referred to as the PSI), who had been Foreign Minister in the previous government, was told on July 14 that he was under investigation for corruption.
One of De Michelis's aides, Giorgio Casadei, was arrested on July 6, along with the president of the regional council of Veneto, Gianfranco Cremonese (Christian Democrat —DC), and three other people likewise charged with contravening laws on the financing of political parties.
In Venice the corruption was said to be principally related to an understanding between local sections of the PSI and the DC, and to have involved the payment of bribes by businessmen for the award of public contracts in motorway construction and waterworks projects.
De Michelis said that he was entirely innocent of any malpractice.
By the end of July at least 23 investigation or arrest warrants against businessmen and politicians had been issued in Venice and about 70 arrest warrants in Milan.
In the first days of July, 12 people were arrested in Florence, including the deputy mayor, Gianni Conti (DC).
On July 17, 11 city councillors were arrested in Reggio Calabria.
New council and continuing arrests in Milan
On July 9 a new city council of Milan was elected, replacing the council which had resigned in May [see p. 38896], and thus avoiding the need for new elections.
The new council retained Pietro Borghini (PSI) as mayor and, although it contained six independent technocrats, the same five parties, headed by the PSI and the DC, continued as the governing coalition.
On June 3 Mario Chiesa, the Milan PSI official whose arrest in March 1992 had sparked the corruption enquiries, told examining magistrates that in the spring of 1990 the PSI leader Bettino Craxi had asked him to support, financially and organizationally, Craxi's son Bobo Craxi as a city council candidate.
Chiesa said he had then been rewarded with the directorship of the Pio Albergo Trivulzio old people's home.
Craxi repudiated the allegations and Chiesa himself subsequently claimed that his own testimony to magistrates had been distorted.
As arrests continued in Milan, Salvatore Ligresti, a leading financier, was taken into custody on July 16 and admitted paying bribes to Milan politicians of up to £500,000.
On July 18 a warrant was issued for the investigation of Silvio Lega, DC assistant secretary and a deputy for Turin.
Lifting of deputies' immunity
On July 9 the Chamber of Deputies approved the removal of the parliamentary immunity from five of its members, who would thus face charges of corruption, abuse of office and illegal financing of political parties in Milan.
The chamber refused to give magistrates power of arrest over the five, however.
Those who had their immunity waived were all noted parliamentary figures: Carlo Tognoli (PSI), the Minister of Tourism in the previous government, two other PSI members Paolo Pillitteri and Renato Massari, Antonio Del Pennino from the Italian Republican Party and Gianni Cervetti from the Democratic Party of the Left (PDS, formerly the Communist Party of Italy).
On July 20 the Chamber of Deputies received further requests for the lifting of the immunity on four more deputies, including De Michelis.
A total of 13 deputies and former ministers were under investigation by Milan magistrates, and nine were being investigated in other towns.
Criticism of Foreign Minister's resignation
The resignation on July 29 of Vincenzo Scotti (DC), who had been appointed Foreign Minister four weeks earlier, prompted widespread criticism.
Scotti's replacement was named as Emilio Colombo, 72.
President Scalfaro on July 30 described Scotti's action as a sign that "factional interests" had been allowed to take priority, coming as it did at a time of national crisis.
Scotti represented a Naples constituency as deputy and had opposed a new DC policy that ministers should resign their parliamentary seats.
Emergency budget
The new government under Amato demonstrated its commitment to economic reform by pushing through, before parliament's summer break, an emergency budget that was presented as a Cabinet decree on July 10.
On July 22 a the Chamber of Deputies, by 294 votes to 228, agreed to give the decree emergency status, but the tabling of 651 proposed amendments forced the government on July 29 to put its slim 16-seat parliamentary majority to the test by proposing a vote of confidence.
The government won the vote with a comfortable majority, and on Aug. 7 the Senate gave the budget final approval by 157 votes to 89.
The budget sought to raise L30,000,000 million (about US$26,900 million) in extra revenue through one-off taxes on bank deposits and property, increases in stamp duty and the cost of passports and some licences, and spending cuts achieved especially through a freeze on employment in the civil service and some state companies.
Accompanying decrees would allow for changes to be made in civil service employment, pensions and the public health service, for increased financial autonomy for local authorities and for privatization.
The pensionable age was raised to 65 for both men and women (from 60 and 55 respectively) and an increase in the minimum contribution period, from 15 to 20 years, was aimed at curbing pension abuses rife in the public sector.
On July 31 the government reached an agreement with trade unions and employers for the abolition of the scala mobile, which since 1946 had guaranteed large numbers of Italian workers wage rises in line with inflation.
Bruno Trentin, leader of the communist CGIL trade union federation, resigned after signing the agreement, after many union members had expressed dissatisfaction.
Privatization
On privatization, the government on 23 July backtracked on a proposal it had announced on July 13 for the creation of two large holding companies to combine Italy's four main industrial and financial state concerns, together with some other interests at present controlled by the Treasury, in order to facilitate privatization.
After anxiety expressed by foreign bankers over the uncertain legal status of the foreign debt of the four existing concerns under the new structure, and after it was confirmed on July 20 that a fifth state holding company, Efim, had unilaterally declared a moratorium on its debts, of which over a quarter was owed to foreign banks, for up to two years, the government announced on July 23 that the companies, IRI, ENI, ENEL and INA, which had all on July 13 become joint stock companies, would remain under Treasury control.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Removal of ban on political parties
A ban on certain political parties, which had been in force since the time of the 1980 military coup, was removed by Cabinet decree on July 3.
The parties prohibited in 1980 were the Justice Party (although its membership had gone on to found the True Path Party —DYP), the Republican People's Party, the right-wing National Movement Party and the Islamic fundamentalist National Salvation Party.
The longer established Democratic Party, which had been outlawed in 1960, was now also decreed to be no longer illegal.
On July 10 the Constitutional Court ordered the banning of the Turkish Socialist Party for "activities against the indivisibility of the territory" .
In the legislative elections of October 1991 the party had failed to reach the necessary minimum of 7 per cent of votes cast.
First visit by Israeli President
On July 15-17 Chaim Herzog became the first Israeli President to visit Turkey.
He and President Turgut Özal addressed a reception commemorating the arrival in Turkey 500 years previously of Sephardim Jews fleeing the Spanish inquisition.
Herzog also had discussions with Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Thomas Klestil, who had been elected President in May [see p. 38929], took office on July 8.
On July 16 Israel restored full diplomatic relations with Austria, having downgraded its representation to the level of chargé d'affaires following the election to the Austrian presidency in 1986 of Kurt Waldheim, who had attempted to conceal his wartime military service in Yugoslavia.
EUROPE
DENMARK-RUSSIA
The Danish Foreign Ministry announced on July 15 that a Russian diplomat had been expelled for activities incompatible with his status.
He had reportedly been given personal details of Danish citizens abroad who had died and was thought to have used these to obtain false papers; his source, a Copenhagen city official, had been arrested.
EUROPE
EFTA-ISRAEL
On July 16 Israel and the seven-member European Free Trade Association (EFTA) initialled an agreement intended to introduce free trade in industrial and processed farm goods, fish and marine products from Jan. 1, 1993; the accord also included clauses on intellectual property — rights, public procurement, state monopolies and state aid.
EUROPE
GREECE
One person was killed and six injured in Athens on July 14 when an anti-tank rocket narrowly missed Finance Minister Ioannis Paleokrassas; the November 17 group claimed responsibility for the attack, which took place in Constitution Square, central Athens.
The rocket, fired from a nearby building, touched the top of the minister's car and set fire to a nearby car.
EUROPE
MALTA
On July 7 Prime Minister Edward Fenech Adami survived a vote of no confidence, proposed by the opposition Labour Party, over his government's failure to secure acceptance for Malta's application for full European Community membership; Malta's application would, however, come up for review by the EC Council of Ministers before the end of the year.
EUROPE
NORWAY
Arne Treholt, 49, who had been sentenced in mid-1985 to 20 years' imprisonment for espionage on behalf of the Soviet Union and Iraq [see p. 34113], was pardoned on July 3 on health grounds; his second wife had died earlier in the year and he was reportedly suffering from depression.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Controversy over UN weapons inspectors
The threat of a Western military attack against Iraq diminished after the government granted permission to a team of "neutral" UN weapons inspectors, drawn mainly from European countries, to conduct a search of the Ministry of Agriculture on July 28 and 29.
The inspection produced no evidence of information on Iraq's chemical and ballistic missiles programme, the issue about which suspicions had been expressed by UN weapons inspectors.
The incident was the second major crisis since September 1991 [see p. 38451]involving access by international weapons inspectors acting under UN Gulf ceasefire resolutions.
In early July UN chemical weapons inspectors led by US Maj. Karen Jansen had been refused entry to the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation in Baghdad.
On July 6 the UN Security Council ordered Iraq to grant immediate access to the building.
Talks in Baghdad on July 8 between Iraqi officials and the regional chief of the UN Special Commission on Iraq based in Bahrain, Douglas Englund, failed to defuse the crisis.
On July 11 Jansen left Iraq after delegating her responsibilities to another US national, Mark Silver, who continued to maintain the team's vigil outside the Ministry of Agriculture (until July 22, when the team withdrew in fear of physical reprisals from anti-US and anti-UN demonstrators).
On July 17 President Saddam Hussein denounced the UN as "an advertising agency" of the USA and indicated his government's determination to obstruct further weapons inspections.
The head of the joint UN and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) special commission on Iraq, Rolf Ekeus, left Iraq on July 19 at the end of three days of fruitless negotiations with Iraqi officials.
Signs of a shift in the Iraqi position emerged on July 20.
Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz, who had met Ekeus, was quoted as saying that Iraq was ready to invite weapons experts from "neutral Security Council member countries or non-aligned states" .
Since mid-July there had been mounting press speculation of imminent military action by the US and its Western allies, following a US warning on July 16 that it was determined to enforce Iraqi compliance with UN Gulf war resolutions.
A White House spokesman was quoted on July 21 as saying that the current stand-off between Iraq and the UN was "about as serious as any we have faced" .
Subsequent reports on July 24 indicated that the USA and the United Kingdom had agreed in principle to resume the air war against Iraq, and that US President Bush had cancelled all immediate engagements to meet with top US military advisers.
Responding to the threat of military action, Iraq's permanent representative at the UN, Abdul Amir al-Anbari, said on July 21 that "throwing a bomb or two" on an Iraqi city was unlikely to force the government to change its stance.
Intensive diplomatic negotiations between UN and Iraqi officials in New York on July 24 and 25 led finally to an announcement on July 26 confirming that the government had agreed to a compromise proposal by the UN, involving the appointment of a new team of "impartial" inspectors.
Iraqi Prime Minister Muhammad Hamzah al-Zubaydi described this settlement as a "brilliant victory" for Iraq.
Ekeus told a press conference in New York on July 27, however, that "in picking the team, we took into account certain sensibilities, without compromising the quality of the inspection" .
The 13th nuclear weapons inspection team headed by a US national, Richard Cooper, arrived in Baghdad on July 14.
Renewed Iraqi demand for lifting of sanctions
In a formal letter addressed to the UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali on July 11, Iraq renewed its demand for an end to international trade sanctions, saying that it had met its obligations under Gulf ceasefire resolutions.
Referring to its rejection of strict UN-imposed conditions attached to the sale of Iraqi oil [see p. 38985], the government claimed that the terms prevented the Iraqi people from benefiting from "the revenues…for the purchase of food and medicines" .
Efforts in mid-July to resume oil talks suspended in late June failed after the government reportedly turned down UN conditions demanding that oil exports be channelled through Turkey to the Mediterranean terminal of Ceyhan rather than through the Iraqi port of Mina al-Bakr.
Reports in early July said that the USA had drawn up plans for closer monitoring of international sanctions against Iraq following Jordan's alleged violation of the trade embargo.
The move came amid reports that Iraq's success in initiating its post-war reconstruction programme might have been assisted by systematic sanctions-busting by some countries.
Widespread public discontent with soaring food prices was reported on July 29 to have led the government to order the execution of seven food merchants charged with profiteering.
Cabinet changes
Key Cabinet changes attributed to mounting economic problems under UN sanctions were announced on July 30.
Majid Abd Ja'far was replaced as Finance Minister by Ahmad Husayn Khudayyir.
Khudayyir's position as Foreign Affairs Minister was assumed by Muhammad Said Kazim al-Sahhaf, hitherto Minister of State for Foreign Affairs.
Huma Abdel Khahaliq Abdel Ghafur, hitherto head of the Atomic Energy Organization, replaced Abd al-Razzaq Qasim al-Hashimi as Minister for Higher Education and Scientific Research.
Appointment of new Kurdish Council — US meeting with Kurdish and Shia leaders
Kurds in northern Iraq formed their first government on July 4 following a general election in May [see p. 38934].
The 16-member Cabinet under Fuad Maasum, a politburo member of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), was elected by the Kurdish National Assembly.
The new government, whose authority was not recognized by the central government in Baghdad, said that its first task would be to restore order in Iraqi Kurdistan.
On July 4, 400 people were reported killed or wounded after a massive explosion aimed at police headquarters in the northern oil city of Kirkuk.
On July 6 Danielle Mitterrand, wife of the French President François Mitterrand, escaped with minor injuries during a car-bomb attack near Sulaimaniya which killed four people.
Unknown gunmen on July 17 shot and killed a UN guard in a remote part of Iraqi Kurdistan.
US meeting with opposition leaders
Six opposition leaders representing Kurds, Shias and Sunnis met US Secretary of State James Baker in Washington on July 29 to seek US support for the Iraqi opposition.
The move followed unconfirmed reports of a coup attempt in late June by a brigade of the elite Republican Guards.
Although the official Iraqi News Agency (INA) on July 6 denied the reports as "groundless" , opposition sources claimed that the coup had triggered a major purge of the Iraqi officer corps.
Reports in early July of a renewed government offensive against the Shia minority were confirmed after UN human rights investigators on July 30 accused Iraq of indiscriminately bombing Shia villages in the south.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Diplomatic tensions with UK
On July 15 the Iranian Foreign Ministry protested about the action of some 230 United Kingdom members of parliament (MPs) in signing on the previous day a statement supporting the exiled National Council of Resistance, which was dominated by the Mojahedin-e Khalq.
The MPs' statement condemned Iran's human rights record and the April air raid against a Mojahedin base in Iraq [see p. 38887].
The official Iranian news agency said that such statements not only effectively supported the Mojahedin's "terroristic" activities within Iran, but also their role in suppressing the Kurdish uprising in Iraq in early 1991.
A third secretary at the UK embassy was reported on July 21 to have been given until the end of the month to leave the country, accused of having "violated diplomatic norms" .
On July 24 the UK government ordered the expulsion from the UK of three Iranians accused of involvement in intelligence activity —two working without diplomatic status in the Iranian embassy, and the other a student —whose presence the Home Office said was "not conducive to the public good for reasons of national security" .
It was suggested in the UK press that the expulsions were connected with the need to protect the writer Salman Rushdie [see also p. 38984].
Resignation of Islamic Guidance and Culture minister
The Minister of Culture and Islamic Guidance, Mohammed Khatami, resigned on July 16 and was replaced on a provisional basis by Ali Larijani.
Khatami's resignation had been rumoured for some months, as conservative newspapers had accused him of "leniency" towards the "corrupt, Westernized" Iranian intellectuals and artists, especially those in exile.
In his letter of resignation (published in Iranian newspapers on July 18) Khatami said that the "stubborness and lawlessness" of some of the country's senior clergymen and "leftist revolutionaries" were potentially harmful to the revolution and true Islamic values.
Khatami had criticized attacks since mid-1991 on newspaper offices by groups claiming to protect Islamic values.
Controversy over 1988 US attack on airbus
Allegations in a broadcast by the US television company ABC News provoked renewed controversy on the fourth anniversary of the incident on July 3, 1988, when the US warship Vincennes shot down an Iranian civilian airliner [see pp. 36169-70].
US Senate armed services committee chairman Sam Nunn asked the Defence Department to conduct a further investigation, citing the statement in the ABC broadcast by Adml. (retd) William Crowe, former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, that the Vincennes had been in Iranian waters when it fired the missile, not in international waters as previously claimed.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
Law approving political parties — US allegations of sanctions violations
A draft law lifting the ban on political parties was passed by the National Assembly after being approved by the House of Representatives and the Senate on July 5 and 23 respectively.
The new law, anticipated in June 1991 following royal approval of a national charter sanctioning political parties [see p. 38311], was regarded by observers as a decisive step towards greater political liberalization; in April King Hussein had ordered the abolition of all martial law provisions [see p. 38888].
Critics of the government alleged, however, that the measure aimed merely to contain political opposition in the event of the current round of Middle East peace talks leading to a compromise unacceptable to Palestinian and Jordanian nationalists.
Other reports indicated that the proposed law had been prompted by fears that recent events in Algeria would encourage Islamist parties, who won one-third of the seats in parliamentary elections held in November 1989 [see pp. 37052-53], to mount an extra-parliamentary challenge.
Preliminary details of the new law stipulated that any political party was required to have at least 50 founding members and to give an undertaking to work within the Constitution to qualify for registration.
The law also barred parties from receiving funding from abroad.
US allegations of sanctions violations
Information Minister Mahmud al-Sharif on July 15 denied unconfirmed reports that Jordan had agreed to allow UN inspectors to monitor its border with Iraq following US allegations of Jordanian violations of the international trade embargo against Iraq.
The allegations were confirmed by US Secretary of State James Baker who said on July 1 that the Bush administration was "looking at a variety of options" , said to include policing by UN guards, to halt the illegal flow of oil and commercial goods across the Iraqi-Jordanian border.
There was increasing speculation about Jordan's deteriorating relations with the USA, amid reports that the Jordanian government had refused to back a US plan to overthrow Iraqi President Saddam Hussein.
Such a plan had allegedly been mooted by Robert Gates, director of the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), who visited Jordan in late June.
On July 6 King Hussein denied any involvement in a recently reported coup attempt against Saddam Hussein [see p. 39026].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST PEACE PROCESS
Policy of new Israeli government
The formation of a Labour-led Israeli government under Prime Minister Itzhak Rabin was seen as improving the prospects for progress in the Middle East peace process, with the expectation that the new government would adopt a less intransigent stance than its predecessor over Jewish settlement in the occupied territories.
Outgoing Prime Minister Yitzak Shamir was reported on June 27 to have said in an interview with the Israeli newspaper Ma'ariv: "I would have carried on autonomy talks for 10 years and meanwhile we would have reached half a million souls in Judea and Samaria [the West Bank]…
I didn't believe there was a majority in favour of a Greater Israel, but it could have been attained over time."
In his inaugural speech to the Knesset (Israeli parliament) on July 13, however, Rabin said that his government would continue to "strengthen and build up Jewish settlement along the confrontation lines, due to their security importance, and in metropolitan Jersualem" .
The "confrontation lines" were understood to refer to the Jordan Valley and the Golan Heights.
Rabin also said that "Jerusalem is not a negotiable issue" .
He offered to visit Amman, Damascus or Beirut for talks with regional leaders and suggested that a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation might visit Jerusalem for informal talks.
In a speech later on the same day, Rabin referred to the "autonomy" to be ceded during a five-year transitional period to the Palestinians of the occupied territories, and emphasized that by"autonomy…
I am not talking of municipal autonomy —they almost have that —but of self-rule as is written and spelled out in the Camp David accords".
He said that the outgoing government had "retreated from its pledge to hold general elections to [a pledge on]holding municipal elections" .
On July 22 the new Foreign Minister Shimon Peres emphasized that the government treated "with the greatest gravity" its election promise to implement autonomy within nine to 12 months.
Meretz's coalition agreement
The Meretz group, which formed part of the new Israeli coalition government [see p. 39028], signed on July 9 a coalition agreement with the Labour Party which recognized Meretz's right to differ on a number of points.
These included advocacy of the Palestinian's "right to an independent and demilitarized Palestinian state" and of participation by the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in the peace negotiations, once the PLO had proved that it recognized Israel and had "ceased terrorism" .
Freeze on new building contracts — Cancellation of existing contracts
On July 16 the new Housing Minister Benyamin Ben-Eliezer announced that all building contracts for Israel and the occupied territories which had been approved but not signed would be frozen pending a review of housing needs.
This reportedly affected up to 3,000 homes in some 12 West Bank settlements —some existing ones and some new settlements).
Ben-Eliezer launched a review of contracts already signed for another 14,000 housing units, now in various stages of planning and construction.
On July 20 the Israeli government formally resubmitted to US Secretary of State James Baker [see below]its request for loan guarantees enabling Israel to borrow US$10,000 million from commercial banks [see pp. 37939; 38023; 38452; 38787].
On July 23, following Baker's departure, the Israeli government announced that contracts already signed for 6,681 homes would be cancelled, as they concerned "political" rather than "security" settlements.
A further 8,781 housing units on which construction had actually begun, would, however, be completed, together with all 1,686 units due to be built in the greater Jerusalem area.
The Israeli Peace Now organization (on July 23) and Palestinian representatives claimed that this decision would allow the population of some 120,000 settlers in 140 Israeli settlements in the West Bank and Gaza strip to be increased by a further 50,000.
On July 26, Cabinet ministers announced that a new committee would review the financial benefits that the previous government had made available in order to encourage settlement in the occupied territories.
Palestinian reactions
One of the Palestinian negotiators, Hannan Ashrawi, meeting with Baker in Jerusalem on July 20 described Rabin's move towards imposing a temporary freeze as "encouraging" .
This constituted an apparent retreat from earlier calls by the Palestinian negotiating team for a total freeze on settlement building.
Ashrawi asserted, however, that if funds to be obtained by the Israeli government through US loan guarantees were channelled into settlement building, this would disqualify the US from its role as peace-broker.
The Palestinian negotiating team, the PLO, and Arab governments involved in the peace process, like Baker [see below], rejected the distinction made by Rabin between "political" settlements, which would no longer receive official subsidies, and "security" settlements, which would continue to be funded.
The PLO leadership (including the PLO executive committee) met in Tunis on July 20-21 and reiterated its demand for a total freeze on settlement building, calling for imminent elections to a "legislative council" which would have "complete authority" in the occupied territories during the transitional period.
Members of the Palestinian negotiating team meanwhile said that according to the letter of assurances given by the co-sponsors of the Madrid conference, Israel was to retain control of security and foreign affairs during this five-year period (according to Ziyad Abu Ziyad on Israeli radio July 6).
PLO chair Yassir Arafat in an interview on July 28 said: Rabin"has admitted that some of the settlements are illegitimate.
This is the first step".
Baker's Middle East visit
Baker visited Israel, Jordan, Egypt, Syria and Lebanon on July 19-23.
On July 19 he arrived in Jerusalem, where he met with Rabin and Peres; on the following day he met Palestinian negotiators.
In Amman on July 21 Baker said that the USA continued to regarded all settlements in the occupied territories as "obstacles to peace" and did not distinguish between "political" and "security" settlements.
He said that the USA had previously proposed that in return for a complete "freeze or suspension" of settlement building, "the Arabs should consider an equivalent suspension of the boycott" of Israel (by the Arab League).
On July 22 Baker met with President Mubarak of Egypt in Cairo and on July 23 he was in Syria for talks with President Hafez al-Assad, and in the Bekaa valley, Lebanon, for talks with Lebanese President Elias Hrawi.
Rabin's visit to Egypt
Rabin visited Cairo on July 21 —the first such visit by an Israeli Prime Minister since 1986.
Mubarak said that the Israeli freeze on settlement building was "a good step in the right direction…but more is needed" .
He also stated that he had no objections to negotiations in the current peace process being held in Cairo.
Talks in Damascus
On July 24-25 the Syrian government hosted talks in Damascus between the Foreign Ministers of Syria, Jordan, Egypt and Lebanon, the head of the PLO political department Farouq Qaddumi, and members of the Palestinian delegation to the peace talks, including Faisal al-Husseini and delegation leader Haider Abdel-Shafi.
A statement agreed on by the Foreign Ministers asserted "the illegitimacy of all forms of Israeli settlement" in the occupied territories and stressed the importance of "full UN participation" and "effective EC participation" in the peace process.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Coalition government — New Cabinet
On July 13 Itzhak Rabin, chair of the Israel Labour Party since February, was sworn in as Prime Minister and announced the composition of his Cabinet.
Labour was joined in the new government by the left-Zionist Meretz grouping and the ultra-orthodox Shas (International Organization of Torah-observant Sephardic Jews).
Meretz had three components —Mapam, Shinui ( "Centre Party" ) and Ratz (also known as the Citizens' Rights Movement).
The Labour-led government had also secured the passive support of five Knesset members from two Arab parties, Hadash and the Arab Democratic Party (ADP).
With these, the total number of seats controlled by the new government was 67, giving it a majority of seven seats.
Rabin had formally declared his success in forming a coalition government on July 10 [for inter-party negotiations see p. 38946].
In the new 17-member Cabinet 13 ministers were from the Labour Party, three from Meretz (one from each of its component parties), and one from Shas.
Shimon Peres, Rabin's former rival for leadership of the Labour Party [see p. 38787], became Foreign Minister, a post he had held previously (1986-88).
The appointment of Shulamit Aloni, leader of the Meretz grouping, as Minister of Education was likely to be controversial in religious circles.
From 1974 to June 1992 she had been a Knesset member for the Ratz, with its strongly secularist policies [for Meretz's coalition agreement see p. 38946].
The Interior Minister, Arie Der'i, the Moroccan-born leader of the Shas, was alone in the new Cabinet in having also served in the outgoing Likud government (also as Interior Minister).
Avraham Shochat, who became Minister of Finance, was regarded as a technocrat and as an advocate of increased privatization; he first became a Knesset member in 1988.
Rabin kept the Defence Ministry under his own control, together with those of Religious Affairs, Labour and Social Affairs (pending the appointment of other ministers and as according to the law).
Itzshak Rabin (Lab) Prime Minister; Defence; Religious Affairs; Labour; Social Affairs Shimon Peres (Lab) Foreign Affairs Avraham Shohat (Lab) Finance Aryeh Der'i (Shas) Interior Shulamit Aloni (Meretz) Education Micha Harish (Lab) Trade and Industry David Libai (Lab) Justice Moshe Shahal (Lab) Police and Communications Haim Ramon (Lab) Health Benyamin Ben Eliezer (Lab) Housing Yisrael Kessar (Lab) Transport Ora Namir (Lab) Environment Yair Tzaban (Meretz) Immigration and Absorption Shimon Shitrit (Lab) Economy and Social Development Uzi Baram (Lab) Tourism Ya'akov Tzur (Lab) Agriculture Amnon Rubinstein (Meretz) Energy and Infrastructure
New Israeli Cabinet
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Fatah-Hamas agreement
On July 13 an accord was signed in Gaza between the Fatah group, which constituted the mainstream of the Palestine Liberation Organization, and Hamas ( "Islamic Resistance Movement" ).
Since early July an unprecedented level of clashes between supporters of the two organizations had centred on the Khan Yunis refugee camp and had left one 17-year-old dead and 90 injured.
The accord, negotiated with the help of Haider Abdel-Shafi, leader of the Palestinian negotiating team in the Middle east peace process, was an attempt to install a "permanent" dialogue through a number of joint committees [see also p. 38984).
University of Nablus seige
On July 14-17 the area of An-Najah University in Nablus was surrounded by Israeli soldiers and declared a closed military zone.
Some 2,000 to 4,000 students, lecturers and university workers remained inside, refusing to leave and to submit to searches at the exits to the campus.
On July 14, Israeli soldiers had reportedly arrested an armed man near the university.
Later there were claims that armed Fatah supporters had entered the campus in order to sway the results of student council elections.
On July 17 six armed men surrendered to representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), following mediation notably by Faisal al-Husseini and his fellow member of the peace process delegation, Saeb Erakat.
The six, described as local Fatah activists wanted for attacks on alleged Palestinian collaborators, were "voluntarily expelled" across the Jordanian frontier for three years.
EC grants for Palestinian housing
On July 8, European Community (EC) representatives signed an agreement with Husseini according to which the EC granted US$35,000,000 as the first instalment of a $54,000,000 grant for the construction of 1,200 housing units in the occupied territories.
A second agreement on July 9 accorded the Palestinians credits worth $20,000,000 for investments in industry and infrastructure.
Assassinations of Palestinians in Lebanon
On June 30 the commander of the Fatah militias in southern Lebanon, Anwar Madi, was shot dead in an ambush by two men as he drove from Sidon to his office in the Ain Helweh refugee camp on the outskirts of the town.
On July 23 gunmen assassinated in Beirut Walid Khaled, an official of the Fatah Revolutionary Council, which had broken away from the mainstream Fatah in 1973 under the leadership of Sabri Khalil al Banna (also known as Abu Nidal).
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Preparations for general election
On July 24 dates were set for elections to a unicameral National Assembly, in what would be Lebanon's first general election since 1972.
The decision to hold the elections was approved by the National Assembly on July 16.
Rightist Christian organizations criticized the decision, seeking to insist on a Syrian troop withdrawal from Lebanon before a general election.
The Lebanese Forces (LF) under Samir Geagea had demanded, on June 30, that voting be delayed until populations displaced by the civil war (1975-1990) had returned to their former homes.
In most Christian areas of Lebanon a general strike was observed on July 23 in response to a call by Geagea, and with the support of the National Liberal Party of Dory Chamoun, in protest at the election plans.
Voting was to take place on Aug. 23 (constituencies in the governorates of North Lebanon and the Bekaa), Aug. 30 (governorates of Beirut and Mount Lebanon), and Sept. 6 (governorates of the South and Nabatiyah).
The elections were to be held in accordance with the 1989 Taif accord [see p. 36986], although the new electoral law approved on July 16 increased the number of deputies to be elected to 128 rather than the 108 laid down in the Taif accords [see also amendment of election law pp. 38214; 38311].
On the question of a Syrian troop withdrawal, Syrian Vice-President Abdel Halim Khaddam said in an interview published in a Beirut newspaper on July 15 "We shall still be here [in September]and beyond…we shall stay" , arguing that the process of constitutional reform in Lebanon was not yet complete.
The National Reconciliation Document encapsulating the Taif Accords, which had been ratified by the Lebanese parliament on Nov. 5, 1989, had stated that the Syrian forces would assist the Lebanese government "to extend the authority of the Lebanese state within a limited period not exceeding two years after the ratification of the National Reconciliation Document, the election of the President of the Republic, the formation of the Government of Reconciliation and the adoption of the political reforms constitutionally" .
At the end of this period the Syrian and Lebanese governments "would decide to redeploy the Syrian forces in the Bekaa area" and at certain other points as might be agreed [see also May 1991 agreement p. 38214].
The Hezbollah organization announced on June 30 that it would take part in the elections, although it had not participated in any government formed since the Taif accord.
The Progressive Socialist Party (PSP) of the Druze leader Walid Jumblatt had likewise said that it would participate in the elections, although Jumblatt on July 17 expressed reservations about the new electoral law, reiterating that he did not think that conditions were yet right for the holding of elections.
The government voted on July 7 to return some 350,000 citizens displaced by the civil war to their pre-war homes.
The relocations were to begin on July 21 with the return of Maronite Christians to more than 80 villages in the predominantly Druze Chouf mountains and the area east of Sidon.
Repossession of government buildings
The Lebanese army on July 24 began the repossession of buildings which had been taken over by the various militias during the civil war.
On July 25-26 they moved into the building in Karantina, Beirut, which had formerly housed the Health Ministry but which during the civil war had become the headquarters of the LF.
Samir Geagea was escorted from the building to his home in Ghedras, north-east of Beirut.
Buildings occupied by the PSP and by the Shiite militia Amal were also repossessed and on July 27 Hezbollah began evacuating its largest base in Lebanon —the Sheikh Abdullah Barracks in Bekaa, 70 km east of Beirut.
Resignation of Health Minister
On July 30 Jumblatt announced that the (PSP) Health and Social Affairs Minister Marwan Hamadah had resigned from the government on July 28.
Jumblatt also announced that he was suspending his own participation in the Cabinet until the army had withdrawn from the National Library, the Emir Amin Palace and the Bayt al-Din Palace — buildings the PSP had recently been occupying.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Appointment of new HCS president and new Prime Minister
Ali Kafi assumed the position of president of the High Committee of State (HCS) on July 2, following the assassination of Mohammed Boudiaf three days earlier [see also p. 38981].
Kafi, 64, had been a colonel in the war of independence from France, later became president of the influential National Organization of the Mujahidine (war veterans), and from 1979 was a member of the central committee of the then sole legal party, the National Liberation Front (FLN).
On July 8 Sid Ahmed Ghozali resigned as Prime Minister and was replaced by Belaid Abdesselam.
Ghozali, in announcing his resignation on July 8, had spoken of "forces who were working behind the scenes…stemming from positions which they had won inside sectors of the administration, economy, enterprise, the mass media and politics" .
On July 21 it was announced that Ghozali had been appointed Algerian ambassador to Paris [see also below].
There was speculation as to Abdesselam's future policy towards the repayment of Algeria's foreign debt and towards foreign companies participating in the extraction of oil and gas reserves; Abdesselam had been a director of Sonatrach, the state oil company, and then minister responsible for overseeing the nationalization of the oil industry in 1971.
In 1991 he had resigned as a member of the FLN's central committee in order to stand as an independent candidate in the abortive general election of December 1991.
Commentators noted that a number of new members of the Cabinet had gained their political experience, like Abdesellam himself, under the regime of President Houari Boumedienne (1965-1978).
Abdesselam told the press on July 27 that the elimination of corruption remained a high priority and that "those who paid the price for the measures that have been taken so far are the youth…let no one expect me to make the deprived masses pay any more" .
New Cabinet
Only eight out of 26 ministers retained their posts in a new Cabinet announced on July 19; key ministries remaining in the same hands included Defence under Maj.-Gen.
Khaled Nezzar and the Foreign Ministry under Lakhdar Brahimi.
Maj.-Gen Larbi Belkheir was replaced as Minister of the Interior by Mohammed Hardi, a civilian.
There had been calls for Belkheir's resignation after the Algerian press pointed out that the "special intervention unit" charged with Boudiaf's security came under Interior Ministry control.
The former FIS leader Said Guechi left the Cabinet, being replaced as Minister of Vocational Training by Djelloul Baghli.
Abdesellam himself took responsibility for the Economy Ministry, as had Ghozali before him.
Abdelhamid Mahi-Bahi became Justice Minister, replacing Hamadani Benkhelil.
Inquiry into Boudiaf's assassination
On July 25 the commission of inquiry into Boudiaf's assassination published preliminary results.
The authorities' earlier identification of Lembarek Boumaraaf as the assassin [see p. 38981]was endorsed; the commission confirmed that he had previously been known to be an Islamist sympathizer, but rejected as improbable the suggestion that he had acted alone.
The report referred to "the failure, negligence, complacency and indifference noted on all levels of the services that had planned the visit [Boudiaf's visit to Annaba], organized its schedule and guaranteed the security of the President" .
Ten members of the "special intervention unit" charged with presidential security had been arrested.
Sentencing of Madani and Belhadj
The trial of the two Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) leaders, Abassi Madani and Ali Belhadj (which had been suspended on June 27 —see p. 38981), resumed on July 12, although the accused continued to refuse to recognize the authority of the military court in Blida.
The trial ended on July 15 with the sentencing of the two leaders to 12 years in prison.
The sentences were lighter than had been generally expected; the military prosecutor on July 14 had asked for life sentences rather than death sentences (as sought in June).
Between July 17 and July 19 at least six people were killed in Algiers in clashes between FIS supporters protesting against the verdict and the security forces.
Of the five other FIS officials accused, one was sentenced to six years' imprisonment and four to four years each.
Defence lawyers said that they would appeal to the Supreme Court.
On July 14 Ghozali gave evidence to the court about the events of June 1991, when the army had been called on to the streets of Algiers to combat FIS supporters [see p. 38312].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
Decision of General People's Congress — Criticism of Kadhafi
On June 23 the General People's Congress (GPC) meeting in Sirte resolved that the two Libyans whose extradition was being sought in connection with the December 1988 Lockerbie bombing could be tried abroad, provided the trial took place in a "fair and just" court.
The Congress announced after 10 days of debate that "while emphasizing its adherence to Libyan penal and procedural laws the General People's Committee [equivalent to a Council of Ministers]do not object to the investigation and trial being carried out through the committee of seven constituted by the Arab League [see p. 38883]or through the United Nations before a just and fair court to be agreed on" .
In the days prior to the opening of the GPC meeting on July 13 there had been unprecedented criticism of the Libyan leader, Col. Moamer al-Kadhafi, in the state-controlled media.
Some observers interpreted this as a manoeuvre in preparation for a shift in Kadhafi's position on the extraditions.
Articles in the weekly Al-Jamahiriya newspaper (reported at length by the official news agency JANA) criticized Kadhafi for following the "mirage" of Arab and Islamic unity while Arab countries had complied with the UN sanctions imposed on Libya in April [ibid.].
Meeting with UK officials — Renewal of US sanctions
The UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office on July 3 said that further information would be requested from the Libyan government, following a meeting between the Libyan ambassador to Tunisia, Abd al-Atti Obeidi, and other Libyan officials and United Kingdom representatives at the Geneva headquarters of the UN on June 9.
The UK officials were seeking specific information concerning past Libyan contacts with the Irish Republican Army (IRA) and arms shipments to the IRA.
On July 7 US President George Bush renewed the US economic sanctions against Libya first imposed in January 1986 [see pp. 34260-64]and renewed every six months since then.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
Legislation to combat "terrorism" 
Legislation approved by the National Assembly on July 16 supplemented the existing Emergency Laws by giving the authorities additional powers to confront illegal Islamic fundamentalist organizations.
The legislation decreed the death penalty for anyone engaging in an act of "terrorism" .
Membership of a "terrorist group" was punishable by five years' imprisonment and it also became a crime to possess "directly or indirectly" written or recorded materials condoning "terrorist" activity.
Those who ceased to associate with such organizations within one month of the law coming into effect would be exempt from punishment.
The law allowed the Attorney General the right to secure information on bank accounts; Prime Minister Atef Sidki in introducing this clause said that evidence suggested that Egyptian "terrorist groups" were funded from abroad.
The legislation was opposed by 23 National Assembly deputies —members of the National Progressive Unionist Grouping and of the New Nasserite Party and some independents.
The Emergency Laws passed following the assassination of President Anwar Sadat in 1981 had allowed for detention without trial of up to 60 days and for the banning of certain public gatherings.
Continuing arrests
On July 11 Gamal Farghaly Haridi, who was said to have incited the recent disturbances in the Sanabu region [see pp. 38935; 38983], was arrested in a Cairo flat.
On July 26 Interior Minister Mohammed Abdel-Halim Moussa announced that over previous weeks 73 Islamic "agitators" had been arrested in Dayrut.
The semi-official Al-Ahram newspaper on Aug. 1 reported 300 recent arrests in the Qenah region of Upper Egypt and the arrest of 20 alleged supporters of Islamic groups in Alexandria on July 31, including "three leading officials" of the Sudanese National Islamic Front and of the Islamic Movement in Jordan.
Middle East Watch criticism
On July 27 the US-based Middle East Watch human rights group detailed what it claimed was a "sub-culture of violence" among officers working under the Egyptian Interior Ministry, in particular in the State Security Investigation (SSI) unit.
The allegations were dismissed on the same day by an Egyptian Interior Ministry official, who cited a small number of cases of abuses by policemen but claimed that they had been properly investigated.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
YEMEN
Talks were held between Yemeni and Saudi Arabian government representatives in Geneva on July 21 with a view to solving the border dispute between the two countries [see p. 38886]; it was agreed that a committee of experts would be created to determine an appropriate framework for future negotiations.
INTERNATIONAL
CSCE
Summit meeting
Leaders from 52 member countries of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) assembled in Helsinki, Finland, on July 9-10 to attend their first follow-up summit meeting since signing the Paris accord in November 1990 [see pp. 37838-39].
In a new accord entitled "Challenges of Change" signed on July 10, member states agreed to "prevent, manage and settle conflicts peacefully" by transforming the CSCE into an effective body capable of preventing wars and promoting political stability across the European continent.
The declaration endorsed the creation of "new instruments of conflict prevention and crisis management" and aimed to "strengthen the Council and the Committee of Senior Officials (CSO)" .
It backed the extension of "CSCE capacities in the field of early warning" and announced the establishment of a new post of High Commissioner on National Minorities with responsibility for monitoring potential ethnic conflicts.
Leaders also agreed that henceforth the CSCE would seek "the support of international institutions and organizations, such as the EC [European Communities], NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization]and WEU [Western European Union]" to provide peacekeeping forces to quell crises.
Suspension of Yugoslav membership
The CSCE on July 8 suspended the membership of the rump Yugoslavia, consisting of Serbia and Montenegro, until Oct. 14.
A CSCE committee also agreed in the interim to send "exploratory" missions to the Serbian-controlled provinces of Kosovo, Sandjak and Vojvodina to investigate allegations of human rights abuses against Albanian, Moslem and Hungarian minorities in these areas.
A statement issued by the Yugoslav Foreign Ministry on July 9 described the suspension of Yugoslavia's membership of the CSCE as "unjust and wrong" and as a "contravention" of CSCE principles which sought peaceful solutions on the basis of full communication "on equal terms" with all parties.
The summit declaration's notable omission of any plans to resolve the crisis in Yugoslavia was understood to have stemmed from lack of agreement among leaders who were bound by the CSCE's rule of consensus.
According to a report on July 11 the French President François Mitterrand had called for the abolition of the consensus rule, saying that "this conference must adapt" .
Meanwhile, NATO Foreign Ministers, meeting in ministerial session in Helsinki, agreed on July 10 to authorize a NATO maritime operation drawing on the Standing Naval Force Mediterranean (STANAFORMED) to monitor Yugoslavia's compliance with UN Security Council resolutions and to co-ordinate military arrangements in the region with the WEU.
Russian troop withdrawal from Baltic states
The CSCE accord called on "participating states concerned to conclude, without delay, appropriate bilateral agreements, including timetables, for the easy, orderly and complete withdrawal of such foreign troops from the territories of the Baltic States" [see also p. 38926].
The inclusion of the article relating to troop withdrawals was made at the insistence of the leaders of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania who had reportedly threatened not to sign the declaration, so preventing its adoption, without an agreement on the withdrawal of Russian troops from the Baltic states.
In June Lithuanians had voted overwhelmingly for Russian troops to be withdrawn by the end of 1992; Latvia and Estonia had reportedly also made the same demand.
On July 8 the Russian President Boris Yeltsin had announced at a press conference in Munich after talks with leaders of the Group of Seven (G-7) industrialized countries [see p. 38990]that Russia had made a political decision to withdraw an estimated 130,000 troops from the Baltic states, and that an agreement "on a schedule for the withdrawal of troops for the second half of this year and for 1993" would be signed "soon" .
However, on his arrival in Helsinki later that day, Yeltsin claimed that this timetable was impossible, saying: "We need housing and barracks for the troops…it's also a question of where to put them." 
On July 23 reports from Estonia and Lithuania indicated that Russia had refused to accede to Estonian and Lithuanian demands for large-scale troop withdrawals in 1992.
Meeting of CSCE parliamentary assembly
Deputies from CSCE member states (including the former Yugoslavia) on July 3-5 attended the first meeting in Budapest of the CSCE parliamentary assembly established in April 1991 [see p. 38171].
A final statement adopted unanimously on July 5 called for the CSCE to be endowed with the "the procedures and the means to take effective action to prevent and resolve situations of conflict" .
Deputies held Serbia responsible for the civil war in Bosnia-Hercegovina and proposed to send international observers to the provinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina "where there is no war yet but minorities are in danger" .
They stressed that such intervention did not imply intervention in the internal affairs of the country concerned.
The CSCE assembly on July 5 also adopted a resolution on the situation in the Dnestr region of Moldova [see pp. 38877-78; 38924]demanding "an immediate ceasefire between the sides involved in the conflict, as well as the [ex-Soviet]24th Army's neutrality and its withdrawal from the Republic of Moldova" .
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
CFE treaty — CSCE agreement on troop reduction
The Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty signed at a summit meeting of the Conference of Security and Co-Operation in Europe (CSCE) in Paris in November 1990 [see p. 37838], came into force on July 17.
[The "open skies" treaty signed under the auspices of the CSCE in Helsinki in March was expected to take effect in 1993 — see p. 38841.]
Potential problems regarding the treaty's formal implementation, which surfaced after the former Soviet republics of Armenia and Byelarus said that they were unable immediately to ratify the accord, were circumvented by an extraordinary conference in Vienna at which representatives from 29 signatory nations approved "provisional application" of the treaty pending its ratification by Armenia and Byelarus.
Moldova, Ukraine and Russia announced their ratification of the CFE treaty on July 1, 2 and 8 respectively.
On July 20 a group of French inspectors arrived in Ukraine to monitor implementation of the treaty, marking the start of an intensive 120-day period of mutual "baseline inspections" to establish current holdings in each country.
[For other inspections under CFE treaty see pp. 38458; 38553.]
Agreement on troop reduction in Europe
The first non-binding agreement limiting the number of land and air forces in Europe was finalized by 29 CSCE member countries on July 6 in Vienna and signed on July 10 at their summit meeting in Helsinki [see p. 39030; for other recent force reductions in Europe see pp. 38365; 38745; 38793].
Ceilings under the agreement included: USA –250,000 troops (a substantial reduction from an estimated 350,000 US troops stationed in Europe at the height of the Cold War); Russia –1,450,000; Ukraine –450,000; Germany — 345,000; France –325,000; United Kingdom –260,000; Poland accepted a ceiling of 75,000 and Hungary 100,000.
Czechoslovakia's ceiling of 140,000 would need adjustment, officials said, in view of the anticipated creation of separate Czech and Slovak states.
US weapons withdrawal
US President George Bush said on July 2 that the USA had completed its promised withdrawal of all ground and naval tactical nuclear weapons from bases around the world in keeping with a pledge made in September 1991 [see pp. 38457-58].
US-Russian talks on joint defence system
US-Russian negotiations on a joint global ballistic missile defence system [see pp. 38744-45; 38792]were held in Moscow on July 13-14.
In a statement issued afterwards the two sides agreed to establish joint working groups to study the feasibility of an anti-ballistic missile (ABM) early warning centre; to examine legal co-operation in the field of the exchange of technologies; and to assess trends in the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Malcolm Toon, a special US envoy inquiring into US prisoners of war still held in the former Soviet Union, was quoted on July 1 as saying that he had found no evidence to substantiate the claims made by Russian President Boris Yeltsin in June [see p. 38986].
INTERNATIONAL
ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK
Annual meeting
Finance Ministers representing 44 member countries of the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) met in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, on July 4-5.
Ministers at their opening session approved the membership of Azerbaijan and restored Afghanistan's membership, suspended in 1979 following its invasion by Soviet troops.
The latest accessions, including that of Turkmenistan in June, brought total membership to 46.
On July 5 Islamic Finance Ministers agreed to increase the IDB's working capital from 2,000 Islamic dinars (the IDB's unit of account, equivalent to the special drawing right of the IMF; ID1=US$1.4355 as at July 6, 1992) to ID4,000 million, and to raise authorized capital to ID6,000 million.
The increase in authorized capital was mandated to assist development in poorer member states and in non-participating countries with significant Moslem communities.
The IDB had announced on July 2 that it would finance projects worth US$80,500,000 during 1992-93; Pakistan was allocated US$27,000,000 for the import of crude oil and fertilizers.
Funds and expertise extended by the IDB for projects in Moslem countries since 1976 were valued at nearly US$11,000 million.
INTERNATIONAL
IEA
Report on French energy policy
France formally joined the International Energy Agency (IEA) on July 28.
The IEA had issued on July 16 its first review of France's energy policy, calling for greater diversification to reduce dependence on nuclear energy.
While recognizing the efficiency of France's nuclear programme, the IEA urged greater consideration for alternative sources based on natural gas and clean coal technology.
A report on July 20 said that France's state-owned electricity monopoly, Electricité de France (EDF), had sought government clearance for the ordering of its first new nuclear reactor for five years.
INTERNATIONAL
HUMAN RIGHTS
Amnesty International annual report
The human rights organization Amnesty International in its 1992 annual report released on July 9 claimed that governments around the world had connived with security forces in permitting extrajudicial murder, abduction and torture.
The review, which covered 142 of the world's 178 countries showed that in 1991, 65 countries still held prisoners of conscience, while the use of "disappearance" as a tactic for eliminating political opponents had been substantiated in 26 countries.
In 1992 the death penalty remained in force in 106 countries, among them China, which was censured by the report for authorizing the execution of more than 1,000 people in 1991.
Hundreds of people were illegally executed in Indonesia and Myanma, and Thai security forces committed "gross human rights violations" , killing an unknown number of pro-democracy demonstrators.
In the Middle East more than 800 people were hanged, shot by firing squad or stoned to death in 1991.
In addition, evidence of widespread arbitrary arrests, torture, disappearances and killings had been recorded in Iraq and Kuwait.
Some of the worst excesses were documented in Africa, where there were more than 1,000 extrajudicial executions in Burundi against a background of ethnic tension.
The report accused the South African government of complicity in the extrajudicial execution of its political opponents.
In Chad, Ethiopia and Niger investigations into human rights abuses by former officials had failed to result in convictions.
While the report recognized that some reform-minded governments had sought to correct recent abuses of human rights, others such as India emerged as violators with up to 25,000 political prisoners, many of whom were routinely tortured, some dying, in police custody.
The report was careful also to underline atrocities committed by rebel movements, particularly in Peru and Sri Lanka, where, it claimed, innocent civilians had been indiscriminately murdered or maimed.
The United Kingdom government was criticized on two counts, for detaining 90 Arab nationals during the Gulf war and for allegedly ill-treating suspects in police custody in Northern Ireland.
INTERNATIONAL
WAR CRIMES
Ruling on Gecas libel case
A former wartime lieutenant in the Lithuanian police, Anton Gecas, on July 17 lost a £600,000 libel case against the United Kingdom Scottish Television company which had described him as a war criminal.
In his verdict the judge who presided over the four-month hearing said that Gecas (formerly Antanas Gecevicius), 76, a retired mining engineer living in Edinburgh, had "participated in…the killing of innocent Soviet citizens, including Jews, in Byelorussia during the last three months of 1941" .
Observers believed that the ruling opened the way for the first prosecution under the UK War Crimes Act approved in May 1991 [see p. 38219], and that 30 members of a former Lithuanian police battalion living in the UK could soon be charged with the killing of thousands of civilians and Jews in eastern Europe during the Second World War.
Controversy over Goebbels' diaries
The discovery in Russian archives in Moscow of the first complete version of the diaries of Joseph Goebbels, Adolf Hitler's Propaganda Minister, was reported on July 3.
The report generated controversy after it emerged that the Sunday Times newspaper, which intended to serialize extracts, had commissioned the right-wing "revisionist historian" David Irving to authenticate the diaries.
INTERNATIONAL
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Eighth AIDS conference
An estimated 11,000 delegates from 123 countries attended the eighth international conference on AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) in Amsterdam on July 19-24 [for seventh AIDS conference see p. 38315].
The conference, originally scheduled to be held in Boston, had its venue changed after the US government refused to lift its immigration ban on individuals infected with HIV (human immunodeficiency virus).
Addressing delegates on July 20 Michael Merson, Director of the World Health Organization (WH0) Global Programme on AIDS, said that the world was at the beginning of an "AIDS era" ; WHO estimates showed that at least one person became HIV-positive every 15 seconds.
Transmission rates in parts of south and south-east Asia, once considered relatively safe, were as high as sub-Saharan Africa, while "new-found freedom" in eastern and central Europe had also contributed to the spread of AIDS.
Latest official figures from the WHO predicted that between 30,000,000 and 40,000,000 people would be infected with HIV by the turn of the century.
Merson drew special attention to the spread of AIDS among women, especially in the world's poorest regions, saying that "by the year 2000, more than half of all newly infected adults may be women" .
Jonathan Mann, chairman of the conference and director of the Harvard AIDS Institute, criticized countries which had downgraded their prevention and research strategy and warned that "the gap between the intensifying pace of the pandemic and lagging national and global response is widening rapidly and dangerously" .
AIDS scientists told delegates on July 21 that large-scale trials of several potential AIDS vaccines to protect healthy people from HIV would begin by 1995.
Meanwhile speculation about the emergence of a "fresh strain of HIV" grew after reports that 30 patients in France, Spain, the United Kingdom and the USA had developed a rare form of immuno-deficiency illness with AIDS-like symptoms but without traces in their blood of known strains of HIV.
WHO membership
The Republic of Turkmenistan on July 2 joined the WHO as its 179th member.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Upholding of whaling ban for one year
The 44th annual meeting of the International Whaling Commission (IWC), held in Glasgow, Scotland, on June 29-July 3, was marked by accusations from pro-whaling member countries that anti-whaling countries were distorting the charter of the IWC in an effort to outlaw whaling on ethical grounds.
The conference, by a vote of 16 to one with 11 abstentions (and nine of the 37 IWC member countries not present), agreed in effect to maintain the ban on commercial whaling at least for one further year.
During this time conditions were to be worked out for a monitoring scheme and new quota system, which was expected to allow renewed exploitation of certain stocks, notably of minke whales.
A Japanese and Norwegian proposal on models for estimating whale populations and catch limits was defeated by 16 votes to 5.
 "Scientific" whaling, which allowed a very limited catch supposedly for research purposes, was allowed to continue in the interim.
Among countries advocating lifting of the moratorium, Iceland withdrew formally from the Commission on the eve of the meeting, and Norway announced on June 29 a unilateral resumption of commercial hunting from 1993.
The two countries, together with Greenland and the Faroe Islands, announced the formation of a new organization, the North Atlantic Marine Mammal Commission.
Quashing of conviction of Exxon Valdez master
Joseph Hazelwood, the master of the Exxon Valdez oil tanker at the time of its oil spill off Alaska in 1989 [see pp. 36606; 36541], had his conviction for "negligent discharge of oil" quashed in early July, on the grounds that, under US federal law, a master who reported a spill could not be prosecuted for it.
Dropping of EC Commission actions against UK
The European Commission announced on July 31 that it was dropping legal action against the United Kingdom in five out of seven cases where UK plans had been deemed to infringe EC environmental assessment directives.
The cases included the M3 motorway extension at Twyford Down, Hampshire, the scene of environmental protests, and the M11 extension to Hackney, east London.
In a decision described as "reasonable and pragmatic" by the EC Commissioner temporarily responsible for environmental matters, Karel van Miert, the Commission ruled that the UK had indeed complied with the directive in the five cases dropped.
However, action was proceeding on two cases: the East London River Crossing via Oxleas Wood, and the new BP oil terminal at Kinneil, near Grangemouth on the Firth of Forth in Scotland.
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
Ruling against Pan Am
A judge in New York on July 11 ruled that the US airline Pan American World Airways (Pan Am) was guilty of "wilful misconduct" in its security procedures for baggage on its flight PA103 in December 1988 which was blown up by a bomb over Lockerbie, Scotland, killing 270 people [see pp. 36409-10].
The civil case had been brought by relatives of the victims who were seeking damages of more than US$300 million from Pan Am which went into bankruptcy in January 1991, ceasing operations in December [see pp. 38123; 38699].
On July 22 a jury in New York awarded damages totalling US$9,230,000 to the family of one of the victims of the Lockerbie bombing.
Air crashes
All 71 people on board an Indonesian airliner died after it plunged into a mountain in eastern Indonesia on July 25.
More than 200 people were killed in separate air crashes in Nepal and China on July 31.
A report released on July 18 on an inquiry into the crash of a United Airlines Boeing 737 over Colorado, USA, in March 1991 [see p.
R150], said that it had resulted from "no known cause" .
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
Giotto rendezvous
At a distance of 214 million km from earth, the space probe Giotto of the European Space Agency (ESA) passed within 250 km of the nucleus of the Comet Grigg-Skjellerup on July 10.
This was Giotto's second rendezvous with a comet, a historic encounter with Halley's Comet having taken place in March 1986.
Giotto was launched in July 1985 and almost 70 per cent of its original instruments remained intact.
Mission scientists stated that it had detected traces of water, carbon, hydrogen and metals in Grigg-Skjellerup, providing further clues as to how the solar system was formed approximately 4,500 million years previously.
Soyuz flight
A Soyuz TM-15 spacecraft with two Russians and one French researcher on board was launched on July 27 to deliver fresh equipment to prolong the life of the Mir space station.
The two Russians would replace the two cosmonauts currently on board, and would stay in space until January 1993.
US Shuttle flight
The US space shuttle Columbia successfully completed a 14-day flight on July 9, the longest ever by a space shuttle crew, during which the prolonged effects of weightlessness on the human body were further studied.
Protein crystals were also grown and among those activated were the anti-viral protein interferon, a protein which regulated blood pressure, and a serum which transported iron from the liver to immature red blood cells.
INTERNATIONAL
IMO
Croatia on July 8 became the 137th member of the International Maritime Organization.
INTERNATIONAL
UN
Georgia on July 31 became the 179th member of the United Nations [for accessions of other former Soviet states see p. 38842].
Bosnia-Hercegovina, Croatia and Slovenia had joined on May 22.
INTERNATIONAL
VATICAN
A four-page document published by the Vatican on July 23 stated that, unlike ethnic origin, "homosexual orientation is an objective disorder" ; it was therefore not "unjust discrimination" to take sexual orientation into account in the placement of children for adoption, the employment of teachers or athletic coaches and military recruitment.
A similar statement sent to Catholic bishops in the United States in June was leaked to the US press in mid-July.