

AFRICA
SOMALIA
Threat of deaths through mass starvation
With the food supply situation critical throughout most of the country, UN officials reported on Aug. 31 that some 2,000 people were dying daily.
Agreement had been secured locally for the deployment of 500 armed UN peacekeeping troops in the capital, Mogadishu, and on Aug. 28 the UN had approved the deployment of an additional 3,000 troops.
Uncertainty surrounded the likely consequences of such a deployment, and no troops had been despatched to Somalia by the end of August.
The 50 unarmed UN military observers who had been sent to Mogadishu in July remained in the country, although on Aug. 6 they were reported still to be unable to leave their compound due problems of transport.
On Aug. 28 two of the group were injured after an attack in Mogadishu in which three local guards were apparently killed.
Some aid agencies and other concerned groups meanwhile suggested that the only solution to the problem of the looting by armed groups of food supplies arriving in Somalia was for the country to be "flooded" with food aid.
Political developments — UN technical mission
The 23-member UN technical mission, led by Peter Hansen (Denmark) and including representatives from the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the World Health Organization (WHO), arrived in Mogadishu on Aug. 6.
Its brief was as approved by the UN Security Council on July 27 [see p. 38992; see also pp. 38800, 38855].
It completed its mission on Aug. 14, having met with both the transitional President, Ali Mahdi Mohammed (based in the north of Mogadishu) and his opponent, Gen. Mohammed Farah Aydid (at his base in Bardera, 320 km west of Mogadishu).
The technical team also visited Kismayo, Baidoa and Beletuen, speaking with relief workers and other militia leaders.
Agreement on deployment of UN force
On Aug. 12 Mohammed Sahnoun (since May the special representative in Somalia of UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali) signed an agreement with Gen. Farah Aydid at Bardera.
The agreement would allow 500 armed UN guards to be deployed in Mogadishu within 21 days with a brief to protect food distribution operations.
Farah Aydid agreed to allow the UN troops to guard Mogadishu airport and harbour, and to protect the transport of food to warehouses and distribution points within the city.
The question of their deployment beyond Mogadishu remained a subject of negotiations, however.
Mahdi Mohammed was in agreement with the proposed UN deployment and had in fact, Sahnoun reported, called for the despatch of a 10,000-strong UN force.
Formation of SNA — Armed clashes
On Aug. 14 four armed groups, which had in recent weeks come together under Farah Aydid's leadership in the south of the country as the Somali Liberation Army, formed a Somali National Alliance (SNA).
The SNA comprised that section of the United Somali Congress (USC) which supported Farah Aydid, the Somali Patriotic Movement (SPM), the South Somali National Movement (SSNM) and the Somali Democratic Movement (SDM).
In mid-August clashes continued between the SNA and pro-Mahdi Mohammed forces in the Galgudud region, central Somalia, and other inter-clan fighting was reported south of Mogadishu.
All six groups which had reached an agreement at Djibouti in July 1991 [see p. 38322], including the faction of the USC that continued to support Mahdi Mohammed, had on July 29 welcomed the UN resolution adopted two days earlier and the proposed deployment of UN troops in Somalia.
They had asked for a greater number of "peacekeeping forces" to be sent, although Sahnoun on Aug. 12 was to emphasize that the proposed deployment was not to be regarded as a peacekeeping operation, but was to protect food distribution.
Approval of more UN troops
On Aug. 28 the UN Security Council approved a resolution ordering the deployment of a further 3,000 armed UN troops in the country.
They would be deployed as four 750-strong "security units" .
The anticipated force would be commanded by Pakistan's Brig. -Gen.
Imtiaz Shaheen, and was expected to consist mainly of Pakistani troops.
On Aug. 6 Canada had said that it was prepared to contribute 500 troops.
Kouchner's visit
The French Minister for Health and Humanitarian Action, Bernard Kouchner, visited Mogadishu on Aug. 4-5.
He held talks with both Mahdi Mohammed, and with the vice-president of the United Somali Congress (USC) Abdi Osman Farah (as a representative of Farah Aydid's faction).
Kouchner visited Mogadishu port and Baidoa, in the south-west, where he saw French food aid arrive.
At a news conference in Nairobi on Aug. 6 Kouchner spoke in the strongest possible terms of the seriousness of the situation.
After a visit to Somalia on Aug. 10-12, the Irish Foreign Minister David Andrews said that he would argue for increased European Community (EC) aid to the country.
Amnesty International report
In a report published on Aug. 5 the human rights group Amnesty International (AI) cited a witness who spoke of mass executions and human rights abuses in the inter-clan conflicts of recent months, and said that this report was consistent with others received by AI.
UN and ICRC food distribution
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), having brought more than 83,000 tonnes of food into Somalia through 18 different entry points between January and August, was continuing to bring in 20,000 tonnes a month.
Since May the UN, however, had only brought 22,000 tonnes of the total of 64,000 tonnes allocated to the country (according to the Guardian newspaper of Aug. 5).
Some aid workers estimated that as much as half of the food aid sent since January had been stolen, although some pointed out that looted food eventually found its way on to the market.
Sahnoun appealed for a large increase in the amount of aid promised.
Praising the work of non-governmental organizations and implicitly criticizing the UN World Food Programme (WFP) and other UN agencies, he pointed out that together private and UN agencies were at present providing only a quarter of the minimum monthly food needs.
Eight foreign non-governmental organizations were involved in food distribution in Somalia.
The UK-based Save the Children Fund criticized the UN operation, maintaining that the efforts of the various agencies within the UN were unco-ordinated.
The Fund's overseas director Mike Aaronson said on Aug. 29 that there was "a shameful degree of infighting between UN agencies which pursue their own interests" .
On Aug. 18 Peter Davies of Interaction, a coalition of relief organizations concerned with aid to Somalia, had estimated that "one-fourth of children under five are estimated to have perished already" .
By Aug. 20 the ICRC had begun an operation using two helicopters to convey food to four coastal towns north of Mogadishu–Uarsciek, Ataleh, Harardera and Obbia.
It was then planned to transport the food aid by lorry to some of the collective kitchens which the ICRC was operating throughout Somalia.
By Aug. 10 UNICEF had airlifted emergency medical supplies to four towns where the malnutrition rate was 80 per cent.
On Aug. 15 a UN flight left Nairobi, carrying high-protein biscuits to Baidoa, where some 500-700 people were estimated to be dying daily.
Airlifts were also planned for the towns of Hoddur and Baidera.
On Aug. 16, as a shipment of UN relief arrived for the first time in the southern port of Kismayo, a local militia which had been hired to protect it stole 600 tonnes of food and fuel.
On Aug. 24 a 45-truck WFP convoy arrived in Gelib, southern Somalia, carrying 450 tonnes of food and by Sept. 2 the WFP had flown in four planeloads of food aid to Bardera.
On Aug. 31 the UN announced another 79,200 tonnes of food for Somalia, worth US$26,000,000 and reckoned to last three months.
Sahnoun told a news conference in Rome that only 10-15 of Somalia's 70 hospitals were functioning, and that the water supply had collapsed.
US and other foreign government aid
On Aug. 14 the US administration announced that the Defence Department was to take charge of a two-month US operation to airlift food into Somalia (or into Kenya for onward distribution into Somalia and use in refugee camps).
It was planned to send 80,000 tonnes of US food aid in the next six weeks under the 1992 budget, and 145,000 tonnes from Oct. 1, after the beginning of the new fiscal year.
The operation would use 11 military cargo planes and would eventually cost over US$200,000,000.
The announcement came four days after the Democratic Party's candidate in the presidential elections, Bill Clinton, had urged President George Bush to take the lead in galvanizing the UN into ending the civil war in Somalia.
On Aug. 17 a 34-member team from the US Defence Department flew into Mombasa, Kenya, which was to be the main base for the US aid operation.
It was planned to fly food to the north-east Kenyan town of Wajir, from where it would be trucked to Somali refugees living in UN camps along the Kenyan border or sent by air into Somalia.
On Aug. 21 a meeting between Kenyan president Daniel arap Moi and US officials resolved tensions which had arisen over what the Kenyan authorities had perceived as the lack of proper consultation about the US operation, involving as it did US military aircraft overflying Kenyan airspace and the arrival of up to 300 US military personnel.
There was also increased tension between the Kenyan authorities and Somali refugees, and on Aug. 16, 1,550 Somalis were detained near Nairobi by Kenyan police who claimed that they had not obtained proper refugee status.
By Aug. 27 the US Defence Department and the ICRC announced that they had agreed to work together on the airlift.
US planes would carry the Red Cross emblem.
To conform with the usual ICRC practice, they would not carry armed US soldiers (as the original US plan had envisaged).
The first planes of this airlift arrived in Beletuen on the same day.
On Aug. 19 French military transport planes began flying planeloads of food aid from Djibouti to Baidoa, where they handed the food to ICRC representatives.
On Aug. 3 the European Commission announced that it would send 10,000 tonnes of emergency food aid to Somalia to support the work of the ICRC in Somalia.
It would also be sending 140 tonnes of food aid to Somalis in the refugee camps of Yemen.
During August Belgium, Germany, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and the UK were among other countries pledging emergency food and medical aid.
EUROPE
FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
Military intervention issue
During August there was discussion at the UN, THE North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Western European Union (WEU) and the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) on the practicalities and appropriate scale of any international military intervention in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
This took place against a backdrop of reports of executions of detainees, mass expulsions through force and intimidation, and other human rights violations, as armed groups attempted to establish facts on the ground which might become the basis for any future international negotiations over territory.
Fighting continued around Sarajevo, Bihac and Goradze and in various areas of northern Bosnia-Hercegovina, while in the south Bosnian Croatians consolidated their hold on the area they had named the Croatian Community of Herzeg-Bosna [see p. 39012].
The government of Bosnia-Hercegovina under President Alija Izetbegovic continued as the internationally recognized government of Bosnia-Hercegovina but had lost control of most of the territory of the state as it existed when it was recognized internationally in April 1992 [see p. 38848].
UN resolution on atrocities
The UN Security Council unanimously adopted on Aug. 4 a resolution proposed by the USA which condemned the detention camps reportedly holding both soldiers and civilians in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The resolution reminded all parties of their obligations under the 1949 Geneva Conventions and said that "persons who commit or order serious violations of these conventions are individually responsible" .
Human Rights Commission session
On Aug. 13-14 an extraordinary session of the UN Human Rights Commission was held in Geneva to examine events in the former Yugoslavia.
The meeting concluded with the unanimous approval of a resolution strongly condemning the policy of forced expulsions—the policy which had been given the name "ethnic cleansing" ("etnicko ciscenje).
The session adopted a predominantly hostile tone towards the forces of the Bosnian Serbs.
The representative there of the Bosnian Serbs, Misha Milosevic, told the commission (i) that no concentration camps existed in Serbian territory in Bosnia-Hercegovina;(ii) that no hidden camp had been created;(iii) that the [self-proclaimed]Serbian government of Bosnia-Hercegovina had never carried out operations of "ethnic cleansing" on its territory; and (iv) that the same government had never refused international control over the prison camps in its territory.
He made counter-accusations that 42,000 Bosnian Serbs were being held as detainees, in 21 camps, by the Bosnian Croats and Moslems, and that over 6,000 Bosnian Serb civilians had been killed as detainees.
He said that over 300,000 Bosnian Serbs had been terrorized into fleeing their homes.
The Human Rights Commission assigned to Tadeusz Mazowiecki, who had been Polish Prime Minister in 1989-90, the task of collecting all "available and credible" information on human rights in Yugoslavia and particularly in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Mazowiecki's report, published on Aug. 31, recommended that the mandate of the UN Protection Force in Yugoslavia (UNPROFOR) be extended to include reporting on, stopping, and assisting the victims of, human rights abuses throughout Bosnia-Hercegovina.
A human rights tribunal should be established to investigate "mass and flagrant" human rights violations and victims of so-called "ethnic cleansing" should have the right to return under international supervision.
The report said that the mistreatment of ethnic Serbs in Croatia "however repugnant" could not be compared with the "systematic use of violence employed against ethnic Croatians and Moslems in Bosnia-Hercegovina" .
UN resolutions on humanitarian aid and detention camps
The UN Security Council on Aug. 13 approved Resolution 770, sponsored by Belgium, France, Russia, the UK and the USA, which authorized "all measures necessary" to ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid.
The resolution was adopted by 12 votes to none, with China, India and Zimbabwe abstaining.
The resolution was interpreted as authorizing the use of force as a last resort, as several European governments expressed the need for caution.
A second UN resolution, Resolution 771, which was unanimously adopted, demanded that the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) should have unimpeded access to detention camps throughout the territory of the former Yugoslavia and that those responsible for human rights violations should be held personally responsible.
Offers of European troops
The French government on Aug. 14 announced that France was prepared to contribute a 1,100-strong "force of protection and escort" to Bosnia-Hercegovina, in the framework of the UN resolutions agreed on Aug. 13.
Spain and Italy and later Belgium also said that they intended to send an unspecified number of troops.
The USA and the UK reiterated their opposition to the use of ground troops.
On Aug. 18, however, the UK government did an about-turn when it announced that 1,800 soldiers would be placed at the disposal of the UN in order to ensure the protection of humanitarian convoys in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
[For January 1992 decision on the sending of UN peacekeeping troops and the subsequent deployment of UNMLO personnel and (from March) UNPROFOR personnel see January—p. 38704—and subsequent months.]
Sarajevo situation
On Aug. 1 Gen. Lewis MacKenzie, the Canadian commander of UNPROFOR in Sarajevo, left the city after two months there.
He was replaced on Aug. 10 by Egyptian Gen. Hussein Ali Abdelrasik.
On Aug. 5 and 20 two Ukrainian members of the UN contingent in Sarajevo were killed.
ICO and UN General Assembly resolution
Representatives of the Islamic Conference Organization (ICO) met in New York on Aug. 4.
The representatives of Turkey, Iran, Egypt, Pakistan and Senegal were designated to negotiate with the UN Security Council over the predicament of the Moslem population of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The ICO advocated the use of force against the Serbian forces in compliance with Article 42 of the UN charter, and the lifting of the UN arms embargo against Bosnia-Hercegovina (approved in September 1991—see p. 38422).
[For ICO meeting in June see p. 38970.]
Izetbegovic on Aug. 3 had addressed a letter to the UN Security Council in which he demanded that the government of Bosnia-Hercegovina be allowed to import arms in order to "achieve the right to individual and collective self-defence" guaranteed by Article 51 of the UN Charter.
The UN General Assembly on Aug. 25 adopted almost unanimously a resolution sponsored by the 47 ICO member-states.
The resolution called on the Security Council to "urgently contemplate…the means to end fighting and restore the unity and territorial integrity of the Republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina" .
It cited Chapter VII of the UN Charter, which authorized the use of force where economic embargo had failed.
It reaffirmed UN support for the "just struggle" of the people of Bosnia-Hercegovina and demanded the repatriation of refugees and deportees.
Casualties and detainees
A report published on Aug. 19 in Washington, written by two staff members of the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee after a visit to the region on Aug. 7-14, estimated that 35,000 people had died in Bosnia since late March; Bosnian Moslems formed the largest group of casualties.
It speculated that some 20,000 deaths might have come about during the forced evacuations from Moslem villages, and estimated that the Bosnian Serbs had already largely completed their plans for the creation of homogenous Serb-populated areas.
Some Croat and Moslem sources in Bosnia-Hercegovina estimated in August that at least 70,000 people from those two communities were detained in 45 camps, while others cited higher numbers.
[For Serb counter-accusations at UN Human Rights Commission on Aug. 14 see above.]
On Aug. 10 a representative of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees in Zaghreb, Croatia, received from the Bosnian Serb authorities a list of 5,000 families (some 28,000 people) from the predominantly Moslem town of Bihac who they claimed had "voluntarily" expressed the desire to leave Bosnia-Hercegovina for Croatia.
By Aug. 13 a UNHCR representative was seeking to contact the Bosnian Serb military leadership to obtain the lifting of a siege on four predominantly Croat towns—Prijedor, Sanski-most, Bosanka-Krupa and Bosanki-Petrovac—in north-west Bosnia-Hercegovina.
London Conference
The London Conference on Aug. 26-27 brought together the representatives of some 20 countries, including leaders of the six former Yugoslav republics and representatives of the European Communities (EC), of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, the CSCE and other governments and concerned parties, including political organizations of the Kosovo Albanians and the Hungarian minority in Vojvodina.
The conference was hosted by the UK government, as the incumbent of the EC presidency.
UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali co-chaired the conference with the UK Prime Minister John Major.
Cyrus Vance, the former US Secretary of State and the UN's special envoy on Yugoslavia, also attended.
The resignation of Lord Carrington, 73, as the chair of the ongoing EC-sponsored peace process, was announced as the conference opened.
On Aug. 27 Lord Owen (who as David Owen had been UK Foreign Secretary in the Labour government in 1977-79 and subsequently a founder and then leader of the Social Democratic Party) was named as Carrington's successor.
With Vance, he was to co-chair the UN-EC peace initiative.
France and Italy had also put up candidates for the post.
The delegation representing the Serbian-dominated Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY)(which had yet to achieve international recognition) was headed by Prime Minister Milan Panic and President Dobrica Cosic.
The president of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, was on Aug. 27 apparently prevented by Panic from addressing the conference.
Panic stressed that the FRY would respect the internal frontiers inherited from the epoch of Tito, that the rights of minorities would be respected, that there was no FRY military involvement in Bosnia-Hercegovina, where it was desirable that refugees should return to their places of origin, that the FRY condemned so-called "ethnic cleansing" and that the FRY would provide logistic support to humanitarian convoys.
Panic also advocated the positioning of UN observers along the border between Serbia and Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Cosic demanded the lifting of sanctions against the FRY.
Karadzic, speaking as leader of the Bosnian Serbs, said on Aug. 27 that "20 per cent" of territory held by Bosnian Serbs might be relinquished, and that detention camps run by these same forces, which he claimed contained no civilians, would be closed down within weeks and that "ethnic cleansing" was something he condemned.
Izetbegovic, the President of Bosnia-Hercegovina, repeated his previous appeals for either international military intervention in the conflict, or for the lifting of the arms embargo against his forces.
At a press conference in Sarajevo on Aug. 23 he had outlined a "future constitutional arrangement of Bosnia-Hercegovina" which would guarantee equality between the three major groups though a lower house in parliament where decisions would only be passed by a consensus and a tribunal to monitor "human and national rights" .
Closing declaration
While the principles enunciated in the London Conference's closing declaration were in line with those which had guided the EC 's peace efforts since mid-1991, the conference represented a widening of the peace process to include the CSCE, countries neighbouring the region, and Moslem countries.
Participants in the London Conference agreed on a declaration which condemned "the expulsion of civilian communities from their homes" , undertook to collate information on human rights violations and outlined terms for a political settlement.
Such a settlement was to include: recognition of Bosnia-Hercegovina by all the former Yugoslav republics; respect for the integrity of present frontiers unless changed by mutual agreement; guarantees for "national communities and minorities" ; and the right of return for those who had been expelled.
Future negotiations would deal with specific topics including "the cessation of all outside interference in terms of personal or material support in the present conflict" ; the grouping of heavy weaponry under international control; and the establishment of refugee and relief centres for citizens of Bosnia-Hercegovina expelled from their homes, pending their return.
The declaration concluded that "an international peacekeeping force under UN auspices may be created by the UN Security Council to maintain the ceasefire, control military movements and undertake other confidence-building measures" .
WEU
Following the London Conference the nine member countries of the WEU agreed to tighten the enforcement of sanctions in the Adriatic sea and on the Danube river.
The initial measures of enforcement had been agreed on by the WEU and NATO in July [see also pp. 39012-13].
On Aug. 28 it also announced that, in complete collaboration with NATO policy-making, the WEU would put at the immediate disposal of the UN almost 5,000 troops, along with transport and logistical equipment.
Macedonia
New government — Further international recognition
After Macedonia's Prime Minister-designate Peter Gosev had "returned the mandate" given him in July to form a new government, his party—the (ex-communist) Social Democratic Alliance of Macedonia—presented party leader Branko Crvenkovski as Prime Minister-designate on Aug. 13.
He was installed by President Kiro Gligorov on Aug. 17.
A new Cabinet announced on Aug. 26 included members of several parliamentary parties.
Russia on Aug. 6 recognized the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia as independent, prompting protests from the Greek government which had held out against wider European recognition.
Macedonia's independence was also recognized by Albania, Bulgaria and Turkey.
An amendment to legislation was approved on Aug. 20 requiring all former Yugoslav citizens who had lived in Macedonia less than 15 years to leave the republic.
Kosovo
Panic announced as he returned from a visit to Albania on Aug. 10 that the state of emergency in Serbia's province of Kosovo was to be lifted.
He emphasized, however, that he was not yet proposing any withdrawal of federal troops from the province.
In Albania, Panic had met with the Albanian Prime Minister Aleksander Meksi, the first such visit by a Yugoslav leader to Tirana since 1948.
Various emergency measures had been imposed during the 1989-90 disturbances in Kosovo by Serbia's President Slobodan Milosevic.
The leaders of Kosovo Albanian political groupings on Aug. 14 rejected a proposal by Panic that talks should be held in Belgrade on the Kosovo question, insisting that any talks between Kosovo Albanians and Serbs should be held under international auspices at the forthcoming London Conference.
Slovenia
FRY recognition
The FRY recognized the independence of Slovenia on Aug. 13, but the Slovene President Milan Kucan said on the same day that this recognition meant nothing "until the FRY itself obtains international recognition" [for wide international recognition of Slovenia in January 1992, see p. 38703].
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
ANC mass action
As the African National Congress (ANC) stepped up its campaign of mass action with a two-day nationwide strike, the government made various attempts during August to convince the ANC of its good faith.
Although these efforts failed to persuade the ANC to renew constitutional negotiations, both parties supported a UN plan to assist in the transition to democracy.
The ANC and its allies the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) and the South African Communist Party (SACP) intended that the general strike on Aug. 3-4 and the three following days of nationally co-ordinated protests should be the climax of the protest action which had begun on June 16 [see p. 38948].
The ANC estimated that more than 4,000,000 people heeded its strike call, while the South African Chamber of Business estimated that the strike was observed by half that number.
There were reports that 90 per cent of the workforce stayed away in the Johannesburg region, although this figure fell to 50 per cent in the Natal area, where Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi's Inkatha Freedom Party opposed the strike.
Business leaders estimated the cost of the strike at R250 million (about US$65,000,000).
Over 50 people were killed in unrest across the country in the period Aug. 2-4, although police said that it was not clear whether all the deaths were related to the strike.
The strike and subsequent activity was monitored by a team of 10 UN observers, as agreed by the government at the end of July [see p. 38991].
The observers helped to defuse tension and, according to an official of a regional peace committee, "made everyone behave better" .
On Aug. 4, UN team members intervened to avert a threat of violent conflict in Ciskei.
Ciskei was one of 10 "homelands" or bantustans created under the apartheid regime; four of these, including Ciskei, had accepted a nominal independence from South Africa which no other country had recognized, but which constituted an additional obstacle to the transition to a post-apartheid South Africa.
On Aug. 4 the Ciskei military forces were confronted on the borders of the bantustan by 30,000 protesters, who were eventually allowed to hold a rally within Ciskei, following negotiations with Brig.
Joshua Oupa Gqozo.
(Gqozo had taken power in Ciskei as chairman of a Military Council in March 1990—see p. 37305.
There had been suggestions in early 1991—see p. 37992—that Gqozo was moving towards relinquishing Ciskei's claim to sovereignty.
A state of emergency had been imposed in October-November of that year, however, amid ANC accusations of repression.)
Mass rally in Pretoria
The climax of the mass action campaign was a rally on Aug. 5 addressed by ANC President Nelson Mandela from the steps of Union Buildings, the seat of government in Pretoria.
Mandela told the 80,000-strong crowd that the general strike had been "unquestionably one of the greatest events in our history" .
He applauded the UN observer team for contributing to the peacefulness of the campaign and congratulated employers for their response to the action.
He declared that the ANC and its allies wanted "peace and democracy" and that "if the government…responds in the same spirit, our action will have been the best thing that could have happened to the negotiations process" .
UN involvement
On Aug. 7 UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali reported to the Security Council the findings of special UN envoy Cyrus Vance on his July visit to South Africa [see p. 38991].
His report, which received Security Council approval, included a number of proposals aimed at bringing a peaceful transition to multiracial democracy.
Key recommendations included (i) the establishment of an expanded National Peace Committee (NPC) with permanent local and regional offices which would replace dispute resolution committees;(ii) the stationing of 30 UN observers who would serve with the NPC and would draw on the experience of the UN team which monitored the mass action campaign;(iii) the provision of UN assistance to the Goldstone Commission for full-scale inquiries into the South African Defence Force (SADF), the South African Police (SAP) and the Kwazulu Police as well as the armed wing of the ANC, Umkhonto we Sizwe, and its Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) and Azanian People's Organization (AZAPO) equivalents; the Commission's findings, hitherto presented to the government, would be released to the multiparty NPC;(iv) UN reassessment of its role every three months;(v) the resumption of constitutional negotiations as soon as possible with the establishment of a "deadlock-breaking" mechanism;(v) the appointment of "an eminent and impartial person" to convene the talks;(vi) the urgent release of political prisoners; and (vii) an end to the bias of the state broadcasting services.
On Aug. 13 Foreign Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha said that the government accepted to plan "in broad outline" .
On Aug. 17 the UN Security Council unanimously passed Resolution 772 authorizing the urgent deployment of UN observers.
The move was welcomed by the ANC which said that it would co-operate fully with them.
Amnesty offer
On Aug. 13 the government announced that substantial agreement had been reached with the ANC on the details of an amnesty for political offenders which would "wipe the slate clean and bury the past" .
Under the government's proposal a blanket amnesty, not dependent on prior confession of wrongdoing, would cover members of the security forces and police officers as well as political prisoners.
The ANC, however, denied that any such agreement had been reached.
It reiterated its view that the 300-400 political prisoners who remained in prison could be released under existing measures, but that all security force members involved in violence should face prosecution.
The ANC said that discussions with the government, which had been resumed following the intervention of UN envoy Vance [see p. 38991], had proved "fruitless" because there had been "no visible movement" from the government in terms of meeting the ANC's core demands [see p. 38948].
The ANC said that substantial progress in fulfilling these demands would have to be made before negotiations could recommence.
Reorganization of SAP
Law and Order Minister Hernus Kriel announced on Aug. 27 that 13 police generals had been dismissed in a reorganization of the SAP.
The changes, apparently made in response to the damning report on the police by the British academic Peter Waddington [see p. 38991], included plans to retrain officers in community policing and the appointment of black officers to senior posts.
Kriel also announced that an independent body was to be established to investigate allegations of serious crimes committed by the SAP.
This new body, whose board would consist of a judge, three senior police officials and the Attorney General, would have 35 inspectors drawn from the police, the intelligence service, lawyers and possibly "foreign experts" , who would be answerable to the board.
The ANC described the moves as "window dressing" , noting that none of the generals named in allegations of police excesses and assassination squads were among those removed.
Boipatong inquiry
The Goldstone Commission investigating the killing of at least 45 people in Boipatong in June [see p. 38948]heard on Aug. 11 that vital taped evidence had been erased.
The Commission was told that all 13 hours of recordings of communications between the operations room of the SAP internal stability unit and police officers on the day of the massacre had been erased accidentally.
The recordings would have helped to establish the role played by the police.
On Aug. 11-12, however, the Commission heard from seven witnesses who testified that the police assisted in the massacre.
Ntietsa Xaba, a policeman living in the township, testified that he had been threatened by a fellow officer who wanted him to change his statement.
The Commission went into recess on Aug. 14 and was not expected to hear evidence on the events in Boipatong until November.
Conservative Party split
Internal strife within the Conservative Party (CP) surfaced when five members of parliament resigned from the party on Aug. 13.
The members of the rebel faction, led by Cehill Pienaar, hitherto CP leader in the Orange Free State, decided to leave after trying unsuccessfully to persuade the party hierarchy to accept their constitutional proposals.
These included a reduced Afrikaner homeland within a federation, and entering into the negotiations process, which would effectively mean negotiating with the ANC.
Both of these proposals conflicted with official CP policy.
On Aug. 29 the five established a new political party, the Afrikaner-Volksunie Party (Afrikaner United People's Party), with Andries Beyers as its parliamentary leader.
It was not known if Koos van der Merwe, an advocate of the negotiations process who was expelled from the CP in April [see p. 38850], had joined to the new party.
Release of Gerhardt
On Aug. 27 Dieter Gerhardt, a former commander of the Simonstown naval base, was released from prison where he had been serving a life sentence since 1983 after being convicted of acting as an agent for the Soviet Union [see p. 32659].
An indemnity committee considered that he had spied for political reasons and was thus eligible for release under the government's indemnity programme.
He was immediately deported to Switzerland.
Decision by Verwoerd's grandson to join ANC
The South African Sunday Times of Aug. 23 reported that Wilhelm Verwoerd, grandson of former Prime Minister Hendrik Verwoerd, the main architect of apartheid, had joined the ANC.
The paper quoted his wife as saying: "We hope our work within the ANC will…make up for the hurt caused to so many people by Dr Verwoerd." 
AFRICA
NAMIBIA
Walvis Bay agreement
Following months of negotiations [see p. 38517]it was announced on Aug. 21 that agreement had been reached with South Africa over the administration of the Walvis Bay enclave.
It was agreed that a Walvis Bay Joint Administration Body would be established with equal representation for both governments.
However, neither country was prepared to yield their respective claims over the territory.
The South African government argued that negotiations over the sovereign status of the Bay (with the only deep-water harbour on the Namibian coast) could not take place until a new political order had been established in South Africa.
Agreement was also reached on the demarcation of Namibia's southern border with South Africa, with the decision to shift the boundary from the northern bank of the Orange River to the middle.
Refusal of drought aid
Norway and Sweden announced on Aug. 6 that they would not contribute to an appeal for assistance to relieve the effects of the drought, in protest at the purchase a few days before the launch of the appeal of a US$29,000,000 presidential aircraft.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Constitutional reforms
The National People's Assembly (parliament) approved a number of constitutional changes on Aug. 27, one month ahead of the country's first multiparty elections scheduled to take place on Sept. 29-30.
Central to the amendments was the changing of the country's official name from the People's Republic of Angola to the Republic of Angola.
It was also agreed to delete the words "Popular" and "People's" from the (1975) Constitution and from the names of official institutions, including the parliament and the armed forces.
Other changes included the abolition of the death penalty.
Clashes in Malanje
Serious clashes in the city of Malanje, 350 km inland from Luanda, the capital, between government forces and members of the rebel National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) continued throughout the first half of August.
The fighting, which began in July, was reported to have been the most serious since the two sides signed a peace accord in May 1991 [see p. 38180], and was apparently triggered by the harassment of the local population by armed UNITA militants.
By Aug. 3, according to official sources, at least nine people had been killed and several dozen injured in Malanje, traditionally a stronghold of the ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola—Workers' Party (MPLA-PT).
Diplomatic sources said the death toll was probably several times higher.
On Aug. 19 Joint Political and Military Commission (CCPM) observers reported that the situation remained tense, and expressed dismay that recommendations to end the violence, which had been made some days earlier, had yet to be implemented.
These included the urgent setting of a date for the complete demobilization of troops of both sides.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
Dismissal of ministers
According to local press reports in early August, President Frederick Chiluba dismissed Ephraim Chibwe as Minister of Works and Supply following allegations of "anomalies" in buying South African furniture for official buildings.
He was replaced by Chuulu Kalima.
The President also reportedly removed Stan Kristafor as Minister of Information and Continuing Education after the Minister had made racist remarks.
His responsibilities were given to Dipak Patel.
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
Ministry budget revolt
On Aug. 26, members of the House of Assembly belonging to the ruling Zimbabwe African National Union—Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) refused to approve the budget for the newly created Ministry of National Affairs, Employment Creation and Co-operatives headed by Didymus Mutasa.
There had been considerable hostility to the new ministry since its establishment in July [see p. 38995].
In the debate on a proposed Z$40,000,000 (about US$8,500,000) allocation for the ministry, members of the House denounced it as a "completely useless" department and declared it to be the Ministry of Political Affairs (which had been headed by Mutasa until its closure in June—ibid.) under a different name.
Shooting of Zimbabwean student in Moscow
A Zimbabwean student at the Patrice Lumumba University in Moscow was shot dead by a Russian police officer on Aug. 11.
The killing led to rioting by African students who claimed that the officer wilfully shot at point-blank range.
The officer was subsequently charged with abuse of power.
On Aug. 23 it was announced the Zimbabwe had cancelled the purchase of MiG-29 aircraft from Russia.
According to official sources the decision was based on reduced tension in southern Africa and was unrelated to the incident in Moscow.
AFRICA
MALAWI
Arrest of clerics
With religious leaders continuing to lead anti-government protests [see p. 38804], a pro-democracy rally condemned as "subversive" by the government was banned on Aug. 29 because of "security regulations" .
The ban followed the detention of 11 of the organizers of the rally on the same day.
The rally, scheduled to take place on Aug. 30, had been organized by church leaders from several denominations to support their demands for greater political freedom and a national referendum on political reform.
Earlier in the month, 26 Protestant leaders published an open letter declaring the right of every generation to determine the form of government.
One of those detained, Fr Tom Leahy, a Roman Catholic priest from Ireland, was deported on Aug. 31.
On his departure, he accused the government of seeking to delay political reform and urged the church to maintain pressure on the regime of President Hastings Kamuzu Banda.
The other church leaders were released after several hours in custody, although three were re-arrested the following day.
Refusal of aid by Norway
Turning down a request to support a US$22,000,000 telecommunications project, the Norwegian government on Aug. 22 announced that it would refuse Malawian requests for economic development aid as a result of continuing allegations of human rights abuses [for Norwegian attitude towards Namibia see p. 39038].
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
Peace accord
On Aug. 7 President Joaquim Albert Chissano and Afonso Dhlakama, leader of the rebel Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo), signed a peace accord to end the civil war by Oct. 1.
Meeting for the first time, the two leaders declared themselves "determined to do all in our power to end the catastrophe resulting from the combined effects of the war and drought in our country" .
The agreement was signed in Rome where for two years representatives from both sides had worked with mediators from the Italian government and the Roman Catholic Church to end the 16-year war.
The fighting began in 1976, the year after independence.
Renamo, which had been set up with the support of the white minority government in Rhodesia and which after Zimbabwean independence received substantial South African assistance, was opposed to the Marxist regime imposed by the Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (Frelimo).
By mid-1992 more than 1,000,000 people had been killed in the fighting, while an estimated 2,000,000 people had been displaced.
From the beginning of 1992 the effects of the war were further compounded by a regional drought [see also pp. 38755; 38855].
The final round of the Rome talks was attended by President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, who played a crucial role in persuading the two leaders to meet, Gaositwe K. T. Chiepe, the Botswanan External Affairs Minister, Emilio Colombo, the Italian Foreign Minister, Mario Raffaelli, the co-ordinator of the mediators, and the other mediators—the Most Rev. Jaime Gonçalves, Archbishop of Beira, André Riccardi, and Don Matteo Zuppi of the Saint Egidio Order.
Also present was Roland "Tiny" Rowland, chief executive of the British-based multinational Lonhro with extensive interests in east Africa.
Rowland had assisted in peace negotiations from 1984.
He was involved in the mediatory efforts of President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya in 1987 and, in the latest round of peace talks, had worked with President Mugabe to bring Chissano and Dhlakama together.
Details of agreement
The main undertakings under the terms of the Rome agreement were as follows.
Chissano and Dhlakama pledged (i) to guarantee conditions that would allow complete political freedom "in accordance with internationally recognized principles of democracy" ;(ii) to guarantee the personal security of all Mozambican citizens and all members of political parties;(iii) to accept the role of the international community and particularly the UN in monitoring and guaranteeing the implementation of the general peace agreement, particularly the ceasefire agreement and electoral process;(iv) to respect the principles contained in Protocol No. 1 [see p. 38517]under the terms of which the government undertook not to adopt or apply laws which could conflict with agreements between the parties, while Renamo undertook to stop fighting and to behave as a political party;(v) to respect political rights, with the government specifically committing itself to incorporating the various agreements and protocols into law [see pp. 38517; 38565; 38804]; and (vi) to complete an agreed agenda and sign a general peace agreement incorporating a ceasefire by Oct. 1.
President Chissano had offered an immediate armistice, but this had been turned down by the rebel leader.
Defending the decision, Dhlakama said that it was"not enough to just call a ceasefire.
You must have the proper mechanisms set up to supervise it…
We don't want a simple truce…
We did not refuse peace…
What we want is peace with security."
In later press interviews both men promised to respect the results of future multiparty elections, which Chissano expected would be held within a year.
Immediately after the signing of the agreement, negotiators began discussions to resolve a number of outstanding issues.
These included the name and size of the future army.
Renamo was said to have proposed an army of 24,000 soldiers, with a further 1,000-strong air force and 800-strong navy, with each side contributing half the force.
The government proposed a force of 35,000-36,000 people.
Allegations of Renamo offensive
On Aug. 24, following reports of a number of "spectacular operations" , the Minister of Defence accused Renamo of preparing a military offensive in the Zambezi River valley, in central Mozambique.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Election of Tshisekedi as Prime Minister
In what was widely regarded as a defiant challenge to President Mobutu Sese Seko, on Aug. 15 delegates to the national conference elected as Prime Minister Etienne Tshisekedi, leader of the opposition Democratic Union for Social Progress (UDPS).
His election followed renewed conflict between the conference and Mobutu and was met by scenes of jubilation in Kinshasa.
On Aug. 5 Mobutu had threatened to suspended the conference following its decision the previous day to resume the use of the country's name before 1971, the Republic of Congo, and to adopt the country's former flag, anthem and motto.
After much discussion it was agreed that the changes would not be implemented immediately but would be included as proposals in a constitutional referendum.
Tshisekedi, who in 1991 had headed a "crisis government" for a three-week period beginning Sept. 29 [see pp. 38423; 38515-16], received nearly 70 per cent of the votes cast by the 2,651 national conference delegates.
He indicated that multiparty elections would be held in six months at the earliest, and appointed a commission of experts to draft a constitution, as well as an election law and an election timetable.
On Aug. 29 the new Prime Minister named a 21-member transitional government.
Among those appointed were Mathieu Bossunga as Minister of Interior and Territorial Security, Pierre Lumbi "of the Christian opposition" as Minister of External Relations and Roger Gisanga as Minister of Justice.
Nkanga Bongo, an adviser to President Mobutu, was named Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development.
Opposition to Tshisekedi
Tshisekedi's election was not met with universal approval.
Over the next few days at least five people were killed in clashes in Shaba province between his supporters and activists of the Union of Independent Federalists and Republicans (UFERI), the party of Nguza Karl-I-Bond, Tshisekedi's predecessor.
On Aug. 18 Nguza, who had refused to stand in the election, warned that Shaba, his home province, would not accept Tshisekedi's authority.
On Aug. 23 fears of a power struggle heightened when the Katanga Gendarmes, a secessionist movement based in Angola, declared their support for Nguza and said that they were awaiting his orders to begin military operations in the country.
However, there had been no reports of such activity by the end of the month.
AFRICA
RWANDA
Continuing peace negotiations
Progress was recorded at a second round of discussions between the transitional government and the rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front (FPR) on Aug. 10-18 in Arusha, Tanzania.
Members of the FPR were to be brought into a new transitional government (although no date was specified), and according to Le Monde of Aug. 12, a proposed accord also envisaged constitutional reforms and the creation of an independent body to ensure the respect of human rights.
Negotiations were expected to resume in Arusha on Sept. 7 and to focus on the formation of a new national army which would include FPR fighters and arrangements for the return of refugees.
Despite the August accord both sides complained of ceasefire violations throughout the month, and on several occasions the rebels expressed scepticism about the commitment of President Juvénal Habyarimana to the peace talks.
On Aug. 25 FPR radio claimed that Habyarimana's party, the National Republican Movement for Democracy and Development, was "indulging in the odious slaughter of peaceful, innocent and defenceless civilians" .
AFRICA
KENYA
Constitutional changes
On Aug. 5 the Constitution of Kenya Amendment Bill was approved by the National Assembly with the backing of 140 of the 141 members.
The legislation stipulated that a winning presidential candidate would have to receive not only a majority of votes nationwide, but also a minimum of 25 per cent of votes in at least five of the country's eight provinces.
It did not, however, specify what would happen if no candidate fulfilled this condition.
Nor did it stipulate how long the incumbent would hold office until fresh elections produced a successful candidate.
Under the terms of the Bill a successful candidate would be required to form a government from the political party which had nominated him, even if that party had failed to win a majority of seats in the legislature.
Presidential tenure was limited to two five-year terms.
Death of opposition leader
Masinde Muliro, vice-chairman of the Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD), collapsed and died at Jomo Kenyatta airport on Aug. 14 shortly after his arrival from London.
The circumstances of his death were surrounded by controversy and led to suspicions of foul play within opposition circles.
Particular concern was expressed that a post-mortem examination had not been carried out, apparently on the instructions of Muliro's physician.
Muliro had played an important role in trying to bring together two factions within FORD led respectively by Kenneth Matiba and Oginga Odinga.
Their differences centred on the method adopted by the party for the selection of its presidential candidate—both men having earlier declared their candidacy for the position [see p. 38902].
The Matiba faction demanded a direct secret ballot of all party members while Odinga insisted on an indirect method.
The crisis in the party increased on Aug. 11 when four of the six founding members of FORD attempted to suspend Odinga from the party.
Odinga ridiculed the attempt and maintained that he would continue as chairman.
In these circumstances Muliro put himself forward as a compromise presidential candidate, and had hoped to heal the rifts in the party at the party conference due in early September.
AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Grand National Debate
A "Grand National Debate" to discuss the political future of the country was held on Aug. 1-31.
The meeting, postponed since February [see p. 38707], was boycotted by the Consultative Group of Democratic Forces (CFD), an alliance of 14 opposition parties, which demanded that a national conference with sovereign powers be convened.
In the absence of any significant opposition, the national debate was thus dominated by members of the ruling Rassemblement démocratique centrafricain (RDC).
On Aug. 30 the National Assembly passed a series of measures which ratified decisions taken at the Grand National Debate.
These included regulations covering the registration of political parties and a number of amendments to the Constitution which were reported to include the implementation of a semi-presidential regime, with executive powers vested in a prime minister.
The National Assembly also voted to allow President André Kolingba to rule by decree until a new multiparty legislature was elected.
Although a date for the elections was not set, the government indicated that it was anxious for voting to take place before the end of the year.
The CFD, however, declared that early elections would inevitably be rigged, and pressed for them to be held in April 1993.
The Debate took place against a background of violence and strikes.
On Aug. 1 Jean Claude Conjugo, leader of the opposition Alliance pour la démocratie et le progrès (ADP), was killed during clashes between security forces and demonstrators.
His death prompted "ghost town" operations on Aug. 3 and Aug. 20 when Bangui, the capital, was brought to a halt by striking workers who denounced the regime's "crimes" and demanded a sovereign national conference.
AFRICA
CONGO
Congo election results
Election victories for UPADS
Pascal Lissouba, leader of the Pan-African Union for Social Democracy (UPADS), was victorious in presidential elections held in August, UPADS having emerged as the largest party, but without a clear majority in either chamber, in the legislative elections in June and July.
The elections to the National Assembly, which began amid controversy in June [see p. 38950], were concluded on July 24, with UPADS winning 39 of the 125 seats.
In the senatorial elections on July 26, UPADS won 23 of the 60 seats.
The former single ruling party, the Congolese Labour Party (PCT), came third in the National Assembly elections with just 19 seats and fifth in the elections to the Senate with three seats.
The first round of voting in the presidential elections took place on Aug. 2.
Lissouba headed the poll and went through to a second round run-off on Aug. 16 against the second-placed Bernard Kolelas of the Congolese Movement for Democracy and Integral Development (MCDDI).
Candidates eliminated in the first round included the current President, Denis Sassou-Nguesso of the PCT, and interim Prime Minister André Milongo.
Milongo, who received only 10.18 per cent of the vote, was reported to have petitioned the Supreme Court on Aug. 11 to have the result of the first round annulled because of irregularities.
However, on Aug. 12 Milongo asserted that he was satisfied with the progress of the democratic process.
Sassou-Nguesso, also forced to concede defeat, declared that he had "bow[ed] out to the choice of the Congolese people" with "serenity" .
He later urged voters to support Lissouba in the second round and, according to sources close to the two parties, on Aug. 11 UPADS entered into a formal electoral alliance with the PCT.
Lissouba was sworn in as President on Aug. 31.
In his inaugural speech he indicated that opposition parties would not be excluded from "participation in possible structures" in the government.
He also announced that parliament would be asked to grant Sassou-Nguesso immunity from prosecution for his actions during his term of office.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Cancellation of party primaries
On Aug. 7 the National Electoral Commission (NEC) cancelled the results of the first round of presidential primary elections and suspended all further rounds.
The decision, made in consultation with both the National Republican Convention (NRC) and the Social Democratic Party (SDP), followed allegations of widespread irregularities.
Based on the US presidential election system, voting in the first round of primary elections took place in five states on Aug. 1, when party members were asked to select the party candidate from 20 aspirants.
In all five states it was found that there had been "massive rigging, tampering with figures [and]double voting" with the result that the number of votes cast exceeded the number of people registered as party members for the two parties.
There was also evidence of vote-buying on a massive scale.
Voting in Borno State was disrupted by violence when agents for one of the candidates openly distributed cash.
Foreign media sources reported that at campaign rallies candidates were expected to pay people who attended, as well as local government officials, entertainers and often local journalists.
There were also complaints about the levies of the equivalent of between US$19,000 and $25,000 imposed on candidates by the parties, ostensibly to reduce the number of contestants.
Segun Ogundimu, who had earlier withdrawn from the race, voiced the widely held belief that"the moneybags have hijacked the parties…
It was as if the presidency is for sale".
On Aug. 24 the NEC announced that fresh elections would take place in three rounds between Sept. 12 and Sept. 26, when voting would only be permitted on production of membership cards which would be issued to party members in the interim.
AFRICA
BENIN
Trial of Cissé — Army mutiny
The trial of Mohammed Amadou Cissé, who was for many years the Minister of State in charge of Security and personal adviser to former President Mathieu Kérékou, began on July 31.
Cissé, who was also Kérékou's soothsayer, and nine other defendants were the first members of the former regime to face criminal charges.
The most serious charges against them related to the fraudulent transfer of public funds estimated at more than 2,300 million francs CFA.
Other charges included abetting various other financial offences and abusing state authority.
The trial was expected to continue for some time and it was widely believed that evidence would be given which would incriminate politicians still active.
On Aug. 3 a group of soldiers took control of the Kaba military camp in Natitingou, in the north-east.
They were led by Capt. Pascal Tawes, former deputy commander of the Presidential Guard, who had been arrested following the firing of gunshots around the presidential palace on May 27.
Having escaped from detention with several of his supporters, he proclaimed himself commander-in-chief of the Kaba camp and demanded the release of other officers arrested after the May 27 incident.
The mutiny ended the following day when government forces regained control of the camp and arrested 45 of the rebel soldiers.
Tawes was not apprehended.
AFRICA
TOGO
Extension of transition period
On Aug. 27 the High Council of the Republic (HCR—the transitional legislature) adopted a series of measures which extended to Dec. 31 the period of transition to democracy, due to end on Aug. 28, ostensibly to allow further preparation for the constitutional referendum as well as for municipal, legislative and presidential elections.
However, the move was widely seen as a concession to the President, Gen. Gnassingbe Eyadema.
The HCR was responding to a proposals made on Aug. 26 by a Joint Consultative Commission which comprised members of the former ruling party, the Rassemblement du peuple togolais (RPT), and eight opposition parties.
Their recommendations were made against a background of an increasing number of attacks on opponents of Eyadema [see p. 38994]as well as on members of the interim government—on Aug. 18 there was an assassination attempt on Minister of Equipment and Mines Joseph Yao Amefia.
Moreover, on Aug. 19 the government had been forced to postponed indefinitely the constitutional referendum scheduled to take place on Aug. 23, following armed attacks on election offices.
Among the measures approved by the HCR was the restoration to Eyadema of most of the powers stripped from him in August 1991 [see p. 38379].
Apparently prompted by the desire to avoid the creation of a political vacuum, the HCR decided that Eyadema could chair Cabinet meetings and represent the state abroad.
It was also agreed to drop the clause in the draft constitution prohibiting serving members of the armed forces from standing in the presidential elections, and thus allowing Eyadema to run.
In another concession to the President, the RPT, in theory defunct since August 1991 [see p. 38379], was allowed to contest the forthcoming elections.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Continuing fighting
Heavy fighting began on Aug. 17 between Charles Taylor's National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) and the United Democratic Movement for Democracy (Ulimo), a coalition of supporters of former President Samuel Doe, allegedly based in Sierra Leone.
This activity continued despite the threat made at the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) summit in July to blockade NPFL territory if Taylor did not implement the terms of the Yamoussoukro IV peace agreement by the end of August [see p. 38993].
By the end of the month fighting between the two factions to the north and west of Monrovia resulted in more than 1,500 deaths, including that of an International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) worker and an ECOMOG (ECOWAS Monitoring Group) soldier.
A further 30,000 people had been forced to flee to the relative safety of the capital.
According to reports from ECOMOG, Ulimo forces had captured the Bomi Hills and the Grand Cape Mount County from the NPFL.
Other reports indicated that Ulimo had besieged Tubmanburg, an NPFL stronghold, and were pushing towards Taylor's headquarters in Gbarnga, some 170 km north-east of Monrovia.
Ulimo officials on Aug. 25 professed to be committed to the ECOWAS peace initiative and claimed that their forces were only fighting to ensure that the NPFL abided by the Yamoussoukro agreement.
They also indicated that they would surrender their arms to ECOMOG as soon as the NPFL had done so.
NPFL radio reported on Aug. 26 that Taylor had asked UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to send UN military observers to replace ECOMOG which, he said, had "failed the Liberian people" .
ECOMOG officials, however, categorically denied Taylor's claim that Ulimo had been able to advance so rapidly because it had received aid from countries contributing to the ECOMOG force.
Maj.-Gen.
Ishaya Bakut, the ECOMOG commanding officer, stressed that his was a neutral force.
On Aug. 27 ECOWAS officials met with Ulimo chairman Raleigh Seekie in Freetown, Sierra Leone, to persuade him to commit Ulimo, which had not been represented at earlier talks, to applying the peace accord and surrendering its weapons.
Seekie refused and, despite earlier declarations to the contrary, asserted that the conflict "must be resolved by Liberians themselves without any interventions from outside" .
Maj.-Gen.
Bakut reported on Aug. 30 that NPFL forces had been observed around Monrovia and appeared to be preparing for "hostilities" .
AFRICA
CHAD
Cabinet reshuffle — Alleged massacre
The Cabinet was reshuffled on Aug. 13, following the resignation by Aug. 8 of three civilian Cabinet members.
The most significant appointment was that of Loum Hinassou Laina as Defence Minister.
On Aug. 24 the 13 parties of the Co-ordinating Committee of the Democratic Opposition condemned what it alleged was a recent army massacre of civilians, including some 12 schoolchildren, in Doba, in the south.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Malnutrition and deaths from starvation in south-east
Relief workers reported in early August that since the beginning of the year thousands of Ethiopians had died in the Ogaden region and in the refugee camps of Gode, Kelafo and Dolo in the south-east.
The French Médecins sans Frontières organization reported malnutrition rates of 43-50 per cent among children of newly arriving families in the Gode camp.
Many families were Ethiopians who had gone as refugees to Somalia to escape the Ogaden war in 1977 and who were now returning.
Cabinet changes — Hijacking — Allegations of executions by EPRDF
In a new Cabinet list published on Aug. 29, appointments were made to six vacant ministries, four ministers were re-shuffled and a Ministry of Natural Resources, Development and Environmental Protection was established under Mesfin Abebe.
The new Minister of Justice was Mehitema Solomon and Yosef Kumalo became Minister of Commerce.
Five Ethiopians hijacked an Ethiopian Airlines plane soon after it left Addis Ababa airport on Aug. 28.
They surrendered at Rome airport on Aug. 30 after receiving assurances they would not be deported to Ethiopia, where they claimed that they had suffered political persecution.
As tensions and clashes continued in eastern Ethiopia between government forces and forces of the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF), an organization known as the Ethiopian Human Rights Council on July 16 published in Addis Ababa a report claiming that 13 people had been summarily executed by the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) in the period March to June 1992.
It also said that 1,751 people had been detained without trial due to their political affiliation.
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
Labour Minister's resignation
Helaf Orbis Ali resigned as Minister of Labour on Aug. 26 and announced that he was leaving the ruling Popular Rally for Progress (RPP) to join the United Opposition Front (UOF) —an umbrella group including members of the parliamentary opposition and the opposition guerrilla Front for the Restoration of Unity and Democracy (FRUD).
Two other ministers had already resigned since January, apparently also to go into opposition: Mohammed Djama Elabe, Minister of Health and Souleiman Farah Lodon, Minister of Public Adminstration.
Orbis Ali, an Afar, announced that his resignation was in protest against the civil war, which had now continued for one year, and against the deteriorating economic situation.
President Hassan Gouled Aptidon had announced on June 27 that a constitutional referendum would be held on Sept. 4, to be followed by the legalization of political parties.
The UOF rejected the timing of the referendum.
On Aug. 17, in a letter addressed to President Gouled Aptidon and the President of the Consitutional Court, 20 parliamentary deputies expressed their opposition to the referendum.
Clashes with FRUD guerrillas
Intermittent clashes continued from mid-June between government forces and FRUD guerrillas near the coastal town of Obock and (on Aug. 6-9) in the region of Garabaousse, in the south-west.
On Aug. 2 the UOF published in Paris an appeal to non-governmental organizations to send aid to some 200,000 civilians in the north and south-west of Djibouti, who it claimed were dying at the rate of 100 a day due to the effects of drought and a government blockade of areas of rebel activity.
It was alleged that the Ethiopian authorities were also blocking access to the region.
AFRICA
MADAGASCAR
Constitutional referendum
In a referendum on Aug. 19 popular approval was given to a new constitution drafted by the National Forum, a multiparty conference dominated by the opposition Comité des forces vives formed in mid-1991.
An estimated 70 per cent of those who voted were in favour of the new constitution which enshrined a unitary state and reduced the powers of the president.
However, voting was marred by violence and almost one-quarter of the population was prevented from voting by protesters demanding a federal state.
Opposition to the new constitution came primarily from the Front for the Defence of Malagasy Socialism (MMSM), a coalition of parties supporting President Didier Ratsiraka.
Ratsiraka had attempted to declare the country a federation of six states in August 1991 [see p. 38378], but this declaration had been disregarded by subsequent governments.
On polling day federalist supporters burned polling booths and ballot boxes in Maroantsetra, in the north-east, and prevented people casting their votes in Toliara (formerly Tuléar) in the south-west of the country.
No voting took place in the northern town of Antseranana (formerly Diego Suarez) where pro-Ratsiraka demonstrators seized control of the local airport and media facilities and declared the creation of a "federal directorate" .
Similar -incidents took place in Toamasina, a stronghold of the President on the east coast.
By Aug. 23 the army had regained control of both towns, but at least five people were killed in clashes in Toamasina between rival supporters of the Comité des forces vives and the MMSM.
With the Constitution approved, presidential elections were expected to take place by the end of October and legislative elections were scheduled for the end of December.
AFRICA
SADCC
Summit — Transformation into SADC
At the 12th annual summit meeting of the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC) in Windhoek, Namibia, on Aug. 17, leaders of the 10 member states agreed to transform the organization into the Southern African Development Community (SADC).
The Treaty of Windhoek establishing the SADC was signed by leaders from Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
Sir Ketumile Masire, President of Botswana, was named as the chairman of the new organization.
Set up in 1979 [see p. 29817], the primary aim of the SADCC had been to counter economic destabilization by, and regional dependence on, apartheid South Africa.
This purpose had been called into question when constitutional reform began to get under way, albeit falteringly, in South Africa.
Responding to the changed situation, SADC leaders indicated that South Africa would itself be invited to join once a democratically elected government was in place.
They also expressed a desire to institute mechanisms for co-operation and integration before then, although the need to safeguard against South African economic domination in the region was stressed.
Cyril Ramaphosa, secretary-general of the African National Congress (ANC), who attended the summit as an observer, was cautious about the role of a post-apartheid South Africa.
He warned that the "appalling legacy of apartheid" would limit its initial contribution.
The newly designated community had a population of 80,000,000.
Its aims included the establishment of a common market with the harmonization of economic policy and regional trade liberalization.
Officials also foresaw the creation of a regional parliament and a peacekeeping force, and hoped that member states would eventually adopt unified foreign and defence policies.
It was expected that the SADC would form the southern part of the African Economic Community agreed at the Organization of African Unity (OAU) summit in June 1991 [see p. 38279].
AFRICA
CAMEROON
Garga Hamam Adji resigned as Minister of Public Service on Aug. 27, alleging that investigations into the financial dealings of certain ministers had been suppressed; Adjoudji Hamadjoda, Minister of Livestock, was assigned temporary responsibility for the ministry.
AFRICA
CEPGL
The 14th summit meeting of the heads of state of the Economic Community of the Countries of the Great Lakes was held in Gisenyi, Rwanda, on Aug. 1; discussions concentrated on regional security which was declared to be the "first objective" of the community.
AFRICA
THE GAMBIA
On Aug. 5, at the end of a three-day visit to Iran, President Dawda Kairaba Jawara signed an economic agreement of understanding with the Iranian government which included a commitment to purchase 100,000 barrels per day of Iranian crude oil.
AFRICA
MALI
On Aug. 5 Gen. Amadou Toumani Touré, head of state during the period of transition to democracy from March 1991 to June 1992, was granted personal immunity from prosecution in recognition of "his role in the restoration of the Third Republic" .
AFRICA
OMVS
President Abdou Diouf of Senegal was elected chairman of the Organization for the Development of the River Senegal (OMVS) at the 10th summit of the heads of state or government of member countries, held in Nouakchott, Mauritania, on Aug. 24-25.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Presidential election campaign
Prior to the opening of the Republican Party convention, the party's leadership attempted to curb the huge lead enjoyed by the Democrats by launching a series of attacks on the character of Democratic presidential nominee Bill Clinton.
In several instances, however, this tactic apparently caused greater discomfort to President George Bush than to Clinton, and strengthened the view that the Bush campaign was suffering from inept management.
On Aug. 3 the White House was forced to repudiate a newsletter written by Mary Matalin, political director of the Bush campaign, which had accused Clinton of character failings ranging from the avoidance of military service and marital infidelity to overeating.
Having attempted to define the campaign's agenda on the basis of "family values" , Bush was also severely embarrassed by a front page story carried in the New York Post on Aug. 11 which alleged that he had had an extra-marital affair with Jennifer Fitzgerald, a former personal assistant and a current protocol officer in the State Department.
The newspaper story marked the first occasion on which the media had given coverage to the longstanding allegation of Bush's infidelity.
When confronted on the issue by reporters Bush angrily refused "to take any sleazy questions like that" and stated that he would not respond to it "other than to say it is a lie" .
Another important development prior to the opening of the Republican convention was the finalization of party policy by the Republican platform committee.
The committee overwhelmingly voted that the platform should once again contain, as it had since 1980, the demand for a constitutional amendment to prohibit abortion.
Opinion surveys had consistently found that this position was opposed not merely by a majority of voters, but also by many Republicans, including a sizable portion of those chosen as delegates to the convention.
The deep divisions within the party over the abortion issue were illustrated by Bush in an interview on Aug. 12 in which he appeared to have softened his own stance of opposition to abortion under almost all circumstances, by recognising the importance of a woman's personal choice in the matter.
Prior to 1980 Bush had supported the right of women to choose to have an abortion.
Appointment of James Baker as Chief of Staff
In an attempt to revitalize his campaign Bush announced on Aug. 13 that Secretary of State James Baker was to become White House Chief of Staff, effective from Aug. 23.
He replaced Sam Skinner who was given the largely ceremonial post of chairman of the Republican National Committee.
Baker, whose key tasks in the State Department had included supervising the Middle East peace process, was succeeded in an acting capacity by his deputy, Lawrence Eagleburger.
Although Robert Teeter remained as the nominal head of the Bush campaign, it was generally acknowledged that Baker would use his new post to exercise overall and ultimate responsibility for the campaign and attempt to provide it with a greater degree of coherence.
The transfer of Baker, who in 1988 had resigned as Treasury Secretary in order to take over Bush's election campaign when it was trailing badly in the polls, had been widely anticipated in the month prior to the announcement.
Republican national convention
The Republican national convention opened in the Houston Astrodome, Texas, on Aug. 17, with the emphasis very much on creating an impression of party unity.
An attempt by opponents of the party's anti-abortion platform to have the issue openly debated was defeated, and the candidacy of Bush was endorsed by his main challenger in the primaries, the right-wing journalist Pat Buchanan.
There was also an emotional speech in support of Bush from former President Ronald Reagan.
Proceedings over the next two days involved vitriolic attacks on Clinton together with attempts to reassert the Republican party as the traditional repository of "family values" .
Speeches from Barbara Bush and Marilyn Quayle, the wife of Vice-President Dan Quayle, both emphasized (the former somewhat more indirectly than the latter) the value of motherhood, and sought to build on Buchanan's earlier criticism of Hillary Clinton, Clinton's wife, as a symbol of liberal feminism.
On Aug. 19 Bush was formally nominated as presidential candidate by the 2,210 delegates.
His acceptance speech, made on the following evening, was well delivered but generally perceived as lacking in detail.
Although the President promised to use his second term for a new "crusade" to secure peace and prosperity within the USA, he offered few new prescriptions for the ailing economy, preferring instead to concentrate on a broad agenda which included less government and lower taxes.
Repudiating as "bad judgment" his 1990 decision to raise taxes—a move which had contravened his 1988 election pledge—Bush promised across-the-board tax cuts of an indeterminate size, unspecified spending reductions, and a plan to reduce the size of the country's debt during his second term.
By the end of August the opinion polls suggested that Bush had reduced, but not eliminated, Clinton's lead.
Iran-contra investigation
Trial of Clair George
A mistrial was declared on Aug. 26 in the trial of a former CIA deputy director of covert operations, Clair George.
The jury, which had begun deliberating on Aug. 20, had been unable to reach a decision on any of the nine criminal charges against him.
Appeals by defence lawyers for the charges to be dropped were rejected by the prosecution, and federal judge Royce Lamberth, who had presided over the initial trial, set Oct. 19 as the date for George's re-trial.
George had pleaded not guilty to charges of perjury and obstructing congressional inquiries into the Iran-contra scandal.
While admitting that his testimony to Congress in 1986 had contained inaccuracies, he denied that it had been his intention to mislead the investigation.
A key prosecution witness in the case was Alan Fiers, a former CIA operations chief who had reached a plea bargain with prosecutors in 1991 [see p. 38327].
George was the most senior CIA official to have been indicted in connection with the Iran-contra affair and, during the course of his four-week trial, there were numerous embarrassing revelations concerning the practices and policies of the agency.
Clearing of Reagan — Delay of Weinberger trial
It was revealed on Aug. 5 that the special prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair, Lawrence E. Walsh, had informed Ronald Reagan that his office considered the former President "simply as a witness" in the investigation and not a candidate for indictment.
Walsh did not rule out the possibility of criminal charges against former members of Reagan's Cabinet, however, and there were strong suggestions that former Attorney General Edwin Meese had become a key target of the investigation.
A federal judge on Aug. 7 postponed the start of the trial of former Defence Secretary Caspar Weinberger from Nov. 2 to Jan. 5, 1993.
Weinberger was the highest-ranking former official yet to have been indicted in connection with the Iran-contra affair.
Developments in "Iraqgate" affair
Attorney General William P. Barr on Aug. 10 denied a congressional request for an independent investigation of the so-called "Iraqgate" affair—the allegation that the Bush administration had sought to conceal its policies towards Iraq by undertaking an illegal cover-up.
The conditions in which an independent counsel (special prosecutor) would be appointed were laid down in legislation passed after the Watergate scandal.
Barr stated, however, that the July 9 request by the judiciary committee of the House of Representatives for an independent prosecutor to examine the Iraqgate affair [see p. 38998]contained "vague and general allegations" which did not meet these conditions.
This was the 10th occasion on which Congress had requested the appointment of a special prosecutor, and only the first on which it had been denied by an Attorney General.
Among the allegations related to the Iraqgate affair was the claim that the US administration had fraudulently channelled loans to Iraq through the Atlanta branch of Italy's Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL).
Prior to Barr's decision the House banking committee had voted on Aug. 6 to subpoena secret Iraq-related documents from the CIA and other government agencies.
Following Barr's ruling, Judge Marvin H. Shoob, who had presided over a criminal case arising from the BNL affair, criticized the Attorney General on the grounds that plea bargaining within the case had denied any opportunity to probe the affair fully and had left unanswered numerous crucial questions concerning the government's role.
Democrats in both houses of Congress responded to Barr's decision by increasing their criticism of the Bush administration's alleged obstruction of all efforts to investigate the Iraqgate allegations, and members of the House banking committee did not rule out the possibility that they would make a more specific request to Barr for the appointment of a special prosecutor.
Indictment of police officers in King case
All four of the white Los Angeles police officers, whose acquittal in the Rodney King beating case sparked several days of rioting in the city in late April and early May [see p. 38894], were indicted by a grand jury on Aug. 4 on federal charges of violating King's civil rights.
The indictments charged that Sgt. Stacey Koon and officers Laurence Powell, Timothy Wind and Theodore Briseno had "wilfully and intentionally used unreasonable force" during King's arrest for speeding in March 1991, and that Koon had failed to prevent the "unlawful assault" of King by officers under his supervision.
Despite the fact that the savage beating of King, who was black, had been filmed by an onlooker, the four officers had been acquitted on almost all state charges by a predominantly white jury [see p. 38856].
Only on one count, against Powell, was the jury unable to reach a decision and a mistrial declared; Powell's retrial on that specific charge was due to start on Oct. 19.
Following the grand jury's indictment, however, the retrial was set aside pending the outcome of the federal case.
Whereas the state case against the officers had been heard in Ventura County, an almost exclusively white suburb of Los Angeles, the federal case was due to be decided by a jury selected from a pool of seven southern California counties (with a total population of 16,000,000 people) which was likely to be less predominantly white in composition.
If convicted on the new charges, each defendant faced a maximum sentence of 10 years in prison and a $250,000 fine.
Hurricane Andrew
Considerable damage and dislocation was caused by Hurricane Andrew in late August.
Having swept across the Bahamas on Aug. 23, the hurricane ravaged southern Florida in the early hours of Aug. 24 before proceeding westwards across the Gulf of Mexico.
The storm, involving winds of up to 140 miles per hour, during the night of Aug. 25-26 hit the coast of Louisiana, some 60 miles south-west of the city of New Orleans, causing extensive damage.
As it moved inland its force was reduced and, on the afternoon of Aug. 26, it was officially downgraded to the status of a tropical storm.
At least 33 people were killed in the Bahamas, Florida (where the death toll was greatest) and Louisiana, although the final figure was expected to be higher.
Up to 200,000 people were also left homeless, and damage to property in Florida alone was estimated at $20,000 million, making Andrew the costliest natural disaster in US history.
An estimated 2,000,000 people either fled or were evacuated from the coastal regions in advance of the hurricane.
This factor, together with the severe damage caused to the roads and power supplies, greatly hampered relief efforts.
Some 7,000 federal troops together with National Guard units were deployed to assist with the distribution of emergency food and medical care, and to prevent looting and civil disturbances.
Nevertheless, there was widespread criticism that the relief operation was slow and badly organized.
In brief Reduction in Milken's sentence
The prison sentence imposed on "junk bond" financier Michael Milken was reduced on Aug. 5 from 10 years to 33 months and 26 days.
Federal judge Kimba Wood explained the reduction—which made Milken eligible for release in March 1993—on the grounds of his full co-operation with the authorities, his good behaviour in prison and the illness of one of his children.
Ethics committee rebuke for senator
The Senate ethics committee rebuked Senator Mark Hatfield (Rep., Oregon) on Aug. 12 for "improper conduct" in accepting and failing to disclose gifts and travel expenses from a former university president who had sought Hatfield's assistance support in gaining a government grant.
Ruling against Michigan abortion law
It was reported on Aug. 6 that County Circuit court judge Philip Schaefer had ruled as unconstitutional the state of Michigan's 18-month-old abortion law requiring girls under 18 years of age to receive permission from a parent or probate court before obtaining an abortion.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Agreement on new constitutional reform package
A constitutional conference, chaired by Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, opened on Aug. 18 in order to consider the draft agreement—popularly dubbed the Pearson accord—which had been negotiated by the nine English-speaking provinces in July [see pp. 38999-39000].
The conference, which included all 10 of the country's provincial premiers, representatives of the federal government and territorial and native leaders, was the first occasion on which the predominantly French-speaking province of Quebec had participated in direct constitutional negotiations since the collapse of the Meech Lake accord in 1990 [see pp. 37519-20].
Following the rejection of the Meech Lake package by English-speaking provinces opposed to the concessions which it had offered to Quebec, there had been a surge in separatist sentiment in the French-speaking province.
This had been evident not merely among adherents of the separatist Parti Québecois, but also within the governing Liberal Party, headed by provincial Premier Robert Bourassa.
Although over the preceding 12 months a combination of a deep economic recession, conciliatory gestures from many of the English-speaking provinces, and the skilful diplomacy of Bourassa, had served to cool some of the enthusiasm for independence, the province was due to hold a referendum on the sovereignty issue on Oct. 26, and Mulroney had made it clear that he was keen to have reached some form of inter-provincial agreement prior to the vote.
On Aug. 23 it was announced that the constitutional conference had reached a broad agreement on all outstanding issues.
This included an increased degree of autonomy for Quebec (and any of the other provinces which sought it) through the proposed transfer of numerous powers and areas of responsibility from the federal to the provincial sphere of government.
Responsibilities to be transferred exclusively to the provinces included mining, forestry, tourism, urban affairs, housing and recreation, although the agreement also committed the government to make concessions in the areas of culture, immigration, telecommunications, labour training and regional development.
While not meeting the demands made by all of Quebec's separatists, the deal represented a substantial increase in provincial autonomy.
Quebec also received recognition of its status as a "distinct society" , together with a guarantee that its share of seats in the federal House of Commons would not fall below 25 per cent.
A further concession to Quebec was the provision that any single province could veto future changes to federal institutions.
The conference also reached an agreement on the question of how to reform the federal Senate.
This issue had proved a major stumbling block in recent talks, as equal representation in the upper chamber for every province—the implacable demand of several of the less populous provinces—would mean a reduction in the share of the seats currently held by the country's heavily populated provinces, particularly Ontario and Quebec.
The compromise agreed by the conference involved the creation of an elected 62-member Senate (compared with the current 104-member appointed chamber), with limited powers, which would comprise six representatives from each province and one from each of the country's two territories.
This deal was made acceptable to those provinces which would lose seats in the new Senate by increasing their representation in a House of Commons expanded from 295 to 337 members.
Quebec and Ontario would each gain 18 new seats in the lower chamber, while British Columbia and Alberta would receive an additional four and two seats respectively.
The agreement also granted unprecedented powers of self-government to the country's 750,000 native Indian and Inuit inhabitants, including the right to raise taxes and to exercise direct regulation of their internal affairs.
Ron George, leader of the Native Council of Canada, expressed his support for the package which, he said, would allow Canada's native inhabitants for the first time to become "contributing members instead of poor statistics" .
Mulroney described the new constitutional agreement as "a fair and honourable compromise that will strengthen Canada" , but acknowledged that Quebec had made "unprecedented gains" .
These sentiments were echoed by Bourassa, who described himself as "very pleased with the results" of the new accord and suggested that Canada was now "on the way to stability after two years of uncertainty" .
Bourassa's view of the package was overwhelmingly endorsed by a special 4,000-member Liberal Party convention in Quebec on Aug. 29-30, at which the provincial Premier gave a powerful performance and promised to win over the population of Quebec at the October referendum.
The agreement (in a final version whose legal drafting had yet to be completed) would become operational only after ratification by the federal parliament and all of the provincial legislatures.
In several provinces referendums were due to be held, the results of which would be binding on their legislatures.
It was also possible that a national referendum would be held on the package, an option which the leader of the opposition Liberal Party at federal level, Jean Chretien, strongly supported, but on which the Mulroney government remained uncommitted.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
State elections
Voting took place on Aug. 2 to elect governors, state legislators and mayors in the states of Durango, Veracruz, Oaxaca, Aguascalientes, Zacatecas and Baja California.
The abstention rate in some states was as high as 70 per cent, and the polls were marked by mutual accusations of fraud by the participating parties.
Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas Solózarno, leader of the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD) and the government's most public critic, accused the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) of corruption and consolidating its power through electoral fraud.
The PRI claimed victory in all six states, despite allegations by the PRD and the National Action Party (PAN) of illegal campaigning, PRI intimidation, theft of ballot boxes and the manipulation of the results.
The opposition especially disputed the results for the governorships of Durango and Veracruz, where the PRD and PAN ran joint slates.
[For July defeat of PRI in state of Chihuahua see p. 39000.]
Over 40,000 demonstrators led by Cárdenas gathered in the central square of the capital, Mexico City, on Aug. 29 to demand changes in the political system following the controversial state elections.
Analysts were agreed that the demonstration was part of Cárdenas's plan to build a popular anti-government campaign to boost his campaign for the presidency in 1994.
AMERICAS
NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
Draft agreement
The terms of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the first trade pact of its type linking two industrialized powers with a developing state, were agreed on Aug. 12.
Under it, the capital, expertise and technology of the USA and Canada would be combined with the cheap labour and resources of Mexico to establish the world's most populous free-trade market with 360,000,000 consumers and a combined gross domestic product (GDP) of US$6,450,000 million.
The treaty was subject to ratification in the legislatures of all three countries before it could be formally signed.
The agreement came after 14 months of negotiations [see pp. 37849; 38140; 38671; 38761]and 10 days of intensive bilateral and trilateral talks in Washington between Trade Ministers from the three countries.
The urgency to complete it was put down to US pressure to achieve a result in time for the opening of the Republican Party convention on Aug. 17, apparently in an attempt to boost the troubled election campaign of President George Bush by convincing the US electorate that his skills in the foreign policy field had domestic benefits.
Bush described the treaty as part of his "long-term economic growth plan" and his administration predicted that the current total of 600,000 US jobs dependent on US exports to Mexico would swell to 1,000,000 by 1995.
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico said that NAFTA would generate more jobs and better wages for Mexican workers, but warned that it was not a "magical formula" and that the benefits would not come immediately.
The Canadian government, faced with widespread public opposition to the 1988 Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the USA [see p. 35959]and with only modest trade with Mexico, faced the stiffest test in gaining public acceptance of NAFTA.
Canada was judged to have participated in the talks primarily to safeguard concessions gained under the FTA.
NAFTA provisions
The key NAFTA provisions were as follows.
Tariffs.
Starting from Jan. 1, 1994, an estimated 20,000 separate tariffs, duties and other barriers would be lifted in five to 10 years; however, tariffs on most sensitive goods, especially agricultural products, would remain for up to 15 years.
To limit the operations of non-NAFTA car companies in the North American market, tariffs would be eliminated on intra-regional trade in cars only if each NAFTA country guaranteed, over a phase-in period of eight years, 62.5 per cent local manufactured content and 60 per cent on components.
Taxes on vans imported from Mexico to the USA were to be reduced and eliminated after five years.
After three years, Mexico would be considered North American under the Corporate Average Fuel Economy Act (Cafe), which currently discouraged US manufacturers from importing small cars from Mexico.
Barriers on textiles would be eliminated in 10 years but, to be eligible for preferential trade, most garments, under a "country of origin" clause, had to be produced from yarn made inside NAFTA.
Oil and Gas.
Mexico would not privatize PEMEX, the state oil company, while US and Canadian oil companies would not be allowed to explore for oil in Mexico, nor operate refineries or open petrol stations there.
There would be no guaranteed supplies of Mexican oil to the USA.
Mexico agreed, however, to allow US and Canadian companies access to 50 per cent of PEMEX and Federal Electricity Commission procurement in the first year, rising to 70 per cent over eight years and with no reservation after 10 years.
The Mexican petrochemical area would largely be opened to foreign investment and foreign gas companies would be allowed to sell gas, under PEMEX supervision, to Mexican industry.
Finance.
US and Canadian investors would be allowed to increase their market share in the Mexican banking sector from 8 to 15 per cent and from 10 to 20 per cent in securities over seven years.
By the year 2000, both countries would be placed on an equal footing with Mexican banks.
Environment.
Health and safety standards would be maintained and the environmental impact of new investments assessed within the context of "sustainable development" .
Special settlement panels could call on scientific experts for advice in the case of disputes.
Disputes.
A NAFTA Trade Commission, taking precedence over the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) dispute settlement mechanism, would be established to handle disputes in the first instance.
Failing a settlement, a dispute would be passed on to a binational panel, on which non-NAFTA members could serve to enhance their impartiality.
Retaliation would be allowed against a country which refused to implement a panel's final report or failed to reach some other approved agreement within 30 days.
An arbitration commission could also be set up to deal with disputes between private investors and individual countries.
Immediate reaction
Labour leaders in the USA claimed that NAFTA would destroy jobs and that it offered little concrete provision for retraining.
Major US criticisms also centred on the much vaunted environmental safeguards in the treaty which environmentalists said lacked substance.
These issues were expected to receive close attention when the treaty was submitted to the US Congress.
However, as part of a "fast-track" agreement made with the Bush administration in July 1991, Congress could only vote on the agreement and not amend it.
A final vote, however, was not expected until 1993.
The Mexican stock market reacted calmly to news of the agreement, reflecting a general belief that the treaty was a hostage to Bush's political fortunes and that many obstacles remained before NAFTA became law.
Unions, faced with radical changes in work practices, were critical that NAFTA offered only a limited relaxation of immigration rules, benefiting professional and managerial personnel, while barring the free flow of labour.
The European Communities (EC) stated that it welcomed NAFTA provided that it abided by GATT rules and did not become a closed trade bloc.
GATT hailed the accord as a "major development within the world economy and international trade" .
South Asian countries, exporting goods in excess of US$200,000 million a year to the USA, were generally cautious.
Analysts believed that the greatest fear in the region was that NAFTA "local content" and "country of origin" clauses would encourage the USA to increasingly look to low-wage Mexico as a principal source of imports.
It was felt that NAFTA could spur the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) to redouble its efforts to establish its own free trade area and that other regional trade blocs might follow.
The Japanese government, along with the Japanese business sector, gave NAFTA a cool response and announced that it would ask the GATT secretariat to examine the treaty to ensure that it was in accord with multilateral trade rules.
Caribbean Community (Caricom) leaders expressed concern that NAFTA would diminish the benefits which the region had obtained under the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI) with the USA.
AMERICAS
BAHAMAS
General election
The opposition Free National Movement (FNM) won a historic victory in the general election held on Aug. 19.
Led since 1990 by Hubert Ingraham, 45, the FNM won 33 out of a total of 49 seats, ending a run of five consecutive victories by the Progressive Liberal Party (PLP) of Prime Minister Sir Lynden Pindling, 62, who retained one of the PLP's 16 seats.
Pindling, who served as Prime Minister for 25 years, had led the first black government and in 1967 broke the power of the Bay Street Boys, the white colonial merchants who dominated the economy and ran the islands like a private club.
He led the Bahamas to independence from the United Kingdom in 1973.
Calling for reconciliation, Ingraham promised no victimizations and pledged to "heal" the nation and encourage blacks and whites to participate in the life of the country.
Campaigning under the slogan "deliverance" , the FNM emphasised that it was time for a change, given that its free-market strategy of combating recession, high unemployment and reviving the tourist based economy differed little from the PLP's.
Ingraham appealed more to young voters and advocated a 10-year limit of the Prime Minister's term in office.
Ingraham, a former protegé of Pindling, had been dismissed from the PLP and the Cabinet in 1984 because he had recommended the dismissal of officials who were publicly linked to drugs trafficking [see pp. 33401-02].
Under US pressure, Pindling had established a commission of inquiry which resulted in many of his political and personal colleagues being indicted and, in some cases, imprisoned on drug charges.
Two ministers were forced to resign but Pindling denied personal involvement in corruption, despite the disparity between his lavish personal life-style and his modest Prime Ministerial salary.
AMERICAS
HAITI
OAS diplomatic initiative
The Secretary-General of the Organization of American States (OAS), Joao Baena Soares, led a 13-member OAS delegation to Haiti on Aug. 18-21 after which he stated that there remained "some opportunities" to promote a dialogue to resolve the current crisis [for previous OAS interventions see pp. 38522; 38569; 38670; 38905].
On Aug. 25 Radio Tropic, a local station in the Haitian capital Port-au Prince, reported that Baena Soares had invited representatives of the army-backed government of Prime Minister Marc Bazin [for whose June inauguration see p. 38957]to attend talks in Washington on Sept. 1 with supporters of exiled President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, deposed in a military coup in September 1991 [see pp. 38430; 38522-23].
During the OAS visit the dead bodies of three known Aristide supporters had been found in a Port-au-Prince morgue.
One of them was that of Matine Remilien, who in July had co-founded Louvri Baye (Open the Gates), a pro-Aristide party.
The three had been arrested by the military on Aug. 17 charged with fly-posting photographs of Aristide.
According to the remaining local independent media sources, 20 civilians had been killed during August by the military.
Amnesty report
Amnesty International, the human rights organization, released a report on Aug. 20 based on two weeks of detailed investigations conducted in Haiti in late March.
The report accused the military of re-establishing the repressive structures of the former Duvalier dictatorship and concluded that torture, executions and arbitrary arrests had become a part of daily life.
Questioning of US policy towards refugees
The Amnesty report also accused the US administration of breaking international law by its policy, approved in May, of repatriating fleeing Haitian "boat people" without attempting to identify those at risk from human rights violations [see p. 38905].
The US Supreme Court on Aug. 1 overturned the July 29 decision of a New York appeals court which ruled that the repatriation policy was illegal.
However, before giving its final verdict on the matter, the Supreme Court gave the government until Aug. 24 to defend the policy and its legal challengers until Sept. 8 to make their case.
According to mid-August figures released by the US Coastguard 27,440 out of a total of 37,381 refugees who had fled since the overthrow of Aristide had been repatriated.
In the latest recorded incident, Haitian security police had detained 150 refugees on Aug. 14, only minutes after they had been forcibly returned to Port-au-Prince by the US coast guard.
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Resumption of peace talks
After five days of peace talks in Mexico City, the Mexican capital, the government and the leaders of the left-wing Guatemalan Revolutionary National Unity (URNG) guerrillas agreed on Aug. 7 to restrictions on thousands of army-sponsored Civil Defence Patrols—vigilante groups composed mainly of Indian peasant farmers, who had been accused of gross human rights violations.
The URNG dropped its previous demand for the immediate abolition of the Patrols, which, it claimed, many peasants were forced to join.
The government agreed not to expand them and to give the country's human rights prosecutor the power to recommend legal action if they committed crimes.
The previous peace round to bring an end to the 30-year civil war had ended in deadlock in October 1991 on the issue of human rights [for other rounds see pp. 38141; 38233; 38251; 38330].
The government had reportedly also accepted a three-point plan presented by the mediator at the talks, Mgr Rodolfo Quezada Toruño, the Roman Catholic Bishop of Zacapa and president of the Guatemalan Bishops' Conference, which called for a commission to document, but not punish, perpetrators of past atrocities and for the government to guarantee the rights of captured rebels and of those who had disarmed.
Quezada Toruño stated that both sides would meet again "at the earliest possible date" .
Resignation of Interior Minister
Francisco Perdomo Sandoval was appointed as the new Interior Minister on July 31, replacing Fernando Hurtado Prem who had been forced to resign on July 23, apparently following a wave of protests after anti-riot police violently evicted 500 campesinos (peasants) gathered in the Central Plaza in Guatemala City.
The campesinos had gathered to petition the government to intervene in a land dispute; between 11 and 23 of them, including children, were reportedly injured in baton charges and from the effects of tear gas.
Local press reports stated, however, that President Jorge Serrano Elias had already decided to remove Hurtado, because he had become an embarrassment to his administration and had allegedly misused funds intended to pay Chilean carabineros (security police), contracted by the government to assist in the restructuring and training of the Guatemalan National Police.
Hurtado's 15 months in office had been marked by an escalation in human rights abuses, especially repression by the specially created Hunapú security force.
Human rights report
The latest report by the human rights office of the Archbishopric of Guatemala was issued in late July and covered the first six months of 1992.
It highlighted the use of selective repression by the security forces and military, including the killing of students and staff at the University of San Carlos and of leaders of displaced campesinos and the unemployed.
The report also accused the government of intolerance towards demonstrations of social discontent and the "stigmatization of people, groups and sectors that have demanded the resolution of any type of grievance" .
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
UN intervention
The UN Under-Secretary-General with responsibility for peacekeeping operations, Marrack Goulding, at the close of a four-day visit, mediated a new timetable on Aug. 17 for the completion of the faltering peace process.
He expressed confidence that the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) would demobilize their remaining guerrilla forces and that the government would honour pledges on political and security reforms pledges by Oct. 31, the deadline for compliance with the terms of the January peace treaty which ended the 12-year civil war [see pp. 38716; 38809; 38906].
The new agreement gave both sides one month to catch up with their commitments under the treaty.
The FMLN had reaffirmed on July 29 that the second 20 per cent of its guerrillas due to demobilize on July 31 would not do so as long as socio-economic conditions for their re-integration into the civilian life remained "non-existent" [for start of demobilization in June see p. 38957].
The FMLN stated that agricultural work and legalized land had to be guaranteed, and accused the traditional oligarchic sector—the country's major landowners—of exerting pressure on the government to slow down the peace process.
They also accused the ruling Arena party of delaying tactics to obstruct the emergence of the FMLN as a political force capable of winning the elections to be held in 1994.
President Alfredo Cristiani Burkard claimed that the FMLN had failed to provide specific data which would allow the government to determine how many of its members would benefit from various government programmes.
The Defence and Public Security Minister, Gen. Rene Emilio Ponce, had accused the FMLN on July 28 of deliberately delaying their demobilization.
On Aug. 15-16 the army completed the demobilization of the first of five elite US-trained counterinsurgency battalions, all of which were accused of human rights abuses.
They were to be abolished as part of a 50 per cent reduction in the armed forces.
There was concern, however, that half of the Bracamonte Battalion's 1,000 soldiers were to take up new posts in the army.
The FMLN in turn, following a meeting with the government on Aug. 21, announced that 1,600 guerrillas would be demobilized on Sept. 21, and a similar number on each of three subsequent dates before the end of October.
AMERICAS
PANAMA
Resignation of ministerial portfolio by Ford
Guillermo Ford Boyd resigned his post as Planning and Economic Policy Minister, it was reported locally on Aug. 28, but remained Second Vice-President.
Carlos Abadia, leader of the broad-based opposition movement National Civic Crusade (NCC), claimed that it was well known that Ford wished to stand for the presidency in 1994 and that he wished to give up his ministerial post "to reduce the political pressure on him" .
The architect of the government's current austerity and state privatization programmes, Ford was expected, however, to continue to handle debt negotiations and to direct economic planning.
Delia Cardenas was formally appointed as the new Planning and Economic Policy Minister.
AMERICAS
CENTRAL AMERICA
Common market with Mexico
The Economy Ministers of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua, joined by their Mexican counterpart, agreed on Aug. 20 in the Nicaraguan capital Managua to create a joint regional free trade market.
Planned to begin in 1996, the market would encompass 27,000,000 consumers in Central America added to 84,000,000 in Mexico.
Panama was initially excluded from the agreement, which had its origins in the Tuxtla Gutiérrez trade accord signed in January 1991 in the Mexican state of Chiapas [see p. 37957].
Analysts interpreted the new market as a future bridge linking South America to the recently created North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) zone, the largest market in the world comprising Canada, the United States and Mexico [see pp. 39045-46].
Current Mexican trade with Central America amounted to little more than 0.01 per cent of total trade, due to the high tariffs, lack of export diversity and past conflicts in the region.
Pablo Pereira, Nicaragua's Vice Minister for Trade, stated that the new market would mark the end of the region's economic marginalization by the powerful neighbouring economies of the north.
AMERICAS
SURINAM
Peace accord
The government and the two largest guerrilla groups, the Surinamese Liberation Army (SLA, commonly known as the Jungle Commando) led by Ronnie Brunswijk and the Tucayana Amazonas led by Thomas Sabajo (Commander Thomas), signed a draft peace treaty on Aug. 1 under which the surrender of weapons would be supervised by the Organization of American States (OAS).
[For May suspension of guerrilla hostilities see p. 38907.]
The recruitment of members of both groups into the Police Force of the Interior was also covered by the treaty, an important consideration given the hostile response by Tucayana to the July 1989 Kourou peace accord [see p. 36811]which afforded this provision only to the SLA.
A blanket amnesty for those involved in guerrilla activity since 1985 had yet to be finalized and it was not known if there would be official inquiries into massacres by the military, especially that at Mooiwana in 1986.
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Austerity measures
The government of President Carlos Andrés Pérez announced austerity measures on Aug. 23, in advance of the consideration by the Congress of bills on financial reform, new taxes and the 1993 budget.
The new measures were apparently designed to show the administration's determination to curb state spending, encourage more private investment and accelerate the sale of government assets.
Pérez stated that the current fiscal crisis was the result of the collapse of the revenue-generating capacity of the oil industry, the traditional backbone of the economy.
Oil exports accounted for close to 80 per cent of foreign earnings.
Oil revenue estimates for the current year were US$11,400 million as compared with US$13,000 million in 1991.
The austerity package included most significantly (i) a plan to reduce state employment by 29,000 by 1993 through the freezing of federal government hiring and the major reorganization of the Agricultural Ministry;(ii) a freeze on new public works until February 1994, which marked the end of the current government's term of office;(iii) cuts of US$373,000,000 in the operating and personnel costs of the state oil company, Petróleos de Venezuela, SA (PDVSA);(iv) no new investment projects by Petroquímica de Venezuela, SA (Pequivén), PDVSA's subsidiary petrochemical company, and the sale of its shares on world markets to finance its current US$7,600 million investment programme;(v) a ban on the purchase of new military equipment; and (vi) the privatization of Alcasa, a government aluminium producer, and of sections of Siderúrgica del Orinoco, CA (Sidor), the state steel producer.
Renewed coup threat
Lt-Col. Hugo Chávez Frias, the leader of the February 1992 attempted military coup [see pp. 38759-60], warned in a radio interview conducted from prison where he was awaiting trial, that the dissident Bolivarian Revolutionary Movement (MBR) which led the February coup was gaining strength in the army and that it would take up arms once more if there were no drastic changes in the country's leadership.
Chávez stated that constitutional amendments currently being debated by the Congress represented a "setback" because they ignored the social grievances existing in the country.
He added that the MBR's task at the time of the coup had been to establish the basis "for a profound transformation…in the juridical-political and socio-economic areas" .
He said that the MBR had one final proposal, namely to call on the "country's will and people's sovereignty to attain the necessary agreements" .
Failing this, he threatened that the MBR would once more resort to arms.
AMERICAS
PERU
OAS decision to observe elections
The Organization of American States (OAS) announced in Washington on Aug. 28 that it had decided to send observers to oversee the elections for a Democratic Constituent Congress (CCD) scheduled to be held on Nov. 22.
This was interpreted locally as an endorsement of the plans of President Alberto Keinya Fujimori to return the country to formal democratic rule following his army-backed presidential coup on April 5 [see pp. 38846-47].
In the light of the OAS decision, Fujimori stated on Aug. 30 that there was no remaining excuse for political parties not to participate in the elections.
Breakdown of dialogue
Such participation remained in doubt following the breakdown of the first talks since the coup, on Aug. 16-18, between the government and main opposition parties.
The American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA) had refused to attend, due in part to court proceedings on corruption and possession of arms charges pending against prominent party officials and former president Alan García Pérez, who was in exile in Colombia [see p. 38959].
The centre-right Popular Action (AP) party, led by former President Fernando Belaúnde Terry (1980-1985), which rejected Fujimori's new date for municipal elections, now set for Jan. 29, 1993, and stated that "more than 17 political parties" demanded that he reverse the decision to postpone them from November 1992 [see p. 38959].
The opposition argued that any delay would disrupt local government, claiming that this was the only part of the old democracy still functioning since April.
The AP stated that it would not participate in forthcoming dialogues.
Modification of electoral law
The opposition was further alienated by a clause in a government decree law of Aug. 22 governing the eligibility of candidates representing unregistered political parties, independent organizations and alliances to stand for election to the CCD.
This stipulated that they had to have no less than 100,000 members "with the signature and number of the election list for each one of them" .
Other uncontested stipulations were that any candidate for the CCD had to be "over 21, a practising citizen and be elected in the election registry of Peru" .
Temporary withdrawal from Andean Pact
Blaming its current economic difficulties on the absence of multilateral aid (frozen since the coup), the government announced on Aug. 26 that it was temporarily withdrawing from the Andean Pact, the five-country trade bloc whose other members were Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Venezuela.
Peru would assume observer status in the Pact until the end of 1993 when it would resume full membership.
Just prior to the announcement, Fujimori had injected US$300,000,000 of accumulated government savings into the economy in an attempt to ease the effects of the recession.
Death of Ulloa
Manuel Ulloa Elias, former Prime Minister and Finance Minister in the AP government of President Belaúnde Terry from 1980-82, died of cancer on Aug. 9, aged 69.
While in office he was most noted for his ambitious programme of public works financed by foreign debt.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
US aid agreement — Anti-US feeling
Under an agreement signed in La Paz, the capital, on Aug. 21, the USA was to provide about US$190,000,000 in aid, including some $55,000,000 in alternative development projects, $66,000,000 in balance of payment aid, dependent on the fulfilment of drug eradication targets, and $25,000,000 in drug-related military aid.
President Jaime Paz Zamora was reported on the same day to have requested that the Congress authorize the presence of US troops in the eastern Beni region, and sought congressional approval for a law to support the presence of foreign troops in the future.
The Defence, Interior and Foreign Ministers narrowly escaped congressional censure for violating the constitutional requirement that the presence of foreign troops be approved by the Congress.
The Foreign Ministry had announced on July 31 that it was "temporarily suspending" permission for a new contingent of US servicemen to enter the country pending a study of new regulations for community development programmes [for approval in April 1991 of participation of US troops see p. 38143].
On July 14 the Congress had requested the US government to provide details of the type and number of US troops active in the country, with figures on those acting on community development programmes and anti-drugs operations respectively.
Both the August initiatives were intended to reduce anti-US feeling which in recent weeks had increased following the activities of US military and anti-drug personnel in the country.
In particular, the recent upsurge had followed the arrival unannounced on June 26 of 130 troops from the 37th US task force near the town of Santa Ana in the northern Beni department.
The troops, officially involved in a US$2,500,000 civic action programme to repair a local school and to install a sewage system and water treatment plants, were accused of being an advance guard of a stepped-up US policy to eradicate the growing of coca, the raw material of cocaine, in the region; in the absence of a viable market substitute, thousands of local peasant families depended on the crop for a livelihood.
On July 7 protesters had claimed in Trinidad, the capital of Beni, that the US Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) and the local anti-drug Umopar police had been guilty of abuses against the local population.
The president of the local civic committee demanded action against those responsible for "raids, attempted murders, unjustified arrests and abuses committed in the indigenous communities" .
Resentment was also fuelled by an incident in the eastern city of Santa Cruz in July, when a DEA agent shot and wounded a Bolivian in a bar, but then disappeared from the country before he could stand trial.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Investment grade rating
Finance Minister Alejandro Foxley Rioseco stated on Aug. 17 that Chile had entered the category of low political and economic risk for investment, ranking it above Mexico, Venezuela, Argentina and Brazil.
His comments followed the announcement on the same day by the leading US credit rating agency, Standard and Poor's, that the country had been assigned a BBB investment grade rating, making it the first of Latin America's problem debtors of the 1980s to meet international standards of credit-worthiness.
Foxley forecast a surge in foreign investment flows, which had totalled US$1,100 million in 1991.
The economy was predicted to expand by 8 per cent in 1992, its ninth year of consecutive growth, while inflation was expected to fall to around 13 per cent, from 18.7 per cent at the end of 1991.
Standard and Poor's cautioned, however, that macro-economic success had been achieved at the expense of widening the gap between rich and poor and through reduced spending on health, education and infrastructure.
It urged the government to make greater efforts to rectify this situation.
It also warned that exports were still too dependent on copper.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
Amendments to Tlatelolco Treaty
At the close of the seventh extraordinary meeting of the general conference of the Organization for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Opanal) on Aug. 28, Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Mexico presented amendments to the 1967 Tlatelolco Treaty prohibiting nuclear weapons in Latin America [see pp. 22505-07].
The approved amendments opened the way for the full co-operation of Argentina, Brazil and Chile within the terms of the treaty.
France ratified Protocol No 1 of the treaty, which made provision for nuclear powers outside the region which had territories under their jurisdiction within it, in this case French Guiana.
Cuba announced on Aug. 27 that it would sign the treaty once all the states in the region had assumed their own obligations regarding the agreement.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Nicanor Costa Mendez, a former Foreign Minister and a key figure in Argentine diplomacy at the time of the Falklands/Malvinas war of 1982, died of cancer on Aug. 2, aged 69.
AMERICAS
CARICOM
Edwin Carrington, former Secretary-General of the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) group (within the context of EC-ACP co-operation under the Lomé Convention), replaced Roderick Rainford as the Secretary-General of the Caribbean Community on Aug. 1.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Economic rescue package
The government on Aug. 28 announced a 10,700,000 million yen (about US$85,900 million) economic rescue package designed to reverse the recent decline in the stock market and to stimulate economic growth.
The package was the largest of its kind—both in nominal terms and in relation to the size of the economy—in Japanese history.
[For South Korean emergency package see p. 39050.]
The package was constructed under intense political pressure as the Nikkei share index—an average of 225 leading companies—fell to around 14,000, its lowest level since 1986.
Together with growing evidence of a deepening of the recession in the manufacturing sector, the slide in share prices caused a crisis of confidence in Japan's financial markets and fuelled demands for government intervention.
On Aug. 18 Finance Minister Tsutomu Hata had attempted to restore confidence by announcing a series of measures aimed at discouraging financial institutions from selling shares until the end of September, and allowing them to postpone the reporting of unrealised losses on share holdings until the end of the financial year, in March 1993.
Hata acknowledged that the country's financial system was facing its most difficult period since 1945, and that the sharp decline in share and property prices combined with the general economic slowdown had triggered doubts concerning the financial system's stability and capacity to supply capital which, unless eradicated, could jeopardize any potential recovery.
With the financial markets showing some evidence of recovery, the government announced the Aug. 28 emergency package, amounting to 10,700,000 million yen (2.3 per cent of gross national product), which, it estimated, would increase economic growth by 2.4 per cent in the 12 months from October.
At the centre of the package was an extra 8,600,000 million yen of public investment, including road and airport construction and government land purchases.
This was in addition to the 6,900,000 million yen already allocated for this purpose in the budget for fiscal 1992 (ending in March 1993).
The remainder of the emergency package consisted of 2,100,000 million yen in loan provisions from the government to promote private investment.
Full enactment of the emergency package required a supplementary budget which was expected to be submitted to the Diet in October or November 1992.
Sagawa Kyubin scandal — Resignation of Kanemaru
After several months of comparative quiet, the Sagawa Kyubin scandal re-erupted in August and once more appeared to threaten the existence of the administration of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.
The Sagawa Kyubin scandal, which had first broken in January 1992 [see p. 38721], involved illegal payments made by Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin, the largest regional affiliate in the Kyoto-based Sagawa Kyubin group, Japan's second-largest parcel delivery firm.
In addition to making large payments to the Inagawa-kai crime syndicate, Hiroyasu Watanabe, former president of the Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin trucking company, who was due to stand trial later in the year, was alleged to have paid some 70,000 million yen or more to around 130 members of the Diet.
Among these, it was alleged, were several leading members of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), including Shin Kanemaru [see below], two current Cabinet members and three former Prime Ministers.
While it was generally considered to be almost impossible to prove bribery charges against those in receipt of such payments—the success of such a charge would require specific evidence of mutual benefit—the sums received by individual politicians were large enough to have contravened the Political Funds Control Law which restricted the size of political donations and required those over 1,000,000 yen to be registered along with the donor's name.
The scandal claimed its most prominent victim to date when, on Aug. 27, Kanemaru, 77, admitted that his secretary had accepted 500 million yen in 1990 from Watanabe.
Kanemaru accepted responsibility for the payment and resigned as vice-president of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP).
He remained a member of the Diet and, although he tendered his resignation as leader of the Takeshita faction, this was not accepted.
The loss of Kanemaru, nicknamed "The Don" in recognition of his status as "Godfather" of the LDP, was a serious blow to Miyazawa.
Kanemaru had accepted the vice-presidency of the party in January 1992 in order to revitalize the unpopular and politically moribund administration of Miyazawa, who had been elected party leader and Prime Minister three months earlier.
By accepting the post Kanemaru had immediately bolstered Miyazawa's position by bringing with him the support of the Takeshita faction, the largest of the LDP's internal groupings.
Kanemaru was instrumental in ensuring Diet approval for Miyazawa's budget, and arranged sufficient support among the opposition parties to enact the Peace Keeping Operations (PKO) bill, allowing Japanese troops to serve overseas [see pp. 38962-63].
By July 1992 the government's position had improved sufficiently for the LDP to make modest gains in the Upper House elections [see pp. 39003-04].
Controversy over planned imperial visit to China — Commemoration of ending of Pacific War
After months of national debate it was reported on Aug. 10 that Miyazawa had approved a proposed state visit to China by Emperor Akihito, in October, designed to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the normalization of diplomatic Sino-Japanese relations.
The visit, formally approved by the Japanese Cabinet on Aug. 25, was fiercely opposed by right-wing nationalists who feared that it would involve pressure upon the Emperor to apologise to the Chinese people for Japan's brutal military intervention in the country between 1931 and 1945.
Foreign Ministry sources stressed that the visit was designed to promote friendship and goodwill and would not include an imperial apology for past Japanese actions.
Miyazawa had earlier tried to appease right-wing nationalist sentiment by announcing on Aug. 9 that, in a reversal of his previously stated position, he would make a visit to the Yasukuni shrine, Japan's most venerated memorial to Japan's war dead, particularly those killed in the Pacific War.
In view of the international and domestic controversy generated in 1985 when Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone visited the shrine, together with the complications arising from Japan's strict constitutional separation of church and state—those commemorated by the shrine being revered as Shinto deities—and the recent accusations of incipient militarism made by many neighbouring countries following the enactment of the PKO bill, however, Miyazawa stressed that his visit would be "in a private capacity" and would not take place on Aug. 15, the anniversary of the ending of the Pacific War.
Nevertheless, 12 members of the Cabinet did visit the shrine on Aug. 15 (and at least three others had visited it earlier in the month), although most claimed that they had done so in a private capacity.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Diplomatic relations with China
The recent process of rapprochement between South Korea and China culminated on Aug. 24 with the normalization of diplomatic relations between them.
A signing ceremony was held in Beijing and attended by China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen and his South Korean counterpart Lee Sang Ock, during the latter's official visit to China on Aug. 23-25.
South Korean President Roh Tae Woo described the development as "a significant turning point in world history" and as the removal of the "last external constraint" for peaceful reunification of the Korean peninsula.
Although hundreds of thousands of Chinese troops had fought against South Korean forces in the Korean war (1950-53), in recent years relations between the two states had improved greatly.
The main impetus for this had come from Roh's policy of improving links with communist regimes, which had resulted in the establishment of diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union and its eastern European allies in 1988-91.
Although relations with China had improved at a less dramatic pace, in 1990 a South Korean team had participated in the Asian Games in Beijing and a trade agreement between the two countries had been signed [see p. 38623].
Economic links between the two states steadily increased and, in 1991, they exchanged trade missions and conferred "most-favoured nation" trade status upon each other.
The total volume of trade between the two countries reached US$5,800 million in 1991, and was expected to exceed $10,000 million in 1992, thereby making South Korea China's fourth largest trading partner (after Hong Kong, the USA and Japan).
In 1992 the two countries had agreed to exchange Bank of China and Korean Exchange Bank officials and, in April, Lee Sang Ock had become the highest-ranking South Korean to visit China when he attended a meeting of the Economic Commission for Asia and the Pacific in Beijing.
The government of North Korea, which was believed to have received advanced warning of the move from its longstanding Chinese ally, gave a muted reaction to the news.
In Taiwan, a traditional ally of South Korea, there were, however, anti-Korean protests and a vitriolic government statement which condemned South Korea for having "violated our trust and trampled on international justice" .
Diplomatic relations between South Korea and Taiwan were immediately severed.
Although Taiwan maintained diplomatic relations with almost 30 countries, South Korea had been one of the most important and was Taiwan's last formal diplomatic ally in Asia.
By normalizing its relations with China, South Korea accepted the Chinese position that Taiwan was a province of China rather than a country in its own right.
Agreement on postponed elections — Roh's resignation as party leader
An agreement on Aug. 12 settled a protracted dispute between Roh's ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP) and the opposition Democratic Party over the government's decision to postpone local elections.
The indefinite postponement, of what would have been the country's first direct election of mayors and provincial governors since 1961, had led to opposition charges of dictatorship against the DLP.
Ill-feeling between the government and opposition was so serious that the National Assembly had been paralysed since convening in June, following the March 1992 general election.
The postponement—announced at the beginning of the year and rationalized on the grounds that, with legislative and presidential elections due to be held in 1992, a third set of elections would have involved undue expense—was also condemned by a growing number of student protesters and threatened to become a key issue in the campaign leading up to the presidential elections in December.
Under the Aug. 12 agreement, signed between the DLP's executive chairman and presidential candidate Kim Young Sam, the Democratic Party's Kim Dae Jung, and Chung Ju Yung of the small United People's Party (UPP), the question of when the postponed elections would take place would be settled by a committee upon which all three parties were represented.
With the issue resolved, Roh stepped down as DLP president on Aug. 25 in order to allow Kim Young Sam to take over the leadership prior to the presidential elections.
The party's central executive council chose Kim as Roh's successor, and conferred upon Roh the ceremonial title of honorary party president.
Unveiling of plan to boost stock market
Finance Minister Rhee Yong Man on Aug. 24 unveiled an emergency package to boost the country's languishing stock market through the injection of more than 3,000,000 million won (US$1=780.697 won as at Aug. 24, 1992).
In addition to providing tax incentives to investors, the package required banks and insurance companies to purchase stocks over the next six months, and encouraged pension funds to do likewise.
[For Japanese emergency package see p. 39049.]
The Korea Securities Stabilization Fund, established in May 1990 to revitalize the market, was also to be encouraged to raise 500,000 million won with which to buy stock.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Stock market riots in Shenzhen
A riot broke out on the evening of Aug. 10-11 in the southern city of Shenzhen involving 50,000-60,000 would-be investors who were protesting against unfair distribution of share application forms, which had been sold out earlier than expected.
On Aug. 11 the Shenzhen stock exchange was closed for the afternoon after "A" shares—reserved for Chinese investors—fell by 17 points.
An estimated 1,000,000 people arrived in Shenzhen from all over China on Aug. 9-11 seeking to purchase the application forms for a forthcoming share offer on the Shenzhen stock exchange.
Applicants queued for two days for a total of 5,000,000 application forms on a first-come first-served basis.
Only one in 10 applications would be eligible to buy up to 1,000 shares in 14 company flotations which, it was hoped, would raise 500 million yuan (US$1=5.4556 yuan as at Aug. 10, 1992).
Protestors complained of forms being resold at eight times the original price, and accused officials of reserving share applications for family and friends.
They also claimed that police and officials had pushed queuers aside to make room for family and friends.
Police were attacked and one vehicle was set on fire and others overturned, as the demonstrators marched on the local government offices chanting "Down with corruption!" .
Police used tear-gas, electric batons and sticks to disperse the crowds, arresting 20.
One person was reportedly killed in the crush, while 200 others were hospitalized.
Initially, the Chinese media ignored the riot; the official Xinhua news agency reported a "slight disruption of sales" , and later blamed the disruption on a "small number of people" .
Analysts attributed the popularity of the "A" share application issue to the high level of individual savings, negative real interest rates and the fact that a similar share offering in November 1991 had brought large gains to investors.
At a news conference on Aug. 11 the mayor of Shenzhen admitted that there might have been some mishandling of the issue of forms, and promised to seek out corrupt officials.
Seventeen people were subsequently arrested for reselling share applications and vouchers.
The Minister of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade, Li Lanqing, allayed fears of a clampdown on economic reform when he said that China would continue to develop stock markets despite the Shenzhen riot.
Meanwhile, according to the Financial Times of Aug. 13, the State Council set up a special group to co-ordinate the government's response to the Shenzhen riot, headed by Zou Jiahua, a Vice-Premier and the Minister in charge of the State Planning Commission.
Crisis on Shanghai stock market
On Aug. 12 there was panic selling of "A" shares at China's second stock exchange in Shanghai.
The exchange closed down 9.5 points, with prices of some stocks falling 50 per cent.
Analysts said that the fall was due to expanded market listings rather than to the Shenzhen riot.
Trial of last pro-democracy activist
In the last trial of activists linked to the pro-democracy movement which ended in the massacre in Tiananmen Square in June 1989 [see pp. 36720-22], the poet and theorist Wu Jiaxing was sentenced on Aug. 25 to three years' imprisonment for "counter-revolutionary incitement and propaganda" , and then released for time served.
A former advisor to the deposed Chinese Communist Party general secretary Zhao Ziyang, and a senior researcher at the Party Central Committee General Office, Wu Jiaxing had spent more than three years in prison awaiting trial.
John Kamm, a US businessman and human rights activist, was told by government officials that all those detained in connection with the pro-democracy movement had now been brought to trial.
On Aug. 5 a Beijing court handed down a four-year sentence on Gao Shan, who worked at an institute for political restructuring under the Communist Party central committee, for revealing state secrets during the 1989 democracy movement.
Bao Tong, his former superior, had received a seven-year sentence in July [see p. 39004].
Amnesty for students abroad
According to a decision of the State Council, an amnesty was announced on Aug. 20 for students abroad who had participated in activities and organizations opposing the government.
The amnesty welcomed students to return to China "no matter what their political attitude was in the past" , and said that there would be no investigation into "wrong things" they had said or committed abroad.
Asia Watch report on forced labour camps
The New York-based human rights organization Asia Watch issued a report on Sept. 1 claiming that political prisoners were being used as forced labour in prison factories producing for export in Liaoning Province, and rejecting the Chinese government's claim that prison-made products were not for export.
Death of Gang of Four member
Wang Hongwen, 58, died on Aug. 3 while serving a life sentence imposed in 1981 for his role as a member of the so-called "Gang of Four" .
The Gang, headed by Mao's wife Jiang Qing, had been held responsible for the excesses of China's 1966-76 Cultural Revolution.
Trade talks with USA
The fifth round of Sino-US trade talks held in Beijing on Aug. 19-21 on allowing greater US access to China's markets failed to make any significant progress.
A list of goods on which the USA might impose punitive tariffs, covering about one-fifth of Chinese exports to the USA, was made public on Aug. 21 for discussion.
Ira Wolf, the assistant US Representative for Trade Negotiations, said that China had been too slow in opening its markets.
US officials said that imports from China had increased by 42 per cent in the first six months while US exports to China had risen by only 18.4 per cent, and the US trade deficit with China was expected to rise to US$15 billion.
The list targeted exports worth US$3,900 million, including shoes, jewellery, silk clothing, foods, and household appliances.
Tariffs of up to 100 per cent would be imposed on these targets unless China acceded by Oct. 10 to US demands for market opening (including publicizing secret regulations on foreign trade and removing restrictions such as import bans and high tariffs on imports).
US trade officials said that the list aimed to target state-owned industries and to minimize the impact on Hong Kong, many of whose exports were manufactured in factories in south China.
China's Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade criticized the publication of the list, and threatened to retaliate if it was implemented.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Confusion over investment loans policy
Conflicting statements by banking officials on Aug. 10 and 11 caused confusion over government policy towards loans for Taiwanese business projects in China.
On Aug. 11 Y. D. Sheu, chairman of the state-run Bank of Taiwan, publicly disavowed a press release issued the day before by the bank's President, C. M. Pu, announcing suspension of the loans.
The situation appeared to expose a conflict within the government over its continued ban on direct trade and investment with China, following a recent apparent softening of political attitudes.
The extent of Taiwan's indirect business with the mainland, via Hong Kong, was expected to reach a record US$7,000 million in 1992, and Taiwan's investments in China could come to US$10,000 million, reports said [see p. 39005 for lifting of ban on contacts with PRC].
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Patten's talks with senior Beijing representative
Six weeks after being sworn in as Governor of Hong Kong [see p. 39005]], Chris Patten had what he described as "very useful" talks on Aug. 20 with Zhou Nan, China's most senior official in the colony.
It was his first encounter with Zhou, director in Hong Kong of the New China News Agency, who had been on sick leave; it had been billed as a "get to know you" meeting, which would sidestep controversial issues.
Both were understood to have reiterated their governments' stated positions on matters including the HK$175,300 million (approximately US$24,000 million) new airport project, which had been stalled over China's objections to proposed financing arrangements [see pp. 38340; 39005].
On Aug. 28 it was reported that Patten was to visit China on Oct. 12-14, when it was expected that he would have talks with Premier Li Peng and other officials.
Before going to Beijing, on Oct. 7 Patten was expected to make a key policy speech to the Hong Kong legislative council, reports said.
Further deportations of Vietnamese
The authorities on Aug. 4 deported 60 Vietnamese, the largest single group to be flown to Hanoi since late 1991.
Hong Kong officials were quoted as saying that none of the deportees, the first to be sent back since Patten's arrival, had offered resistance.
[For May UK-Vietnam agreement see p. 38912.]
Asia Watch, the US-based human rights group, had been quoted as saying the previous week that 133 members of the Nung ethnic group held in Hong Kong refugee camps faced persecution if they were returned to Vietnam.
Sixteen people on Asia Watch's list were later reported as among those deported on Aug. 4.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Continuing difficulties of peace process
Throughout July and August the Khmers Rouges maintained their boycott of phase two of the October 1991 UN peace process, under which 70 per cent of the country's estimated 200,000 fighters were to be assembled and disarmed [see p. 38864].
Since about mid-June, the Khmers Rouges had been refusing the chief co-ordinator of the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), Yasushi Akashi, access to areas they controlled around Pailin, reports said, even though the peace agreement, which they had signed together with the three other factions, gave him authority to travel anywhere.
After the Khmers Rouges announced their boycott, ceasefire violations were said to have worsened, with outbreaks of fierce fighting between their guerrillas and government troops north of Phnom Penh during July and August.
The faction was said to be demanding that government forces disarm and demobilize in stages, in parallel with the guerrillas, and that UNTAC provide assurances that no Vietnamese forces remained in the country.
Akashi was reported to have dismissed these Khmer Rouge demands, insisting that the peace agreement provided for the country's Vietnamese-installed administration to remain in place until replaced by an elected government in April or May 1993.
The UN denied that any Vietnamese troops remained in the country, and in an interview on Voice of Vietnam radio on Aug. 10, Akashi praised Vietnam's co-operation with the peace process.
On July 26, 12 Asian and Pacific Rim countries and the European Communities (EC) issued a consensus statement at the meeting of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) in Manila [for which see pp. 39005-06], accusing the Khmers Rouges of "obduracy" and threatening to enforce economic sanctions by sealing access points to areas held by them, mainly in western Cambodia adjacent to Thailand.
A report in the International Herald Tribune at the end of August suggested that the Khmers Rouges were keeping away from the UN disarmament process because their forces had grown so small that they would lose influence if the numbers were made public.
Khmer Rouge announcement of ending of boycott
As Japanese, Thai and Khmer Rouge officials met in Bangkok to try to end the impasse, the Khmers Rouges suddenly announced on Aug. 27 that they were dropping their boycott of the peace monitoring process and would resume co-operation with UNTAC.
A spokesman was quoted by Reuters as saying that the faction would be sending representatives to seven Cambodian provinces to work with UN peacekeeping forces.
Attachment of new conditions to peace plan
At a meeting of the Supreme National Council (SNC) under the chairmanship of Prince Norodom Sihanouk on Aug. 24, the nominal Khmer Rouge leader Khieu Samphan announced new conditions for the implementation of the October 1991 peace plan.
All "treaties and agreements" entered into during the Vietnamese occupation must be cancelled, he said, new borders delineated between Cambodia and Vietnam, and special SNC committees set up to control the Phnom Penh adminstration and the police.
On Aug. 16, the Khmers Rouges had issued a statement insisting that Pol Pot, author of the 1975-79 reign of terror in Cambodia, had definitely retired.
Reporting the statement, Reuters said that it had been assumed that Pol Pot was directing the Khmers Rouges from secret bases.
There had been speculation that the group might be following a secret agenda to regain total power, the agency noted.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Demotion of senior military figures
In an assertion of civilian authority, the interim government of Prime Minister Anand Panyarachun on Aug. 1 demoted three top military leaders widely held to be responsible for the shooting of pro-democracy demonstrators by the military in May [see pp. 38894-95].
The changes anticipated the annual military reshuffle due in September.
Air Chief Marshal Kaset Rojanani was relieved of two posts, as Armed Forces Supreme Commander and Head of the Air Force, and was appointed as Armed Forces Inspector-General.
Kaset also resigned as the chairman of Thai Airways.
The head of the Army, Gen. Issarapong Noonpakdi, was demoted to deputy permanent defence secretary.
Lt-Gen.
Chainarong Noonpakdi, head of the First army region and responsible for directing the army units which fired on the unarmed demonstrators, was made director of the Institute of Army Academics.
Nine other changes were also made.
New appointments
The new Army Commander, Gen. Vimol Wongwanich, promised to unify the Army and on Aug. 7 ordered commanders of all army units not to intervene in politics or do anything to help or hinder any political party.
Vimol was, reportedly, well regarded within the military, with a reputation for professionalism and integrity.
The new Air Force Commander was Air Chief Marshal Gun Pimarnthip, and Gen. Chetta Tanajaro was appointed as the new Head of the First Army Region.
Air Chief Marshal Voranart Apichari became the new Supreme Commander.
Search committee
Anand ordered the creation of a committee on Aug. 11, comprising representatives from both the public and private sectors, to search for those missing as a result of the May events.
To date, 52 people had been confirmed shot dead but 400 others were thought to be missing.
The Defence Minister Gen. (retd) Banchop Bunnak, stated on Aug. 11 that he would reveal the full results of the investigation into the May military crackdown "when the time was right" .
Assembly petition
A petition signed by 115 leading personalities, requesting the King to appoint a 1,300-1,500 member National Assembly, drew widespread opposition from the main political parties which claimed that it would drag the monarchy into politics.
The proposal for the Assembly came originally from Chaianan Samudavanij, a well known political scientist.
Its supporters claimed that such an Assembly, composed of members from all walks of life, would and act as a "complementary institution" which would advise Parliament.
They argued that it would act as a mirror "to reflect the desires, opinions and hardships of the Thai society" so as to promote unity, ensure that the population's grievances were heard, and prevent future crises from undermining the country and its institutions.
The petitioners also asked the King to postpone approval of a constitutional amendment calling for the next Prime Minister to be elected, until the post-election government was set up.
This was, reportedly, to avoid confusion over the status of Anand and to allow him to work unhindered up until the time the new government was formed.
Bombing
The Pattani United Liberation Organization (PULO), an outlawed group seeking independence for the country's four southern provinces, claimed responsibility for a bomb explosion at a railway station on Aug. 13 in the southern city of Hat Yai, 40 km from the Malaysian border.
Three people were killed and 73 wounded.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Reopening of colleges
Over 30 universities and colleges resumed work on Aug. 24 on the orders of the military government, which had closed them in response to student riots in December 1991 [see p. 38681].
Strict security measures were in force on campuses as thousands of students returned to classes, but no incidents were reported.
During the closures the authorities were reported to have sent 2,096 university teachers on special training courses in techniques of student management and control.
Release of detainees
A total of 14 detainees whose sentences had been reduced were freed on Aug. 14 from prisons in Mandalay, Tharawaddy and Toungoon, Radio Burma announced.
They included Nai Khin Maung, who had served as a member of the central executive committee of the Mon National League for Democracy, held since October 1991.
Earlier reports had said that by the end of May more than 100 of an estimated 2,000 political prisoners had been freed [see p. 38913].
Accession to Geneva conventions
Foreign Affairs Minister U Ohn Gyaw and other officials participated in a ceremony attended by the regional representative of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), David Delapraz, on Aug. 24, when Myanma signed four 1949 Geneva conventions on humanitarian treatment of civilians and military personnel in time of war.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Prime Minister's visit to Pakistan
Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia visited Islamabad, the Pakistan capital, on Aug. 9-11 for talks with her Pakistani counterpart, Mohammad Nawaz Sharif.
They discussed the sharing of assets and liabilities of the old Pakistan, and the issue of repatriation of 228,000 Pakistanis still stranded in Bangladesh.
Radio Bangladesh quoted an official spokesman as saying on Aug. 10 that the independent Mecca-based Islamic body, Rabitah, had agreed to fund half the estimated US$50,000,000 cost of repatriation and rehousing, and Pakistan was to make up the rest.
The two leaders were reported to have agreed to remove trade imbalances by 1993.
An agreement was also signed promoting co-operation in scientific and technological policy, electronics, food processing, silicon technology and industrial research.
Relations with India
Bangladesh and India were to extend for a further three years the trade agreement due to expire in October 1992, All-India Radio reported on Aug. 6 following talks in New Delhi.
Two days of ministerial talks on the shared use of the waters of the Ganges, Tista and other common rivers ended in Dhaka on Aug. 25, a joint communiqué stating that a Joint Committee of Experts (JCE) was being established.
India's Foreign Secretary J. N. Dixit had visited Dhaka on Aug. 23 for talks which he described as "practical and constructive" involving Begum Zia and Foreign Minister Mustafizur Rahman.
A two-day meeting of the JCE opened next day with the arrival in Dhaka of India's Water Resources Minister, V. C. Shukla.
Defeat of no confidence motion
The government on Aug. 12 survived by 168 votes to 122 an opposition no confidence motion alleging that it was failing to tackle lawlessness.
New charge against Ershad
Reuter reported on Aug. 4 that Hussain Muhammad Ershad, the imprisoned former President, was facing new charges alleging misappropriation of some US$6,000,000, involving an Asian Development Bank funded project [for February conviction of Ershad see p. 38763].
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Killing of senior military commanders
A landmine explosion killed 10 senior army and naval officers on Aug. 8, at Araly Point on Kayts Island off the Jaffna Peninsula.
Among those killed were Maj.-Gen.
Denzil Kobbekaduwa, commander of operations against the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), who was due to assume the post of army chief-of-staff in January 1993, and Brig.
Vijaya Vimalaratne, security forces commander in Jaffna.
The blast, attributed to the LTTE, revived fears of a backlash against Tamils living in Colombo and in southern and central parts of the country.
On Aug. 9 the army denied any involvement in an attack, shortly after the explosion, on a Tamil village in the eastern district of Batticaloa which killed 25 people.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Continuing controversy over securities scandal
Renewed criticism from opposition parties, after reports of government interference in the official inquiry into the Bombay securities scandal [see pp. 38913; 38967; 39008], led to the resignation of K. Madhavan, Joint Director of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and head of the investigating team.
On Aug. 3 Prime Minister Narasimha Rao denied allegations that his office had asked Madhavan to "go slow" with the investigation of government ministers and senior officials.
Parliament on Aug. 6 approved the setting-up of a joint committee with extensive powers to probe the scandal.
Madhavan was officially said to have sought early retirement.
He denied reports that he had laid down conditions for the withdrawal of his resignation, and said that the inquiry was "not dependent on one person" and would go on.
Pressure on the government to widen the scope of the inquiry intensified further after the arrest on Aug. 7 under the Prevention of Corruption Act of V. Krishnamurti, an influential technocrat and former member of the Planning Commission.
A report on the scandal, the third in a series by the Reserve Bank of India [see pp. 38967; 39008]and issued on Aug. 25, said that two US banks, Citibank and Bank of America, had contravened Indian banking guidelines by using investment management schemes as "deposit substitutes" to mobilize funds, mainly from government corporations.
On Aug. 26, Citibank blamed the Indian banking system for irregularities in its Indian operations and denied that it had "accommodated" or had been involved with those implicated in the scandal.
Bank of America on Aug. 28 also denied that it had violated banking guidelines or issued or accepted fraudulent bankers' receipts.
The United Kingdom bank Standard Chartered, also implicated in the scandal [see pp. 38967; 39008], was reported on Aug. 6 to have transferred an additional US$200,000,000 to meet liquidity shortages in its Indian operations.
The bank was said to have incurred losses estimated at US$299 million [see p. 38967].
Supreme Court commission on Ayodhya
The Supreme Court on Aug. 5 appointed a three-man commission to report on "the nature, extent and magnitude" of construction work on the disputed site of Ayodhya.
The report was due to be submitted within two weeks.
It was expected to ascertain whether the Uttar Pradesh government had violated two court orders by granting permission to Hindu militants in July to start work on the construction of a Hindu temple [see p. 39008].
Election of Vice-President
The veteran diplomat and former Union Minister K. R. Narayanan was elected as India's ninth Vice-President on Aug. 19 in succession to S. D. Sharma, who had been elected President in July [see p. 39008].
Constitutional amendment
Both houses of parliament on Aug. 20 unanimously approved a constitutional amendment granting official language status to Konkani, Manipuri and Nepali.
Relations with Russia
A Russian parliamentary delegation led by the Speaker of the Russian Supreme Soviet, Ruslan Khasbulatov, held talks in Delhi with Prime Minister Rao and senior government officials during a visit on Aug. 3-9.
Addressing a press conference on Aug. 6, Khasbulatov said that Russia would fulfil its rocket technology agreement with India and that "no other country will be allowed to interfere in their bilateral relations" .
In May the USA had imposed limited trade sanctions on India after claiming that an Indo-Russian deal on the supply of rocket engine technology to India violated the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) agreement [see p. 38914].
States developments
Punjab
Sikh separatists were reported to have massacred up to 57 people, mainly police officers and their relatives, in the first two weeks of August in retaliation against the recent killing of three Sikh militant leaders, namely Gurjant Singh Budhsinghwala, head of the Khalistan Liberation Force (killed in July—see p. 39008), his successor, Navroop Singh (killed on Aug. 2) and Sukhdev Singh Babbar, chief of the Babbar Khalsa International (killed on Aug. 9).
Kashmir
The government announced its intention on Aug. 11 to extend president's rule for a further six months, shelving plans for state assembly elect-ions.
Twenty-three people were reported killed on Aug. 17 in sporadic fighting following a strike call in protest against the resumption of the sixth round of Indo-Pakistan talks [see below].
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Indo-Pakistan talks
The sixth round of Indo-Pakistan talks at foreign secretary level, held in New Delhi on Aug. 17-19, culminated in the signing of two agreements banning the use of chemical weapons and establishing a code of conduct for diplomats in the two countries.
The talks had been postponed in May following allegations of an assault on an Indian diplomat stationed in Pakistan [see p. 38914].
The August meeting was described by Pakistan's foreign secretary, Shahryar Khan, as the "most productive" so far.
On Aug. 19 Khan told reporters in New Delhi that the two sides had also agreed "to address the issue of Jammu and Kashmir" , and described this development as "a positive step forward" .
However, an Indian External Affairs Ministry spokesman, when he was asked on the same day whether negotiations had been more constructive with regard to the long-standing Kashmir dispute, said only that "the talks should be viewed as a measured and gradual approach to stabilization of our relations" .
An agreed statement issued by the Indian government at the end of the talks made no mention of Kashmir.
Formation of new political alliance
A left-of-centre coalition of eight political groups formed the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) on Aug. 21.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Bombardment of Kabul
More than 1,800 people, mostly women and children, were killed and a further 1,500 wounded during August in the heaviest fighting between mujaheddin factions since the fall of the Soviet-backed Najibullah regime in April [see pp. 38847; 38915].
The forces of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, the leader of the Hezb-i-Islami fundamentalist group opposed to the interim government of President Burhanuddin Rabbani, launched on Aug. 10 a continuous bombardment of Kabul, the capital, with rockets, shells and cluster bombs, and followed up with ground attacks, supported by tanks, on Aug. 19.
On Aug. 16 Rabbani, who was forced to postpone foreign visits to Iran and Pakistan due to the crisis, dismissed Prime Minister Abdul Sabur Fareed as the most senior Hezb-i-Islami member in the government and Hekmatyar's personal nominee for the post.
Deputy Defence Minister Gen. Abdul Hakim, also of Hezb-i-Islami, was also forced to step down.
Hekmatyar retorted that Rabbani had no right to dismiss Fareed and that he no longer recognized him as President.
On Aug. 17 Rabbani announced that Hekmatyar had been formally expelled from the Leadership Council, the highest authority in the country, which was made up of mujaheddin leaders.
At least 126,000 civilians were reported to have fled Kabul by Aug. 22.
The staff of most foreign embassies, and 27 members of the UN mission, had also left by road following the killing of two Russian embassy personnel in rocket fire.
On Aug. 23, it was reported that the Bulgarian ambassador was wounded by shrapnel and that two local personnel in both the Pakistan and French embassies had been killed.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) announced on 24 that it had no plans to abandon Kabul.
UN agencies in the country were also reported to have prepared a US$10,000,000 emergency humanitarian aid package.
Hekmatyar was reported on Aug. 23 to have received a joint mujaheddin peace delegation representing several provinces, but to have rejected a proposal from Rabbani that a ceasefire should not be conditional on the withdrawal from Kabul of the powerful Uzbek militia led by Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostam.
A former supporter of the Najibullah regime who had switched sides, Dostam was now a mainstay of the mujaheddin government.
Hekmatyar threatened to "mount the last act" if the Uzbeks did not vacate Kabul within a week to 10 days.
Despite Hekmatyar's public avowal that his war was with the Uzbek militia and not with other mujaheddin groups, analysts were agreed that he had stepped up the military pressure against the government to prevent Rabbani from consolidating his position and marginalizing the Hezb-i-Islami.
Pakistani stance
The Pakistan government's appeal on Aug. 26 for a 72-hour ceasefire went unheeded.
Hezb-i-Islami had previously had the backing of Pakistan and had bases inside that country, but on Aug. 13, in an unprecedented statement, Pakistan's Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif had obliquely attacked Hekmatyar, stating that "Pakistan would not allow its territory to be used by unscrupulous elements engaged in undermining the territorial integrity of Afghanistan" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
KAZAKHSTAN
Accords with China
Foreign Minister Tuleutai Suleymenov flew to Beijing on Aug. 7 on a four-day visit at the invitation of his Chinese counterpart Qian Qichen [for Prime Minister's March visit to China see p. 38814].
The Xinhua news agency reported that at a meeting with Li Peng soon after the Kazakh party's arrival, the Chinese Premier called for enhanced relations in all fields and said that the recently completed rail link would help bilateral relations in the economic and trade fields.
On Aug. 4 Kazakh radio had reported that trade between Kazakhstan and the Chinese autonomous district of Ili Kazak had totalled US$122 million in the first four months of 1992.
Seven intergovernmental c-operation agreements were signed during Suleymenov's visit.
At a press conference in Alma Ata, the Kazakh capital, on Aug. 17, Kazakh news agency qoted him as saying that the agreements included provisions for new border crossing points and visa-free travel; Kazakhstan was prepared to provide China with assistance in geological prospecting, ore enrichment, the chemical industry, laser and biological technology, and in building hydroelectric power stations.
Joint processing of Kazakhstan's medicinal raw materials and Chinese participation in reconstructing Dzhambul phosphate works were also considered.
Education, publishing and cultural links were to be developed, and China had agreed to develop traffic on the Great Silk Route.
Military agreement with Russia
Delegations headed by the Russian Armed Forces Chief of General Staff, Col.-Gen.
Viktor Dubynin, and Kazakhstan's Defence Minister, Col.-Gen.
Sagadat Nurmagambetov, held two days of talks in Alma Ata which concluded with the signature on Aug. 19 of a military agreement, covering the transfer of personnel between the two armed forces, training, and military co-operation.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KIRGIZSTAN
Earthquake deaths and damage
Fifty people were estimated to have died and some 200 were injured, with many still unaccounted for, after 186 earth tremors struck mountain villages, according to agency reports on Aug. 20.
The US Geological Survey said that the earthquake measured 7.5 on the Richter scale and was centred in the Susamyr valley.
President Askar Akayev was reported to have toured the area before flying to Moscow on Aug. 24 to ask President Boris Yeltsin for Russian aid.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TURKMENISTAN
Oil pipeline agreement with Iran
President Saparmurad Niyazov visited Tehran, the Iranian capital, on Aug. 25 at the head of a large delegation, meeting President Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani.
The two countries were later reported to have agreed to build a pipeline to deliver gas from Turkmenistan to Europe, via Turkey.
Under a presidential decree of Aug. 6, oil and gas export prices were deregulated so as to bring them into line with world prices.
ASIA — PACIFIC
UZBEKISTAN
Co-operation agreements with Pakistan
President Islam Karimov visited Islamabad on Aug. 13-14, signing three protocols with Pakistan's Prime Minister Mohammad Nawaz Sharif, covering the reciprocal promotion and protection of investments, co-operation in the fields of water resources, power generation, irrigation and reclamation, and co-operation in posts and telecommunica-tions.
The Pakistani Prime Minister had visited Tashkent in June.
Creation of central bank
Establishment of the Central Bank of Uzbekistan was announced on Aug. 7.
The Interfax news agency reported that the bank would issue banknotes and securities, and carry out hard-currency operations in Uzbekistan and abroad.
Implementation of defence legislation
The Uzbek defence law came into effect on Aug. 6, under which the country became effectively a neutral, non-nuclear state, renouncing all territorial claims on other states, according to Interfax.
The legislation provided for the maintenance of ground forces, an air force, air defence, a task force and a national guard.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Resignation of Executive Secretary
Executive Secretary Peter Garrucho, a key aide of the newly elected Philippine President Fidel Ramos, resigned from the Cabinet on Aug. 10, after little more than a month in office.
He was replaced by Edelmiro Amante, a member of the House of Representatives.
Garrucho's resignation was prompted by his involvement in two controversies since his appointment to the Cabinet on June 30.
The first involved the extension of duty exemption on cement imports for three years, and the second arose from an order instructing the Bureau of Inland Revenue to refund to mining companies some 2,000 million pesos (US$1=23.8713 pesos as at Aug. 10, 1992) in taxes from which, Garrucho ruled, they were exempt.
It was later revealed that Ramos had not been consulted over either of the decisions, both of which he later reversed.
Garrucho's resignation, a public illustration of disunity within the Ramos administration, fuelled growing rumours that the government was racked by conflicts, despite the new President's repeated commitment to teamwork.
The differences within the Cabinet reflected the factional nature of the coalition which Ramos had hurriedly assembled in support of his candidacy prior to the May 1992 presidential elections.
However, disagreements appeared less motivated by ideological differences than by issues of personality and style (unlike the factionalism which had bedeviled the early days of the administration of Corazon Aquino, his presidential predecessor).
Resignation of police chief
The Philippines chief of police, Cesar Nazareno, head of a 100,000-strong force, resigned on Aug. 16 in a widening scandal over the alleged involvement of senior officers in illegal gambling, kidnapping and other crimes.
Lifting of foreign exchange controls
The government on Aug. 10 announced the dismantling of foreign exchange controls on current transactions in an effort to attract more foreign investment.
The move, announced jointly by Ramos and the governor of the Central Bank, Jose Cuisia, had been approved on Aug. 7.
It provided for the unimpeded movement of foreign exchange and gold into and out of the country by both Philippine residents and overseas investors, and removed the requirement that foreign exchange earned abroad by Philippine-based commodity and service exporters be sold to Manila-based banks.
Issues relating to Imelda Marcos
The decision to remove exchange controls had an unexpected bearing on the progress of the campaign against Imelda Marcos, whom the government was prosecuting on corruption charges relating to the years in which her late husband had been President of the Philippines.
On Aug. 13 it was reported that a Manila judge had dismissed 11 of the 39 charges against Marcos on the grounds that the government's de-regulation of foreign exchange dealings had removed the court's authority to hear charges relating to currency violations arising from the overseas bank accounts held by Marcos.
Initially Ramos expressed no opposition to the ruling but, on Aug. 17, he altered his position following pressure from central bank governor Cuisia who had said that individuals would not be let off past breaches; Justice Secretary Franklin Drilon, who had initially merely commented that the judge had made an erroneous decision, since the new regulations were not even in effect at the time of the ruling, later instructed government lawyers to investigate the possibility of an appeal against the dismissal of charges.
On Aug. 19 Ramos gave permission for the body of Ferdinand Marcos to be flown from Hawaii (where it had lain since his death in 1989) for private interment in his native province of Ilocos Norte in northern Luzon.
The Aquino government had resisted the return of the body on the grounds that it would have had a destabilizing effect on the country.
In late August, however, only days before the body was due to be transported, Imelda Marcos announced that the burial had been delayed on the grounds that she would not submit the body of her husband to the "indignity" of being transported on the cargo aircraft which had been offered by the Philippines' government.
Release of rebel leaders — Informal talks with communist insurgents
On Aug. 25 Ramos ordered the temporary release of five leading members of the outlawed Communist Party of the Philippines-Marxist Leninist (CPP).
The move came on the eve of informal peace talks in Utrecht, the Netherlands, between representatives of the government, led by Eric Singson, and a CPP delegation led by Jose Maria Sison.
The talks were held under the auspices of the National Unification Commission, a body which had been established by presidential proclamation in early August in order to promote the new government's policy of encouraging all insurgents to renounce armed struggle in return for an amnesty.
Among those released were Romulo Kintanar, the alleged head of the CPP's military wing, the New People's Army (NPA), which had been engaged in a guerrilla war with the government since 1968.
Also freed was Saturnino Ocampo, described as the general secretary of the CPP.
The freeing of the five communists was more than balanced by the simultaneous release of four army colonels and 12 other officers who had been imprisoned for participating in coup attempts against the Aquino government.
Among those freed were Col. Luisito Sanchez and Capt. Danilo Lim, both of whom were former members of the elite First Scout Ranger regiment which, in 1989, had occupied Manila's financial district for a week during a failed coup attempt.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Launch of anti-corruption drive by new government — Election of new opposition leader
It was reported on Aug. 5 that three members of the opposition had been suspended from the National Parliament only two weeks after being sworn into office.
The three, all of whom faced corruption allega-tions, were among the first victims of the newly elected government's avowed determination to combat official malpractice.
Assisted by a recent Supreme Court ruling that members of the last parliament were not immune from prosecution for corruption even if they had been re-elected, Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Sir Julius Chan had launched a full investigation in late July into the financial dealings of the previous government.
According to Sir Julius, the investigation would concentrate particularly on allegations relating to a discretionary fund used by former Prime Minister Rabbie Namaliu and his Finance Minister, Paul Pora.
Sir Julius confirmed that the investigation would also examine the use of government resources and assets during the recent general election campaign.
If necessary, he suggested, a full commission of inquiry would be established.
It was reported on Aug. 3 that Namaliu had been replaced as leader of the opposition Pangu Pati by former Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Sir Michael Somare.
The election of Sir Michael followed Namaliu's decision to retire from politics in order to spend more time with his wife who was seriously ill.
As reported, the terms of Somare's election were that he would lead the party until March 1993, whereupon the leadership would then be transferred to former Minister of Forests Jack Genia.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Unveiling of budget — Corruption cases against Nick Greiner and Alan Bond
Presentation of expansionary budget
The government of Prime Minister Paul Keating produced an expansionary budget on Aug. 18 designed to stimulate economic growth and boost employment.
The move was widely interpreted as an attempt to improve the prospects of the Australian Labor Party (ALP) winning a further term of office in the next general election, due by mid-1993.
The budget, for the fiscal year 1992-93 (ending in June 1993), set total expenditure at A$109,900 million (a 4.1 per cent increase in real terms compared with the previous year; US$1=A$1.3798 as at Aug. 17, 1992), while revenue was calculated at A$96,500 million (an increase of 0.5 per cent).
The key element of the budget was a package of measures worth A$4,500 million which federal Treasurer John Dawkins described as being designed to provide the economy with a "strong but temporary stimulus" over the next two years.
The package, which included an ambitious capital works and infrastructure programme, was designed to reduce unemployment from its current level of 11 per cent to 10 per cent by mid-1993.
The fiscal effect of the package involved an increase in the budget deficit, predicted to reach a record A$13,400 million by June 1993, compared with a deficit of A$9,300 million in 1991-92, and a surplus of A$1,900 million in 1990-91.
The budget was accompanied by a forecast from the Treasurer that economic growth in the 1992-93 fiscal year would amount to 3 per cent.
This represented a considerable revision of the 4.75 per cent prediction made by Keating in February 1992.
Dawkins explained this slower rate of growth as due to drought, subdued economic activity among Australia's main trading partners and fragile business confidence.
It was predicted that inflation would rise from its current level of 1.2 per cent to around 3 per cent.
Corruption cases against Greiner and Bond
The Supreme Court of New South Wales on Aug. 21 cleared the former Premier of the state, Nick Greiner, of the corruption allegations which had forced him to resign from office in June 1992 [see p. 38965].
The Court judged that the allegations brought against Greiner by the state's Independent Commission Against Corruption were "wrong in law" .
Bankrupt Australian entrepreneur Alan Bond was released from prison on Aug. 27 after the Western Australian Court of Criminal Appeal quashed a fraud conviction against him.
The move followed fresh evidence which threw doubt upon the veracity of the testimony during Bond's trial of a key witness, Laurie Connell.
Bond had been imprisoned for 2@1/2 years in May 1992 [see p. 38917]after being convicted of acting dishonestly during attempts in the late 1980s to rescue Connell's Rothwells merchant bank.
Following the appeal court's decision Bond was remanded on A$1000,000 bail until Oct. 5, when the Perth district court was due to set a date for a new trial.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
Death of Muldoon — Maori fishing rights
Sir Robert Muldoon, former Prime Minister of New Zealand, died in the early hours of Aug. 5 at the age of 70.
His funeral was held in Auckland on Aug. 7.
Muldoon, who throughout his political career was renowned for his abrasive manner and acerbic tongue, had become leader of the National Party in 1974.
In 1975 he led the party to a crushing electoral victory and, thereafter, served as Prime Minister until 1984 when he called a sudden election and was defeated by the Labour Party.
His time in office was marked by a high degree of state intervention in the economy, an approach which was rejected by the Labour Party in the 1980s and, following Muldoon's replacement as leader in November 1984, was also rejected by the National Party.
Nevertheless, until the end of his life Muldoon continued to command a significant degree of support among interventionists within the parliamentary caucus of the National Party, a factor which consistently served to undermine his leadership successors.
Muldoon had retired from politics in 1991 and became a popular talk-show host with an Auckland radio station.
Decision by Waitangi Tribunal on Maori fishing rights
It was reported on Aug. 12 that the Waitangi Tribunal, New Zealand's powerful advisory body on Maori affairs, had recommended that ownership of most of the fisheries of the country's South Island should be transferred to the Ngai Tahu, one of the country's smallest Maori tribes.
The tribunal ruled that the government had failed in a number of ways to honour its obligations to the Ngai Tahu since the signing of the Waitangi treaty between the white population and the Maoris in 1840.
It found that the small South Island-based tribe had an exclusive right to fish virtually all of the South Island coastline, as well as the right to a reasonable share of the country's 200-mile deep-water fishing zone.
Prime Minister Jim Bolger stated that the recommendation would not be accepted in full.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
On Aug. 27 the General Assembly of the UN passed a resolution condemning Indonesia over its violation of "fundamental rights" in East Timor.
EUROPE
COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES
Anniversary of abortive Soviet coup — Yeltsin review of reform process
In public appearances marking the anniversary of the failed 1991 coup against the then Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev [see p. 38368-73]which accelerated the break-up of the Soviet Union, Russian President Boris Yeltsin dismissed the possibility of a new coup, and stressed the need to press ahead with reform and privatization, foreseeing success despite the economic and administrative turmoil of the past year.
In a televised speech on Aug. 19, Yeltsin said that the past year had been "extremely difficult" but that the first steps to normalization were being taken.
He said that the country had surmounted a crucial test when price controls were lifted for most goods in January.
Starting from Oct. 1, vouchers with a value of 10,000 roubles each would be issued to all Russians to enable them to buy shares in privatized state property.
Yeltsin said that each voucher was a "ticket to a free economy" .
[See p. 39057for more details on Russian privatization plans.]
He also announced 50 per cent pay rises and plans for the introduction of a new wage structure for employees in education, health, social services and other fields.
At a news conference on Aug. 21, Yeltsin said that despite current problems "there will be no second putsch" .
He said that the national priority was now privatization.
Unemployment, he predicted, would rise but would not reach the levels experienced in Western countries.
He forecast that the 1992 grain harvest would be better than the previous year, and could guarantee that the people would not go hungry during the winter.
Predicting that conditions would be better in 1993, he acknowledged, however, that moving agriculture to a market economy had been "the most complicated problem" and that agricultural market mechanisms were not working well.
In answer to questions, Yeltsin said that help from other countries would ease the economic transition but that reform depended on Russia itself.
He put Italy at the top of the list of countries providing efficient co-operation through credits, direct investment and joint ventures, and added that Japan "helps least of all in this respect" .
The CIS, he said, would evolve but would continue to exist, and he emphasized the continuing necessity for co-ordination and co-operation among the former Soviet republics.
He affirmed the principle of territorial integrity, and rejected suggestions of Russia being drawn into the conflict between Abkhazians and the Georgian state authorities [see pp. 39058-59].
Recalling the defeat of the 1991 coup, Yeltsin said that he had outwitted the former KGB chief, Vladimir Kryuchkov, whom he identified as the main organizer of the attempt.
Yeltsin said that he had lured the coup leaders out of the Kremlin, where they were protected, by challenging them to go to Foros, the Black Sea resort where Gorbachev was being held, to get a statement from Gorbachev to confirm their claim that he was unable to carry out his duties.
Yeltsin said that he had promised to go with them, although he knew that the Russian Supreme Soviet would not allow him to do so.
They were arrested on their arrival at Foros.
Gorbachev news conference
At a news conference on Aug. 17, Gorbachev criticized the economic policies of the Russian leadership and again urged that a new type of union be negotiated by the former Soviet republics.
He described the drastic measures to move to a market economy as Utopian and a kind of "neo-Bolshevism." 
Congressional approval of US aid
The US House of Representatives approved an economic aid package for CIS countries on Aug. 6.
The Senate had already approved a similar measure.
The package included approval for a US$12,000 million increase in the overall US commitment to the International Monetary Fund, US$1,200 million in economic aid, and authorization for up to US$3,000 million for an international fund to back stabilization of CIS currencies.
Statement on imprisonment of foreigners in Stalin era
The Russian Security Ministry said on Aug. 18. that more than 2,000 foreigners were imprisoned in Soviet labour camps under the regime of Josef Stalin.
Maj.-Gen.
Anatoly Krayushkin of the Ministry directorate was quoted by Reuters as saying that the prisoners included 501 Bulgarians, 155 Mongolians, 116 Germans, 29 Hungarians and two Britons.
According to Russian press reports, Krayushkin had also given an Austrian diplomat a list of more than 200 Austrian prisoners.
Chiefs of staff meeting
Chiefs of Staff of the armed forces of CIS member republics agreed on Aug. 18 that contacts between their defence ministries and the CIS joint armed forces headquarters should be strengthened.
Permanent representatives would be assigned from the ministries to the joint headquarters before Sept. 1.
The meeting of the chiefs of staff committee in Moscow was the first since the agreement on the structure of the CIS high command, which had been concluded by heads of state at their Moscow summit meeting on July 6 [see pp. 39017-18].
EUROPE
RUSSIA
IMF and World Bank credits — Negotiations on debt repayment
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) Executive Board approved on Aug. 5 a US$1,040 million drawing by Russia over five months, intended to replenish Russian foreign currency reserves and to support Russia's transition to a market economy.
On Aug. 6, the World Bank granted Russia a US$600 million loan for priority imports.
The moves were the first steps in a longer-term support package for the former Soviet republics, estimated at US$24,000 million, which had been mapped out by the Group of Seven (G-7) industrialized countries [see p. 38888].
Further steps were conditional on the republics implementing economic and fiscal measures to create stable market economies, control inflation and facilitate investment.
Western conditions for the support, especially tight monetary policies, were the subject of intense debate in Russia and negotiation with the IMF.
The Acting Chairman of the Russian Central Bank, Viktor Gerashchenko, was in dispute with supporters of acting Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar, chief architect of the drive to a market economy, over measures to deal with the massive outstanding debts of state enterprises.
Gerashchenko warned of the dangers of letting enterprises go bankrupt, but government officials said that approving new credit could undermine agreement with the IMF to restrict the budget deficit to 5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP).
In an interview in the Washington Post of Aug. 21, Gerashchenko criticized the plans agreed with the IMF and said that some of the government's statements sounded like a fairy tale.
IMF officials who visited Moscow for talks on Aug. 24-26 said, however, that Russian authorities, including Gerashchenko, were still in general agreement on the plans.
Richard Erb, Deputy Managing Director of the IMF, said that it was too early to say whether Russia could meet inflation or budget deficit targets for 1992.
Talks on debt repayments
Russian delegates met representatives of G-7 in Paris starting on Aug. 27 to try to negotiate rescheduling of repayments on foreign debt inherited from the Soviet Union, estimated at some US$70,000 million.
Gaidar said in Moscow on Aug. 28 that Russia, already some US$4,000 million in arrears, could afford to repay no more than US$2,000 million in 1992.
According to estimates put out by the Reuters news agency, however, interest payments alone would have amounted to almost US$10,000 million for the year.
The Paris talks were in preparation for a meeting in September of the so-called "Paris Club" of creditor countries.
Rouble weakness
The rouble fell to a six-month low of 205 to one US dollar on the Moscow Interbank Currency Exchange on Aug. 27, Reuters reported.
The plunge dented hopes of stabilizing the currency and preparing for convertibility.
Economy
Privatization
President Boris Yeltsin chose the first anniversary of the August 1991 coup attempt to announce a further stage in the Russian government's privatization programme.
In a broadcast on Aug. 19, he said that from Oct. 1, privatization vouchers for 10,000 roubles' worth of state property would be distributed free to every citizen [see also p. 39056].
Further details were provided at a press conference on Aug. 21 held by the Russian Federation State Committee for the Management of State Property, the body managing the privatization scheme.
Anatoly Chubais, the Committee's chairman, explained the ways in which the privatization vouchers might be used:(i) workers could acquire shares in their own enterprise;(ii) vouchers could be used at auction to buy shares in enterprises which were to become joint stock companies;(iii) vouchers could be spent via private investment funds which would be intermediaries in share purchasing; or (iv) vouchers could be sold for cash.
At least 35 per cent of the purchase price for shares would have to be paid in privatization vouchers.
The same rules applied to both foreign and domestic purchasers.
Inter-enterprise debt
A decision over the issue of inter-enterprise debt was described by the Financial Times of Sept. 4 as "a messy compromise" .
A telegram from the new Chair of the Central Bank, Viktor Gerashchenko, to local bank branches on July 28 had authorised them to finance the estimated debts of 1,190,000 million roubles accumulated between Russian state enterprises.
Reformers warned, however, that this move would jeopardize international credit agreements with Russia and undermine government policy.
Accordingly, on Aug. 4 the Russian government ordered the Bank to stop the automatic cancellation of enterprise debts.
A Russian television interview with both Gerashchenko and acting Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar on Aug. 9 implied that the credit issued to enterprises would stand at about 350,000-400,000 million roubles.
Meanwhile, a mechanism to sell off debt or property of net debtors, meshing with the privatization of state enterprises [see above], was to go ahead.
Agriculture
There were warnings of a potential "scissors crisis" in agriculture, similar to that of the 1920s, in which the disparity between agricultural and industrial products had caused peasants to withhold grain.
Despite the government's resolution of Aug. 11 to pay up to 12,000 roubles per tonne for standard quality grain in an attempt to persuade producers to sell to the state, only a quarter of the target figure for state reserves had been delivered by mid-August.
The recommended price for grain, as fixed in negotiations in July with farmers unions, had been 10,000 roubles per tonne.
Some regions of Russia, however, were reported to be unilaterally withholding deliveries.
At a press conference on Aug. 18 Viktor Khlystun, Russia's Agriculture Minister, outlined his plans to prevent monopolies from developing during privatization of the agricultural sector.
On Aug. 30 Canada resumed shipments of wheat to Russia which had been interrupted from Aug. 18 because of payment arrears.
On Aug. 20, Australia was reported to have stopped supplies for the same reason.
Industrialists' conference
Two conferences in August sought to unite workers with enterprise directors in opposition to the government's economic reform policy.
However, the conferences turned out to carry less political weight than had been expected.
An article in Izvestiya of Aug. 17 commented that their failure to create a structured opposition stemmed from the conflict of interests between enterprise directors and the parliamentarians who had organized both conferences.
Industrialists heading soon-to-be privatized enterprises, while supporting calls to relax monetary policy, could not concur with the calls for strikes and for a new government, which parliamentarians and trades union leaders were perceived to be making for their own political motives.
The conference of enterprise managers, convened on Aug. 13-14 by the Industrial Union (a parliamentary faction led by Yury Gekht), failed to endorse a call for the government's resignation and appeared fragmented.
Its major results were to appoint a permanent body, the All-Russian Co-ordinating Council of Industrialists, chaired by Gekht, and to mandate the Industrial Union to submit the presidential decrees on privatization for judgment by the Constitutional Court.
The absence of any government representative except for Industry Minister Aleksandr Titkin angered delegates.
Observers noted that Georgy Khizha and Vladimir Shumeiko did not attend, although as ministers brought into the government from the defence industry sector in May [see p. 38923]they were thought to support the interest group represented at the conference.
Gaidar, although summoned by the conference participants, did not attend.
The alternative economic programmes of the Industrial Union and of the loosely allied Civic Union [see p. 38974]were published before the conference, and reported in Izvestiya of Aug. 12 and July 23 respectively.
The programmes were broadly similar in their call for a gradual transition to the market and a return to more state control.
Izvestiya warned that the Civic Union's programme would cause spiralling inflation which could only be broken by "strict, consistent monetary-credit and financial policy, the policy from which the government is retreating under pressure" .
However, Civic Union leaders, who included Vice-President Aleksandr Rutskoi and the increasingly influential leader of the Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs, Arkady Volsky, reportedly distanced themselves from their organization's draft programme.
On Aug. 15 the All-Russian Labour Conference held a plenary meeting, chaired by I. Konstantinov, a People's Deputy who had participated in organizing the Industrialists' Conference.
The Labour Conference, which described itself as a body uniting all forms of workers' struggle for their rights, called for a national warning strike which would create local bodies which could participate in the struggle against the current government and its reforms.
The economic demands of the conference included a return to state price control and the repeal of decrees on privatization and bankruptcy.
Izvestiya, which described the Labour Conference as a group which united the interests of right-wing parliamentary factions and conservative trades unions, called these measures "as populist as they are irresponsible" .
The official trade union organization, the Federation of Independent Trade Unions of Russia, formerly the official Soviet trade union body, announced on Aug. 14 the results of a poll among its members.
Of 10,000,000 workers polled, only 10 per cent said that they would support a strike in protest at the government's economic policies, although 86 per cent expressed willingness to participate in protest demonstrations.
Industrial action
A strike by Russian air traffic controllers on Aug. 15 lasted less than 24 hours before it collapsed.
The strike had been declared illegal by the Russian Prosecutor General.
Controllers were demanding doubled wages, improved conditions, and the creation of an air traffic department independent of the Transport Ministry.
Media issues
Izvestiya on Aug. 28 printed a resolution by the State Committee for the Management of State Property establishing the Izvestiya publishing house and formally abolishing the USSR Supreme Soviet Izvestiya publishing house.
Thus the struggle for ownership of the influential Izvestiya newspaper appeared settled by a nominal change in ownership, taking the paper out of reach of the Supreme Soviet.
The State Committee's resolution was issued on Yeltsin's instruction.
The Russian Supreme Soviet had attempted to gain control of Izvestiya in July [see p. 39020], on the grounds that, as successor to the USSR Supreme Soviet, it was the paper's rightful owner.
During August, Russia's Constitutional Court had come down on the side of Izvestiya and Yeltsin, while the Prosecutor's Office and the Russian Federal Property Fund had unsuccessfully supported the Supreme Soviet.
Pravda, formerly the newspaper of the Soviet Communist Party, announced its intention to increase publication from three to five times weekly from Sept. 1, having been saved from bankruptcy by establishing a joint venture with a Greek businessman who retained a controlling share.
Pravda's financial difficulties had led to a brief suspension in March [see pp. 38825; 38874], but its pro-communist line had changed little since its reappearance following a ban in August 1991 for alleged support for the attempted coup [see pp. 38418].
Banning of Liberal Democratic Party
The misleadingly named Liberal Democratic Party of the Soviet Union was effectively banned in August.
The Russian Justice Ministry announced on Aug. 11 that it had annulled the party's registration, thus denying it legal status.
The Liberal Democratic Party was recognized to be in fact an ultra-nationalist formation.
Its leader, Vladimir Zhirinovsky, had surprised commentators by coming third in Russia's June 1991 presidential elections [see p. 38273].
The party's registration by the USSR Justice Ministry on April 12, 1991, was annulled because of alleged falsification of the party's membership lists.
The Russian Justice Ministry claimed that this infringement of the law governing the registration of parties had taken place with the connivance of ex-Soviet officials.
International co-operation agreements
On Aug. 26 an intergovernmental agreement between Russia and Armenia, Azerbaijan, Estonia, Kirgizstan, Lithuania, Moldova, Turkmenistan and Ukraine was signed in Moscow.
The agreement covered economic, scientific, technological and cultural co-operation.
EUROPE
GEORGIA
Internal conflict
Tension between Georgia and its autonomous republic of Abkhazia (which had declared independence in July—see p. 39018-19) escalated into armed conflict in August, causing over 100 deaths.
By Aug. 31 a fragile ceasefire was in place in preparations for negotiations on Abkhazia's status beginning on Sept. 3.
Russia, fearing the spread of independence demands by Abkhazia's neighbouring North Caucasian republics within the Russian Federation, acted as mediator in the ceasefire talks held on Aug. 29 in Sochi.
According to the 1989 census, Abkhazia was only 17.8 per cent Abkhaz and 45.7 per cent Georgian (other major ethnic groups being Russians and Armenians), but since 1978 it had demanded secession from Georgia, this campaign having escalated in 1990 [see pp. 37665; 38079].
On Aug. 14, Georgian National Guard detachments were deployed in Abkhazia, following a televised address by Georgian President Eduard Shevardnadze, in which he warned that all measures would be employed to secure the release of Interior Minister Roman Gventsadze and other officials, who had been taken hostage on Aug. 11 by supporters of ousted Georgian President Zviad Gamsakhurdia.
(Gventsadze was released on Aug. 14.)
The kidnapped officials had gone to negotiate the release of hostages captured in July, including deputy Prime Minister Aleksandr Kavsadze [see p. 39019].
The Abkhaz authorities called the deployment an "occupation" , referring to the April 1992 agreement which permitted Georgian National Guard troops to enter Abkhazia only with permission from the Abkhaz government.
Between Aug. 14 and 16 fighting in Abkhazia's capital Sukhumi caused up to 50 deaths.
On Aug. 18, despite a ceasefire and the reported withdrawal of Georgian forces from Sukhumi the previous day, National Guard troops commanded by Georgian Defence Minister Tengiz Kitovani, shelled the town in an attempt to force the resignation of Vladislav Ardzinba, the Abkhaz leader behind the current independence campaign.
As Ardzinba and a group of Abkhaz parliamentarians fled north to Gudauta, the Georgian troops took over major installations in Sukhumi, and Givi Lomanidze, the Abkhazian Interior Minister deposed in June [see p. 39019], was reinstated.
On Aug. 19, Kavsadze was released.
Shevardnadze at this point attempted to restrain the fighting, negotiating with Ardzinba by telephone.
He refused to back a threat by the new commander of Georgian troops in Abkhazia, Col. Georgy Karkarashvili, to attack Gudauta if Ardzinba did not surrender on Aug. 26.
However, by the end of August, fighting had spread to Gagra, north of Gudauta.
The situation was complicated by the intervention of the Confederation of Caucasian Mountain Peoples [see p. 38926], which had encouraged volunteers to support the Abkhazians "against the Georgian aggressors" .
President Boris Yeltsin of Russia, emphasising his support for Shevardnadze's insistence on Georgia's territorial integrity, condemned the their actions.
Lifting of state of emergency
On Aug. 4, at a rally celebrating Georgia's admission to the UN on July 31, now named "national reconciliation" day, a Georgian State Council resolution ended the state of emergency in Georgia and the curfew in Tbilisi.
These restrictions had been in force since armed conflict with former leader Gamsakhurdia erupted in October 1991 [see p. 38538].
As part of the "national reconciliation" , an amnesty was announced for supporters of Gamsakhurdia, including those arrested for the attack on the television centre in June [see p. 38981].
EUROPE
ARMENIA/AZERBAIJAN
Progress of the war
An Azeri attack on Armenian territory around the village of Artsvashen in western Azerbaijan in early August prompted Armenian President Levon Ter-Petrosyan on Aug. 10 to appeal to the signatories of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) collective security treaty (signed by six member states at the Tashkent summit in May—see p. 38922) to "carry out their obligations" in coming to Armenia's aid.
The response to Armenia's appeal was cool, a Russian spokesman emphasising that the treaty envisaged negotiations before any military involvement.
However, the Presidents and Premiers of Armenia and Russia agreed on Aug. 21 in Moscow to Russian military support for Armenia and on the legal status of Russian forces in Armenia.
Fighting in August reflected Azerbaijan's continued attempt to recoup the losses suffered in the spring, and was heavy around the Mardakert region of northern Nagorny Karabakh, the scene of fighting in July.
There were reports of Azeri bombing attacks on Stepanakert, the capital of Nagorny Karabakh.
Armenia denied reports that the Lachin corridor connecting Nagorny Karabakh with Armenia [see p. 38925]had been taken under Azeri control.
Peace negotiations
Following an offer of mediation from Kazakhstan's President Nursultan Nazarbayev, trilateral negotations at Foreign Minister level began on Aug. 27 in the Kazakh capital, Alma Ata, and produced a ceasefire agreement to begin on Sept. 1.
The fourth round of preliminary talks in Rome on a peace conference sponsored by the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) took place between Aug. 1 and 5, but produced no results.
Visiting the region on Aug. 25-26, the chairman of the CSCE negotiations, Mario Raffaelli, proposed a 60-day truce in the conflict.
Nagorny Karabakh
On Aug. 13, the Nagorny Karabakh Supreme Soviet, prompted by "aggression on the part of Azerbaijan and the occupation of a considerable part of [Nagorny Karabakh]territory" , introduced a six-month state of emergency in the enclave, and ordered a general mobilization.
Two days later, in emergency session, the Supreme Soviet accepted the resignation of the government of Prime Minister Oleg Yesayan, and replaced it with a Defence Committee, which was invested with governmental authority until the end of the war.
The Committee was chaired by Robert Kocharyan, a close associate of the Armenian President and a leading member of the Armenian Pan-National Movement.
Karen Baguryan was appointed acting Supreme Soviet chair, replacing Georgy Petrosyan.
Armenia
An emergency session of the Armenian parliament on Aug. 17 failed to reach agreement on holding a referendum to decide whether Ter-Petrosyan should resign.
Rallies in previous days organized by the National Unity opposition coalition, angered by his refusal to grant outright recognition to the "Republic of Nagorny Karabakh" , had demanded his resignation.
Azerbaijani currency
On Aug. 14, Azerbaijan's new currency, the manat (divided into 100 gopik), became legal tender.
The manat, which would circulate in parallel with the rouble, was set at a value of 1 manat=10 roubles.
EUROPE
MOLDOVA
Apparent success of ceasefire — Agreement on Russian troop withdrawal
The July peace agreement designed to end the fighting between Moldova and the self-proclaimed Dnestr republic appeared to be holding on Aug. 7 as Russian and Moldovan leaders began talks in Moscow on the implementation of the accord, and on economic ties.
Russia's acting Premier Yegor Gaidar and Moldovan Prime Minister Andrei Sangheli [for his appointment on July 1 see p. 38976]agreed to open negotiations over the removal of Russian troops stationed in the republic.
Moldova had repeatedly accused these forces of fighting on the side of Slav separatists in the Dnestr conflict.
A joint Russian, Moldovan and Dnestr peacekeeping force had been deployed on July 29 to halt the fighting after an agreement signed by Russian President Boris Yeltsin and his Moldovan counterpart Mircea Snegur over the future status of the Dnestr region [for July agreement see p. 39019].
On Aug. 21 Nikolai Zhurbenko and Pavel Creanga, the heads of the commission monitoring the Dnestr ceasefire, reported that large numbers of arms had been surrendered and that warring groups had mostly disbanded, although Zhurbenko said that it was too soon for peacekeeping forces to be withdrawn.
Peacekeeping forces came under fire in isolated incidents.
Some 47,400 refugees from the conflict were reported to have fled to Ukraine.
Russia and Moldova agreed on Aug. 26 a two-month timetable for the removal of the 300th Russian Parachute Regiment from its base in Kishinev.
Negotiations over the removal of the 14th Army from the Dnestr region were to begin in September.
On Sept. 1, Yeltsin and Snegur expressed their satisfaction that peace had been restored to the Dnestr region.
Yeltsin announced that he would mediate in talks between the two sides over Dnestr's future, and both presidents appealed to Ukraine to co-operate in allowing the Russian troop withdrawals from Moldova through its territory.
Agreements with Romania
Sangheli visited Bucharest for talks on Aug. 18-19 with Romanian Prime Minister Theodor Stolojan.
They discussed the Dnestr ceasefire and signed agreements for the construction of power lines to link Moldova to Romania's national grid, and for rail and road improvements.
Snegur met Romanian President Ion Iliescu on Aug. 28.
EUROPE
UKRAINE
Agreement on Black Sea Fleet
On Aug. 3 at a meeting in Yalta, the Ukrainian and Russian Federation (RF) Presidents, Leonid Kravchuk and Boris Yeltsin, signed an agreement on the division of the Black Sea Fleet.
The issue of control over the Fleet had been a source of tension between the two states since the collapse of the Soviet Union in December 1991 [see pp. 38732; 38878].
The defection of a frigate of the Fleet to Ukraine in July [see p. 39021]had fostered fears that no agreement would be forthcoming at Yalta.
Under the Aug. 3 agreement, there would be a transitional period extending to 1995, during which the Black Sea Fleet would be removed from Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) joint armed forces and "placed under the direct jurisdiction of the Russian Federation and of Ukraine" .
It was expected that the fleet would be divided at the end of the transitional period.
The removal of the fleet from CIS command confirmed a decision taken in May [see p. 38925].
The August agreement stipulated that during the transitional period, Russia and Ukraine would exercise joint command over the Fleet; enjoy equal use of its bases and facilities; recruit to it equally by conscription; and allow servicemen of the fleet to swear allegiance to the state of which they were citizens.
At Yalta, the two states also made progress in other aspects of their bilateral relations, building on their June negotiations in Dagomys [see p. 38973].
Agreements included visa-free travel between the two countries, and a confirmation, signed by the two Foreign Ministers, of Ukraine's right to a share of former Soviet property located abroad for the use of diplomatic and trading missions.
Opposition congress
The Congress of National Democratic Forces of Ukraine held its inaugural meeting on Aug. 2, attended by 16 parties and organizations including the Ukrainian Republican Party and the Democratic Party of Ukraine.
The congress expressed support for President Kravchuk, but sought the dismissal of the present government under Prime Minister Vitold Fokin, the dissolution of the current parliament (elected in March 1990) and the holding of fresh legislative elections.
It declared its goal to be the attainment of full state independence for Ukraine, which, it asserted, necessitated withdrawal from the CIS.
However, the largest nationalist organization of Ukraine, Rukh, voted on Aug. 1 not to take part in the congress, considering it to be too moderate in its opposition to the current regime.
President Kravchuk sent a message of greetings to the congress.
Trade agreement with China
On Aug. 8, during an official visit to China, Ukraine's Minister of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade, Anatolii Voronkov, signed an agreement on trade and economic co-operation with his Chinese counterpart, Li Lanqing.
A delegation from China's legislature, the National People's Congress, furthered contacts between the two states with an eight-day visit to Ukraine beginning on Aug. 18.
Ukraine and China had established diplomatic relations on Jan. 4, 1992.
EUROPE
ESTONIA
IMF agreement on financial aid
The managing director of the International Monetary Fund, Michel Camdessus, agreed on Aug. 17 during a three-day visit to Tallinn to provide backing for Estonian economic reforms with financial credits and other support worth up to US$40,000,000.
Estonian Prime Minister Tiit Vahi compared the agreement with the Marshall Plan for post-war Europe.
It would aid business restructuring and privatization in an economy which, according to Vahi, was just withstanding a tenfold rise in raw material prices, a 100 per cent increase in fuel prices and the loss of 90 per cent of its export market.
The national debt rose by 32.9 per cent in 1991 and consumer prices increased by 211.8 per cent.
Camdessus praised Estonia's handling of the introduction of its own currency, the kroon, which became the sole legal tender on June 20 [see p. 38971].
It was reported on Aug. 19 that the Swedish bank Forex had become the second foreign bank to buy and sell kroons, following the Lithuanian bank Litimpex's decision to do so in June.
The US government announced on Aug. 24 that it was to double Estonia's credit limit for buying grain to US$10,000,000.
Russian proposals on debt
Russian officials during talks in Moscow on Aug. 31 proposed the writing-off of all debt between Estonia and Russia.
The surprise offer of a so-called "zero option" came in advance of a meeting scheduled for Sept. 2 between Vahi and Russia's acting Prime Minister, Yegor Gaidar.
The talks raised hopes about the early signing of an Estonian-Russian free trade agreement.
The Russian side also indicated that Russia would not demand that Estonia should help to pay off the former USSR's foreign debt.
EUROPE
LATVIA
Membership of World Bank — Economic indicators
Latvia joined the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD—the World Bank) on Aug. 9, making an initial contribution of US$5,700,000.
Latvia had been admitted to the International Monetary Fund in May [see p. 38937].
The announcement came amid new indications of the depth of Latvia's economic crisis.
Prime Minister Ivars Godmanis told local authorities on July 25 that rising energy prices could result in Latvian enterprises cutting production to save fuel, and he forecast widespread redundancies.
The government's debt, incurred buying energy supplies on credit, was rising, according to Godmanis.
Coal supplies from Ekibastuz in Kazakhstan were halted on Aug. 12 because of an unpaid 100 million rouble debt for previous supplies.
Godmanis announced on Aug. 27 that the government would borrow US$12,000,000 from Latvian enterprises to pay farmers for grain, dairy and meat reserves, so that they could buy seed for the winter sowing.
Payment had been held up because of a cash shortage.
The move, he said, would mean selling on the produce at convertible prices, and he promised an increase in the minimum wage from Oct. 1 to compensate for price increases.
Trade agreement with Ukraine
An agreement on trade and economic co-operation was signed by Godmanis and Ukrainian Prime Minister Vitold Fokin in Kiev onAug. 4.
EUROPE
LITHUANIA
Russian economic proposals — Energy problems
Russian proposals for new talks on economic links with Lithuania were put forward on Aug. 15 by Russia's acting Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar.
The proposals involved establishing trading procedures, setting up trade missions, settling finance and credit terms, and various forms of economic co-operation.
The new negotiations began on Aug. 28, and were scheduled to continue into September.
An early focus was an agreement on debt settlement between the two countries.
As of Aug. 1, the debt owed by Russian firms to Lithuania was calculated as 11,000 million roubles, while Lithuanian businesses owed Russia 4,700 million.
Deputy Premier Bronislovas Lubys complained on Aug. 20 that Russian enterprises had doubled prices for gas and petrol and then threatened to cut off supplies within days if the increased bills were not paid.
Formation of new political movement
A new political movement, the Jan. 13 Fraternity of the Defence of the Independence of Lithuania, was formally constituted on Aug. 18.
The name was taken from the date in 1991 on which 14 people were killed by Soviet troops during the crisis over Lithuania's demands for independence from the USSR [see pp. 37944-45].
The group had an initial membership of 2,000 and intended to contest elections to the Seimas (parliament).
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Visit of Yeltsin
Russian President Boris Yeltsin arrived in Sofia on Aug. 3 as the guest of President Zhelyu Zhelev, with whom he held a first round of talks the same day, signing a 10-year treaty of friendship and cooperation before leaving on Aug. 4.
The Russian delegation included the Deputy Premier and the Foreign, Defence, and Industry ministers.
Separate agreements were signed on military cooperation and on the formation of an intergovernmental commission on trade, economic and scientific co-operation.
At a joint press conference, Yeltsin raised the controversial issue of Macedonia and foreshadowed the imminent recognition of Macedonian independence by Russia (formalized on Aug. 6—see p. 39036), saying that "the people of that country alone have the right to decide its name" .
His remarks gave offence to Bulgaria's neighbour, Greece, whose ambassador was instructed to protest on the grounds that "the possible recognition of Skopje under the historical Greek name of Macedonia" constituted "an unfriendly stance with negative consequences for relations" .
Zhivkov's "not guilty" plea
Bulgaria's former President and Communist Party leader, Todor Zhivkov, on trial since February 1991 on various charges of corruption and abuse of power, pleaded not guilty at his final court defence appearance on a first charge, of embezzlement, on Aug. 14.
On Aug. 24, the prosecution granted Zhivkov's request for more time, giving him until Sept. 11 to prepare his defence in connection with charges of alleged racial discrimination and incitement to racial hatred against Bulgaria's ethnic Turks.
On July 27, the prosecution had demanded a 10-year sentence for the former leader, aged 80, in connection with the embezzlement charge [see also p. 39014].
Government's adoption of budget draft
The government approved a draft 1993 budget on Aug. 6 which, Finance Minister Ivan Kostov told a press conference, would constitute Bulgaria's "most trying ordeal since the start of the economic reform" .
The budget had to respond to the two challenges of tax reform and resumption of debt service payments, he said.
The draft was expected to be presented to the government as a bill, before going before parliament by the end of October.
Closure of uranium mines
The government announced on Aug. 12 the discontinuation of all uranium extraction and the closure of processing plants, angering uranium miners, who had received their last pay packets in April.
An Industry Ministry statement said that the closures would take place in stages, to be completed by 1994.
At several sites, protesting miners were reported to have gone down the pits and stayed there following the announcement.
At the Smolyan mines, 67 men were said to have been on hunger strike below ground since Aug. 13 [see p. 39014 for labour unrest].
Arrest of Podkrepa union leader
Konstantin Trenchev, chairman of the leading Podkrepa Trade Union Federation, was arrested on Aug. 7 and charged with incitement to destroy public property together with 37 others alleged to have participated in an attack on the Sofia headquarters of the Bulgarian Communist Party on Aug. 26, 1990 [see p. 37666].
Returning on Aug. 17 from a visit to the United States, Trenchev alleged that a press campaign was being waged against him.
The secretary, of Podkrepa, Svilen Marinov, was arrested on Aug. 18.
Prime Minister's meeting with former King
In Barcelona to attend the closing ceremony of the 1992 Olympic Games [see p. 39073], Prime Minister Filip Dimitrov met the exiled former King of Bulgaria, Simeon II, for a "relaxed private conversation" on Aug. 10.
Dimitrov had been received by King Juan Carlos of Spain on Aug. 9.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Agreement on a timetable for partition
It was agreed on Aug. 27 that Czechoslovakia would formally split into two independent states on Jan. 1, 1993.
Talks about the modalities of dividing the Czechoslovak federal state had resumed on Aug. 4.
The process of abandonment of the Czechoslovak federation had been gathering pace through the previous two months [see pp. 38944-45; 39015].
The Czech Prime Minister and leader of the Civic Democratic Party (ODS), Vaclav Klaus, and the Slovak Prime Minister, Vladimir Meciar, leader of the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), met in Prague on Aug. 12.
By Aug. 20, the three Interior Ministers, Petr Cermak (federal), Gen. Jozef Tuchyna (Slovak) and Jan Ruml (Czech), had reached agreement at talks in Bratislava on devolving the federal Interior Ministry's powers to the Republics in the event of partition.
The following day, the newspaper Lidove Noviny reported that Slovak leaders were proposing a treaty on close economic and political ties under a "Czecho-Slovak Union" to be formed upon partitition.
It said that Meciar was to put the plan to his Czech counterpart at their next round of talks.
Before the two Prime Ministers' next scheduled meeting (by then set for Aug. 27), however, Meciar suddenly announced that the HZDS side would not be attending.
In a letter to Klaus on Aug. 21, he said that he considered further talks "unsuitable" and accused the Czech side of failing to live up to previous agreements, and on Aug. 24 he turned down the Czech Prime Minister's formal invitation to the talks.
In the invitation letter, cited the same day on Radio Czechoslovakia, Klaus was said to have urged the Slovak leader to reconsider.
On Aug. 25, in a further volte face, Meciar announced that he would after all attend "merely consultative" talks and had agreed to meet Klaus next day at Brno.
During a break in the ensuing negotiations on Aug. 26, Meciar told journalists that Czechoslovakia would cease to exist on Jan. 1, 1993.
 "There is no chance of maintaining the present state of affairs," he added.
Reuters news agency cited him as saying that he and Klaus had agreed a timetable for moves towards the split and for preparing legislation at both federal and republic level to ensure a peaceful transition to two independent states.
A Washington Post report said that both men strove to put on a reassuring front when asked about opinion polls which continued to show a majority of voters in both republics against separation.
The bilateral agreement signed by Klaus and Meciar in July had foreseen dissolution of the existing state by Sept. 30, but left several issues unresolved [see p. 39015].
While the agreement of Aug. 27 deferred formal dissolution until the New Year, both leaders were still said to be optimistic on the Sept. 30 deadline for passage of federal laws to dissolve the federation and divide its powers and property.
By January, the two republics would have drawn up their separate budgets, reports said.
By Sept. 30 the Federal Assembly would pass a law, which the federal government had already approved, legalising four possible ways of winding up the federation: by referendum; by agreement between the two republics; by the unilateral secession of one republic; or by a simple declaration of the Assembly.
Measures to avoid economic dislocation
The two parties were reported to have agreed in principle to create a customs union and a currency zone in which future separate currencies would be linked by a fixed exchange rate.
The agreement fixed no date for introducing separate currencies which, the Financial Times said on Aug. 28, would be issued at a one-to-one exchange rate.
Formation of a customs union, the Financial Times reported, was intended to ensure that dissolution of the federation did not jeopardise the country's obligations towards the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the European Communities (EC).
The EC, the Washington Post report noted [see above], had not given any promise that it would renew the current association agreement when it expired in December.
Second and third rounds of privatization
The second round of selling of vouchers under Czechoslovakia's privatization procedure ended on Aug. 18, with the third round commencing on Aug. 26 and scheduled to end on Sept. 15 [for details of the scheme and previous stages see pp. 38469; 38734; 38777; 38921].
It was reported that by Aug. 19, 75 per cent of vouchers purchased had been traded for company shares.
The sales were organized separately in the two republics for the first time.
Future of the army
On Slovak television on Aug. 21 Czechoslovakian Defence Minister Imrich Andrejcak said that in the event of a division of the federation, the army would be split up "in an organized manner under a combined command" .
This would enable it to fit into a future "joint co-ordinated organ of a European type" .
Future of mass media
Representatives of the Czech and Slovak television and radio services met in Bratislava on Aug. 5 and agreed on joint back-up and operations of television and radio coverage in both republics.
On Aug. 23 Milan Knazko, the Slovak Minister of International Relations, was reported to have attacked the republic's television service, accusing it of political bias.
Failure to elect federal President
Czechoslovakia's Federal Assembly failed on Aug. 6 in a fourth round ballot to choose a new President to replace Vaclav Havel, who resigned on July 20 [see p. 39015].
No party in the Federal Assembly put a candidate forward, forcing postponement of the voting until Sept. 24.
Alliance of Slovak leftist parties
The Party of the Democratic Left, the second largest Slovak political party, led by Peter Weiss, and the Social Democratic Party in Slovakia, led by Alexander Dubcek, signed a political co-operation agreement on Aug. 25.
Death of Cardinal Tomasek
The former Archbishop of Prague, Cardinal Frantisek Tomasek, who under Communist rule had become a symbol of the struggle for religious freedom, died on Aug. 4 aged 93, of heart failure complicated by pneumonia.
The funeral in St Vitus's Cathedral on Aug. 12 was attended by Presidents Lech Walesa of Poland and Thomas Klestil of Austria, Hungarian Prime Minister Jozsef Antall, Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany, and leading Czechoslovakian political figures.
Klaus and Havel delivered funeral orations.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
World Hungarian Congress — Decision on state ownership — Visit by Klaus
After an interval of 54 years the World Federation of Hungarians held its third congress in Budapest on Aug. 19-21.
The congress represented ethnic Hungarians throughout the world—Hungary's 10,000,000 Hungarians as well as some 5,000,000 ethnic Hungarians living abroad, in particular the sizeable minorities in the neighbouring regions of Transylvania (Romania), Slovakia, and Vojvodina (Serbia).
In a closing statement the 195 delegates declared that the congress was "held in the new spirit of peace and co-operation of eastern European peoples" , and that the federation would "serve the interests and the moral and intellectual renewal of all Hungarians" and would be "independent from political parties and governments" .
They stressed that "granting national minorities forms of self-determination is a natural concomitant of respect for human rights" .
Addressing the congress on the opening day, Hungarian Prime Minister Jozsef Antall reiterated that Hungary had no territorial claims on neighbouring countries but also said that the Hungarian government had a duty (stated in the Constitution) to protect the interests of "Hungarians living beyond the borders" .
Decisions on state ownership
The government on Aug. 28 published a list of some 160 companies which would remain wholly or partly in state ownership.
As expected, state control would be maintained over much of the country's energy, telecommunications and transport sector.
State participation in other major industrial enterprises, however, would be restricted to 25 per cent, with state equity held in a new holding company structure.
Visit by Klaus
Antall and Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus met in Budapest on Aug. 17 to discuss the future of regional co-operation and relations with the European Communities (EC) in view of the impending break-up of the Czechoslovak federation.
Both leaders reiterated their commitment to co-operation within the Visegrad Three (Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland—see p. 38930) and to the creation of a regional free-trade zone, and stressed their wish that an independent Slovakia should be included in both.
EUROPE
POLAND
Continuing industrial unrest
A month-long strike for better pay and conditions by approximately 40,000 workers at the KGHM Polska Miedz Copper Combine in Legnica ended on Aug. 20 when strikers voted to suspend their action, having apparently failed to obtain pay increases of up to 30 per cent.
In a statement reported on Polish Radio the same day, the Finance and Privatization Ministers, respectively Jerzy Osiatynski and Janusz Lewandowski, denied claims by the strike committee that pay demands would be met.
Under Polish law, strikers would not be paid for the duration of the stoppages, and the two ministers said that the costs of the strike would drastically reduce the enterprise's ability to increase wages.
However, they apparently did not rule out eventual increases, although these would have to be met exclusively from the company's own funds.
On Aug. 17 Lewandowski had said that he would recommend shutting down the entire copper complex, which included the Lubin mines, if the strike continued.
A company spokesman, Jerzy Pietraszek, was quoted as saying that the strike had caused the loss of 25,000 tonnes of electrolytic copper from the planned annual production of 320,000 tonnes.
Reuters news agency reported that KGHM had lost US$70,000,000 and that strikers had been offered one-off payments equivalent to US$100 to US$130 each to go back to work.
The copper workers' strike, which had started on July 20 [see p. 39017], was supported by six other unions, which called for a national general strike to start on Aug. 18, and for an end to Poland's economic reforms.
This call was followed at seven collieries and by some railway workers, disrupting rail freight and reportedly causing the cancellation of approximately one-quarter of passenger ser-vices in Silesia.
Sporadic trouble, marked by strikes and demonstrations, continued in the coal industry throughout August, although a number of mines were reported to have returned to work by the end of the month following case-by-case wage settlements.
At other pits, union-management negotiations were continuing.
Walesa's warning against "unreasonable demands" 
On Aug. 13 President Lech Walesa warned Polish workers against "unrealistic demands" , and denounced union leaders who had attempted to compare the present situation in the country with that of August 1980.
Walesa was reported as mediating discreetly with union leaders over disputes in various sectors throughout the month.
Strike at FSM car plant and Ursus tractor plant
On Aug. 7, Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka, addressing a public meeting in her native Poznan a month after taking office [see p. 39017], was applauded when she criticized striking workers, saying that they did not belong to the groups which earned least.
The government would not yield to pressure, she promised.
Her main criticism was directed at workers on strike since July 22 at the FSM small car plant at Tychy who, she said, were jeopardising the plant's proposed new contract with Fiat of Italy, without which no pay rises would be possible.
On Aug. 13, however, the 3,800 strikers (of the total 7,000 Tychy workers) occupied the factory, and by the end of the month, there was still no settlement in sight.
Despite the plant's troubles, Fiat was reported on Aug. 22 to have confirmed its commitment to buy a 90 per cent stake in FSM, which manufactured the Fiat 500 model under licence.
During continuing negotiations with mediating union officials, the government threatened on Aug. 26 to dismiss strikers if they had not returned to work by 8 am on Aug. 28.
On Aug. 31, Polish radio reported that some 3,500 workers were continuing a sit-in.
On Aug. 24, workers went on strike at the Ursus tractor plant near Warsaw.
On Aug. 26, responding to a call by the Solidarity trade union, an estimated 5,000 of Ursus's 7,600 employees marched through the capital to demonstrate outside the Cabinet offices, demanding salary increases and a rescue plan for the company.
Talks between representatives of the strikers and of the Industry and Trade Ministry were broken off on Aug. 28, and on Aug. 31 the factory's strike committee voted to continue the action.
Suchocka was reported to have refused an invitation to meet the strikers.
On Aug. 27 some 200 workers at the Gdansk shipyard, which had a total workforce of 9,000, voted to reject a call to join a strike initiated by 38 of their colleagues on Aug. 17.
Minimum wage increase
Labour and Social Policy Minister Jacek Kuron announced on Aug. 17 that the national minimum wage was to be increased by 8.33 per cent to 1,300,000 zlotys (about US$98: US$1.00=13,217 zlotys as of Aug. 24) per month from Sept. 1, in line with forecast price increases in the third quarter of the year.
Average monthly pay in July was 2,900,000 zlotys (about US$215) according to a report by the Polish news agency PAP.
Further privatization measures
The government on Aug. 18 approved a bill on privatization providing for the establishment of approximately 20 investment funds in the form of joint stock companies to manage some 400 enterprises.
According to PAP, 10 per cent of the equity in an enterprise would be available free to employees, with 30 per cent being held by the State Treasury.
The scheme, which still had to go before parliament, had the backing of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Constitutional amendments
The Sejm, the lower house of parliament, on Aug. 1 passed the so-called "small constitution" , redefining relations between the legislature and the executive of the Polish Republic.
The bill was passed by 241 votes to 55, with 55 abstentions.
The legislation aimed to prevent conflicts between the President and the government such as those which led to the dismissal in June of the short-lived government of Jan Olszewski in June [see pp. 38972-73; 39016].
The legislation was welcomed by the Prime Minister, but Walesa was said to object that it failed to go far enough in changing the 1952 Stalinist constitution.
Emergence of new centre-right coalition
Former Prime Minister Olszewski and several former members of his government gave their support to an emergent new coalition of "patriotic and independence-oriented" groupings of the centre-right, according to a Polish television report on Aug. 10.
Olszewski was cited as saying that the new coalition did not want to overthrow the authorities and was not oriented towards a putsch.
Appointments
Jacek Kozlowski, director of the government press office under Prime Minister Jan Krzysztof Bielecki's government until its replacement in December 1991 [see pp. 38685-86], was reinstated by Suchocka on Aug. 4.
Gen. Tadeusz Wilecki took over as Chief of General Staff of the Polish Army on Aug. 12, replacing Gen. Zdzislaw Stelmaszuk, who said that during his five years in command, the army had been reduced from 412,000 to 217,000 soldiers.
Forest fire
A fire described in some press reports as the biggest in Europe's history was reported to have raged out of control in an area close to the southern city of Katowice during the last ten days of August, following weeks of hot, dry weather.
Six people were reported killed by flames or smoke and up to 10,000 hectares of forest were destroyed.
Some 8,000 troops, firemen and police attempted to bring the fire under control.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
First privatization
The Vranco textile factory became Romania's first state-owned company to undergo privatization when its shares were sold on Aug. 3; the Italian firm Incom purchased 51 per cent while the remaining 49 per cent were divided between staff and management.
Vranco was one of 30 major firms which were due to be privatized under a programme financed by the European Communities (EC).
In a related development, the government on July 29 approved the statutes for five private ownership funds (POFs).
Romanians would be given the chance to take up an ownership stake in a POF—a kind of embryonic mutual fund—by registering the privatization vouchers which were to be issued to all eligible citizens.
The POFs were then to acquire shares in enterprises which were being privatized; together with the recently created State Ownership Fund (SOF), they would thus form the basis for the mass privatization scheme, which was intended to involve the sale of some 6,200 companies over the next seven years.
Refusal of visa to former king — Co-operation agreement with Poland
The former king, Mihai or Michael, currently living in exile in Switzerland, was denied a visa to enter Romania on Aug. 13.
The government described the timing of his planned visit as "inopportune" in the run-up to the general election scheduled for Sept. 27.
The Romanian and Polish Interior Ministers, respectively Victor Babiuc and Andrzej Milczanowski, signed a co-operation agreement on Aug. 13 in Warsaw covering the fight against terrorism, organized international crime, the illegal production and sale of arms and drugs, financial crime, and crime against human life or property.
POLAND
Continuing industrial unrest
A month-long strike for better pay and conditions by approximately 40,000 workers at the KGHM Polska Miedz Copper Combine in Legnica ended on Aug. 20 when strikers voted to suspend their action, having apparently failed to obtain pay increases of up to 30 per cent.
In a statement reported on Polish Radio the same day, the Finance and Privatization Ministers, respectively Jerzy Osiatynski and Janusz Lewandowski, denied claims by the strike committee that pay demands would be met.
Under Polish law, strikers would not be paid for the duration of the stoppages, and the two ministers said that the costs of the strike would drastically reduce the enterprise's ability to increase wages.
However, they apparently did not rule out eventual increases, although these would have to be met exclusively from the company's own funds.
On Aug. 17 Lewandowski had said that he would recommend shutting down the entire copper complex, which included the Lubin mines, if the strike continued.
A company spokesman, Jerzy Pietraszek, was quoted as saying that the strike had caused the loss of 25,000 tonnes of electrolytic copper from the planned annual production of 320,000 tonnes.
Reuters news agency reported that KGHM had lost US$70,000,000 and that strikers had been offered one-off payments equivalent to US$100 to US$130 each to go back to work.
The copper workers' strike, which had started on July 20 [see p. 39017], was supported by six other unions, which called for a national general strike to start on Aug. 18, and for an end to Poland's economic reforms.
This call was followed at seven collieries and by some railway workers, disrupting rail freight and reportedly causing the cancellation of approximately one-quarter of passenger ser-vices in Silesia.
Sporadic trouble, marked by strikes and demonstrations, continued in the coal industry throughout August, although a number of mines were reported to have returned to work by the end of the month following case-by-case wage settlements.
At other pits, union-management negotiations were continuing.
Walesa's warning against "unreasonable demands" 
On Aug. 13 President Lech Walesa warned Polish workers against "unrealistic demands" , and denounced union leaders who had attempted to compare the present situation in the country with that of August 1980.
Walesa was reported as mediating discreetly with union leaders over disputes in various sectors throughout the month.
Strike at FSM car plant and Ursus tractor plant
On Aug. 7, Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka, addressing a public meeting in her native Poznan a month after taking office [see p. 39017], was applauded when she criticized striking workers, saying that they did not belong to the groups which earned least.
The government would not yield to pressure, she promised.
Her main criticism was directed at workers on strike since July 22 at the FSM small car plant at Tychy who, she said, were jeopardising the plant's proposed new contract with Fiat of Italy, without which no pay rises would be possible.
On Aug. 13, however, the 3,800 strikers (of the total 7,000 Tychy workers) occupied the factory, and by the end of the month, there was still no settlement in sight.
Despite the plant's troubles, Fiat was reported on Aug. 22 to have confirmed its commitment to buy a 90 per cent stake in FSM, which manufactured the Fiat 500 model under licence.
During continuing negotiations with mediating union officials, the government threatened on Aug. 26 to dismiss strikers if they had not returned to work by 8 am on Aug. 28.
On Aug. 31, Polish radio reported that some 3,500 workers were continuing a sit-in.
On Aug. 24, workers went on strike at the Ursus tractor plant near Warsaw.
On Aug. 26, responding to a call by the Solidarity trade union, an estimated 5,000 of Ursus's 7,600 employees marched through the capital to demonstrate outside the Cabinet offices, demanding salary increases and a rescue plan for the company.
Talks between representatives of the strikers and of the Industry and Trade Ministry were broken off on Aug. 28, and on Aug. 31 the factory's strike committee voted to continue the action.
Suchocka was reported to have refused an invitation to meet the strikers.
On Aug. 27 some 200 workers at the Gdansk shipyard, which had a total workforce of 9,000, voted to reject a call to join a strike initiated by 38 of their colleagues on Aug. 17.
Minimum wage increase
Labour and Social Policy Minister Jacek Kuron announced on Aug. 17 that the national minimum wage was to be increased by 8.33 per cent to 1,300,000 zlotys (about US$98: US$1.00=13,217 zlotys as of Aug. 24) per month from Sept. 1, in line with forecast price increases in the third quarter of the year.
Average monthly pay in July was 2,900,000 zlotys (about US$215) according to a report by the Polish news agency PAP.
Further privatization measures
The government on Aug. 18 approved a bill on privatization providing for the establishment of approximately 20 investment funds in the form of joint stock companies to manage some 400 enterprises.
According to PAP, 10 per cent of the equity in an enterprise would be available free to employees, with 30 per cent being held by the State Treasury.
The scheme, which still had to go before parliament, had the backing of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Constitutional amendments
The Sejm, the lower house of parliament, on Aug. 1 passed the so-called "small constitution" , redefining relations between the legislature and the executive of the Polish Republic.
The bill was passed by 241 votes to 55, with 55 abstentions.
The legislation aimed to prevent conflicts between the President and the government such as those which led to the dismissal in June of the short-lived government of Jan Olszewski in June [see pp. 38972-73; 39016].
The legislation was welcomed by the Prime Minister, but Walesa was said to object that it failed to go far enough in changing the 1952 Stalinist constitution.
Emergence of new centre-right coalition
Former Prime Minister Olszewski and several former members of his government gave their support to an emergent new coalition of "patriotic and independence-oriented" groupings of the centre-right, according to a Polish television report on Aug. 10.
Olszewski was cited as saying that the new coalition did not want to overthrow the authorities and was not oriented towards a putsch.
Appointments
Jacek Kozlowski, director of the government press office under Prime Minister Jan Krzysztof Bielecki's government until its replacement in December 1991 [see pp. 38685-86], was reinstated by Suchocka on Aug. 4.
Gen. Tadeusz Wilecki took over as Chief of General Staff of the Polish Army on Aug. 12, replacing Gen. Zdzislaw Stelmaszuk, who said that during his five years in command, the army had been reduced from 412,000 to 217,000 soldiers.
Forest fire
A fire described in some press reports as the biggest in Europe's history was reported to have raged out of control in an area close to the southern city of Katowice during the last ten days of August, following weeks of hot, dry weather.
Six people were reported killed by flames or smoke and up to 10,000 hectares of forest were destroyed.
Some 8,000 troops, firemen and police attempted to bring the fire under control.
EUROPE
CROATIA
Croatian presidential election results
Election victory for ruling party
President Franjo Tudjman and his ruling Croatian Democratic Community (HDZ) secured an overwhelming victory on Aug. 2 in Croatia's first presidential and legislative elections since secession from Yugoslavia on June 25, 1991 [see pp. 38274-75].
Tudjman had announced on television on June 24 the decision to call both presidential and legislative elections, in line with the new Croatian Constitution adopted on Dec. 22, 1990 [see p. 37924], he said.
The decision was attacked the following day by Drazen Budisa, chairman of the opposition Croatian Social Liberal Party (HSLS), who complained that "several thousands of inhabitants of Vukovar imprisoned in Serbian camps" and "tens of thousands of Croats from Central Bosnia about whom we have no information" would be unable to obtain their Croatian nationality and thus the right to vote.
Tudjman had been confirmed as the HDZ's presidential candidate on June 28.
The same day, Zagreb radio reported that the HSLS and the Croatian Christian Democratic Party (HKDS) had named their presidential candidates, respectively Budisa and Ivan Cesar.
Other candidates to enter the race subsequently were Savka Dabcevic-Kucar, leader of the Croatian People's Party (HNS), Dobroslav Paraga, leader of the ultra-rightist Croatian Party of Rights (HSP), Silvije Degen, Anton Vujic and Marko Veselica.
During the campaign it was reported that the government had extended voting rights to virtually anyone, wherever they lived, who claimed to have one Croatian parent or even merely an intention of acquiring Croatian citizenship.
Zagreb television estimated in a commentary on July 31 that as many as 3,000,000 votes might be cast abroad, the counts being phoned in from Croatian embassies.
Final results in the presidential elections were broadcast on Zagreb radio on Aug. 6 in the form of a statement to a press conference by the Chairman of the Electoral Commission.
They showed that there were in all 3,575,032 voters on the electoral registers, of whom 2,677,764, or 74.9 per cent, had voted.
In the legislative elections, preliminary results carried by Tanjug gave the HDZ 42.6 per cent of the vote, the HSLS 17.7 per cent, the HNS 6.9 per cent and the HSP 6.4 per cent .
The Party of Democratic Change (SDP), comprising former Communist supporters, polled 5.8 per cent, and the Serbian People's Party (SNS) 1.1 per cent .
Tanjug reported that most of the approximately 600,000 Serbs in Croatia had failed to participate in the elections.
They included approximately 200,000 people living in Serb-dominated and UN-patrolled areas, roughly one-quarter of total Croatian territory.
A further 200,000 Croatian Serbs who had fled the war to Serbia did not vote.
At a press conference on Aug. 3, the HSP chairman accused the ruling party of rigging the elections, and of manipulating the national media.
Appointment of new government
On Aug. 9, Zagreb radio announced that Tudjman was to replace Premier Franjo Greguric and his government.
Greguric's replacement would be Hrvoje Sarinic, hitherto Head of the President's Office.
On Aug. 12, the national television announced the appointment of three Deputy Premiers, Vladimir Seks, Mate Granic and Darko Cargonja.
The announcement said that Gojko Susak, Ivan Jarnjak and Zdenko Skrabalo were to retain their posts as Ministers of Defence, Internal Affairs, and Foreign Affairs respectively.
On Aug. 31, it was announced that Tudjman had appointed Ivan Milas as another Deputy Premier and Smiljo Sokol as Government Minister, and that Goran Radin was being replaced as Government Secretary by Jurica Malcic.
On Aug 28, Croatian television reported that the President was reducing the number of ministries from20 to 14.
Prisoner exchanges
On Aug. 7 Greguric met the Prime Minister of the rump Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY), Milan Panic, in Budapest, with the mediation of Hungarian Prime Minister Jozsef Antall.
Talks on exchanges of prisoners followed, with the participation of Cornelio Sommaruga, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and on Aug. 14 exchanges involving several hundred prisoners from each side took place at Nemetin, near Osijek in territory controlled by the UN Protection Force in Yugoslavia (UNPROFOR).
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Maastricht Treaty ratification by Greece — Opinion on Swedish application — Agreement on banana imports
On July 31 the Greek parliament, the Vouli, voted overwhelmingly to ratify the Maastricht Treaty on European economic and political union [see pp. 38658-9].
Of the assembly's 300 members, 286 voted in favour and eight against; the Communists were the only main party to vote against.
After Ireland and Luxembourg, Greece thus became the third member country to approve the treaty.
Swedish application
On July 31 the European Commission issued its opinion on the membership application formally submitted by Sweden in July 1991 [see p. 38353].
It welcomed the application in principle, declaring that there were no insurmountable obstacles to Swedish membership, and recommended that formal negotiations be opened early in 1993.
In a reference to Sweden's long-standing neutrality, the Commission urged that the Swedish government be required to give "specific and binding assurances" that it would accept the terms of a common EC security policy which might emerge within the context of the Maastricht Treaty.
The Swedish government welcomed the positive opinion, and reiterated its view that neutrality or defence considerations would not form an obstacle to Sweden's accession to the EC.
Agreement on banana imports
The European Commission agreed a regime for the importation of bananas from 1993 on July 31.
Quotas would be introduced (2,000,000 tonnes for 1993) and imports from all countries except the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries associated with the EC would be subject to customs duty of 20 per cent[see also p. 38910].
The issue had proved highly controversial.
The United Kingdom and France had sought to protect access to the EC market for bananas from the Caribbean countries, while Germany in particular had been reluctant to penalize imports from Latin American countries, traditionally its main source of bananas.
The proposed quota and duty system was strongly criticized by the Latin American producer countries, which claimed that it violated the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
EUROPE
SWEDEN
Security issues
On Aug. 20 the government protested to the Russian authorities about the discovery of "bugging devices" at the Swedish consulate in St Petersburg.
At a press conference the Prime Minister, Carl Bildt, agreed that it was likely that the surveillance equipment had been installed by the former Soviet authorities, but he insisted that it was Russia's responsibility, as the successor state, to remove them.
He warned that the affair could have a lasting effect on bilateral relations.
On Aug. 26 Edward Lee Howard, a former US Central Investigations Agency (CIA) agent who defected to the Soviet Union in 1985, was refused permission to settle in Sweden on the grounds that he was a security risk.
He thereupon returned to Moscow.
He had moved to Stockholm after the collapse of the Soviet Union in November 1991.
EUROPE
FINLAND
New trade minister
On Aug. 3 Pekka Tuomisto was appointed Trade and Industry Minister in place of Kauko Juhantalo, who was alleged to have given lucrative contracts to various firms he owned.
Both were members of Prime Minister Esko Aho's Centre Party (KESK)[for April change see p. 38872].
EUROPE
DENMARK
Draft budget for 1993
The minority government submitted the draft budget for 1993 to parliament on Aug. 25.
Its main features were (i) major spending cuts through reductions in state subsidies to industry and commerce and reductions in unemployment benefits; and (ii) proposals for rationalization of government services and privatization of state assets.
Overall the budget would be in deficit by 33,900 million kroner (US$6,300 million) or 3.8 per cent of GNP.
Left-wing parties were highly critical of the proposals, and called instead for increases in public spending to reduce unemployment, which was expected to remain at around 10 per cent.
The draft was due to be discussed with opposition parties in September with a view to securing a parliamentary majority.
The government also forecast GNP growth of 2.5 per cent in 1993 (up from 1.3 per cent), and inflation of 2.3 per cent (the same as predicted for 1992).
EUROPE
IRELAND
Court ruling on abortion information
On Aug. 7 the Dublin High Court prevented 14 students from providing information within Ireland about abortion services which could be obtained in the United Kingdom.
The Court referred the case to the Director of Public Prosecutions to see whether the students involved should be prosecuted for breaching earlier court orders.
The ruling conflicted with a declaration made by European Community (EC) ministers in May that special provisions in the Maastricht Treaty on European union concerning abortion in Ireland should not limit the freedom to provide information in Ireland on "services lawfully available in member states" [see also p. 38942].
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Banning of UDA
On Aug. 10 the United Kingdom government announced the banning of the Ulster Defence Association (UDA), with effect from midnight.
The Northern Ireland Secretary, Sir Patrick Mayhew, stated after a detailed review: "I am satisfied that the UDA is actively and primarily engaged in the commission of criminal, terrorist acts and so merits proscription." 
The UDA had been blamed for about one-third of the killings of civilians in Northern Ireland over the previous 23 years (more than 2,000 civilians having been killed during this period).
Ten groups in all were now specifically proscribed in Northern Ireland.
The four banned loyalist groups were the Ulster Freedom Fighters, the Ulster Volunteer Force, the Red Hand Commandos, and the UDA.
The six banned republican groups were the Irish Republican Army (IRA), the Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) and four smaller groups—the Irish People's Liberation Organization (IPLO, which broke away from the IRA in 1987), Cumann na mBan (the women's group within the IRA), Fianna na hEireann (the IRA's youth wing) and Saor Eire (a left-wing organization involved in robberies in the Republic in the 1960s).
EUROPE
GERMANY
Rostock riots
Five nights of serious rioting at a reception centre for asylum seekers in Lichtenhagen, a suburb of the town of Rostock on the Baltic, on Aug. 22-26 marked a resurgence of anti-foreigner violence in eastern Germany.
The attacks brought increased pressure for a change in the country's liberal asylum provisions, although the Independent of Aug. 31 reported "a few voices warning against politicians giving the impression that constitutional change will solve everything" .
Neo-Nazi skinheads had carried out similar attacks on a smaller scale on a hostel in the Saxon town of Hoyerswerda in September 1991 [see p. 38447].
Each night over the five-day period from Aug. 22, several hundred neo-Nazis and skinheads attacked the reception centre.
There were about 280 asylum seekers (the majority of them from Romania) either lodged at the centre or, because of lack of space, camping on the area outside the centre.
Some were evacuated to other locations on Aug. 24; many of those who remained in the building were Vietnamese.
On Aug. 25, after a football match, right-wing extremists stormed the home and set the ground floor ablaze.
Rioters gave the Nazi salute and shouted slogans such as "Sieg Heil!" ,
 "Foreigners out!" , and "Germany for the Germans!" .
They were in many cases cheered on by local bystanders.
Initially the police appeared seriously to have underestimated the scale of the violence and it was only after several days that sufficient reinforcements (including special anti-riot units from western Germany) were brought in to control the situation.
Siegfried Kordus, the Mecklenburg police chief in charge (who was later replaced), maintained that the attacks had been co-ordinated by citizens' band radio and that protesters had driven in from Berlin, Hamburg and other towns.
There was criticism of the way in which the crisis was handled by the state government in Mecklenburg-West Pomerania.
In particular there were calls for the resignation of the state Interior Minister, Lothar Kupfer, who initially expressed "a certain understanding" for the rioters.
Berndt Seite, who had taken over as Minister President in Mecklenburg-West Pomerania in March [see p. 38822], was already under considerable pressure because of the severely depressed state of Rostock's sole major industry, shipbuilding.
Anti-racism marches
In protest at the Rostock violence, anti-racism marches were held on Aug. 26 in Berlin (attended by 2,000), in Frankfurt (attended by 1,000), and in other cities.
On Aug. 29 some 15,000 demonstrators marched in Rostock, calling on the people to "stop the pogroms" .
Renewed right-wing attacks
On the weekend of Aug. 29-30 there were right-wing extremist attacks in at least 15 towns, primarily although not exclusively in eastern Germany.
On Aug. 30 a bomb was detonated at a Berlin memorial commemorating victims of the holocaust.
Asylum statistics
In the first seven months of 1992 there were 233,000 requests for asylum in Germany (primarily from Romania and former Yugoslavia, and excluding refugees driven from their homes by the fighting there).
The total number of asylum requests for the whole of 1991 was 256,000.
Membership of right-wing organizations
A report by the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution, published on Aug. 13, found that in 1991 there were 39,800 members of extreme right-wing organizations (including 24,000 in the German People's Union—DVU—for whose showing in April 1992 state elections see p. 38871).
This total compared with 32,000 in 1990 when figures applied only to West Germany.
Membership of neo-Nazi groupings increased from 1,200 in 1990 to 6,000 in 1991.
The number of extreme right-wing assaults increased from 270 to 1,300 in 1991, the majority of these attacks (70 per cent) being in western Germany.
SPD policy changes on asylum
On the weekend of Aug. 22-23 the leadership of the opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD) put forward proposals, which would require formal approval, to modify the party's liberal stance on asylum.
(Proposals were also made to allow for future decisions on the use of German armed forces outside the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) area.)
As advocated by the party's grassroots but opposed by its left wing, party leader Björn Engholm declared that immigration had to be "braked and controlled" .
He said that the party would support an amendment to the Basic Law, which currently stated that "persons persecuted on political grounds shall enjoy the right to asylum" .
The SPD would favour an amended wording, to allow for the automatic expulsion, for instance, of asylum-seekers from countries where there was deemed to be no persecution.
Ruling on abortion
On Aug. 4 the Federal Constitutional Court approved a request for a preliminary injunction preventing the entry into force on Aug. 5 of the legislation on abortion which had been approved by parliament in June and July [see p. 38977].
The request had been brought by 247 conservative MPs including Chancellor Helmut Kohl, and was supported by the Bavarian government.
A decision on the bill's constitutionality had still to be made; in the meantime different legislation would continue to apply in the two parts of Germany.
Trial of RAF member
On Aug. 26 Inge Viett, 48, a Red Army Faction (RAF) member, was sentenced to 13 years' imprisonment for the attempted murder in Paris on Aug. 4, 1981, of a French policeman, whom she shot in the neck during a police chase.
Viett was cleared of involvement in the 1979 attempted murder of former NATO Supreme Allied Commander Europe Gen. Alexander Haig [see p. 29913; for Viett's arrest in mid-1990 see p. 37828].
EUROPE
BELGIUM
Budget for 1993
The draft 1993 budget was announced by the centre-left government on Aug. 3.
Austerity measures were intended to reduce the budget deficit from 5.7 per cent of gross national product (GNP) in 1992 to 5.2 per cent in 1993, with a four-year timetable for reducing the deficit to 3 per cent by 1996 as required under plans for economic and monetary union (EMU) in the European Communities.
The government's overall aim was to freeze spending on state-owned enterprises, social security and defence for the next four years.
Income would be raised by suspending indexation of tax allowance thresholds, by sales of assets and partial privatizations, and by raising fuel and other indirect taxes.
Substantial funds would be diverted to service the national debt, one of the highest in Europe, which would be reduced from 124 per cent of GNP to 60 per cent of GNP by 1996 to meet the terms of EMU.
Overall expenditure for 1993 would be 1,707,000 million francs (US$53,000 million) and income 1,353,000 million francs.
The budget was criticized by the opposition Liberal parties and economists for being too soft.
Many analysts had called for a more ambitious target in reducing the budget deficit.
EUROPE
FRANCE
Allegations of corruption
Jean-Claude Gaudin, an influential senator of the centre-right Union for French Democracy (UDF) party and chairman of the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur regional council, was indicted on Aug. 6 on charges involving alleged fraud and abuse of his position.
Gaudin had stood successfully against the extremist National Front leader Jean-Marie Le Pen and Bernard Tapie, the controversial left-wing millionaire chairman of Olympique Marseille football club, in the March 22 regional elections [see pp. 38820-21].
It was alleged that Gaudin had corruptly employed an opposition supporter during the campaign to investigate Tapie's political and personal life.
Tapie had resigned in May as Minister for Towns amid an alleged business scandal [see p. 38928].
On Aug. 12 it was reported that a lawsuit had been filed against Henri Emmanuelli, President of the National Assembly (lower house of Parliament), for alleged misuse of public funds [see p. 39023 for Le Monde report].
Defection of Russian embassy official
A counsellor at the Russian embassy in Paris, Viktor Oshchenko, an acknowledged member of Russia's foreign intelligence service who had been missing from his posting since July 27, appeared in London on Aug. 13 together with his wife and daughter.
In London, the Home Office confirmed that it was processing applications for leave to remain on behalf of the three.
Escalation of gangland violence in Corsica
Four murders in the five days to Aug. 22 brought the death toll in Corsica's crime wave to 28 since the beginning of the year.
The latest victims included Jean Orsini, 52, whose early career as a transatlantic drug-smuggler was said to have inspired the film The French Connection.
He was shot dead in sight of hundreds of diners at kerbside restaurants in Calvi on the night of Aug. 21.
Two days earlier, following a special interministerial committee presided over by Prime Minister Pierre Bérégovoy, Interior Minister Paul Quiles had announced the dispatch to Corsica of an additional two companies of CRS paramilitary riot police, bringing the total police and gendarmerie presence to 2,200.
Orsini, known as "the shepherd" , had "retired" to his home village of Moncale, near Calvi, in May 1992, following his release from prison for lack of evidence relating to an alleged cocaine-smuggling racket.
He had previously been released after serving 10 years of a 25-year sentence for heroin smuggling in the USA.
Repeated suggestions that the Mafia was behind extortion rackets on the island, sheltering behind Italian business investments, were reported to have prompted a declaration by the separatist National Front for the Liberation of Corsica (FNLC) that it would in future "intervene militarily" to halt Mafia activity.
The FLNC had itself been denounced by rival movements, Resistenza, Accolta Naziunali Corsa (ANC) and the Union du Peuple Corse (UPC), over its imposition of a "revolution tax" extorted from companies and wealthy individuals.
Le Monde of Aug. 21 reported that the Prime Minister was to visit the island shortly.
EUROPE
SPAIN
End of unofficial truce with ETA
The Basque separatist organization Euzkadi ta Askatasuna (ETA) on Aug. 18 announced the "continuation of the armed struggle" , thus ending hopes raised when it offered an unofficial two-month truce on July 10 [see p. 39024].
On Aug. 3 police in south-west France arrested Stanislao Villanueva Herrera (also known as Txapu) whom the authorities claimed had been a leading figure in ETA since the arrests of other leaders in March [see p. 38823-24].
On Aug. 17 a gunman killed two off-duty civil guards in the Basque town of Oyarzun, bringing to 622 the total of apparent ETA victims in 1992, 18 of them having been killed in the period January to March.
Illegal immigrants
On Aug. 26 Spain deported 195 North Africans, nearly all of them Moroccans, who had attempted the crossing from the Spanish enclave of Melilla, bordering Morocco, to Almeria in mainland Spain, in a 15-metre motor boat.
The interception of their boat was part of a growing pattern of interception of illegal would-be immigrants into Spain.
On the weekend Aug. 22-23 three African migrants were found drowned near Tarifa, apparently having been dumped offshore [see also p. 38982].
Death of former Foreign Minister
Francisco Fernández Ordoñez, who had been Foreign Minister from 1985 until his resignation in June [see p. 38978], died on Aug. 7 aged 62.
A prominent political figure since Spain's return to democracy in 1975, he was Minister of Finance from 1977-79 and Minister of Justice 1980-81.
EUROPE
ITALY
Anti-Mafia legislation
Legislation to increase the powers of the police and the judiciary in combating organized crime received final parliamentary approval, with strong cross-party support, on Aug. 7.
The measures adopted were largely as had been approved by the outgoing Cabinet on June 8, in response to the assassination of Judge Giovanni Falcone [see pp. 38895-96; 38978].
The main emphasis was on encouraging the use of evidence extracted from former Mafia members, who would now give evidence as far as possible in front of the judge alone [for other provisions see p. 38979].
Police would be allowed to use undercover operations and to tap telephones in the course of anti-Mafia investigations.
The Chamber of Deputies introduced an amendment which meant that politicians discovered making payments in order to secure votes could be sentenced to up to six years in prison.
Opposition from the Democratic Party of the Left (PDS) led to the omission of a clause which would have allowed police to detain suspects without charge for up to 48 hours.
The bill also dissolved, from December 1992, the High Commission for the Fight against the Mafia (which since the early 1980s had had little success) in order to make way for the new Anti-Mafia Investigation Directorate (DIA).
Appointment of anti-Mafia officials
On Aug. 10 a Supreme Court judge, Giuseppe di Gennaro, 68, took up the new post of director of the DIA on a provisional basis.
Liliana Ferraro, 48, on Aug. 27 replaced the assassinated Falcone as director-general of the Justice Ministry's penal affairs division.
On Aug. 31 Angelo Finocchiaro (since August 1991 Italy's anti-Mafia high commissioner) was transferred to head Italy's civil intelligence organization, which it was now planned to mobilize against the Mafia.
Television legislation
On Aug. 13 the government published a list of television companies which had been awarded official concessions and were thus entitled to continue broadcasting for the next six years beyond an Aug. 23 deadline.
Approval was given to nine of Italy's 14 national channels (six of those approved being privately owned) and to 831 local channels.
Among the national channels approved were the three owned by Fininvest, the holding company of Silvio Berlusconi, whose influence in media ownership had attracted the opposition of a range of political opinion.
Berlusconi also indirectly controlled three pay-TV channels; a decision on pay-TV was deferred until February 1993.
According to a media law approved in August 1990 [see p. 37624]the government had been obliged to allocate television frequencies by Aug. 23, 1992, in order to regulate the chaos which prevailed as large numbers of national and local television stations crowded the airwaves.
Incidents in Sardinia
Six soldiers were slightly injured on Aug. 15 when a grenade exploded near Nuoro in Sardinia.
Three days later 100 paramilitary carabinieri were sent to the island, to join another 100 who were already providing protection for the 5,000 troops (largely conscripts) who since July 21 had been stationed there, ostensibly for training exercises.
A number of incidents left a total of 11 soldiers injured by the end of August.
EUROPE
GREECE
Cabinet reshuffle
A number of ministerial changes were made in a Cabinet reshuffle announced on Aug. 7.
The daughter of Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis, Dora Bakoyannis, returned to the post of Under-secretary to the Prime Minister [for her dismissal in August 1991 see p. 38403].
The post of Foreign Minister went to Michalis Papaconstantinou, hitherto the Justice Minister, a native of Kozani in the west of the northern Greek province of Macedonia, and a strong defender of its Greek identity.
Responsibility for Foreign Affairs had been held by Mitsotakis himself since April, when he dismissed Antonis Samaras [see p. 38873].
National Defence Minister Ioannis Varvitsiotis assumed the additional responsibilities of Justice Minister.
Stefanos Manos remained at the National Economy Ministry, but now assumed responsibility for Finance also, in a move to facilitate the process of economic reform.
Ioannis Paleokrassas left the Finance Ministry to become Minister of Commerce.
Manos's first action in his new capacity was to announce steep increases in taxes on bank deposits from September, an immediate increase in fuel prices, and changes to the scales of value added tax to bring Greek rates more in line with European Community (EC) policy.
Public-sector strike
Following the approval by the Vouli (parliament) on Aug. 7 of the privatization of public transport in Athens, there was a nationwide public-sector strike on Aug. 27.
It was organized by the General Confederation of Greek Workers (GSEE) and other principal unions and represented a mobilization against the government's economic policy in general.
Employees of the publicly owned public transport company EAS had been on indefinite strike since July 23 and the army had been running a reduced transport service in the capital.
EUROPE
CYPRUS
Direct talks
In a series of meetings between July 15 and Aug. 14 in New York UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali had discussions separately with the President of Cyprus, Georgios Vassiliou, and the president of the self-proclaimed Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, Rauf Denktash.
Face-to-face talks on Aug. 12-14 between Denktash and Vassiliou failed to produce either the initialling of a draft agreement or approval of a map illustrating proposals for territorial adjustments.
In the "proximity talks" the two leaders were brought together to work towards a framework agreement in line with UN Security Council Resolution 750 of April 1992 [see p. 38873; for talks in June see p. 38980].
Boutros-Ghali again presented the UN's proposal that Cyprus should be a two-zone federation of two politically equal communities overseen by a secular federal government, with one sovereignty and one citizenship.
It was reportedly also proposed that a legislature would be created with upper and lower houses, the upper house with a 50:50 ratio between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots and the lower with a 70:30 ratio.
The five permanent members of the UN Security Council were involved in an effort to increase the flexibility of the Turkish Cypriot position, and, like the US administration, also asked the Turkish government to apply pressure in this direction.
On Aug. 26 the UN Security Council approved Resolution 774, which enshrined the UN proposals and the map presented by Boutros-Ghali as the basis for a future solution to the Cyprus problem.
A statement produced at the end of a Cabinet meeting of the Turkish Cypriot administration on Aug. 27 rejected Resolution 774 as not constituting "a healthy contribution to the Cyprus negotiating process" .
Further discussions under UN auspices were scheduled for Oct. 26.
Denktash rejected the map published by the UN on Aug. 25 showing the demarkation of the proposed two zones.
The Turkish-Cypriot zone was allocated 28.2 per cent of the island, instead of the 37 per cent occupied at present.
The proposed adjustments would also return the Varosha suburb of Famagusta and the citrus-producing town of Morphou (referred to in Turkish as Guzelyurt) to the Greek-Cypriot zone.
It was proposed that 80,000-100,000 Greek-Cypriot displaced persons should be allowed to return to their homes in the northern part of the island.
Denktash's own proposals involved "29 per cent plus" of the territory remaining in Turkish Cypriot hands.
He accepted in principle the "right of return" of Greek Cypriot refugees (apparently abandoning his preference for mass compensation), but suggested a number of restrictions which would in fact limit that right.
Denktash argued that UN proposals would mean that 40,000 Turkish Cypriots would be forced to leave homes they had lived in since the Turkish invasion of the island in 1974.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Fighting in Sirnak
Forty hours of gun-battles in the Kurdish town of Sirnak from late Aug. 18 until the morning of Aug. 20 prompted a large part of the town's 25,000 population to flee to neighbouring villages.
Some reports said that 20 or more people were killed (including five soldiers) and about 400 arrested.
The authorities said that the shooting began with an attack on military and administrative buildings in the town centre by 1,500 fighters of the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK).
The PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan, in an interview published in an Istanbul newspaper on Aug. 25, repudiated this version of events and said that the government had "mounted a provocation against the Kurds of Sirnak" .
By Aug. 19 the town was under curfew, and access to journalists remained restricted for several days.
On Aug. 20, army personnel were officially "continuing their searches and investigations among the inhabitants" .
Witnesses were reported to have said that troops set fire to shops, and that tank-fire was directed at houses [for disorder in Sirnak in March 1992 see p. 38833].
An official statement issued on Aug. 27 following emergency meetings held by President Turgut Özal with the Cabinet and the National Security Council, said that continuing military measures against "terrorism" would go hand-in-hand with increased funds for regional development.
Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel, according to Turkish television, appealed to the town's citizens: "Come back.
There are ways to eliminate the disaster created by the terrorists.
The state embraces you."
Clashes and scores of casualties continued elsewhere in south-east Turkey, where it was now estimated that about one-third of the Turkish army, or 150,000 troops, were deployed.
PKK's halting of supplies to Iraqi Kurds
In early August, in a dispute between the PKK and the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP, based in Iraq), the PKK prevented the trucking of supplies to the Kurdish-controlled area of Iraq, via the Habur bridge north of Zahko, Iraq.
This traffic was the object of UN toleration in spite of being theoretically in contravention of UN sanctions against Iraq.
On Aug. 22 the PKK allowed the traffic to resume.
Relations with Syria
Foreign Minister Hikmet Cetin visited Damascus, the Syrian capital, for talks ending on Aug. 2 on water-sharing.
The issue, an ongoing source of tension, had been aggravated by remarks in July by Demiral on the eve of the inauguration of the Ataturk dam on July 25, to the effect that Iraq and Syria could not lay claim to the water Turkey drew from the Euphrates and Tigris rivers.
Following the talks a joint communiqué reiterated both governments' adherence to the protocol signed in Damascus in August 1987, and in addition Turkey committed itself to releasing more than the current 500 cubic metres of water a second to Syria.
Other co-operation agreements were signed, covering economics, trade, transport, technical affairs, culture and drug policing.
EUROPE
EUROPE
Formation of European Romany Parliament
Twenty-two Romany or gypsy organizations from European countries established the European Romany Parliament in Budapest, Hungary, on Aug. 27.
The statutes of Eurom, as the body would be known in abbreviation, stated that its main objective would be to represent the legal, social and cultural interests of the Europe's 10,000,000 Romanies.
The participants also adopted a statement addressed to the politicians and citizens of Europe in which they demanded protection for Romanies against attacks from racist groups.
EUROPE
PORTUGAL
Measures announced on Aug. 13 with effect from Aug. 31 authorized Portuguese firms to borrow freely on foreign capital markets, while non-residents would from Oct. 31 be able to acquire Portuguese government bonds.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Establishment of air exclusion zone
An air exclusion zone, aimed at protecting the Shia and Marsh Arab population in southern Iraq, was officially proclaimed by France, Russia, the United Kingdom and the USA on Aug. 26, as announced by US President George Bush.
They reportedly dismissed an Iraqi proposal inviting a "committee of wise men" composed of UN Security Council members, including China and some non-aligned states, to visit southern Iraq.
The measure was not the subject of a specific UN resolution, although its proponents saw it as coming within the scope of general principles of international humanitarian law, and as providing a safer environment for Western reconnaissance aircraft to monitor Iraqi compliance with UN Security Council Resolution 688 of April 1991 against "repression of the Iraqi civilian population" [see p. 38127].
It imposed an immediate ban on flights by Iraqi helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft south of the 32nd parallel [see map].
Iraq was formally informed of the decision through its permanent representative at the UN, Abdul Amir al-Anbari, who denounced the plan as an "illegal action" requiring "clear and firm" Arab opposition, and warned that "we shall choose the proper way and the proper time to confront this outrageous aggression" .
Arab states including Algeria, Jordan, Sudan, Syria and Yemen strongly condemned the plan, regarding it as setting a dangerous precedent in the region and also as signalling the effective three-way partitioning of Iraq into Kurdish, Sunni and Shia blocs.
Serious reservations were also believed to have been expressed by Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
Other member states of the Gulf Co-Operation Council (GCC) registered a lukewarm response.
Kuwait alone publicly endorsed the scheme [see p. 39069 for strengthening of US troop presence there].
Background — Reports of Iraqi activity in south
Prospects of imminent Western action had gathered momentum in early August following reports of increased Iraqi military activity and allegations of human rights violations against the Shia population in the south.
On Aug. 11 the UN's special human rights rapporteur on Iraq, Max Van der Stoel, told a special meeting of the UN Security Council convened by France, the UK, and the USA that there was documentary evidence of a systematic policy by the Iraqi government to destroy the lives and culture of the Shia Marsh Arab population.
In a formal report submitted to the UN in late July Van der Stoel had charged Iraq with massive human rights violations against the Shia population and failing to comply with Resolution 688 ordering Iraq to end the repression of its civilian minorities.
On Aug. 12 Iraq dismissed Van der Stoel's allegations as "inaccurate" .
On Aug. 18 senior officials from France, the United Kingdom and the USA said that they had reached agreement over the imposition of an air exclusion zone over southern Iraq.
The disclosure coincided with an announcement by the UK authorizing the despatch of six Tornado jets to participate in an allied surveillance operation over southern Iraq.
On Aug. 20 France declared that it would contribute 10 Mirage 2000 jets; more than 200 US aircraft were believed already to be operating in the area.
In its first official comment on Aug. 20 Iraq denounced Western plans for an aerial exclusion zone as an "imperialist conspiracy" aimed at dismembering the country, and claimed that the scheme had been devised with the active co-operation of Iran [see also below].
Reaction among Arab and other Gulf war allies suggested that the depth of Arab hostility had accounted for delays in implementing the plan.
On Aug. 20 Egypt expressed concern for the safety and integrity of Iraqi territory.
Turkey on Aug. 22 said that it would "oppose any plan directed against the territorial integrity of Iraq" .
On Aug. 23 official statements from Algeria, Jordan, Libya, Sudan, Syria, Yemen and the Arab League also stressed the importance of maintaining Iraq's territorial integrity and warned that the exclusion zone plan would heighten regional tension.
Reports that Saudi Arabia had denied the use of its Dhahran air base to station UK Tornado jets were denied by a UK Foreign Office spokesman on Aug. 26.
Iraqi opposition groups, some of whom had reportedly been consulted on the scheme during talks with senior US officials in late July and early August, were broadly supportive of Western plans.
However, a spokesman for the Iraqi National Congress (INC) said in London on Aug. 25 that no section of the opposition had any interest in the disintegration of Iraq.
Ayatollah Mohammad Bakr al-Hakim, head of the country's largest Shia organization, the Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SAIRI), was also reported on Aug. 25 to have approved "safe havens" in southern Iraq but to have declined to back the use of Western aircraft to enforce an air exclusion zone.
Reports in late August indicated that while the enforcement of the air exclusion zone had proved effective, there appeared to have been an intensification of the government's ground campaign against Shia rebels.
Iraqi allegations of Iranian involvement in south
A formal Iraqi protest alleging Iranian involvement in the south was lodged with the UN on Aug. 26.
On Aug. 6 the Iraqi government had accused Iran of infiltrating over 4,000 fighters into southern regions of Iraq with the intention of maintaining a permanent presence.
This charge was denied on Aug. 11 in a letter sent to UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali) by the Iranian permanent representative at the UN, Javad Zarif, who described the allegations as an attempt to provide cover for Iraq's own "systematic campaign to eliminate" the Shias in the south.
On Aug. 23 Iran's Supreme National Security Council (SNSC) declared that "under no circumstances should Iraq's territorial integrity and independence be marred" .
UN weapons inspections
A team of UN nuclear and chemical weapons inspectors conducted inspections at eight unnamed sites on Aug. 7-18.
The mission, headed by Nikita Smidovich, was the first to resume operations since the three-week stand-off in July precipitated by the government's refusal to grant chemical weapons inspectors access to the Ministry of Agriculture [see p. 39026].
The threat of a similar crisis involving a possible Western attack against Iraqi targets had been revived on Aug. 6 after the government declared that it would no longer grant weapons inspectors access to official buildings and ministries.
Smidovich claimed on Aug. 18 that Iraqi officials had supplied "good information" on the government's ballistic missile programmes.
His team was understood to have gained access to some government ministries, including the highly sensitive Ministry of Military Industrialization.
A summary of the team's findings released on Aug. 25 showed no evidence of Iraq's capability of producing complete guidance and control systems for ballistic missiles.
Non-renewal of UN humanitarian memorandum
The UN Under-Secretary-General for Emergency Relief Co-ordination, Jan Eliasson, said in Baghdad on Aug. 21 that he had failed during talks with senior Iraqi officials on Aug. 17-21 to persuade the government to complete a new memorandum of understanding covering UN relief operations in Iraq.
Entrance and visa requirements for all UN and foreign personnel were reported to have been tightened since the expiry of the last memorandum on June 30.
In a separate development, the UK on Aug. 20 demanded the immediate release of British businessman, Paul Ride, who had received a seven-year prison sentence for illegally entering Iraq without travel documents in late June.
A British cyclist, Michael Wainwright, also detained on charges of illegal entry in May, was expected to stand trial shortly.
Economy
President Saddam Hussein in a radio broadcast on Aug. 12 confirmed the execution, first reported in late July [see p. 39026, of merchants charged with profiteering.
Around 42 private traders were understood to have been executed and more than 500 detained in what observers regarded as a reflection of the country's critical economic situation.
On Aug. 12 the Trade Minister Mohammad Mehdi Saleh disclosed that the clampdown, aimed at imports from Jordan, had reduced the volume of trade between the two countries by up to 50 per cent.
Reports from Jordan indicated that Iraqi businessmen fearful of incurring penalties were no longer prepared even to transport food and essential humanitarian supplies to Iraq.
Death of Khoei
The supreme head of the world Shia community, Grand Ayatollah Abolqassem al-Khoei, 93, died in Kufa near the holy city of Najaf on Aug. 8.
A three-day period of official mourning, marked by a curfew on the day of the government-organized funeral on Aug. 9, was condemned by opposition parties as a ploy to preempt anti-government demonstrations.
Tension heightened after family members claimed that Khoei, who was recovering from a heart operation in July, had died in "suspicious" circumstances.
Iranian-born Khoei, a scholar who had written more than 90 books on theology, was known for his adamantly apolitical stance.
He had spent his last years under effective house arrest at his home in Kufa.
In March 1991 his appearance on national television in support of government action against Shias in the south [see pp. 38081-82]had shocked followers.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
Arrival of US troops
As tension rose over international weapons inspection in Iraq [see this page], the US administration announced on Aug. 1 that an extra 2,400 US troops—a reinforced armoured battalion—would shortly arrive in Kuwait for training exercises with the Kuwaiti army.
The units comprised tanks and mechanized infantry, and would participate in a joint exercise in accordance with the defence agreement signed by the USA and Kuwait in September 1991.
This exercise had been planned for September 1992, but was now brought forward.
Two other such joint exercises, involving marine and amphibious forces, were already scheduled to start on Aug. 3.
Three US marines were killed (on Aug. 9 and 16) in helicopter and plane crashes in the exercises, which took place on Aug. 3-17 and involved in total about 5,000 US troops.
Defence agreement with France
A defence agreement signed by Kuwaiti and French government representatives in Paris on Aug. 18 was described as slightly less extensive than those which Kuwait had signed with the USA and the United Kingdom in September 1991 and February 1992 respectively [see pp. 38455; 38790.]
The agreement, to last 10 years, allowed for joint military exercises and for French military advisors to be attached to the Kuwaiti armed forces.
The Kuwaiti Defence Ministry said that the purchase by Kuwait of "sophisticated French weaponry" was also mentioned in the document.
General election date
On Aug. 28 the Council of Ministers announced the date for a general election to the 50-member National Assembly as Oct. 5 [for voter registration in February see p. 38789].
Report on treatment of servants
The US-based Middle East Watch organization published on Aug. 14 a report detailing abuse of Asian domestic servants working in private households in Kuwait.
The report claimed that intervention by the Kuwaiti government was necessary to correct human rights violations which included rape, physical violence, the confiscation of passports and confinement to the employer's home.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Washington bilateral negotiations
In Washington on Aug. 24 bilateral negotiations in the ongoing peace process launched in Madrid in October 1991 [see pp. 38513-15]resumed for the first time since the change of government in Israel [see pp. 38945-47].
They were expected to continue for a month, with a 10-day break in early September.
There was initial optimism that there had been a breakthrough in relations between Syria and Israel, but by Aug. 27, Palestinian negotiators were expressing disappointment at the detailed autonomy proposals presented by the new Labour government.
On the Israeli side Itamar Rabinovich, the rector of Tel Aviv university, was appointed to lead the negotiations with Syria.
On Aug. 24 the Syrian spokeswoman, Bushra Kanafani said that she had noted a "different style" in the Israeli delegation.
Israeli statements represented a change from the policy of the previous Likud government in that they acknowledged that the principle of "land-for-peace" —as in UN Security Council Resolution 242 (1967) —meant that the Israeli presence in the Golan Heights should be included in discussions concerning the other occupied territories.
Detailed proposals on Palestinian autonomy in the occupied territories were presented by the Israeli delegation on Aug. 25.
They defined the role of a Palestinian autonomous authority or administrative council in controlling health, education, justice and transport.
There was no mention in the document of Israeli troop withdrawals, nor of territorial demarcations.
The Palestinians were seeking a larger, 180-member elected assembly, with legislative powers.
Granting of loan guarantees to Israel
US President George Bush had announced on Aug. 11 that he had recommended that the US Treasury should provide guarantees to allow Israel to obtain on favourable terms credits worth US$10,000 million from private banks.
He had communicated his recommendation to Congress, where it would be subject to approval by both chambers.
The announcement was made during a two-day visit by the Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Rabin to Bush at his holiday home in Kennebunkport, Maine.
Rabin emphasized that his government would seek to limit the "final cost [of the loan guarantees]on the American taxpayer" .
[For loan guarantees as an issue in the ongoing peace process see pp. 38787; 38452 and previous months.]
Bush, who was understood to have welcomed the change of government in Israel, referred to a "special relationship" between the USA and Israel: it was a relationship "between two close friends who are also strategic partners" .
He asserted that the USA wished to see Israel's "qualitative military superiority" over its neighbours maintained.
Bush's announcement on guarantees and his reference to military superiority were criticized by Arab foreign ministers and a PLO representative attending a meeting in Damascus on Aug. 19.
Syrian Foreign Minister Faruq ash-Shar "a said that the USA should first have secured a complete halt to settlement-building, and that the foreign ministers would demand that" Washington play the role of a fair mediator, unbiased towards Israel".
[For ruling on private settlement building in the occupied territories see this page.]
Freeing of Palestinian prisoners
On Aug. 23, the eve of the resumption of peace process negotiations, the Israeli Prime Minister's office announced the release of 800 Palestinian prisoners.
In three days of releases in early September 465 prisoners were reported to have been freed.
The prisoners released had all served at least two-thirds of their sentences.
They were among 7,429 Palestinians in Israeli prisons who had been convicted, mainly for "intifada-related activities" , after standing trial.
There were a further 303 prisoners held under administrative detention, without trial.
The Israeli government also announced on Aug. 23 that some of the approximately 280 houses in the West Bank and the Gaza strip which had been sealed up by the army since 1987 would be unsealed.
The ruling concerned those houses sealed for five years.
Some streets which had been closed off during the intifada would be gradually re-opened.
Inhabitants of the occupied territories wishing to enter Israel would no longer need a permit if aged 50 or over (instead of 60).
On Aug. 24 Rabin cancelled 11 deportation orders issued in January 1992 against alleged Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) activists [see p. 38740].
They would instead be placed in administrative detention in the Qeziot detention centre in the Negev.
On Aug. 9 the Israeli Justice Ministry had announced that it was preparing an amendment to the 1986 law outlawing contacts with the PLO.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Appointment of Arab deputy ministers
On Aug. 2 the Cabinet announced the appointment of two Israeli Arabs, Nawaf Masalha (Labour) and Walid Sadek (Meretz), as deputy ministers of Health and Agriculture respectively.
These were the highest offices Arabs had held in the Israeli government since 1973, when Abdel-Aziz Zoabi had been Deputy Minister of Health.
Demonstration over settlements policy
Approximately 800 demonstrators, including many Jewish settlers from the occupied territories, gathered for an anti-government rally in Jerusalem on Aug. 8.
They were addressed by Knesset members belonging to the right-wing Likud party (the governing party until the 1992 elections): Rafael Eitan, Ariel Sharon and Benjamin Netanyahu.
Speakers focused on the new Labour-led coalition's policy on settlement-building [see pp. 39027-28].
In a move to slow private settlement-building the Israeli Housing Minister Benyamin Ben Eliezer on Aug. 5 had announced the "freezing of all land allocation in the [occupied]territories pending an in-depth study of the scale of the allocation [for privately funded building]of land belonging to the state" .
Military officials in the occupied territories at first appeared to contradict Eliezer's statement when they announced that no such freeze had yet been ordered by the military authorities.
Housing Ministry officials indicated that the announcement concerned land allocation and would not affect plots already purchased [for July freeze on government settlement-building see pp. 39027-28].
Protest over overcrowding among immigrants from Ethiopia
On Aug. 26 some 150 immigrants from Ethiopia were persuaded to abandon a march and hunger strike they had begun in protest at overcrowding in the Ashkelon holiday village where they were temporarily housed.
The Immigration and Absorption Minister Yair Tzaban met the marchers 25 km outside Ashkelon, when he said that it would take three years to provided permanent housing for the 20,000 recent Ethiopian immigrants [see also pp. 38174-75].
Munitions explosion
On Aug. 6 an explosion completely destroyed the Israel Military Industries munitions plant at Nof Yan, north of Tel Aviv.
Two people were killed.
Peres's visit to Russia
The Foreign Minister Shimon Peres on Aug. 21-23 visited Moscow, where he met with Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kosyrev.
A memorandum of understanding on trade, economic affairs and tourism was signed.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
By-elections in Amman
There were minor disturbances in the Amman governorate on Aug. 18 during by-elections for the House of Representatives, called to replace two deputies who had died earlier in the year.
In the event, the elections in the Madaba-Dhiban constituency and in Quwaysimah (a suburb of Amman) returned, respectively, a member of the Moslem Brotherhood and an independent candidate.
These had also been the affiliations of the previous incumbents.
Arrest of deputy
Yaqub Qirrish, a member of the Jordanian House of Representatives, was arrested along with 20 other people on Aug. 27.
He was charged in connection with alleged involvement in organizing a "terrorist" network of Islamic activists.
Machine-guns and explosives were reported to have been seized.
Qirrish's parliamentary immunity was removed.
Corruption charges
On Aug. 4 the House of Representatives voted to refer former Public Works Minister Mahmud al-Hawamidah for trial for misuse of public finds and abuse of authority in connection with the construction of a highway from Azraq to Jafr.
It was decided to withdraw the same charges against former Prime Minister Zaid al-Rifai and former Finance Minister Hanna Awdah.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
First two rounds of general election
Two rounds of voting in Lebanon's first general election since 1972 went ahead in spite of a boycott by leading Maronite Christian parties.
The first two rounds of voting—in north Lebanon and the Bekaa on Aug. 23, and in Beirut and Mount Lebanon on Aug. 30—produced some wins for Hezbollah, an Islamic group aligned with Syrian policy-making which was for the first time participating in elections as a parliamentary party.
Maronite opposition to elections
On Aug. 5 leaders of the Maronite Christian parties, together with the Maronite Patriarch Nasrallah Pierre Sfeir, gathered at Bkirki to call for the elections to be postponed "until the right circumstances and national conditions exist" , and to threaten a boycott.
Two subsequent meetings at Bkirki on Aug. 10 and 18 were attended by representatives of the Phalangist Party (al-Kataeb, led by Georges Saadeh), the Bloc National (led by Raymond Eddé, the National Liberal Party (led by Dory Chamoun; and the Lebanese Forces (of Samir Geagea).
The representatives on Aug. 18 called for a review of the electoral law and the creation of up-to-date electoral rolls; the return of displaced persons and facilities for expatriates to vote; the collection of weapons by the government; and the withdrawal of all non-Lebanese forces from Lebanon.
They called a protest strike for Aug. 21-23, leaving it to individual parties to decide on a boycott.
Phalangist Party
On Aug. 14 the Phalangist Party, after much internal discussion, announced that it would not be presenting candidates.
A statement issued by the party noted that Saadeh had tried to persuade the Syrian government to support a postponement.
Former President (until 1988) Amin Gemayel returned from exile on a short visit at the beginning of August, to contribute to this debate.
According to a Phalangist Party spokesperson on Aug. 1, however, "the party regrets that Gemayel has reopened wounds and disputes within the party and the homeland" .
Hezbollah
The Hezbollah election programme, as announced by the party's secretary-general Sheikh Hassan Nasrallah on Aug. 6, asserted the importance to Lebanon of "resistance against the Zionist occupation" , and pledged to support "the resistance fighters, facilitating their jihad and providing them with official and popular political protection" .
Nasrallah argued that those parties calling for a boycott of the elections had nevertheless in 1982 participated in the presidential elections which, he said, had been held "under Israeli guns" .
The programme promised the "abolition of political sectarianism" ; amendments to the electoral law; political and media freedoms, guaranteeing the "freedom of religion and…respect for the sanctity of religion" ; the extension of social, old-age and health insurance to all Lebanese; and improved technical and religious education.
Hezbollah announced 12 candidates for the first two rounds, eight of them in Baalbek, three elsewhere in the Bekaa, and one in Beirut.
Amal
Nabi Berri, leader of the Shia organization Amal and currently a Cabinet member, said on Aug. 18 that a postponement was undesirable and that "those who call for a postponement are also targeting the Taif accord" .
Amal agreed to offer joint candidates with Hezbollah in southern constituencies.
Resignations
The Speaker of the national Assembly, Hussein al-Husseini, resigned after the first round of voting on Aug. 23.
Known to be pro-Syrian, he had earlier argued against the boycott, but had unsuccessfully stood as a candidate for the National Charter List party in the Bekaa.
His party alleged intimidation at polling stations by Hezbollah, which won eight seats in the district of Baalbek on Aug. 23.
On Aug. 26 the Foreign and Expatriate Affairs Minister Faris Buwayz, son-in-law of President Elias Hrawi, and the Phalangist leader Saadeh, who was Minister of Telecommunications and Posts, resigned from the Cabinet.
Buwayz and Saadeh had again visited Damascus on Aug. 21, to argue for a postponement of the elections.
Further withdrawals by Maronite and other candidates standing in the second round were reported, and Assad Shaftari, deputy leader of the Al-Waad party, withdrew his candidature for the seat in Beirut reserved for the Orthodox Christians.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
WESTERN SAHARA
Defection of leading Polisario member
Brahim Hakim, a leading member of the Polisario Front, left Algeria for Morocco on Aug. 11, in what various Moroccan political parties greeted as a defection to join Moroccan ranks.
Hakim had previously acted as the equivalent of a Foreign Minister of the Democratic Arab Saharan Republic (SADR—which the armed movement Polisario had been struggling to establish in the Western Sahara since 1976).
More recently he had been Polisario's representative in Algiers.
Numerous Polisario members were said by Moroccan sources to have similarly defected after the appeal by King Hassan of Morocco in November 1988 for all Polisario members with "good intentions" to go to Morocco as their "clement and forgiving…homeland" .
In a press conference in Rabat on Aug. 14 Hakim said that the attitude of the Algerian government, and specifically of Defence Minister Khalid Nezzar, had changed, and that it now recommended that a "rapid settlement" with Morocco be found.
In an Aug. 12 interview he referred to a split in the Polisario leadership dating back to 1988 and said that he was "rallying against those who are stubbornly persisting in imposing a disastrous situation on our people…a dead-end solution" .
The Polisario Front on Aug. 13 accused Hakim of treason.
Polisario sources claimed that in a recent internal investigation he had been found guilty of corruption and diversion of funds.
According to Polisario, Algeria remained firmly committed to the UN peace plan for the Western Sahara.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
New government
A new 23-member government was appointed on Aug. 11.
It would preside over a general election scheduled to take place at an unspecified date in the autumn, after a referendum on constitutional reforms on Sept. 4 and local elections on Oct. 16.
Azzedine Laraki, who had been Prime Minister since 1986, was replaced by Karim Lamrani, 72, an economist with a background in business who had previously been Prime Minister in 1971 and 1983.
While the other principal ministers remained unchanged, there were five new appointments, the most significant being that of Abderrahim Harrouchi as the Minister of Health.
The new ministers were described by observers as "technocrats" , rather than party politicians, and only one minister with a clear party affiliation retained his post—Moulay Alaiou of the National Rally of Independents (RNI), who remained Minister of Justice.
The reshuffle was therefore interpreted as a signal from King Hassan that the parties traditionally loyal to the palace (which had been represented by four members in the outgoing Cabinet) would receive favourable treatment compared with the opposition parties of the Democratic Bloc [for whose formation in May see p. 38982].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
Mass trials of Islamic activists
The trial in Tunis Military Court of 171 members of the outlawed Nahda movement, which had a radical Islamic programme, concluded on Aug. 28 after 50 days of hearings.
The accused, who included some army officers, had faced charges in connection with what the authorities claimed had been a plot to assassinate President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali by shooting down his plane, as part of an armed uprising to replace the present government with an Islamic one.
Of the 171 defendants, 37 were tried in absentia; thirty-five of the accused received life sentences, including three exiled leaders: Rachid Ghannouchi, Salah Karkar and Habib Mokni.
Two other leaders who were sentenced to life imprisonment were in detention in Tunis: Sadok Chourou and Habib Ellouz.
Four people were acquitted and the remainder received sentences ranging from three to 20 years.
The sentences were pronounced by a panel of one civilian and four military judges.
The court's general prosecutor had unsuccessfully asked for 19 death sentences to be imposed.
The mass trial was criticized by human rights organizations including Amnesty International and the US-based Middle East Watch.
They alleged that judicial procedures did not conform to international norms and that the confessions which had proved crucial in the convictions had been extracted through the use of torture.
Interviewed by Radio France Internationale on Aug. 28, the exiled Ghannouchi described the trials as "unjust because they address false problems…the remedy cannot be found in the barracks" .
In another military court in the same barracks in Tunis 108 people had also been on trial, since July, in connection with their alleged membership of another Islamic group, the Commandos of Sacrifice.
The military prosecutor had applied for nine death sentences, but when the sentences were announced on Aug. 30 five men were acquitted, 11 received sentences ranging from one to 20 years' imprisonment, and the group's leader Habib Lessoued received life imprisonment.
According to evidence given in the trial, the Commandos of Sacrifice were a Nahda splinter group.
Cabinet changes
There was a minor Cabinet reshuffle on July 3 [for June reshuffle see p. 38982], when Hedi M'Henni replaced Daly Jazi as Public Health Minister and Mohammed Fadhel Khelil replaced Ahmed Smaoui as Social Affairs Minister.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Airport bomb
A bomb explosion at Algiers's Houari Boumedienne airport on Aug. 26 killed at least nine people and injured 128.
No organization claimed responsibility for the attack, the first such random bombing in the latest wave of unrest.
Sporadic attacks by small armed groups continued, meanwhile, against members of the security forces.
Responsibility for an assassination attempt on Aug. 5 against Mohammed Tolba, deputy minister in charge of Public Security, was claimed by the (officially dissolved) Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) in one of its clandestine newsheets.
It was the first time the FIS had claimed responsibility for a violent incident.
The FIS newsheet Mihrab al-Jumaa on Aug. 28 denied FIS responsibility for the bombing of the airport, saying that "the Islamic combatants do not authorize any strike without having precisely defined their objective within respect for the rules of Islam" .
Newspaper closures
A decree published by the High Committee of State (HCE) on Aug. 15 gave the authorities additional powers to order the suspension or closure of any enterprise the activities of which "endanger public order, public security, the normal functioning of institutions or the higher interests of the country" .
The measure was criticized by opposition parties including the Rally for Culture and Democracy (RCD) led by Said Saadi, who said that it was an attempt to "return to power the regime which ruined the country" .
Three independent daily newspapers had been ordered to suspend publication on Aug. 8.
Le Matin, La Nation and Al-Jazair al-Yawm were said to have published erroneous information likely to undermine national interests.
Armed groups
On Aug. 1-2 the security forces arrested about 30 presumed members of the Armed Islamic Movement, along with explosives, in the area of al-Oued, near the Sahara.
On Aug. 19 an "armed gang" was reported to have clashed with security forces in Baba Hacene, Tipasa province.
Ten of the group were killed.
On Aug. 22 five armed men unsuccessfully attacked a gendarmerie unit in Mendes in an attempt to seize their weapons,
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
Renewal of UN sanctions
On Aug. 12 the UN Security Council decided to renew for a further 120 days the sanctions which had been imposed against Libya in April [see p. 38883].
In this first review the Security Council deemed that "the necessary conditions" had not yet been met for the lifting of sanctions.
On Aug. 11 President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt had met with the Libyan leadership.
UN Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Petrovsky told the Libyan leader Col. Moamer al-Kadhafi on Aug. 20 that if he did not comply with the UN demands in connection with the extradition of the two Lockerbie bombing suspects, the Security Council would "within days or weeks" review (and possibly strengthen) the sanctions.
Petrovsky also delivered to the Libyan leader a letter from UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
Kadhafi in a speech on Libyan television on Aug. 31 said that "the UN is like an oven where the demands are cooked; they came to me and they said: " Eat "" .
Observers noted, however, that he also urged a committee established by the General People's Congress to "negotiate directly with America" , without UN mediation.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Fereydun Farokhzad, 48, a singer, poet and political dissident who had lived in exile since the establishment of Islamic government in Iran in 1979, was found stabbed to death at his home in Bonn, Germany, on Aug. 8.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN-UK
Ali Rajavi, a first secretary at the Iranian embassy in London, was ordered to leave the United Kingdom by Aug. 25, as announced on Aug. 14, in retaliation for the expulsion in July of Geoffrey Brammer, a UK diplomat in Tehran [see also p. 39027]; on Aug. 15 the Iranian government ordered an Indian national employed as an accountant at the UK embassy in Tehran and two UK citizens to leave the country within one week, accusing them of involvement in "illegal activities" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
On Aug. 7 it was announced that the United Arab Emirates had launched a programme to strengthen its armed forces (which numbered 40,000 before the 1990-91 Gulf war crisis) and replace its component of Arab and non-Arab expatriates with UAE nationals.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Completion of chemical weapons treaty
The final draft of the international treaty banning the possession, manufacture and use of chemical weapons was presented for approval to negotiators at the UN Conference on Disarmament on Aug. 26.
It was due to be signed in a ceremony in Paris later in the year or early in 1993.
Negotiations on the treaty, which had begun in 1968, were stalled for many years.
The stalemate among the 39 participating countries was gradually broken in the late 1980s as relations between the superpowers improved [for the most recent developments on the negotiations, see pp. 38217; R153; 38986].
The treaty provided for the elimination of all chemical weapons stocks over a 10-year period and for a detailed inspections procedure for to ensure compliance.
French accession to NPT
France on Aug. 3 signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty, which aimed to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Since the NPT's adoption in 1968, the French government's position had been that it would abide by the terms of the treaty but would not sign it because it granted the two superpowers a privileged position in international relations.
This no longer applied in the current geopolitical situation.
US Senate vote on nuclear test ban
The US Senate voted on Aug. 3 by 68 votes to 26 to suspend nuclear weapons tests for nine months, to limit tests for the next three years, and permanently to ban all tests by 1996.
The Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell, described the decision as a "historic vote" , noting that the Senate had never agreed to put any limits on nuclear testing before.
The Bush administration criticized the decision and threatened to use its veto powers.
The margin of approval meant that the Senate would probably command a sufficient majority to override the veto (requiring a two-thirds majority).
A similar resolution was approved by the House of Representatives in June, but by a much smaller margin.
Asia-Pacific disarmament conference
The USA, Russia, China, Japan and North and South Korea took part in an unprecedented disarmament conference in Shanghai, China, on Aug. 17-19.
Among the issues discussed at the meeting were nuclear weapons on the Korean peninsula, the creation of a collective regional security forum, and opportunities for confidence-building measures.
Destruction of weapons under CFE
As officials lit a cutting torch to destroy a Soviet-made armoured car and a cannon at a military base near Erfurt on Aug. 3, Germany became the first country to destroy arms under the terms of the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty signed in November 1990 [see p. 37838].
The CFE treaty provided for the destruction of around 40,000 tanks, artillery, helicopters and other equipment by 1995.
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SITUATION
Sharp fall in value of US dollar
The second half of August saw major upheavals in the world financial markets, with the US dollar falling in value against other major currencies, a development attributed to doubts about economic recovery and uncertainty about the outcome of the presidential elections in November.
Despite repeated interventions by central banks, the dollar fell to a record low of DM1.40 on Aug. 25.
The switch by currency dealers from the dollar to the deutschmark—not least due to the wide gap in interest rates obtaining in both countries—also had an effect on other European currencies.
The UK pound sterling and the Italian lira in particular came under pressure, and central banks had to intervene to keep both within their permitted ranges within the European Community's exchange rate mechanism (ERM).
The uncertainty in the foreign exchange markets also affected stock markets, with share values in London, Paris, Frankfurt and Milan falling to new lows for the year and New York also down.
Only Tokyo was relatively buoyant, largely due to the announcement of an emergency economic package [see p. 39049].
INTERNATIONAL
ARMS TRADE
Report on Middle East arms purchases
According to the Safeworld Foundation, an independent organization based in London, Middle Eastern countries had ordered military equipment and arms worth between US$435,000 million and $445,000 million since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August 1991.
The main purchaser was Saudi Arabia, and the main supplier the USA, but all regional powers made major purchases and all major industrial countries received orders.
The Safeworld report noted that "unless arms transfers to the Middle East [are reduced and controlled], the hopes for the peace process…may disappear beneath an arms race that perpetuates instability, conflict and bloodshed in the Middle East" .
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Report on Gulf pollution
A report by the International Atomic Energy Agency's Marine Environment Laboratory, published on Aug. 19, concluded that pollution of the waters of the Gulf as a result of the 1991 war was much less serious than originally feared.
Initial reports had suggested that the marine ecosystem of the northern Gulf had suffered irreparable damage as a result of the massive oil spills caused by Iraqi action during the Gulf war [see pp. 37937-38; 37988].
The report was based on the work of a team of marine scientists, who had analysed samples of sediments, molluscs and fish collected in the northern Gulf following the war.
They concluded that:(i) severe pollution was confined to 400 km of the Saudi coastline south of Kuwait;(ii) that most of the oil in the spills had been digested by microbes; and iii) that sea-bed levels of cancer-causing chemicals produced by burning oil were no higher than those found in estuaries in the United Kingdom and USA.
Oil pollution in the waters around Bahrain was less than before the war, the team reported, apparently as a result of reduced tanker traffic during the seven-month conflict.
French action against waste imports
The French government on Aug. 20 ordered a ban on the import of all domestic refuse, after the discovery of quantities of hazardous waste concealed in consignments of domestic rubbish imported from Germany for disposal in landfill sites in France.
The hazardous elements included syringes and blood bags from hospitals.
The French action followed the interception by customs officers over the previous weeks of about 20 German lorries carrying dangerous waste.
Tight German recycling laws had been blamed for encouraging the illegal disposal of waste in neighbouring countries.
A representative of Greenpeace Germany claimed on Aug. 18 that much of the export of harmful waste was "in the hands of organized criminal networks" .
The German Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety Minister, Klaus Töpfer, initially expressed disappointment with the French action, but agreed to respect it after a meeting in Strasbourg on Aug. 31 with the French Environment Minister, Ségolène Royal, pending further talks later in the year.
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
Air crashes in Nepal and Russia
A preliminary report published on Aug. 14 by Nepalese investigators, concerning the Thai Airways Airbus which crashed in the Himalayas near Kathmandu on July 31, killing all 113 passengers and crew [see also p. 39033], said that the pilot had struggled with faulty wing flaps minutes before the accident.
All 82 passengers and crew were killed when an Aeroflot plane crashed on Aug. 27 while trying to land in rain and heavy fog in Ivanovo, north-east of Moscow.
Initial investigations suggested that the crash had been caused by a combination of bad weather and either pilot error or a failure in the communications system.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
Atlantis mission
The US Space shuttle Atlantis landed on Aug. 8 after a nine-day mission during which astronauts failed to deploy an Italian satellite on a 20 km sheathed copper tether.
The US$373,000,000 Tethered Satellite System was designed to be pulled through space to investigate the electrical properties of the upper atmosphere.
Earlier predictions indicated that as much as 5,000 volts of energy would be generated along the tether as it crossed the Earth's magnetic field at around 28,000 kph.
Due to jamming, however, the tether could initially only be wound out to some 230 metres and, although it was subsequently freed, another attempt was cancelled to avoid the risk of having to jettison the Italian Space Agency satellite which had been safely recovered.
A full investigation was to take place.
Engineers in Germany successfully fired thrusters on Aug. 7 to boost the European Space Agency (ESA) US$400,000,000 Eureka research satellite to an altitude of 507 km from a dangerously low orbit of 100km where it had been stuck due to data communication problems.
It had been released from Atlantis earlier in the week.
INTERNATIONAL
OLYMPIC GAMES
The games of the 25th Olympiad were held in Barcelona, Spain, on July 25-Aug. 9.
The Barcelona Olympics were the largest ever summer games, with more than 10,000 competitors and 5,000 officials.
Other notable features were (i) the participation of athletes from the member countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and Georgia as a "Unified Team" , a transitional arrangement;(ii) the participation of South Africa, readmitted after being banned since 1960 because of its apartheid policy; and (iii) rigorous testing for drug abuse, which led to the disqualification of five athletes who had tested positive at the games for banned substances (one each from Lithuania, China and the Unified Team and two from the United States), exactly half the number disqualified at the Seoul games in 1988.
INTERNATIONAL
IMF
The International Monetary Fund approved a membership application by Tajikistan, it was reported by the ITAR-TASS news agency on Aug. 20.
INTERNATIONAL
WCC
The World Council of Churches, the association of Protestant and Orthodox Christian churches around the world, elected Konrad Raiser as its new General Secretary on Aug. 24; a German national and professor of systematic theology at the Ruhr University in Bochum, Raiser succeeded Emilio Castro of Uruguay.