

AMERICAS
CANADA
Rejection of Charlottetown constitutional reform package
In a referendum on Oct. 26, the Canadian electorate voted by 54.4 per cent to 44.6 per cent to reject the Charlottetown agreement, a constitutional reform package which had been negotiated to replace the failed Meech Lake Accord.
The agreement involved a delicate balance between concessions to the demands for greater autonomy by much of the French-speaking majority of Quebec and by representatives of the native Indian and Inuit population, and wider constitutional reforms designed to appeal to the western provinces, particularly the creation of an elected Senate where all 10 of the country's provinces would be equally represented [see p. 39000].
Despite the support of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and his ruling Progressive Conservative Party (PCP), together with the two main opposition parties, the Liberals and the New Democratic Party (NDP), the referendum saw the agreement win substantial approval only in Newfoundland, New Brunswick and Prince Edward Island.
In the key province of Ontario — which contained one-third of the country's population — the majority in favour was so tiny as to give only a Pyrrhic victory to the supporters of the accord.
In the western provinces, where the newly established, populist, Reform Party had campaigned strongly against the agreement on the grounds that it made too many concessions to Quebec, the margins of rejection were the highest in the country.
Mulroney accepted that the referendum result had consigned the Charlottetown agreement to "history" , but rejected suggestions that, in the face of such a personal reverse, he might step down as Prime Minister.
He accepted that the issues which the agreement had sought to address remained as a threat to Canada's long-term future, but indicated that his government would now switch its central focus from constitutional issues to the need to revitalize the country's ailing economy.
Indian and Inuit leaders expressed anger over the result of the referendum.
Ron George, the leader of the Native Council of Canada, accused those who rejected the agreement as having "perpetuated apartheid in this country" and predicted that there would be increased violence among the indigenous peoples, who currently constituted around 5 per cent of Canada's total population.
The leader of the separatist Parti Québecois, -Jacques Parizeau, interpreted the referendum result as a further step towards Quebec's eventual separation from the Canadian federation.
With the bulk of the province's French-speaking population opposing the agreement on the grounds that its concessions to their province were insufficient, Parizeau was optimistic of his party's chances of winning power in Quebec's next provincial elections — due by 1994 — and suggested that such a development would be followed by a provincial referendum on the issue of sovereignty for Quebec.
Elections in Yukon
The newly formed Yukon Party led by John Ostashek emerged from the elections in the Yukon Territory on Oct. 19 as the largest single party.
The party won seven seats in the 17-member legislature, while six went to the NDP (which had held power prior to the election — see p. 36457), one to the Liberals and three to independents.
After the election the Yukon Party began negotiations with a view to forming a minority government in the territory.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
14th CCP congress
The 14th congress of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), the first since the violent suppression of China's pro-democracy movement in 1989 and the collapse of communism in the Soviet Union, was held in Beijing on Oct. 12-18.
[For details of 13th party congress in 1987 see pp. 35576-77.]
The congress was attended by 1,989 indirectly elected delegates and 41 "specially invited delegates" .
No foreign delegations were invited.
The congress was preceded by months of high-profile political campaigning by so-called "reformists" who supported the "socialist market economy" line propounded by the country's 88-year old paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
Deng himself had launched the campaign in early 1992 with a much-publicised tour of special economic zones (SEZs) in southern China [see pp. 38722; 38764].
The congress proved a triumph for the reformists, both in terms of policies adopted and of personnel appointed.
Most of the leading conservatives who opposed Deng's market-oriented reforms were retired and the congress decided to abolish the central committee's central advisory commission (CAC) headed by the arch-conservative Chen Yun, Deng's most powerful rival.
Deng — the man and his ideas — were lauded during the congress in a style heavily reminiscent of the personality cult which surrounded the late Chairman Mao Zedong.
Deng did not make a public appearance at the congress itself, but attended the first plenum of the new central committee held on Oct. 19.
Some analysts claimed that the emergence of a Mao-style personality cult surrounding Deng only served to highlight the precarious position of his reformist line.
They argued that the continuation of reformist policies was largely dependent on Deng's personal authority, and that his death might signal a conservative backlash against the predicted rise in prices and growth in unemployment.
Jiang Zemin's keynote speech
Party general secretary Jiang Zemin delivered the keynote speech (the 13th central committee's political work report) at the start of the congress on Oct. 12.
The report was unanimously endorsed by delegates at close of congress.
For the most part Jiang's speech was a recapitulation and celebration of Deng's economic reform line.
China would concentrate on establishing a "socialist market economy" with the aim of achieving "socialist modernization" by 2050.
Towards this end it would widen its contacts with the outside world and deepen the economic reforms already under way.
Loss-making state enterprises would be obliged to enter the market; impediments to the development of the market would be removed, including those for stocks and bonds; and more areas would be opened up to foreign trade and investment.
On income distribution, Jiang said that "simultaneous prosperity for everyone" was impossible, so that, for the sake of efficiency, "we should widen differences in personal income to a reasonable degree" .
Jiang set annual growth targets of 8-9 per cent for the 1991-95 period, significantly less than the double-digit expansion rates advocated by Deng, but greater than the 6 per cent target advanced by Premier Li Peng in his March 1992 government work report [see pp. 38861-62].
The emphasis of the speech was firmly on economics.
Jiang made no mention of party-political reform.
The goal of reform, he said, was to build a "socialist democracy" and "absolutely not a Western, multiparty parliamentary system" .
In pursuing reform, Jiang warned cadres to guard against both "left" and "right" tendencies.
He exhorted delegates to fight corruption, bureaucracy and incompetence.
On international relations Jiang said that China would continue to develop relations with foreign countries "in seeking a favourable international environment for its reform, opening up and modernization" and to "make contributions to world peace and development" .
Approval of constitutional amendments
The congress approved a number of amendments to the party constitution [see p. 35577 for amendments approved at 13th congress].
The revisions gave prominence throughout the full text of the constitution to Deng's theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics, and enshrined economic development as the party's core objective.
Election of central committee
A new central committee was elected on Oct. 18.
It comprised 189 full members and 130 alternate members, compared with 175 full and 110 alternate members elected to the 13th committee.
New members accounted for some 47 per cent of the total.
Many of the new members were young or middle-aged technocrats who replaced old conservatives.
There was increased military representation, reflecting the leadership's concern that economic reforms might lead to civil unrest.
There was also a rise in provincial representation at the expense of the central government.
In a decision which surprised many commentators, none of the sons and daughters of top party leaders (the so-called "princelings" ) were elevated to the central committee.
Election of politburo and other leading organs
The newly elected 14th central committee held its first plenary session on Oct. 19, when Jiang Zemin was formally re-elected as party general secretary.
The plenum also elected a new politburo, secretariat and central military commission.
The new members of the politburo were generally middle-aged officials and included a number of party secretaries from the coastal provinces which had led the Dengist economic reform drive.
These included Xie Fei, Wu Bangguo and Jiang Chunyun, party secretaries of Guangdong, Shanghai and Shandong, respectively.
A significant element of the reshuffle was the effective removal of the Yang brothers, the country's military "strongmen" , from the power equation.
President Yang Shangkun was removed from the politburo and as first vice-chair of the Central Military Commission (CMC).
Yang Shangkun's younger half-brother, Yang Baibing, although promoted to the politburo, was removed from the more powerful post of secretary-general of the CMC.
Yang Baibing was also removed from the secretariat and from his post as director of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) general political department.
The Yang brothers had previously been regarded as close allies of Deng.
However, the Far Eastern Economic Review of Oct. 29 commented that Deng had recently started to fear them as "an incipient alternative power centre" .
Membership of leading organs
The membership of leading party organs was as follows (*new member; **promoted from alternate member):
Members of the standing committee of the politburo: Jiang Zemin, Li Peng, Qiao Shi, Li Ruihuan,
*Zhu Rongji, *Liu Huaqing, *Hu Jintao.
Other full members of the politburo: Tian Jiyun, Li Tieying, **Ding Guangen, *Li Lanqing,
*Yang Baibing, *Wu Bangguo, *Zou Jiahua,
*Chen Xitong, *Jiang Chunyun, *Qian Qichen,
*Wei Jiangxing, *Xie Fei, *Tan Shaowen.
Alternate members of the politburo: *Wen Jiabao,
*Wang Hanbin.
Members of the Secretariat: Ding Guangen, **Wen Jiabao,
*Hu Jintao, *Wei Jiangxing, *Ren Jianxin.
Members of the CMC: Jiang Zemin (Chair), *Liu Huaqing (Vice-Chair), *Zhang Zhen (Vice-Chair), *Chi Haotian, *Zhang Wannian, *Yu Yongbo, *Fu Quanyou.
Zhu Rongji, the only one of the three new standing committee members with thorough reformist credentials, was a former mayor of Shanghai and was appointed as a Vice-Premier and economics expert at Deng's behest in April 1991 [see p. 38145].
Although Zhu enjoyed Deng's patronage, he had no support base within the party.
Liu Huaqing, a 76-year-old general and the new vice-chair of the CMC, was elected to represent the military, as the sole military member of the standing committee; he was regarded as a political neutral, and was described by the Far Eastern Economic Review of Oct. 29 as a "no-nonsense professional" who would push for depoliticization and modernization of the military.
Hu Jintao, 49, a former party secretary in Tibet, had been close to Hu Yaobang, the reformist general secretary ousted in January 1987.
Of the members re-elected to the standing committee, Premier Li Peng's commitment to Deng's reform programme was equivocal and he was believed to have conservative sympathies.
Jiang Zemin was supportive of the reform line, but was regarded as a political lightweight lacking deep roots in the party.
Li Ruihuan, the party ideology chief, was a supporter of Deng.
Qiao Shi, the party security chief, was described by the Far Eastern Economic Review of Oct. 29 as "enigmatic" and "the potential swing vote" ; he was believed to be a reformer, but was a protegé of the conservative party elder Peng Zhen.
Yao Yilin and Song Ping, both hardline conservatives, were removed from the standing committee.
Final verdict on Zhao Ziyang
Before the start of the congress, the outgoing central committee had convened for its ninth, and final, plenary session on Oct. 5-9.
The meeting upheld the party's earlier verdict that Zhao Ziyang, CCP general secretary in 1987-89, had supported the 1989 "turmoil" (the pro-democracy Tiananmen demonstrations) and had split the party [see p. 36722].
Zhao was allowed to retain his party membership and would face no further charges, but the decision effectively foreclosed any possibility of his early rehabilitation.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Continuing ANC-Inkatha conflict
As the level of violence in Natal between supporters of the African National Congress (ANC) and the Inkatha Freedom Party escalated, State President F. W. de Klerk on Oct. 29 doubled the number of troops deployed in the province.
He said that they would support intensified police activity which would include "high density patrols…to stop the infiltration of MK members" (members of Umkhonto we Sizwe, the military wing of the ANC).
He also called on ANC president Nelson Mandela and Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi of Inkatha to meet as soon as possible to end political violence in the region.
In the period Oct. 24-26 at least 33 people were killed in political violence in Natal.
In the worst incident, on Oct. 24 in Mpushini, south of Durban, gunmen killed 20 people in an attack on a homestead belonging to a local Inkatha leader.
Local peace initiative activities were themselves the targets of violence attacks.
On Oct. 27 Reggie Hadebe, deputy regional chair of the ANC, was killed in an ambush as he left a meeting aimed at restoring peace in the region.
His death intensified speculation about the operation of a "third force" of agents provocateurs with links with the security forces [see pp. 38896-97].
Local ANC members claimed that he had been killed by members of the Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo) who were training Inkatha youths locally.
The ANC indicated that it was prepared to meet Inkatha at a multiparty meeting in the context of the National Peace Accord [see p. 38422], but expressed unwillingness to hold bilateral talks, arguing that previous meetings had failed to produced effective results [see pp. 37951-52].
The organization condemned the increased troop deployment, declaring that the government had given the security forces a licence to kill ANC members under the guise of stopping alleged MK activity.
Right-wing meeting
A meeting on Oct. 6 of the "Conference for Concerned South Africans" in Johannesburg brought together Chief Buthelezi, Brig.
Joshua Oupa Gqozo, the military ruler of the Ciskei "homeland" (bantustan), Lucas — Mangope, President of the Bophuthatswana bantustan, Andries Treurnicht, leader of the Conservative Party, and Andries Beyers, parliamentary leader of the newly established Afrikaner Volksunie [see p. 39038].
Issuing a series of warnings to the government and the ANC, they called for the scrapping of the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA — the multiparty forum for constitutional negotiations — see p. 38897) and condemned the Record of Understanding between the government and ANC reached in September [see pp. 39078-79].
Mangope threatened to follow the example of Buthelezi and withdraw from constitutional talks [see p. 39079].
He also warned of bloodshed should the ANC decide to march on Bophuthatswana.
Gqozo told the conference that the neo-Nazi Afrikaner Resistance Movement (AWB) had promised to provide him with military support if the ANC again entered Ciskei [see p. 39078-79].
Treurnicht also promised the support of his party in the defence of homelands threatened by the ANC.
Buthelezi for his part warned that Kwazulu would consider secession if constitutional negotiations did not guarantee adequate self-determination in a federal structure.
Government-PAC meeting
The Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) claimed that it had "forced major concessions" from the government at the end of a meeting in Gaborone, Botswana, on Oct. 23-24, when the two sides agreed that CODESA was unrepresentative.
The PAC reported that the government had agreed to disband CODESA and to establish a different negotiating forum.
Foreign Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha, who had led the government delegation, however, insisted that CODESA would continue, but would need to involve more parties.
Amnesty bill
On Oct. 30 a controversial measure giving blanket immunity to anyone who had committed a politically motivated crime before Oct. 8, 1990 [see p. 39037]was approved by the President's Council and thus became law, despite its having been rejected on Oct. 20 by the House of Delegates, the Indian chamber of the tricameral parliament.
The bill, put forward on de Klerk's initiative and covering the crimes of members of the security forces and the police as well as political prisoners, had been described during the parliamentary debate as a "charter for crooks, criminals and assassins" .
Faced with parliamentary defeat, de Klerk had on Oct. 21 referred the measure to the President's Council, an advisory body dominated by members of the ruling National Party.
This was the first time he had used this mechanism to force through legislation rejected by parliament, and the ANC warned that it would nullify the legislation if it gained political power.
Report on ANC detention camps
On Oct. 19 the ANC released the report of a commission of inquiry appointed by the ANC to investigate allegations of the abuse of detainees held in ANC camps abroad during its years in exile.
The commissioners, advocates Louis Skweyiya and Gilbert Marcus and Bridgette Mbandla (a member of the ANC's legal department), found evidence of "staggering" brutality and the systematic use of torture to extract "confessions" from alleged South African spies.
They found that the worst abuses had been committed at the notorious Quatro "rehabilitation centre" in Angola but also said that conditions in other ANC camps in Angola, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia had in no way been "remotely acceptable" .
They confirmed that men who had taken part in a mutiny at Quatro had been executed and that these executions might have been carried out summarily.
Among the recommendations of the commissioners was the establishment of a more visibly independent commission (Mbandla and Skweyiya were both ANC members) which would take the process further, including the identification of all those ANC officials responsible.
These people, the commissioners said, should then be removed from positions of authority and influence in the ANC.
Other recommendations included the complete withdrawal of allegations against detainees held without trial with a "clear and unequivocal apology for the wrongs they have suffered" and financial compensation for all victims of abuse whether or not it had been proved that they were agents of the South African government.
Mandela said that the ANC accepted full responsibility for the damning findings of the commission and that a fully independent commission would be appointed and that the ANC was considering the commission's other recommendations.
Cabinet changes
On Oct. 28 Gerrit van N. Viljoen announced that he would retire at the end of the November as Minister for State Affairs "in light of the increasing demands posed by the negotiations process" .
His decision prompted de Klerk to make a number of Cabinet changes to take effect on Dec. 1.
Leon Wessels would relinquish to Tertius Delport his responsibilities as Minister of Local Government, and Fanus Schoeman was named as Deputy Minister of Constitutional Development and Communications.
The President said that both Delport and Schoeman would be involved in the negotiations process.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Presidential elections (first round)
Election results — UNITA's Stance
On Oct. 17, after days of speculation, the results of the country's first multiparty elections held on Sept. 29-30 [see p. 39082]were published.
As widely expected the ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of — Angola-Workers' Party (MPLA-PT) won a majority of seats at national and provincial level to give it an absolute majority in the National Assembly.
In the presidential elections the incumbent José Eduardo dos Santos of the MPLA-PT won 49.57 per cent of the vote, just short of the 50 per cent needed to avoid a second round.
His nearest rival was Jonas Savimbi of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) with 40.07 per cent of the vote.
UNITA also took second place in the legislative elections.
The release of the results had been delayed as UNITA, with preliminary results indicating its defeat, made allegations of irregularities and threatened a resumption of guerrilla war.
Independent foreign observers [see p. 39082]stated that the conduct of the elections had been free and fair.
Savimbi, however, claiming that there had been widespread electoral fraud, threatened to resume UNITA's guerrilla war against the MPLA-PT.
On Oct. 5 UNITA withdrew from the Angolan Armed Forces (FAA), the new national army formed in September [ibid.], leading to accusations from the US Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen that UNITA was violating the 1991 peace accord with the government [see p. 38180].
On Oct. 11, with tension mounting, heavy fighting between armed UNITA members and police broke out in Luanda.
As clashes in the capital continued there were similar incidents in the provinces of Malange, Huambo and Huila.
Against this background of violence, negotiators from the UN Security Council, as well as Cohen and South African Foreign Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha, sought to persuade Savimbi to withdraw his threat.
By Oct. 17, although still protesting, Savimbi appeared to have accepted the results of both elections.
He was insistent, however, that the UN should play a greater role in the second round of the presidential elections.
The MPLA-PT for its part welcomed increased UN involvement but demanded that UNITA resume the demobilization of its troops and end its occupation of southern areas of the country.
Savimbi also pressed for UNITA to have greater representation in the National Assembly, a demand which, according to some observers, the MPLA-PT would be forced to accept.
By the end of the month fighting was continuing in several parts of the country and a final compromise had yet to be agreed.
It was expected, however, to give UNITA a decisive voice in an interim adminstration which would govern the country until the presidential run-offs.
These were not expected to take place until December or possibly January 1993.
Party, Votes, %, Seats,, Votes, Seats,, ∘ Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-Workers' Party (MPLA-PT), 2,124,126, 53.74, 70,, 2,087,528, 59,, 129 National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), 1,347,636, 34.10, 44,, 1,298,538, 26,, 70 Angolan National Liberation Front (FNLA), 94,742, 2.40, 3,, 20,053, 2,, 5 Liberal Democratic Party (PLD), 94,267, 2.39, 3,, 0, 0,, 3 Social Renovated Party (PRS), 89,875, 2.27, 3,, 41,484, 3,, 6 Democratic Renewal Party (PRD), 35,293, 0.89, 1,, 0, 0,, 1 Democratic Alliance (AD) Coalition, 34,166, 0.86, 1,, 0, 0,, 1 Social Democratic Party (PSD), 33,088, 0.84, 1,, 0, 0,, 1 Angola Youth,, Worker,, Peasant Alliance Party (PAJOCA), 13,924, 0.35, 1,, 0, 0,, 1 Angolan Democratic Forum (FDA), 12,038, 0.30, 1,, 0, 0,, 1 Democratic Party for Progress of Angolan National Alliance (PDP-ANA), 10,620, 0.27, 1,, 0, 0,, 1 Angolan National Democratic Party (PNDA), 10,281, 0.26, 1,, 0, 0,, 1 Others, 52,219, 1.33, 0,, 0, 0,, 0 Total seats,, 130,,, 90,,, *220 Turnout: 91.34 per cent.
Angolan legislative elections, National elections, +, +,, Provincial elections, +,, Total seats
*The National Electoral Council decided, with the consent of all political parties, that the three seats for Angolans abroad should not be filled.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
Signature of peace treaty
After some delay President Joaquim Albert Chissano and Afonso Dhlakama, leader of the rebel Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo), signed on Oct. 4 in Rome a General Peace Accord ending the country's 16-year civil war.
Oct. 1 had been the date set for signature of the accord, the main points of which had been agreed on Aug. 7 [see p. 39039], but on Sept. 29 Dhlakama announced that he would not sign as a number of issues remained to be resolved to his satisfaction.
These he identified as arrangements for the police and security services, the stationing of troops of both sides and the administration of Renamo-controlled areas in the period before elections.
Mediators from the Italian government and Roman Catholic Church, expressing "deep regret" at Dhlakama's decision, said that these points had been covered in the treaty and that his objections did not justify a delay.
There then followed a frenzied round of negotiations during which it was believed that the Renamo leader was encouraged to sign the accord by the South African government and by Roland "Tiny" Rowland, the chief executive of the UK-based multinational Lonrho who had played a key role in the negotiations process [see p. 39039].
Terms of ceasefire
Under the terms of the treaty, the two sides agreed to a ceasefire which would come into force as soon as the accord was approved by the Mozambique parliament.
Troops from both sides would be expected to assemble at predetermined points around the country within one month of the ratification of the treaty; they would surrender their weapons to UN monitors within six months.
To encourage this process, UN monitors would distribute food supplies from the assembly points.
A new 30,000-strong national defence force would be formed from volunteers among the assembled troops, with both sides contributing an equal number of troops; remaining troops would be demobilized.
It was also agreed that Zimbabwean troops guarding the two strategic corridors across the country be withdrawn within one month.
The whole process would be supervised by a Joint Verification Commission, made up of representatives from both sides and from the eight mediating countries.
Presidential and legislative elections would be held under UN supervision within one year, once the demobilization process was complete.
For its part the Italian government agreed to convene within one month a conference of aid donors to assemble a comprehensive assistance package for Mozambique.
Implementation of peace
On Oct. 9 the Mozambique legislature approved a number of amendments to the Constitution which effectively incorporated the terms of Protocol Number 3 signed between the government and Renamo on March 12 and covering arrangements for the future electoral system [see p. 38804].
It also passed enabling legislation to allow further constitutional amendments to be made in the wake of the peace treaty.
Following parliamentary ratification, Chissano promulgated on Oct. 14 legislation approving the actual peace treaty as well as a general political amnesty.
The amnesty covered all crimes committed to date under the country's security and military legislation, and was agreed under the terms of the accord which committed both sides to release all but common criminals.
Meanwhile on Oct. 13 the UN Security Council endorsed a proposal from Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to appoint an interim Special Representative for Mozambique and to dispatch 25 military observers.
The first of the UN observers arrived in Maputo on Oct. 15.
The withdrawal of Zimbabwean troops began on Oct. 21 despite reports of continued Renamo raids in various parts of the country, with the rebels taking control of four towns (Angoche, Maganja da Costa, Memba and Lugela).
Dhlakama later claimed that these were defensive actions and warned that they would continue unless the government withdrew its troops from areas under Renamo control.
On Oct. 26, with little evidence of the assembly of troops, the two sides met in Maputo under UN auspices with the aim of hastening the creation of various working commissions provided for by the treaty.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Continuing power struggle over transition
In defiance of a decision by the national conference in September to dissolve the National Assembly, President Mobutu Sese Seko called for a new session of the Assembly to open on Oct. 5.
Pro-Mobutu troops surrounded the parliament building with tanks and armoured vehicles on Oct. 5 to protect this unauthorized session.
Mobutu had intended that the Assembly, made up largely of members of his Mouvement populaire de la révolution (MPR), should draft an alternative constitution to that proposed by the national conference in September [see p. 39082-83].
However, the session was poorly attended, with many members heeding calls from Prime Minister Etienne Tshisekedi and national conference chairman Monsengwo Pasinya not to attend.
According to a national television report at least three-quarters of the Assembly chamber was empty, but a small number of pro-Mobutu members were continuing to sit as of late October.
On Oct. 22, troops ended an 18-day siege of the Banque du Zaïre (central bank) and allowed the new governor, appointed by Tshisekedi, to enter the building.
Mobutu had ordered the troops to surround the bank and the Finance Ministry on Oct. 4, after Tshisekedi had on Oct. 1 dismissed Nyemba Shabani as governor of the bank following the discovery that US$5,000,000 was missing from central reserves.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
Official results of Cameroon presidential elections
Presidential elections
With the opposition alleging widespread irregularities, President Paul Biya won a slim majority in Cameroon's first multiparty presidential elections, held on Oct. 11.
Biya had announced the holding of the elections, originally scheduled to take place in March 1993, in early September, in a move regarded by many observers as an attempt to wrong-foot the opposition.
With the opposition boycott of legislative elections in March 1992 [see p. 38802]and updating of the electoral register permitted only between January and March of any year, several opposition parties had failed to register some 1, 500,000 of their supporters.
On Oct. 14, lawyers representing the two main opposition candidates, John Fru Ndi and Bello Bouba Maigari, filed petitions asking the Supreme Court to annul the election; on Oct. 15, however, the Supreme Court rejected the petition.
The petitions had accused Biya of adding names to voter registration lists, setting up fake polling stations and withholding ballot papers.
Foreign observers also accused the authorities of widespread malpractice.
Observers from the US National Democratic Institute said that there had been "serious problems" , that voter registration was incomplete, that registers had not been open for inspection, and that Biya had been allocated 142 minutes of coverage on the state-owned television service between Oct. 7 and polling day, while the six opposition candidates shared only 12 minutes.
The official national results, released on Oct. 23, were met with rioting in North-West Province, a centre of support for Fru Ndi (who had earlier claimed victory himself).
A three-month state of emergency was declared in the province on Oct. 27.
According to local press reports three people were killed in Bamenda, including Tita Fomukong, chair of the Cameroon National Party which had supported Biya.
On Oct. 26, 50 people were arrested and beaten by security forces in Douala after they responded to a protest call by Fru Ndi, who declared that Biya had started a "countdown to civil war" .
AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Cancellation of general election
On Oct. 28 the Supreme Court announced the cancellation of multiparty presidential and legislative elections held on Oct. 25.
Voting had been suspended only a few hours after polling began, because of "premeditated acts of sabotage" , according to Ismaila Nimaga, Minister of Public Security and Territorial Administration.
In its announcement the Supreme Court gave details of a number of irregularities including the compilation and circulation of illegal voter registers, multiple voter registration, the absence of electoral equipment in some polling stations in both the capital Bangui and the interior, and the theft of ballot boxes and voting cards.
Opposition politicians, who had blamed the government for the poor organization of the elections, welcomed the decision.
The elections had been announced by President André Kolingba on Sept. 7 following the close of the Grand National Debate [see p. 39040].
No date was given for fresh elections.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Cancellation of party primaries
In a nationwide broadcast on Oct. 16 President Ibrahim Babangida announced the cancellation of the presidential primary elections and the dissolution of the leadership of the two government-created political parties — the National Republican Convention (NRC) and Social Democratic Party (SDP).
Speaking the day after a meeting of the Armed Forces Ruling Council (AFRC), Babangida said that caretaker committees would take over the adminstration of the two parties and would, in conjunction with the National Electoral Commission (NEC), draw up new guidelines for the selection of party executives at local, state and national level.
He also announced an immediate audit of the party accounts.
Groups of primary elections had been held in August but results were cancelled following widespread allegations of corruption [see p. 39041].
A second attempt to hold elections had begun in September [see p. 39083], but on Oct. 6 the process was suspended pending the outcome of an NEC investigation into fresh allegations of malpractice.
In an interim report to the AFRC meeting on Oct. 15 the NEC gave evidence of gross corruption and fraud, and indicated that abuses were committed by "virtually all the candidates with the support of the factionalized executives of the parties at all levels" .
According to the report bribery was rife, some party members were paid to vote several times at different polling stations, unfavourable results were nullified, and in some instances the vote was deliberately miscounted.
Neither in his speech on Oct. 16 nor subsequently did Babangida confirm whether the timetable for the end of military rule, envisaging presidential elections on Dec. 5 and the inauguration of a civilian administration on Jan. 2, 1993, would be met.
However, his comment that "the National Electoral Commission does not determine the lifespan of this adminstration" was interpreted by many commentators as a hint that the transition to democratic civilian rule would be extended.
Most of the contending candidates for the presidential nomination and 18 of the 30 state governors indicated that they were prepared to support a limited delay in the establishment of a civilian adminstration in order to ensure a smooth of handover of power.
However, trade unions, students and academic staff and human rights groups demanded a commitment from the AFRC that it would not extend its period in power.
AFRICA
TOGO
Army occupation of parliament building
Troops loyal to President Gnassingbe Eyadema again disrupted the transition period [see also p. 39041]when a 100-strong force occupied the National Assembly building on Oct. 22 and successfully demanded the unfreezing of the assets of the Rassemblement du peuple togolais (RPT), formerly the sole legal party, led by Eyadema, which had been dissolved in August 1991 [see p. 38379].
The chairman of the High Council of the Republic (HCR — the transitional legislature), Mgr Sanouko Philippe Kpodzro, and 38 other HCR members were held hostage by the troops until Oct. 23 when Kpodzro agreed to unfreeze the RPT's assets, called for by the troops so that all contributions made by the security forces to the RPT could be reimbursed.
Party contributions had been compulsory for all citizens prior to the RPT's dissolution.
The army action was severely criticized by Joseph Kokou Koffigoh, the transitional Prime Minister, who declared that Kpodzro's decision was invalid since it had been made under duress and had not been subject to a regular vote in the HCR.
President Eyadema, although he had supported the move to have the RPT's assets unfrozen, declared on Oct. 23 that sanctions would be taken against those involved.
Opposition leaders, however, expressed concern at the continuing military disruption of the transition period, and questioned whether effective action would be taken against the military.
According to local reports an opposition strike call was widely observed on Oct. 26.
AFRICA
GHANA
Change to detention laws — Challenge to Rawlings
The ruling Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC) announced on Oct. 2 the repeal of the 1982 Protective Custody Law and the Habeas Corpus Amendment Law of 1984 with effect from Sept. 30.
The repeal of these laws had been a persistent demand of human rights and opposition groups.
However, new public order legislation was promulgated which effectively allowed the Secretary for the Interior to continue to detain individuals on a wide range of grounds.
These included suspicion that a person's actions could result in armed robbery or ethnic conflict or could deprive a community of the "essentials of life" .
The law required the government to publish a weekly list of all those detained under its terms.
It also established a Special Review Court with powers to review detention orders and to extend the initial 14-day detention period.
On Oct. 26 the High Court dismissed an action brought by four leaders of the opposition Movement for Freedom and Justice on Oct. 8, which had attempted to prevent Flt. -Lt.
Jerry Rawlings, Chairman of the PNDC and Head of State, from contesting the forthcoming presidential elections, on the grounds that his father was Scottish and that his allegiance to Ghana could therefore not be taken for granted, and because charges were still outstanding against him arising from the coups in May 1979, June 1981 and December 1981 [see pp. 30437-51; 31477-86].
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Fighting in Monrovia
As members of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) met in Cotonou, Benin, in an effort to end the conflict in Liberia, the ECOWAS peacekeeping forces, known as ECOMOG (ECOWAS Monitoring Group), battled to defend the capital, Monrovia, from attack by Charles Taylor's National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL).
The NPFL reportedly launched an attack on the outskirts of the city in the early hours of Oct. 15, deploying mortars and machine guns in the heaviest fighting in Monrovia for two years.
The UN said that by Oct. 24 some 100,000 suburban residents had fled to the relative safety of central Monrovia.
Hospitals reported that on a single day (Oct. 24) four civilians had been killed and more than 100 injured.
There was concern that, with Monrovia effectively besieged by the NPFL, food and medical supplies would run out.
On Oct. 25, ECOMOG forces, hitherto essentially defensive in their stance, used Nigerian aircraft to bomb rebel positions 5 km outside Monrovia.
However, this attempt to end the NPFL offensive failed and fighting was reported to be continuing as the month ended, with the ECOMOG headquarters in the capital a particular target of the rebels.
Cotonou summit
The heads of state of five ECOWAS countries (Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau and Togo) as well as representatives from other members countries met in Cotonou on Oct. 19-20.
Participants stressed the necessity for a ceasefire to be observed from Oct. 21 by the forces of the NPFL and the other rebel group, the United Liberation Movement for Democracy (ULIMO); the two warring factions were given 15 days from the declaration of the ceasefire to implement all the terms of the Yamoussoukro IV peace accord [see p. 38518].
It was also agreed that should either party fail to comply, sanctions would be imposed.
These would be aimed at ensuring the blockade of all land, air and sea points of entry [see pp. 39041; 39084].
It was further agreed to ask the UN Security Council to endorse this decision and to make the application of sanctions mandatory for all UN member states.
AFRICA
GUINEA-BISSAU
Dismissal of ministers
President Joao Bernardo Vieira carried out a major Cabinet reshuffle on Oct. 26, dismissing eight ministers who had been in the government since independence in 1974.
Foreign Minister Júlio Semedo, Minister of Natural Resources and Industry Manuel dos Santos and Justice Minister Joao Cruz Pinto were among those dismissed.
Bernardino Cardoso, hitherto Minister of Planning and International Co-operation and a close associate of the President, was given responsibility for foreign affairs in the new 16-member Cabinet.
AFRICA
MAURITANIA
Currency devaluation
The announcement on Oct. 3 of a 28 per cent devaluation of the local currency, the ouguiya, against the dollar was met by rioting in Nouakchott as local merchants increased food prices by 40 per cent(US$1.00=105.852 ouguiya as at Oct. 19, 1992).
Riot police used tear gas against demonstrators in the market area of the capital on Oct. 4 and a dusk-to-dawn curfew was imposed until Oct. 17.
Planning Minister Mohammed Ould Michel emphasized that the devaluation was in accordance with agreements recently signed with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and was part of a four-year economic restructuring programme.
He said that the main objectives of the programme were to achieve an annual growth rate of 3-5 per cent; to reduce the annual rate of inflation to 3.6 per cent per annum by 1995 and to reduce the country's external debt.
He acknowledged the government's awareness of the adverse social effects of the devaluation and said that it would take measures to alleviate them, including increasing wages in 1993 and compensating government employees who had lost their jobs as a result of the economic changes.
AFRICA
SENEGAL
Split in government coalition
Divisions within the coalition government established in April 1991 [see p. 38134]emerged on Oct. 18 with the resignation of all four Democratic Party of Senegal (PDS) members of the Cabinet: Abdoulayé Wade (Minister of State), Ousmane Ngom (Labour and Professional Training), Jean-Paul Diaz (African Economic Integration) and Aminata Tall (Minister-Delegate for Literacy and the Promotion of National Languages).
Wade, the PDS secretary-general, was a controversial figure; he had been a presidential candidate in both 1983 and 1988, coming second to President Abdou Diouf on both occasions.
Explaining their resignations in terms of the desire to "recover [their]freedom" , Wade said that he and the other PDS ministers had been excluded from government action and had only been party to decisions over "trivial" issues.
He confirmed that he would be challenging Diouf in the presidential elections due in February 1993.
The resignations prompted a technical Cabinet reshuffle in which serving Cabinet ministers took on extra responsibilities, notably Famara Ibrahima Sagna, who added African Economic Integration to his existing responsibilities as Economy, Finance and Planning Minister.
Rebel attack
At least 31 people were killed on Oct. 26 when an armed group numbering about 20 attacked a fishing village near the Cap Skirring tourist area, 600 km south of Dakar.
The assailants claimed to be separatist guerrillas of the Movement of Democratic Forces of Casamance (MFDC).
The victims were mainly civilians and included several children; three members of the security forces were also killed.
[For September attack by MFDC see p. 39084.]
AFRICA
MALI
French aid for peace process
President Alpha Oumar Konare announced on Oct. 9 that France had decided to given financial support for the implementation of the national peace pact signed in April with Tuareg rebels [see p. 38853].
Konare estimated the cost of integrating Tuareg forces into the regular army at 600 million francs CFA (about US$2,500,000).
The September merger of four Tuareg organizations to form the Azaouad Liberation Front under the leadership of Brahim Lidmi was noted.
AFRICA
CHAD
Government reshuffle — Peace agreements with rebels
Prime Minister Joseph Yodemane reshuffled his Cabinet on Oct. 14.
Economy and Finance Minister Mohiaddine Salah left the government and was replaced by Safi Abdelkader, hitherto Public Works and Transport Minister.
Beade Toira Jérémie was replaced as Commerce and Industrial Development Minister by Mahamat Habib Doutoum, hitherto Energy, Mines and Water Minister.
On Sept. 9 the dismissal had been reported of Armed Forces Chief of Staff Lt.-Col. Mahamat Garfa, following allegations by the Chadian League for Human Rights (LDHT) that soldiers had massacred 150 people at Doba in the south.
Also reported on Sept. 9 was the government's signature of peace agreements with two rebel movements, the Movement for Democracy and Development (MDD — for previous agreement in June see p. 38952), and the National Revival Committee for Peace and Democracy (CSNPD).
On Sept. 6, Radiodiffusion Nationale Tchadienne had announced from Ndjaména, the capital, that a peace agreement had just been signed with the rebel Chadian National Front (FNT).
National conference — Strikes
In an interview on Oct. 5 with French journalists at the Franco-African summit in Libreville, Gabon [see p. 39134], President Idriss Déby said that a promised Sovereign National Conference could be held in early 1993; on Oct. 15 it was announced that the conference would start on Jan. 15, 1993.
It was reported on Oct. 11 that the government had suspended the activities of the Union of Chadian Trade Unions (UST) which had called a one-month strike of public service employees a week earlier, protesting over an income tax increase and non-payment of salaries.
A general strike called by the UST in early September had been supported by 80 per cent of workers, the union claimed.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Renewed fighting
Fighting in the south between government forces and the rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) centred on Juba during September and around Malakal, 500 km further north, during October.
On Oct. 22, four days after rebels claimed control of most of Malakal, heavy fighting was again reported in the city, but on Oct. 28 the head of state, Lt.-Gen.
Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir, said on Radio Omdurman that government forces were in control.
In early October government spokesmen had claimed that the armed forces controlled the south, asserting that the SPLA was split and that its leader, Gen. John Garang, had lost control.
There were reports during the period of desertions from the SPLA by members of Garang'sDinka community.
In early September there had been allegations by Catholic bishops in the south that government soldiers in Juba were burning homes, killing suspected SPLA sympathizers, mining roads out of the town and using civilians as human shields.
On Sept. 23 the human rights organization Amnesty International alleged that government troops had killed at least 300 people in Juba in the previous three months.
On Sept. 10 the US-based human rights group Africa Watch was cited as alleging that the government was seeking to eradicate Sudan's approximately 1,000,000 Nuba people, a black African community dwelling in the Arab-dominated north.
The group also reportedly condemned the SPLA's threat to attack relief flights into Juba, which had been halted on Sept. 7, because of rebel fire [see p. 38993 for UN airlift].
On Oct. 14 it was reported that a UN investigating team had flown into southern Sudan from Nairobi following the murder of a UN official and a Norwegian journalist; two other UN staff members were missing.
The UN had announced on Sept. 30 that it was suspending its humanitarian operations in southern Sudan.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Worsening famine in Ogaden
Relief agencies estimated that approximately 200 people were dying of starvation each week in the Ogaden in the remote south-east, according to reports from mid-October; malnutrition had sharply increased, with the death rate rising to 12 per 10,000 daily since August, when aid workers had warned of a worsening situation [see p. 39042].
Economic reforms — IMF loan
Ethiopia's currency, the birr, was devalued on Oct. 1 by 58.6 per cent(as at Oct. 5, 1992, US$1.00=4.9398 birr).
On Oct. 13 the National Bank of Ethiopia — the central bank — raised interest rates; the government at the same time raised government workers' wages, for the first time since the overthrow of Emperor Haile Selassie in 1974, by up to 110 per cent.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) on Oct. 29 approved a three-year arrangement authorizing loans up to the equivalent of SDR49,420,000 (about US$70,000,000) under the structural adjustment facility (SAF), in support of Ethiopia's medium-term economic reform programme.
Up to SDR14,120,000 ($20,000,000 could be drawn in support of the first annual programme for 1992/93.
Opposition to Eritrean ruling party
Four Eritrean groupings opposed to the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) transitional government in Asmara were reported on Sept. 28 to have formed the Eritrean National Pact Alliance (ENPA), accusing the Front of seeking to establish a dictatorship.
The Eritrean Liberation Front-Central Command (ELF-CC), the Eritrean Liberation Front-Unified Organization (ELF-UO), the Eritrean Liberation Front-Revolutionary Council (ELF-RC) and the Eritrean Democratic Liberation Movement (EDLM) had earlier met in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Obstacles to UN efforts
The presence of 500 Pakistani UN troops at Mogadishu port from early October [see p. 39085 for mid-September arrival of first group]apparently failed to prevent gunmen fighting over food aid intended for famine victims.
On Oct. 1 it was reported that the UN intended to bring its peacekeeping force up to some 4,200.
The largest faction in the civil war, the Somali National Alliance (SNA) of Gen. Mohammed Farah Aydid which claimed control of two-thirds of Mogadishu and of most of southern Somalia, continued to object to a larger UN presence, arguing that this would undermine Somali sovereignty.
A Canadian C-130 transport aircraft came under fire on Oct. 5 during fighting at Mogadishu port and airport between Aydid's troops and loyalists of the interim President, Ali Mahdi Mohammed.
There were repeated clashes and further disruptions to port and airport traffic during the month.
Fighting over Bardera — Worsening plight of famine victims
Fighters of the Somali National Front (SNF) loyal to Gen. Siyad Hersi Morgan (son-in-law of the deposed former President Mohammed Siyad Barre) on Oct. 14 overran the town of Bardera, a stronghold of Gen. Aydid, 300 km west of Mogadishu.
It was reported the same day that the UN military commander in Somalia, Brig. -Gen.
Imtiaz Shaheen, had flown to Bardera to evacuate UN and other relief personnel, who had been providing food and care to approximately 200,000 famine victims.
On Oct. 22 a UN spokesman said that almost 250 people had died of hunger daily in Bardera since the relief workers left.
On Oct. 28 Kenyan Television Network reported that a pro-Aydid faction had recaptured the town.
There were reports also of intercommunal fighting at the southern port town of Kismayu, from which thousands of hungry civilians were said to be fleeing northwards.
Resignation of UN Special Envoy — Irish President's visit
Mohamed Sahnoun, the special representative in Somalia of UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, resigned on Oct. 27, reportedly after being rebuked in a letter from Boutros-Ghali for criticising the UN response to the crisis.
Brig. -Gen.
Shaheen was to take over, pending appointment of Sahnoun's replacement.
President Mary Robinson of the Irish Republic, who visited Somalia on Oct. 3 and 4, said at an emotional press conference in Nairobi on Oct. 5 that the UN and the European Communities were "offending justice" by acting slowly over the Somali crisis.
She again criticized the UN at a press conference in New York on Oct. 7.
AFRICA
KENYA
Dissolution of parliament
President Daniel arap Moi on Oct. 28 dissolved the National Assembly (whose term was due to end in March 1993), as a prelude to multiparty elections.
He set no date, but the Constitution required elections within 90 days of the dissolution of parliament, and specified that the date should be set at least six weeks in advance of polling.
Observers believed that Moi was hoping to take advantage of the divisions in the main opposition grouping, the Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD)[see p. 39085].
These divisions were formalized on Oct. 13 when the two FORD factions registered as separate parties.
The faction led by Oginga Odinga was registered as FORD-Kenya while the Kenneth Matiba faction took the name FORD-Asili.
Ministerial changes
On Oct. 3 President Moi appointed Ojwanga K'Ombudo as Minister of Regional Development to replace Mathews Onyango Midika.
No explanation was given for the change.
On Oct. 14 James Njiru was dismissed as Minister for Culture and Social Services; Moi said that his dismissal was necessitated by a local party leadership dispute.
Njiru had apparently been relieved of the chairmanship of a local branch of the ruling Kenya National African Union (KANU) in May 1992.
AFRICA
UGANDA
State visit to India
President Yoweri Museveni on Oct. 15 ended a three-day state visit to India, the first in 11 years.
Seeking to improve relations with India, the President asked forgiveness from all Ugandans of Indian origin who had "suffered from the excesses of former dictator Idi Amin" .
He also said that his government would welcome the return of the 80,000 Ugandans Asians who in 1972 were forced by Amin to flee the country [see pp. 25469-70], and confirmed that they would be able to recover their property or seek compensation for their losses.
As a result of the visit a joint economic committee was established to reschedule Uganda's US$60,000,000 debt to India and to encourage bilateral trade.
The two governments also agreed to co-operate in agricultural research.
Demobilization of army
The demobilization of troops, delayed on grounds of cost since June [see p. 38953], began on Oct. 17.
On the same day a dusk-to-dawn curfew was imposed on lone armed people, including members of the army, police and local defence forces.
AFRICA
RWANDA
Partial power-sharing agreement
A fourth round of peace talks between the transitional government and the rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front (FPR) on Oct. 6-29 in Arusha, Tanzania, ended with a broad agreement to share power and end the two-year civil war.
On Oct. 31 the two sides signed a partial protocol covering the terms of their agreement.
The talks focused on presidential powers and the distribution of seats in a new transitional Cabinet.
The FPR initially proposed a collective presidency with a national presidential council formed by a college of seven presidents.
It also argued for the complete removal of executive power from the President as well as the abolition of a number of unspecified prerogatives enjoyed by the President as head of state.
The government, however, was reluctant to agree to the surrender of any presidential powers.
Both sides made concessions, and under the terms of the protocol it was agreed that President Juvénal Habyarimana would share executive power with a new transitional Cabinet made up of a maximum of two ministers from each political party, including the FPR, and headed by a prime minister.
The President also undertook not to veto decisions taken by the Cabinet.
It was agreed that talks would resume in Arusha in mid-November to discuss outstanding issues, including arrangements for a new transitional legislative assembly.
AFRICA
MALAWI
Promise of referendum
In an unexpected move on Oct. 12 President Hastings Kamuzu Banda announced a referendum which would allow Malawians to decide whether to abandon the one-party political system in favour of a multiparty system.
No date was set for the referendum.
The announcement, however, did not reflect a substantial change in the attitude of President Banda who remained steadfastly opposed to multiparty politics.
He said that he was convinced that the country did not want change, and was calling the referendum to expose the "lies" spread by "dissidents" about the level of support for multiparty politics; it would, he said, give "people a chance to vote for me and my party…and to reject the introduction of other political parties" .
On Oct. 2 the delegates to the annual convention of the ruling Malawi Congress Party (MCP) had rejected unanimously proposals for the introduction of a plural system.
Death of Orton Chirwa
Orton Chirwa, one of Malawi's most prominent political prisoners, died in prison on Oct. 20, apparently from natural causes, although there was evidence that he had been tortured and had suffered ill-treatment during his 10 years' imprisonment.
The country's first black lawyer, Chirwa was active in the independence struggle and was the first leader of the MCP.
He was dismissed as Minister of Justice by Banda in 1964.
In exile he established and led the Malawi Freedom Movement (Mafremo) until December 1981 when he and his wife Vera <Vera Chirwa> were reportedly kidnapped from Zambia by Malawian agents.
They were charged with treason and sentenced to death in 1983, but following international condemnation the sentences were in 1984 commuted to life imprisonment [see p. 33018].
Chihana trial
Two of the five sedition charges against trade unionist and pro-democracy campaigner Chakufwa Chihana were dropped in the High Court on Oct. 14 [see p. 39086].
The two charges concerned acts likely to incite people against the government and to undermine the authority of the President.
The trial was adjourned until November.
New opposition group
In mid-October a group of former civil servants and former senior members of the MCP announced the formation of the United Democratic Front to campaign for multiparty democracy.
AFRICA
SWAZILAND
Dissolution of parliament
King Mswati III dissolved the Libandla (Parliament) on Oct. 9, one month ahead of the scheduled end of its term, announcing that he would rule with "executive powers" with the help of the Cabinet, which would be converted into a council of ministers and would act as a caretaker government while a new constitution was drafted and elections were held.
The King's announcement followed his approval of the recommendations of a royal commission on constitutional reforms, Vusela-2, which had gathered views from across the country and had been headed by Prince Mahlalengangeni [see also p. 38517].
Among its recommendations was the discarding of the existing electoral system whereby members of the Libandla were elected in secret by an 80-member electoral college.
The King agreed that the forthcoming elections should be by secret ballot, with parliamentary candidates nominated by chiefs and directly elected by traditional tribal communities (tinkundla).
Other proposals made in the Vusela-2 report were the expansion of both houses of parliament, with the House of Assembly increasing from 40 to 50 elective members, and the Senate from 10 to 20 members.
The report endorsed the existing practice whereby the King appointed a further 10 members to each house.
It also emphasized the importance of public education about constitutional and electoral changes.
The King agreed to despatch a delegation to explain throughout the country the Vusela-2 report and its implications.
Mswati did not specify who would decide on the incorporation of the Vusela-2 recommendations into a new constitution, neither did he give a new date for elections, which had been due in November, although he said on Oct. 26 that they would be held in the first half of 1993.
AFRICA
COMOROS
Military rebellion
Fighting between rebel soldiers and forces loyal to President Said Mohammed Djohar resulted in at least 22 deaths and over 100 casualties between Oct. 13 and Oct. 21.
The clashes began when some 100 rebel members of the Comorian Defence Force (FCD), led by Lt. Said Mohammed "Lava" , a former member of assassinated President Ahmed Abdallah's Presidential Guard, forced their way into Kandani military camp 5 km from Moroni, the capital.
They failed, however, to free the soldiers arrested after the failed coup of Sept. 26 [see p. 39086], including Abdallah's sons, Cheikh and Abderamane <Cheikh Abdallah Abderamane Abdallah>.
The rebels then established themselves at a camp some 20 km from Moroni, calling for the resignation of Djohar and his Cabinet and of Capt. Azali Assoumani, commander of the FCD.
The camp was later surrounded by troops loyal to Djohar, and fighting ensued.
By Oct. 16 there were reports of fighting in Hamahamet and Mbeni in the north of Njazidja (formerly Grande Comore) and on another main island, Nzwani (Anjouan).
Moroni, situated on Njazidja, was the scene of the worst clashes which began on Oct. 19.
The situation remained unclear at the end of the month, with some French press reports suggesting that the rebels had opted for guerrilla warfare.
The President had also apparently abandoned his aim of holding the first round of legislative elections on Oct. 25 [see p. 39086], and agreed to reschedule them for late November (with a number of opposition parties still calling for a further postponement).
AFRICA
FRANCE-AFRICA
Franco-African conference
The 17th Franco-African conference was held in Libreville, Gabon, on Oct. 5-7 [for 16th conference, held in La Baule, France, in June 1990, see p. 37524].
The conference was attended by 13 heads of state, the lowest number since the 1980 Nice conference [see p. 31331].
Ill-health prevented the attendance of French President François Mitterrand, while Presidents Said Mohammed Djohar of the Comoros and Hassan Gouled Aptidon of Djibouti cited internal instability as the reason for their absence.
Other notable absentees included Presidents Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaïre and Gnassingbe Eyadema of Togo as well as André Kolingba of the Central African Republic and Cameroon's Paul Biya, both of whom were conducting election campaigns.
Much of the debate focused on African economic problems.
French Prime Minister Pierre Bérégovoy announced the establishment of a debt relief fund which would allow middle-income African states (including Cameroon, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire and Gabon) to convert and cancel up to F4,000 million (about US$840 million) of debts owed to France, in favour of new development projects.
He also called on the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to be more understanding towards Africa, urging them to relax conditions in order to allow new lending and the relief of existing debt.
This sentiment was echoed in the final communiqué of the summit which asked international financial institutions to "take into account the particular circumstances prevailing in Africa" and industrialized countries "to pursue efforts to reduce the African debt burden" .
AFRICA
GABON
Some 10,000 Nigerians, who were said to be either illegal immigrants or Nigerians who had volunteered to return, were repatriated in mid-October, prompting an official protest from the Nigerian government which alleged that the deportees had been mistreated; the opposition Gabonese Progress Party also criticized the action as a breach of human rights.
AFRICA
GUINEA
The Rally of the Guinean People, the Guinean Party of Progress and the Union for the New Republic announced on Oct. 8 the formation of an opposition alliance, the Front for Struggle and for Government; the main aim of the front was to press for the postponement of legislative elections scheduled for November, in order that a national conference could be held beforehand.
AFRICA
MADAGASCAR
Prime Minister Guy Razanamasy announced on Oct. 16 that the Chief of the Armed Forces General Staff and the Commander of the Development Forces of the army had been dismissed following the late delivery of fuel to the capital.
AFRICA
TANZANIA
On Oct. 20 President Ali Hassan Mwinyi carried out a minor Cabinet reshuffle in which Amran Mayagila became Minister of Health, replacing Philemon Sarungi; Mayagila's place at the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock Development and Co-operatives was taken by Jackson Makweta, who was in turn replaced at the Ministry of Communications and Transport by Sarungi.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
On Oct. 1 Kebby Musokotwane, hitherto secretary-general of the previously ruling United National Independence Party (UNIP), was elected party president at an extraordinary congress, succeeding former President Kenneth Kaunda who had resigned the party leadership in January; others elected to party posts included Patrick Luvunga as vice-president, Gen. Malimba Masheke as chair and Gen. Benjamin Mibenge as the new secretary-general.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Presidential election campaign
Closing stages of campaign
The US presidential election campaign drew towards its Nov. 3 climax amidst intensive campaigning by Democratic Party nominee Bill Clinton and his Republican rival and incumbent President, George Bush.
Although Clinton continued to enjoy a consistent lead in the opinion polls, by the end of October the gap between the two candidates appeared to have closed sufficiently to be causing some alarm in the Democratic camp.
Declaration of candidacy by Perot
Texan billionaire Ross Perot, who had campaigned as an undeclared candidate in the early stages of the race but had then withdrawn [see pp. 38997-98], formally declared his candidacy on Oct. 1.
Claiming that the two main candidates had failed to address seriously the urgent need to reduce the federal deficit, Perot said that he had re-entered the race in order "to put our financial house back in order" .
He announced that his vice-presidential running mate was James B. Stockdale, a retired admiral with little political experience.
Stockdale was a former Navy pilot who was shot down in Vietnam in 1965 and held prisoner for 2,714 days, during which time he suffered extensive maltreatment and torture.
Having retired from the Navy, Stockdale became a senior research fellow at the Hoover Institute at Stanford University, California.
Presidential debates — Bush attack on Clinton's character
The recent tradition of holding televised debates between the main candidates was maintained despite earlier indications that disputes over format and procedure might lead to the abandonment of the practice.
Presidential debates involving Bush, Clinton and Perot were held on Oct. 11, 15 and 19, and a debate between vice-presidential candidates on Oct. 13.
A bitter context for the debates was created on Oct. 7 by a sharp character attack on Clinton by Bush.
Once again raising the issue of Clinton's avoidance of service in the Vietnam war, Bush denounced him for having participated in anti-war demonstrations while residing as a student in the UK, and also questioned the nature of a European holiday in 1969 in which Clinton had visited Moscow.
The implicit linking of the two issues represented the most serious attack on the patriotism of Clinton yet mounted by the President, and was denounced by the Clinton team as "a pathetic ploy by a desperate politician" .
The widespread charge that Bush was engaging in a form of McCarthyism was supported when the Washington Post of Oct. 14 revealed that the State Department had ordered a search of Clinton's passport file and of the archives of the US embassies in London and Oslo for evidence of misconduct by the Democratic candidate.
In the first debate, in Clayton, Missouri, Bush was out-shone by Clinton, although in the opinion of most commentators the real winner of the contest was Perot whose performance was characterized by an informal approach and an engagingly comic eccentricity.
In the Oct. 13 vice-presidential debate, in Atlanta, Georgia, Dan Quayle ferociously attacked Clinton while Al Gore concentrated on Democratic Party policy, and Stockdale appeared uncomfortable and poorly briefed.
In the second presidential debate, in Richmond, Virginia, Bush again raised the issue of Clinton's student activities but was sharply rebuked by his opponent who recalled how Bush's own father had been an ardent opponent of McCarthyism.
In the third debate, in East Lansing, Michigan, Bush attacked Clinton as being untrustworthy and for planning to raise taxes, but was in turn assailed by Perot for supporting Saddam Hussein prior to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
Although Perot was the only candidate to leave the debates with a higher opinion poll rating than when he entered them, there was a widespread perception that Clinton had clearly outperformed Bush, appearing assured and in command of an impressive array of detailed policy information, while Bush appeared keener to deal in innuendo and generality.
Allegations of Republican smear tactics
Following the debates Bush appeared to step back from further character attacks on Clinton, a development which led to speculation that he had already privately accepted the inevitability of his defeat and was seeking to preserve a degree of presidential dignity.
This perception was heightened by his decision to focus the closing stages of his campaign not in the crucial mid-west "swing states" — those states which he had to win in order to retain his hold on the White House — but in an attempt to shore up his support in hitherto safe Republican states such as Florida, a pattern of behaviour widely seen as indicative of his desire to avoid being defeated by a landslide.
With Clinton carrying the campaign into the hitherto safe Republican areas, Perot eschewed campaigning in person in favour of buying huge amounts of television time for lengthy "info-commercials" designed to inform the electorate about his analysis of the country's economic difficulties.
The independent candidate made his first personal campaign appearance on Oct. 25, in New Jersey.
He used the occasion to inform the public that his decision to withdraw from the campaign in July had been in response to a Republican dirty tricks campaign which had included a plan to smear his daughter through manufactured photographs and to disrupt her forthcoming wedding.
White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater dismissed the allegations as being without foundation and denounced Perot as "a paranoid person who has delusions" .
Fresh Iran-contra allegations
Evidence that Perot's candidacy was growing in popularity in late October led to hints by both the Bush and Clinton camps that Perot could be included in a future Cabinet.
The combined effect of Perot cutting into Clinton's support and of evidence that Bush's standing in the polls was showing some signs of improvement rejuvenated the President's campaign in the final days of the contest and forced the Democrats to concede that the election could be much closer than had earlier been thought likely.
However, on Oct. 30, the Bush camp was shaken by fresh revelations concerning the Iran-contra affair.
Grand jury documents relating to the forthcoming trial of former Defence Secretary Caspar Weinberger showed that, at a Reagan Cabinet meeting in January 1986, Bush had voted in favour of secretly selling missiles to Iran in exchange for the release of US hostages held by pro-Iranian groups in Lebanon.
The new evidence contradicted Bush's claims that he was "out of the loop" of those who approved the Iran-contra operation and that, when he did discover the arms deal, he was unaware of its quid pro quo element in regard to the hostages.
Clinton used the revelation to accuse Bush of having lied to the public and, thereby, of having diminished the credibility of the presidency.
Bush had emphasized heavily throughout the campaign the issues of trust and character, and this latest revelation appeared to be particularly damaging to him; opinion poll evidence suggested that, at the end of October, Clinton was once again opening up a lead.
 "Iraqgate" developments
After several months of growing pressure the "Iraqgate" affair — which centred on the allegation that the US government had covertly supplied loans to Iraq and then sought to conceal the evidence — burst into the open during October.
The conduit through which the US$5,500 million in Iraqi loans was supplied during the late 1980s was the small Atlanta branch of the Italian majority state-owned Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL).
The branch manager, Christopher Drogoul, was indicted and pleaded guilty to 60 counts of defrauding BNL, thereby suggesting that neither the USA nor Italian authorities had prior knowledge of the loans.
During a three-week sentencing hearing in late September and early October, however, Judge Marvin H. Shoob, of the US Federal District Court of Atlanta, declared that he did not believe that Drogoul was the sole orchestrator of the Iraqi loans, and alluded to Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) documents which proved "definitely" that Drogoul had acted with the full knowledge of BNL's head office in Rome.
Following his comments Shoob on Oct. 5 acceded to requests by the authorities to withdraw from the case and admitted that he had reached "certain preliminary conclusions" concerning the evidence.
Before doing so, however, he made an outspoken attack on the government.
Commenting on the prosecution's agreement to let Drogoul change his plea to innocent, Shoob stated that decisions had been made "at the top levels of the United States Justice Department, Agriculture Department and within the intelligence community to shape this case, and that information may have been withheld from local prosecutors seeking to investigate the case" .
He called for Drogoul's trial to be postponed to allow a special prosecutor (independent counsel) to be appointed to investigate the affair.
Commenting on Attorney General William Barr's refusal in August to appoint a special prosecutor [see p. 39044], Shoob said that this in itself raised concerns "about the government's impartiality in handling this case" .
In a rare statement on intelligence details, the CIA on Oct. 7 admitted that it had failed to provide accurate information to the Justice Department and the federal prosecutors.
The agency claimed that, having stated as recently as Sept. 17 that it had no unreleased BNL material, it had since discovered the existence of a series of transmissions from the CIA's Rome station which indicated that the Rome headquarters of BNL had authorized some of the Iraqi loans.
The agency gave assurances that this new evidence had been passed to the relevant prosecuting authorities, and it was this which had led to the prosecutors' decision to withdraw from their plea bargain arrangement with Drogoul, thereby allowing him to change his plea to innocent.
CIA Director Robert M. Gates stated that an internal inquiry had been launched into the matter.
The revelation was discussed at closed sessions of the Senate select committee on intelligence, chaired by Democrat David Boren.
During the hearings, officials from the CIA apparently admitted having concealed evidence from Judge Shoob, but claimed that they had been pressurized into doing so by the Justice Department.
After two days of hearings, Boren on Oct. 9 called on the Attorney General to investigate the conduct of senior Justice Department officials.
William Barr obliged and, on Oct. 10, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), William Sessions, announced that he was embarking on an inquiry into possible misconduct at the Justice Department (of which the FBI was institutionally a part) with regard to the handling of CIA reports.
Three days later, in an extraordinary further development, the Justice Department announced that it was investigating Sessions and his wife in relation to the possible violation of ethics rules.
The allegations against Sessions, which related to the misuse of government cars and aircraft and were claimed to have originated from an anonymous letter, were widely denounced as having been politically inspired in an attempt to intimidate the FBI and discredit its inquiry.
These developments reinforced the growing pressure being exerted by congressional Democrats for a full investigation.
On Oct. 15 the House judiciary committee's Democratic majority demanded that Barr reconsider his earlier refusal to appoint a special prosecutor, a demand which was endorsed fully by Boren.
Barr responded on Oct. 16 by announcing the appointment of retired federal judge Frederick B. Lacey, 72, to make a preliminary investigation of the conduct of the Justice Department and report back — within the 30-day period within which Barr was legally obliged to make a formal reply to the request of the House — on whether a special prosecutor should be appointed.
Democrats accused Barr of using Lacey's appointment as a means of circumventing the selection of a fully empowered special prosecutor, and of attempting to stall an inquiry into the BNL affair at least until after the presidential elections.
By using a federal regulation rather than the independent counsel statute (which required a panel of judges to choose the appointee), Barr also ensured that he alone could choose the investigator.
Adjournment of Congress — Approval of legislation
The 102nd Congress adjourned (the House of Representatives on Oct. 6 and the Senate on Oct. 9) amid considerable rancour and partisan disputes.
Although some pieces of legislation were passed in its final days, including numerous appropriations bills, several measures were killed by Republican filibustering.
The Democratic majority did, however, succeed in overturning a veto for the first time during the four-year presidency of George Bush.
Some of the many measures dealt with are outlined below.
Cable Television Bill
Bush's sequence of 35 consecutive vetoes, all upheld in Congress, ended on Oct. 5 in relation to a bill to re-regulate the cable television industry, where charges had risen at twice the rate of inflation since deregulation in 1984.
The Senate voted by 74 votes to 25 and the House by 308 votes to 114 to overturn Bush's Oct. 3 veto of the measure.
Education and crime bills
Major education and crime bills were dropped by Congress on Oct. 2 in the face of a determined Republican filibuster in the Senate.
The crime bill was opposed largely because it sought to enact a five-day waiting period for the purchase of handguns, while the education legislation, which aimed at upgrading the country's schools, was opposed by Republicans following a congressional decision to remove an administration proposal to provide government vouchers to assist parents in sending their children to private schools.
Also, with Bush committed to opposing both bills, Republicans in Congress were anxious to enable him to avoid the political embarrassment of vetoing them just before the presidential election.
As a consequence Bush, who once described himself as an "education president" , ended his four-year term without having signed a single piece of legislation designed to improve US schools.
Tax and urban aid bill
Congress gave final approval on Oct. 8 (after a 15-hour filibuster in the Senate) to a tax and urban aid bill on Oct. 8, which sought to raise $27,000 million to finance aid to urban areas.
While Bush supported the bill's aim to create 50 urban and rural enterprise zones, the fact that the bill included some three dozen minor tax increases made it likely that the President would veto the measure either directly, or through simply declining to sign it, a procedure known as a "pocket veto" .
Energy and water bills
On Oct. 8 Congress gave final approval to a major energy bill which promoted the phasing in of alternative fuels, the streamlining of the licensing procedure for nuclear power plants, and the encouragement of energy conservation.
The bill represented the first major overhaul of US energy policy since the 1970s.
On the same day a water bill was approved which covered water-related projects in 17 western states.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Resignation of Michoacán governor
Eduardo Villaseñor of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), who had been inaugurated in September as governor of the western state of Michoacán [see p. 39089], asked on Oct. 6 for a "one-year leave of absence" , a form of words effectively meaning that he was resigning.
He was replaced by another PRI official, Ausencio Chávez.
Michoacán had witnessed months of demonstrations and protests by supporters of the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD), who claimed that the PRI had cheated them of victory in the July 12 state elections [see pp. 39000-01].
The PRD greeted Villaseñor's departure as a further instance of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari being forced to dismiss an unpopular PRI governor [for previous cases see pp. 38385; 38524; 38716; 38905], and as a government concession to the need for political reform.
It was reported that Porfirio Muñoz Ledo, "number two" in the PRD, had been engaged in recent talks with the Minister for the Government, Fernando Gutiérrez Barrios, on preparations for the December municipal elections in Michoacán.
AMERICAS
CARIBBEAN
CARICOM special summit
A special summit of Caribbean Community (CARICOM) leaders in Port of Spain, Trinidad, on Oct. 28-30, agreed to recommend to their respective governments a new regional tariff structure aimed at healing deep rifts among CARICOM's 13 member states over tariff levels [for June CARICOM summit see p. 39003].
The top level of the common external tariff (CET), to be introduced between Jan. 1 and June 30, 1993, was to be reduced from 45 to 30-35 per cent.
The maximum CET would be further reduced to 25-30 per cent by 1995, falling to 20-25 per cent by 1997.
The Bush administration in the USA had sought more substantial and immediate cuts.
The governments of Antigua and Barbuda, St Kitts-Nevis and St Lucia, which had yet to comply with the CET, reportedly gave a commitment to do so.
Agreement with Venezuela
CARICOM also signed an agreement allowing 1,300 products duty-free access to Venezuela (which had CARICOM observer status) by the close of 1996.
This was to be achieved on a graduated scale, with 15 per cent of the total being exempt from import tariffs by the start of the agreement on Jan. 1, 1993, 50 per cent by 1994, 75 per cent by 1995 and 100 per cent by 1996.
In return, Venezuela was to be granted "most favoured nation" status for its exports within the CARICOM area, and, from 1996, reciprocal duty-free access [see also pp. 38336; 39003].
AMERICAS
CUBA
Tightening of US trade embargo
US President George Bush signed on Oct. 23 the Cuban Democracy Act, more widely known as the "Torricelli Law" after its sponsor, a Democratic member of the US House of Representatives, Robert J. Torricelli.
The new law, passed by the US Senate on Sept. 20 [see p. 39090]and the House of Representatives on Oct. 2, made it illegal for the subsidiaries of US companies based anywhere in the world to trade with Cuba, and closed US ports to any ship which had called in Cuba within the previous six months.
The declared US objective was to accelerate the transition to democracy by forcing the government of President Fidel Castro Ruz to hold free and fair elections.
It was also calculated to be popular with the Cuban-American electorate, estimated to number 700,000.
The Free Cuba political action committee headed by Jorge Mas Canosa, who was also leader of the right-wing anti-Castro Cuban American National Foundation (CANF), had donated US$17,000 to Torricelli and a reported total of US$500,000 to 50 other US politicians to promote the bill.
A European Commission statement issued on Oct. 8 on behalf of the European Communities (EC) warned that this extension of the existing 30-year US embargo "had the potential to cause grave damage to the transatlantic relationship" , adding that it could not accept that "the USA unilaterally determines and restricts EC economic and commercial relations with any foreign nation which has not been designated by the UN as a threat to peace or order" .
The UK and Canadian governments, both of which encouraged incorporated US companies to exploit civil market opportunities in Cuba, insisted that their own laws, and not those of the US Congress, would continue to determine all future trade.
The governments of Argentina, Chile and Mexico also expressed their strong disapproval of the law.
New electoral law
The National Assembly of Popular Power (ANPP) on Oct. 29 approved a new electoral law which established mechanisms for the election of deputies and members of provincial assemblies "by direct and secret vote" .
In addition, the law lowered the voting age to 16 and established the principle that elected officials could be removed at any time and must deliver regular reports to the electorate [for July constitutional changes see p. 39000].
Expulsion of Aldana from PCC
Carlos Aldana was expelled from the central committee of the Cuban Communist Party (PCC) and from the party on Oct. 26.
Also expelled from the central committee and the party was Aldana's associate Raúl Castellanos, who had held overall responsibility for education.
Aldana, once one of Castro's closest aides, had been stripped of overall responsibility for ideology, foreign policy and culture in September for his alleged involvement in a financial scandal [see p. 39089].
Ricardo Alarcón de Quesada and José Ramón Balaguer Cabrera, who had respectively taken over responsibility for foreign affairs and ideology [not solely Balaguer as given on p. 39089]were elected to fill the central committee vacancies.
Brief detention of dissident
The country's most prominent dissident, Elizardo Sanchez, leader of the Cuban Human Rights and National Reconciliation Commission, was detained for two days but released on Oct. 13.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Threat to peace process
President Alfredo Cristiani Burkard announced on Oct. 28 that he had suspended all moves to reform, purge and reduce the size of the army, as set out in the UN peace accord of January 1992 [see p. 38716], until the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) guerrillas had completely disarmed and demobilized their forces.
The announcement immediately heightened the political tension in the country and led to speculation that Cristiani's stance now reflected the views of extreme right-wing elements in the army and in his own Nationalist Republican Alliance (Arena) party.
UN Under-Secretary-General Marrack Goulding and Assistant-Secretary-General Alvaro de Soto arrived in San Salvador on Oct. 30 in an attempt to avert another crisis [for evolution of peace process see pp. 38569-70; 38672; 38716; 38759; 38906].
UN initiative
Cristiani had earlier given the impression that the government had accepted a proposal by UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali on Oct. 23 to extend the deadline (currently Oct. 31) for the completion of the UN peace process, to give both sides more time to comply with the details of the accord.
In response to the proposed new guidelines the FMLN, which had demobilized the first 20 per cent of its forces in June [see p. 38957]and a further 20 per cent on Sept. 21, agreed to disband the next 20 per cent on Oct. 31 (on which date it duly proceeded with the disarming of some 1,000 guerrillas), a further 20 per cent on Nov. 20 and the final 20 per cent on Dec. 15.
In turn the government was required to submit to the UN a list of members of the armed forces to be purged for human rights violations.
This list was known to contain the names of 110 senior and middle-ranking officers, including the Minister of Defence, Gen. René Emilio Ponce, his deputy and various officials in diplomatic positions abroad.
The list had been drawn up and presented to Cristiani by the independent Truth Commission, with responsibility under the peace agreement for ascertaining who was responsible for human rights violations during the civil war (1980-1991).
A right-wing death squad, the Maximiliano Hernández Martínez Brigade, had issued a threat, broadcast on radio on Oct. 23, to assassinate the entire FMLN leadership starting on Oct. 31, the original deadline for the completion of the UN peace process.
Exhumation of bodies
An international team of anthropologists began on Oct. 15 to exhume the remains of hundreds of people, many of them children, in and around the village of El Mozote in the north-eastern province of Morazán, an FMLN stronghold during the civil war.
Human rights groups and local people said that the dead were the victims of a massacre in December 1981 by the elite US-trained Atlacatl battalion, which was yet to be disbanded.
Members of this battalion had been convicted of the November 1989 murder of six Jesuit priests and of their housekeeper and her daughter [see pp. 37037-38; 37181; 38716].
AMERICAS
GUYANA
New Guyana Cabinet
General election
A general election on Oct. 5 produced a narrow victory for the People's Progressive Party (PPP).
The PPP's veteran leader Cheddi Jagan was sworn in on Oct. 9 as the new President, with his running mate Sam Hinds as Prime Minister and a new Cabinet.
The election, which ended the 28-year rule of the People's National Congress (PNC), had been postponed repeatedly [for late 1991 postponement see pp. 38142; 38571; 38673].
The PPP list headed by Jagan received 52.3 per cent of the vote compared with 43.6 per cent for the PNC list, headed by incumbent President Desmond Hoyte.
The left-of-centre Working People's Alliance (WPA) took 1.7 per cent; The United Force (TUF — conservative) won 1.2 per cent ; and seven other parties each received a negligible proportion of the vote.
Jagan, 75, once a hardline Stalinist, had first led the PPP to an election victory in 1953, in the pre-independence period, but had been dismissed as Leader of the House of Assembly, when the UK government suspended the Constitution in the face of perceived "communist subversion" [see pp. 13152; 13177; 13239; 13523].
Returned to office in 1957 and 1961, he and his party came under severe UK and US pressure and were defeated in the 1964 elections (the last before independence in 1966; see pp. 19841; 21428).
In the 1992 election campaign, Jagan performed a political volte face, promising to continue with the free market policies latterly pursued by the PNC government, including the privatization of state enterprises, in order to attract foreign investment.
He also chose the Afro-Guyanese Hinds as his running mate as part of a campaign to win the support of the ethnic minority community (generally identified largely with the PNC) and to remove fears of domination by the mainly PPP-supporting Indo-Guyanese majority.
Complex bargaining over parliamentary majority
The PPP engaged in protracted negotiations with the WPA and TUF, over the ensuing weeks, to secure a clear majority with 35 seats in the National Assembly.
The Assembly had 65 seats, made up as follows: 53 allocated directly to party lists on the basis of proportional representation; 10 representing the 10 regional democratic councils or RDCs (the RDCs having also been elected in polling on Oct. 5); and two chosen by the National Congress of Local Democratic Organizations (NCLDO, itself elected by RDC members).
The distribution of the 53 party list seats was as follows: PPP 28, PNC 23, WPA one, TUF one.
RDC seats were initially distributed as follows: PPP four, PNC four, WPA one and TUF one.
However, the WPA was persuaded to give up its seat to the PPP, as did the TUF; in return the PPP, which as the majority party had the constitutional right to determine the two NCLDO seats, allocated one to itself and the other to the WPA; the final distribution of Assembly seats was PPP 35, PNC 27, WPA 2, TUF 1.
Conduct of election
Former US President Jimmy Carter and David Peterson, former Premier of the Province of Ontario, Canada, led an international team of 100 foreign observers and testified to the proper and impartial conduct of the election (whereas previous general elections, repeatedly returning the PNC to power, had been considered seriously flawed).
Outgoing PNC Prime Minister Hamilton Green claimed, however, that the 1992 election had been "hijacked" by the Elections Commission.
An estimated 40,000 names on a revised electoral roll were reported to be suspect.
Green himself had been turned away from a polling station in the capital, Georgetown, for lack of identity papers; this prompted his supporters, drawn from slum districts, to go on the rampage, attacking the Commission's headquarters and that of the PPP and looting and vandalising scores of Indian shops.
At least two people were reported killed and 200 others arrested.
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Attack on presidential motorcade
Despite strong government denials, local media sources were agreed that an attack on the presidential motorcade had been an unsuccessful attempt to assassinate President Carlos Andrés Pérez on Oct. 12 in the western border town of Paraguaipoa, in the state of Zulia.
An official, four soldiers, four children and two adults were injured as a truck driven by two Goajira Indians drove at speed directly at the presidential motorcade.
Both the driver and the passenger were armed and fired several rounds before being shot dead by security men.
The truck then ploughed into the crowd.
The government's desire to play down the incident was set against a background of high political tension fuelled over recent months by widespread protests against austerity and official corruption and the persistent rumours that a repeat of the February military coup attempt was imminent [see pp. 38759-60; 39048].
The government closed down two radio programmes on Sept. 25 for broadcasting the opinions of two previously unknown organizations, the Justices of Venezuela (LJV) and the Bolivarian Forces of Liberation (FBL), which supported violent action against corrupt public figures.
Both groups had claimed responsibility for an assassination attempt on Antonio Rios, former president of the Confederation of Workers of Venezuela (CTV) and a leading member of the ruling Democratic Action (AD) party, who had recently resigned from his post to face trial on charges of influence peddling.
The LJV claimed that Rios was the first name on a "hit list" of 127 public figures whom it considered to be involved in corruption, prominent among whom were former President Jaime Lusinchi and his wife and former secretary Blanca Ibáñez.
The FBL claimed to have links with the Bolivarian Revolutionary Movement 200 (MRB200), the rebel grouping in the army which instigated the February coup attempt.
As rumours of a military coup mounted in late September, there was an increased presence of troops on the streets of all the main cities to prevent an escalation of anti-government demonstrations, particulary those led by students.
The Military Intelligence Directorate (DIM) was reported by the press in the capital, Caracas, as having foiled a military plot by disaffected elements in the army on Oct. 6, after which 20 officers were reportedly summoned for questioning.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Increased anti-subversion spending
The Congress on Oct. 28 endorsed the government's plan to increase spending "to fight subversion in the country" , with the creation of six new counterinsurgency battalions in addition to the existing 13.
The Congress ruled out, however, the establishment of a National Peace Council, as tentatively proposed by President César Gaviria Trujillo on Oct. 2.
In establishing a Peace Council the aim had been to create a body composed of representatives of associations, political parties, the private sector and the government to design a new peace strategy.
The Simón Bolívar National Guerrilla Co-ordinating Board (CNGSB), which grouped together for negotiating purposes the guerrillas of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the National Liberation Army (ELN), had indicated on Oct. 7 its interest in participation in such a Peace Council, as well as in the resumption of stalled peace talks [see p. 38809]and a bilateral truce.
Subsequently, however, the CNGSB announced on Oct. 22 that it intended to launch "a new and fierce terrorist campaign in the country" , but nevertheless qualified this by repeating that it would still support moves by "political parties, the working class, trade unions and everyone else" to find a political solution.
Death of drug cartel chief — Surrenders
On Oct. 28 an elite anti-drug police unit shot dead in Medellín Brance Muñoz Mósquera, 33, known as the Medellín drug cartel's "military commander" .
Although this represented a success for the government, it made more unlikely any early surrender by cartel leader Pablo Escobar Gaviria, who had escaped from prison in July [see p. 39001].
Muñoz, who had ignored a leniency agreement offered by the Gaviria government in 1990 to put an end to the violence [see p. 37772], had been on the run since escaping from prison by helicopter in 1988 while awaiting trial on murder charges.
Three of Escobar's important subordinates — his brother Roberto Escobar Gaviria, Otoniel González and John Jairo Velásquez — had surrendered to the authorities on Oct. 8.
AMERICAS
PERU
Sentencing of Guzmán
The Supreme Military Justice Council on Oct. 14 upheld the conviction for treason, and the sentence of life imprisonment, passed on Oct. 7 by a secret military court on Abimael Guzmán Renoso, 57, leader of the Maoist Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrillas.
An earlier appeal by Guzmán, lodged with the Council of War, another higher military court, had also failed.
[For Guzmán's capture on Sept. 12 see pp. 39091-92.]
Also sentenced to life imprisonment were Elena Reboredo Iparaquirre, Sendero's presumed number two, and Zenon Walter Vargas, the group's national co-ordinator.
All three were fined a total equivalent to US$25,000 million in compensation damages to the state and were to be held in solitary confinement at the naval base on San Lorenzo, an island off the port of Callao near the capital, Lima, where they had been tried.
Guzmán's lawyer Alfredo Crespo, president of the Association of Democratic Lawyers (AAD), described the 10-day trial as a "complete farce" since he was not able to call defence witnesses and had only two 10-minute meetings with his client.
Amnesty International, which described Guzmán as a "political prisoner" , also expressed concern over whether the proceedings met international standards for a fair trial.
In military trials in the southern towns of Arequipa and Puno eight other Sendero leaders each received a life sentences and fines totalling US$20,000,000.
On Oct. 21 President Alberto Keinya Fujimori claimed that 90 per cent of Sendero's leadership was now imprisoned.
A number of Sendero leaders had been captured on Oct. 17 in massive, and reportedly indiscriminate, search and arrest operations by the anti-terrorist police (Dincote).
They included Marta Huatay, an AAD lawyer described as the organization's highest-ranking leader then still at large, and Juan Carlos Flores, son of the government's senior prosecutor Víctor Manuel Potilla Alva who immediately resigned.
Possible reintroduction of death penalty
The government gave notice of its intention of reintroducing the death penalty by announcing on Oct. 15 that it intended to withdraw from the American Convention on Human Rights (also known as the San José Pact, which entered into force in 1978).
Some legal experts held that, even if the death sentence were reintroduced, under Peruvian law it could not be passed retroactively on Guzmán.
Others believed, however, that Fujimori was considering a judicial innovation under which leaders could be held accountable for actions by their organizations, even those committed after their own arrest.
Over 80 killings attributed to Sendero since Guzmán's arrest included the "execution" of 44 members of a self-defence committee in the Andean community of Huayo, in La Mar province, by a Sendero column on Oct. 11.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
New Brazilian Cabinet
New government
Itamar Franco, 61, hitherto Vice-President, on Oct. 2 took office as interim President.
Fernando Collor de Mello, 43, on the same day signed a notice from the Senate, thereby formally acknowledging his 180-day suspension from office following the Chamber of Deputies vote on Sept. 29 to impeach him on corruption charges [see p. 39079].
Collor claimed never to have tarnished the "dignity" of his office, and asserted that "truth and justice will prevail" .
He said that he intended to retain the title of President during his forthcoming trial before the Senate, although on Oct. 5 the Supreme Court ruled that the new government must not extend any official privileges to him.
Collor was accused by Franco of wishing to establish a "parallel government" .
Franco's broad-based Cabinet
Franco promised to establish an honest administration free of corrupt officials, and to tackle high inflation and the recession.
Amid protracted party political disputes, he announced Cabinet appointments on Oct. 2-8 which covered the political spectrum, with representatives from the right-wing Liberal Front Party (PFL — formerly the mainstay of the Collor government); the Social Democratic Party of Brazil (PSDB); the Democratic Labour Party (PDT); and the Brazilian Socialist Party (PSB), as well as one member of the left-wing Workers' Party (PT), in a "personal" capacity (the PT having turned down an invitation to join the government).
The Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement (PMDB), the largest single party in the congress, had at this stage refused to join the government; it had opposed Franco's first choice as Finance Minister but failed to have its own candidate nominated.
Franco's subsequent appointment of Gustavo Kraus, 46, a little-known PFL federal deputy from the north-eastern state of Pernambuco, caused an uproar and the financial markets fell sharply.
Reportedly stung by media criticism that he had appointed a mediocre Cabinet, Franco personally contacted PMDB leader Orestes Quércia, the former governor of the state of Sao Paulo who was known to be wary of involvement in the interim government in case it affected his chances in the 1994 presidential elections.
Franco's reported insistence that PMDB involvement in the government was "fundamental" elicited a PMDB about-face when the party pledged to give "unconditional" support to the government and accept some of the remaining Cabinet posts.
It was reported on Oct. 23 that Roberto Freire, president of the Popular Socialist Party (PSP — formerly the Brazilian Communist Party) had been named by Franco as government leader in the Chamber of Deputies.
Economic plan
Kraus and Planning Minister Paulo Haddad unveiled on Oct. 2 a 13-point 90-day plan to combat inflation and restart economic growth.
The plan ruled out price freezes or regulations, the dollarization of the economy or the confiscation of funds invested in the financial market.
It sought, as the Collor government had done, to open up the economy to foreign competition (a new round of import tariff cuts scheduled for Oct. 1 went ahead as scheduled) and would maintain existing privatization and deregulation programmes, although the involvement of Congress was now expected when the privatization of "strategic" companies was contemplated.
As a guard against corruption, a permanent auditing system was to monitor the workings of the executive branch of government.
Fiscal reform, considered vital to improving the budgetary position and reducing inflation (which in August stood at an annualized rate of 1,055.4 per cent), was also a priority.
Franco was expected to seek congressional approval for a two-step reform to simplify the tax system and to counter tax evasion, in order to meet performance targets set by the IMF in the January 1992 agreement [see pp. 38719-20]for the disbursement of credits.
Brazil had failed to meet these targets in the first two quarters of the year, but the Franco government would continue with efforts to renegotiate them, since it was dependent on IMF support to secure acceptance of the debt accord agreed in outline with commercial creditor banks in July [see p. 39002].
Prison massacre
The Sao Paulo Casa de Detencao, built for 3,000 inmates but housing over 7,000, was the scene of serious violence on Oct. 2, when police stormed the building, ostensibly to end a riot.
Human rights church groups and surviving inmates accused police of carrying out deliberate and systematic executions, blaming them for most of the deaths (which they put at between 200 and 400, as against an official toll of 111 inmates killed and 35 inmates and 22 police officers wounded).
The authorities denied such charges but on Oct. 7, Sao Paulo PMDB state governor Luiz António Fleury Filho was forced by hostile public opinion to dismiss Pedro Franco de Campos, state secretary for public security.
Federal Justice Minister Mauricio Correa Lima ordered a commission of inquiry, to be headed by the Attorney General.
Fleury Filho had delayed announcing the scale of the killings until five minutes before the polls opened on Oct. 3 in nationwide municipal elections, fearing that the news would prejudice the chances of PMDB candidates.
Death of Guimaraes
Ulysses Guimaraes, 75, the former PMDB leader (1971-1989) and the elder statesman of the Congress, was killed in a helicopter crash, along with his wife, a senator and his wife, and the pilot, off the resort of Paraty, south of Rio de Janeiro on Oct. 12.
Guimaraes had emerged from near retirement to play a prominent public role in the process to impeach Collor.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
500th anniversary of arrival of Columbus
Thousands of Latin American Indians and their supporters staged demonstrations on Oct. 12 across a range of Latin American countries from Mexico to Chile, and succeeded in turning the 500th anniversary of the arrival of Christopher Columbus in the Americas from a celebration to a reflection of the current plight of the 40,000,000-strong indigenous population.
A report by the human rights organization Amnesty International, released to coincide with the anniversary and cataloguing a history of discrimination, violence and injustice, stated that "the mass killings of indigenous peoples may have reduced over the past 500 years but they have never stopped" .
A focal point of the continental protest was the third meeting of the Indigenous, African American and Popular Resistance, held in Managua, Nicaragua, on Oct. 6-12.
The 300 delegates from 27 countries were told by Rigoberta Menchu, a Guatemalan Indian campaigner who later received the 1992 Nobel Peace Prize [see below], that Europeans had brought disease, slavery and the destruction of indigenous cultures, and that indigenous peoples in the Americas should be celebrating their own survival.
Police in Colombia were reported to have broken up a march of several thousand Indians, 21 of whom were injured, near the southern town of Popyan.
Indian groups marched in their thousands in Guatemala, blocked roads in Ecuador, occupied the main square in Mexico City, in Panama marched on the national palace in Panama City, and burned US and Spanish flags in San José, Costa Rica.
Earlier, on Oct. 7, in Temuco, southern Chile, police using tear gas and riot vehicles dispersed 1,500 Mapuche Indians who were demonstrating for land rights and against the current state visit of Crown Prince Felipe of Spain.
Award of Nobel Peace Prize
The crowning symbolic achievement of the protests was the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to Rigoberta Menchu, 33, a Quiche Indian, on Oct. 17 [see also pp. 39170-71].
Since fleeing to Mexico from Guatemala in 1980 following the murder of her parents and brother by the then military regime, she had maintained a struggle for the rights of American indigenous peoples.
Her constant condemnation of gross human rights abuses earned her many enemies in Guatemala, and the government of President Jorge Serrano Elias attempted to thwart her nomination by proposing an alternative candidate for the Nobel Prize, claiming that Menchu was a representative of the left-wing guerrilla Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity (URNG).
The Serrano government sent Menchu belated congratulations but refused her an official reception.
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico, however, offered her a special audience and the keys to Mexico City on Oct. 19.
Dominican Republic lighthouse inauguration — Papal visit
The Dominican Republic was the only country in the region formally to celebrate.
The Faro a Colón (Columbus Lighthouse), a favourite project of President Joaquín Balaguer which had cost an estimated US$25,000,000, was intended to be inaugurated during a visit by Pope John Paul II on Oct. 9-14.
However, sustained demonstrations (in the course of which two people were killed on Sept. 20-21 in indiscriminate police and army fire) forced the Vatican to cancel the Pope's involvement in the actual inauguration.
This was shifted to Oct. 6 and was attended by Joao Baena Soares, Secretary-General of the Organization of American States (OAS), but by no other leading Latin American figure; the King and Queen of Spain also declined an invitation to attend.
The Pope did officiate at a public mass at the Lighthouse on Oct. 11.
He stressed that Columbus had brought the "precious seed of faith" to the Americas, which he characterized as one of "the greatest events in history" , and that the Church had also been in the forefront of efforts to curb the abuses of the colonists.
Episcopal Conference
The Pope also presided over the opening in Santo Domingo of the Fourth General Latin American Episcopal Conference, held on Oct. 12-28.
In contrast to the "theology of liberation" advocated by large sections of the Latin American clergy to address such issues as landlessness, poverty and racial and cultural discrimination, the Pope urged that the Church's role was to encourage spiritual work and not social activism.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada resigned on Oct. 27 as president of the right-wing Nationalist Revolutionary Movement (MNR), and announced his withdrawal from the 1993 presidential election race.
Recent internal disagreements within the MNR had culminated in a death threat which Lozada reportedly received, at gunpoint, from congressional deputy Ciro Humboldt Barrero after a turbulent meeting of MNR leaders in the southern city of Sucre, the official capital.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Jorge Jímenez de la Jara resigned as Health Minister on Oct. 30, claiming that President Patricio Aylwin Azócar must be given "complete freedom" to overcome the serious situation affecting intensive care units.
He was immediately replaced by Patricio Silva Rojas.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Sagawa Kyubin scandal
The burgeoning Sagawa Kyubin scandal, which in late August had forced Shin Kanemaru to resign as vice-president of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP)[see pp. 39049-10], in October forced him to resign his seat in the Diet (parliament) and to retire from public life.
His enforced retirement followed a public outcry over the leniency of his treatment in connection with the receipt of illegal payments from Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin, the largest regional affiliate in the Kyoto-based Sagawa Kyubin group, Japan's second-largest parcel delivery firm.
Indictment of Shin Kanemaru
Despite his resignation as vice-president of the LDP, Kanemaru had continued to hold his powerful position as head of the Takeshita faction, the largest internal grouping within the LDP.
He had let it be known that he would resign as faction leader and as a member of the Diet if he was publicly prosecuted in connection with the Sagawa Kyubin scandal.
This threat held serious consequences for the government of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, as support from the Takeshita faction had been an essential ingredient in his election to the leadership of the party, and was generally seen as essential to his continued survival in the post.
Within this context, many observers were not surprised that the prosecuting authorities reached an unusual plea bargain arrangement with Kanemaru.
Spared the indignity of being questioned in person, it was reported on Sept. 25 that lawyers of the veteran power broker had delivered a written statement to the Public Prosecutor's Office in which their client acknowledged breaching the Political Funds Control Law through the receipt of 500 million yen (US$1.00=121.928 yen as at Oct. 26, 1992) from Sagawa Kyubin.
In return the prosecuting authorities withdrew their demand that he appear for questioning in person and chose to issue a summary indictment against him, on Sept. 28, which dispensed with the need for a trial and involved a maximum fine of only 200,000 yen.
The leniency of Kanemaru's treatment was highlighted when, on the same day, Kiyoshi Kaneko was charged with falsely reporting a donation, an indictment which involved a public trial and carried a penalty of five years' imprisonment or a fine of 300,000 yen.
Kaneko had resigned as governor of Niigata prefecture on Sept. 1, amidst allegations that he, too, had accepted illegal payments from Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin.
Public concern was also heightened on Sept. 29 by an announcement that the prosecuting authorities were ending their investigation into the cases of 12 other politicians, none of whom was named, who had received some of the Sagawa Kyubin money originally given to Kanemaru.
Resignation of Kanemaru — Struggle to select new faction leader
Public outrage over Kanemaru's treatment was translated into increasing pressure from within the LDP — particularly given Sagawa Kyubin's connections with organized crime — for his resignation.
He gave in to the pressure on Oct. 14 when he announced his resignation from the Diet, a move which sparked a fierce struggle for the leadership of the 110-member Takeshita faction.
Although Kanemaru had been personally grooming Ichiro Ozawa as his successor, the circumstances of his retirement allowed Ozawa's opponents to mount an effective campaign against his succession.
The strength of opposition was such that Ozawa withdrew from the contest, choosing instead to nominate Finance Minister Tsutomu Hata.
After a week of bitter internal debate among the faction's most senior members, the struggle ended on Oct. 22 (after a plea from Miyazawa to conclude the process), with the selection of Keizo Obuchi, the candidate of former Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita, as the new faction leader.
Obuchi, 55, a former secretary-general of the LDP, had been a Diet member since 1963.
He had held a number of minor Cabinet posts and had served as Chief Cabinet Secretary under Takeshita.
Not renowned for outstanding political skills or vision, Obuchi was known principally for his antipathy to Ozawa and his unswerving loyalty to Takeshita.
Both Ozawa and Hata expressed their disapproval of the choice by boycotting occasion of the announcement of Obuchi's selection.
Ozawa and his supporters — estimated to constitute a majority within the faction's 67 members in the lower chamber of the Diet, and to include almost all of the faction's younger members — contested the procedural validity of Obuchi's selection and indicated that they were prepared to establish a breakaway faction rather than accept his leadership.
An important step in this direction was made on Oct. 28 following Obuchi's confirmation as leader at a meeting of the whole faction.
Hata announced the establishment of a "policy study group" thereby creating, in effect, a separate faction within the Takeshita faction.
This division was aggravated on the following day when Obuchi chose to fill all executive positions within the faction with his supporters, thereby declining to make even a gesture of reconciliation towards his opponents.
Convening of extraordinary session of Diet — Apology by Prime Minister
At an extraordinary session of the Diet, which opened on Oct. 30, Prime Minister Miyazawa apologised for the scandal and promised to seek political reforms designed to reduce the influence of money within the Japanese political system.
 "I acutely feel that public distrust in politics is more serious than I have ever experienced in the past," he said.
 "As an individual politician, and as the person responsible for the government, I sincerely apologise to the people." 
He promised "to work for far reaching political reform to eliminate the root causes which have bred today's distrust of politics, including ensuring greater political transparency of political funding and facilitating elections contested over policy issues and political activity which do not require vast sums of money" .
The extraordinary session of the Diet had originally been called to provide approval for a supplementary budget which formed the heart of a 10,700,000 million yen economic stimulation package unveiled in August [see p. 39049].
Opposition demands for further investigation of the Sagawa Kyubin scandal — and in particular the insistence that Kanemaru and Takeshita testify before the Diet — threatened to disrupt the business scheduled for the session.
In addition to Kanemaru and Kaneko, numerous other politicians, particularly members of the LDP, were thought to have received illegal payments from Hiroyasu Watanabe, former president of Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin.
While it was generally considered to be difficult to prove bribery charges against those in receipt of such payments — the success of such a charge would require specific evidence of mutual benefit — the sums received by individual politicians were large enough to have contravened the Political Funds Control Law which restricted the size of political donations and required those over 1,000,000 yen to be registered.
Trial of Watanabe
Unlike Kanemaru, Hiroyasu Watanabe was not spared the ignominy of a public trial over his role in the scandal.
When his trial opened at the Tokyo District Court on Sept. 22, however, he caused widespread consternation by pleading not guilty to the charges of making illegal payments.
Although it had been widely reported that he had made a full confession during pre-trial questioning, in court Watanabe maintained that "there is no truth" in the reports that he had paid politicians.
Rioting in Osaka
Government concern over Japan's current economic downturn was highlighted on Oct. 1-4 by four nights of rioting in Nishinari Airin, a slum district of Osaka, involving up to 30,000 unskilled labourers.
Amidst declining opportunities for casual work, the unrest was sparked off by a local government decision to end an emergency aid programme.
Order was eventually restored through the deployment of large numbers of riot police.
The unrest was the most serious in Japan since rioting in the same area left several hundred people injured in October 1990 [see p. 37780].
Visit by Emperor to China — Expression of regret over Sino-Japanese War
Emperor Akihito on Oct. 23 became the first Japanese monarch to visit China, and the highest-ranking foreigner to visit China since the 1989 suppression of the pro-democracy movement in Tiananmen Square.
Accompanied by the Empress Michiko, Akihito's official six-day trip included visits to Beijing, Xian and Shanghai.
Ostensibly the visit was designed to mark the 20th anniversary of the normalization of relations between China and Japan.
It was widely known, however, that China had been pressing for a Japanese imperial visit for some time as a means of marking a further stage in the country's rehabilitation from the diplomatic isolation which had followed the Tiananmen Square massacre.
The Miyazawa government, conscious of recent regional criticism of the behaviour of imperial Japanese troops in occupied south-east Asia, however, was concerned that Akihito might be embarrassed by questions or protests relating to Japan's conquest of large portions of China between 1931 and 1945, and to the millions of Chinese civilians who were killed in this process.
Only after receiving assurances that the Emperor would neither be embarrassed nor be expected to apologize for atrocities committed by Japanese forces did Miyazawa consent to the visit.
At a banquet in Beijing on Oct. 23 Akihito referred obliquely to the Sino-Japanese War as "an unfortunate period in which my country inflicted great sufferings on the people of China" .
Akihito expressed his "deep sadness about this" but stopped short of issuing an outright apology.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Discovery of alleged espionage ring
The South Korean Agency for National Security Planning (NSP) announced in early October the discovery of a major North Korean espionage ring which, it said, had set up a cell of the North Korean communist party in the South and undertaken "an overall operation" to bring down the government there.
The NSP said that as a result of the discovery it had arrested 62 people on charges of violating the National Security Law and the Military Secrets Protection Law.
It added that it was actively seeking the arrest on the same charges of over 300 others.
The agency also seized firearms and ammunition, communications equipment and code books and suicide capsules.
The espionage ring was apparently established on the orders of veteran North Korean agent Lee Son-shil.
Its members formed an illegal underground political party in the South and sought links with legitimate political, labour and educational organizations in a strategy allegedly aimed at "communizing the South and unifying the country by 1995" .
On Oct. 12 Pak Nam-chun, chair of the North Korean delegation on the North-South Political Sub-Committee, refused a request from Yi Tong-pok, his South Korean counterpart, for an emergency meeting to discuss the issue.
He claimed that it was "a drama full of lies and deception…an insidious act laying a deliberate, new obstacle in the way of the development of North-South relations" .
Yi, however, said that his government would press the North Koreans for an explanation at the first session of the North-South Joint Reconciliation Committee on Nov. 5 and the ninth Premiers' meeting (scheduled for Dec. 21-24 — see p. 39096).
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
First law on foreign investment
On Oct. 5 the Standing Committee of the Supreme People's Assembly approved North Korea's first law on foreign investment, in a move which was intended to help in reviving the stagnating economy.
Analysts claimed that China, North Korea's closest ally, had strongly advised the government to follow its lead in attracting foreign capital and expertise.
However, the Financial Times of Oct. 21 reported that Western companies "are likely to remain sceptical…since they are still owed millions of dollars for products delivered to North Korea two decades ago" .
The new law permitted foreign investors to establish equity and contractual joint ventures within the country, and to set up and operate wholly foreign-owned enterprises in special economic zones.
Foreign companies would be able to remit part of their profits abroad, and were promised compensation in the event of "unavoidable" nationalization; they would be given tax concessions during the initial five years of operation if they were involved in high-technology industries, resource development or infrastructure construction.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Creation of politically neutral administration — Further defections from ruling party
Resignation from DLP by Roh Tae Woo — Cabinet reshuffle
President Roh Tae Woo formally left the ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP) on Oct. 5 in accordance with the promise which he had made in mid-September to create a politically neutral administration in advance of December's presidential elections [see p. 39096].
He also honoured his commitment to form a neutral caretaker Cabinet and, after talks with the main presidential candidates — Kim Young Sam of the DLP, Kim Dae Jung of the Democratic Party, and Chung Ju Jung of the United People's Party (UPP)— he reshuffled his Cabinet on Oct. 7.
He filled six key posts (all of which were election-related), including that of Prime Minister, with non-party figures, an action which earned him warm acclaim from the main opposition parties both of which pledged full support for the new administration and ended their boycott of the National Assembly.
The new Prime Minister was Hyun Soong Jong, 73, a law professor and president of Hallim University.
The other new appointees were: Lee Hyun Woo as Director of the Agency for National Security Planning; Paik Kwang Hyun as Minister for Home Affairs; Lee Jung Woo as Minister of Justice; Lew Hyuck In as Information Minister; and Kim Dong Ik as First Minister of State for Political Affairs.
Continued defections from DLP — Creation of new party
The severe discord within the DLP, which had been heightened by the accession to the leadership of Kim Young Sam, continued to grow during October as a number of senior figures, including at least five legislators, resigned from the party.
Most of those who left were members of the faction associated with Roh Tae Woo, the largest grouping within the party.
Prominent among the defectors was the party's co-chairman, Park Tae Joon, who announced his resignation on Oct. 10.
Park, until recently the chairman of the huge Pohang Iron and Steel Company, had supported a rival candidate in May at the party's national convention which had chosen Kim Young Sam as the presidential candidate.
Although Park gave no detailed explanation for his decision to resign, the deep antipathy between him and Kim was universally seen as the key factor in his decision.
Some of the dissidents, in conjunction with a smaller number of former members of the Democratic Party, formed a new political party on Oct. 19 called the New Korea Party (NKP).
Despite an invitation, Park chose not to join the NKP, which was headed by former DLP national committee chairman Chae Mun Shik.
Nevertheless the new party appeared poised to launch a serious challenge for the presidency when, on Oct. 28, after several days of mounting speculation, Kim Woo Choong, the chairman of Daewoo chaebol, indicated that he would accept the NKP's nomination for the presidency.
Kim, who had transformed Daewoo from a small textile-exporting company into the country's fourth-largest conglomerate, was renowned as an entrepreneur and was known to have had a huge amount of personal wealth with which to have supported a presidential campaign.
On Oct. 29, however, Kim declared that he would not enter the contest, leading to speculation that he had bowed to pressure from Roh, whose administration had worked closely with Daewoo and who was known to be concerned that Kim's intervention could split the conservative vote and thereby allow Kim Dae Jung to win the election.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Trade agreement with USA
China and the USA narrowly averted a major trade war when a comprehensive trade agreement was signed on Oct. 10; if the agreement had not been signed on that day the USA, under Section 301 of the 1988 Omnibus Trade Act, would automatically have imposed punitive tariffs of up to 100 per cent of value on Chinese-made imports currently worth a total of US$3,900 million.
China, in turn, had threatened to impose retaliatory tariffs on imports from the USA, and negotiators had failed to break the impasse in September [see p. 39095].
Under the terms of the accord China agreed (i) to publish all laws, regulations and guidelines on trade;(ii) to reduce tariffs on a wide range of US products, including foods, chemicals, iron and steel products, photographic materials, machinery, cosmetics, confectionery and electrical parts;(iii) to remove quotas, import restrictions, import-licensing requirements and import controls;(iv) to ban the use of import-substitution measures affecting US exports;(v) to cease requiring technology transfer or local investment as conditions for investment;(vi) to publish previously inaccessible information on sales and marketing opportunities; and (vii) to remove within one year any scientifically unjustifiable standards for farm products.
Expulsion of dissident
Shen Tong, a leader of the 1989 pro-democracy movement, was deported from China to the USA on Oct. 24.
Shen had returned from exile in the USA in August and had been arrested on Sept. 1 as he planned to launch a Beijing office of the US-based Democracy for China Fund [see p. 39095].
A statement issued by the official Chinese news agency Xinhua on Oct. 24 said that Shen had "admitted his wrongdoings" .
A report in the Far Eastern Economic Review of Nov. 5 claimed that Shen's continued detention "would have unduly complicated Sino-US relations" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Ruling party changes
Major structural changes were approved at a plenary session of the ruling Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP) held on Oct. 3-4.
A report by the official Chinese news agency Xinhua on Oct. 4 stated that the party had dropped "for good" its original structure of central committee, presidium and chairmanship; a 169-member Small Hural was elected in place of the central committee, and an 11-member committee in place of the presidium.
Budragchaagiyn Dash-Yondon, hitherto party chair, was elected as secretary-general; Jigjidsurengiyn Yadamsuren was elected as party secretary.
New opposition party
Four major opposition parties merged on Oct. 27 to form the Mongolian National Democratic Party (MNDP).
Davaadorjiyn Ganbold, former leader of the MPNP and a Vice-Prime Minister in the multiparty government which had been replaced in August [see p. 39095], was elected as chair with T. Baasanjav as secretary general.
The four parties — the Mongolian Democratic Party (MDP), the Mongolian Party of National Progress (MPNP), the Mongolian United Party (MUP) and the Party for Mongolian Renaissance (PMR)— had been easily defeated by the ruling MPRP in a general election held in June 1992 [see p. 38962].
Appointment of Deputy Premier
Lhamsuren Enebish, a former mayor of Ulan Bator, was appointed as a Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Administration on Oct. 9.
Relations with Russia
Foreign Minister Tserenpilyn Gombosuren visited Russia on Oct. 18-22, meeting Russian President Boris Yeltsin, acting Premier Yegor Gaidar and Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev.
It was the first visit by a Mongolian minister to the Russian Federation.
On Oct. 19 Gombosuren and Kozyrev initialled a treaty on friendly relations and co-operation.
The Russian Foreign Ministry had announced on Sept. 27 the completion of the withdrawal of Russian troops from Mongolia, which started in early 1987 [see p. 35647].
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Governor's policy statement
The newly appointed Governor of Hong Kong, Chris Patten, delivered his first policy statement on Oct. 7 at the opening of the 1992-93 session of the Legislative Council (Legco), setting out the political agenda for the last five years of British rule in Hong Kong before its handover to China in 1997.
Patten announced the immediate separation of Legco from the Executive Council (Exco).
Henceforth, no Legco member, either appointed or elected, would be permitted to sit on Exco, the body which served as a quasi-Cabinet.
He announced the appointment of a new Exco, bringing in leading lawyers and academics, while retaining many of the non-politicians appointed by his predecessor Lord Wilson of Tillyorn.
Patten also announced the establishment of legislative committees to monitor government business, and the introduction of a monthly Governor's question time in Legco.
On the question of the 1995 elections, Patten revealed that Douglas Hurd, the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary, had formally raised with China the issue of allowing larger number of democratically elected seats.
However, he held out little hope that China would increase the number of directly elected Legco seats.
Instead, he proposed a package which provided for the highest degree of democratization permitted under the Basic Law, the colony's Constitution which had been approved by China in 1990.
Patten proposed that all 230 district and urban council seats be directly elected in 1995; currently, a third of the seats were appointed.
The 230 councillors would then form an electoral college to elect 10 out of the 60 Legco members.
Under the Basic Law a further 30 Legco members would be elected through so-called "functional constituencies" , such as chambers of commerce, trade unions and professional associations.
Patten announced plans to widen the voter base of the 21 existing "functional constituencies" and create nine new ones to represent broad industry groups.
He said that the new system would give each working person in the colony a vote, thereby ending the privileged status of current constituency members.
He also announced that the voting age would be lowered from 21 to 18 years.
Patten also announced a comprehensive package of social and economic reforms, including the establishment of a monetary authority to ensure monetary stability, the establishment of a business council to advise the Governor "on how best we can sustain our economic growth" , a review of freedom of information and press laws, the introduction of a citizens' charter to make bureaucracy more accountable, and the abolition of capital punishment.
He announced large increases in spending on social welfare, education and the environment while stressing his commitment to low taxation.
In a statement on Oct. 7 the Hong Kong branch of Xinhua, China's official news agency (China's de facto embassy in the colony), denounced Patten's reform package as "irresponsible and imprudent" .
The package also angered many Hong Kong liberals who argued that the reforms did not go far enough.
Governor's visit to China
Patten paid his first visit to China as Governor on Oct. 20-23.
Chinese officials expressed anger at his reform package and, according to the Far Eastern Economic Review of Nov. 5, threatened retaliation which could make Hong Kong virtually ungovernable in the five remaining years of British rule.
In a statement issued shortly after Patten's departure on Oct. 23, Lu Ping, head of the Chinese State Council's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, accused Patten of having violated the Basic Law and also of having reneged on a series of secret Sino-British agreements on "convergence" between Hong Kong's current political system and its post-1997 status as a special administrative region.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
New Finance Minister
Finance Minister Wang Chien-shien formally resigned on Oct. 14 and was replaced on Oct. 23 by Pai Pei-ying, hitherto chair of the International Commercial Bank of China.
Wang had tendered his resignation on Oct. 7 following widespread public and cross-party criticism of his controversial proposal for land tax reforms.
The proposal would have ended a system of low taxation on land sales which had helped fuel a property boom since the late 1980s.
Initially, Wang's resignation was rejected by Prime Minister Hau Pei-tsun and he was urged to reconsider by President Lee Teng-hui.
Talks between Taiwanese and Chinese agencies
The two non-governmental agencies assigned to mediate relations between Taiwan and China held a round of talks in Hong Kong on Oct. 28-29.
The two bodies, Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation, and China's Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits, failed to reach an agreement on the issue of document verification and registered mail.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
UN deadline for Khmers Rouges
On Oct. 13 the UN Security Council unanimously approved Resolution 783 which established a deadline of Nov. 15 for the Khmers Rouges to co-operate fully with the 1991 UN peace plan [see p. 38511].
Commentators claimed that the UN would implement its threat of economic sanctions against the Khmers Rouges if they failed to comply with the deadline.
Unlike the other three Cambodian factions, the Khmers Rouges had refused to facilitate the full deployment of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) in the areas under its control.
For their part, the Khmers Rouges claimed that UNTAC had failed to implement major aspects of the 1989 peace agreement, namely the full verification of Vietnam's troop withdrawal from Cambodia and the strengthening of the all-party Supreme National Council (SNC).
A final Thai-Japanese effort to persuade the Khmers Rouges to abide by the plan failed in late October.
A final round of talks was scheduled to take place in China between all the Cambodian factions and France and Indonesia (co-sponsors of the Paris conference which produced the 1991 peace agreement).
In an interview published in the Far Eastern Economic Review of Nov. 12, Khieu Samphan, the nominal head of the Khmers Rouges, warned that if UNTAC "continue to proceed as they have done, there will be no peace in Cambodia" .
The accompanying article stated that many UNTAC officials saw the hardline Khmer Rouge position as designed to undermine its rivals "in a long-term strategy that looks beyond the [May 1993]election period and is aimed ultimately at a unilateral seizure of power" .
Despite the Khmer Rouge boycott of the peace process, UNTAC continued to press ahead with plans to hold elections in May 1993.
On Oct. 5 some 800 teams started compiling voters' lists in Phnom Penh.
On Oct. 21 UNTAC chief co-ordinator Yasushi Akashi announced that UNTAC was temporarily halting the disarmament process.
Akashi said that so long as the Khmers Rouges refused to disarm, a freeze was necessary to maintain the balance of power in the country.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Internal political and security affairs
National Assembly session
The ninth National Assembly's first session ended on Oct. 8 [see p. 39094 for opening of Assembly on Sept. 19 and election of new President].
On Oct. 1 the Assembly elected a new Cabinet [ibid. for Assembly's election of Vo Van Kiet as Prime Minister in September].
Dissolution of National Defence Council
The National Assembly on Oct. 1 approved the dissolution of the powerful National Defence Council, the body which had played a major role in the planning and execution of security policy during the Vietnam war.
President Le Duc Anh, himself a leading military figure, said that the newly created National Defence and Security Council would chart a new peacetime security strategy.
Surrender of Fulro rebels
The United Front for the Liberation of Oppressed Races (Fulro), the Montagnard guerrilla army, in October ended their 28-year struggle for autonomy in Vietnam's central highlands [see p. 39094].
On Oct. 10, Fulro guerrillas based in north-east Cambodia formally surrendered to officials from the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees.
The guerrillas were flown to Phnom Penh where they were placed under the protection of UN troops prior to resettlement in the United States.
Foreign relations
Relations with the United States
On Oct. 8 Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh Cam, in New York for the 47th session of the UN General Assembly [see p. 39120], held talks with US Defence Secretary Dick Cheney and acting Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger.
No details of the talks were given.
US presidential envoy Gen. John Vessey announced at the end of a visit to Vietnam on Oct. 17-19 [see p. 38768 for February visit]that the Vietnamese government had agreed to start a nationwide search of its military archives for documents and photographs relating to US servicemen listed as missing in action (MIA) during the Vietnam War.
In an interview on US television on Oct. 22 US President George Bush described the Vietnamese decision to open its military archives as "a major breakthrough" .
Bush also said that he had a "road map" for normalizing relations with Vietnam, and that "significant progress" to this end had recently been made.
Sino-Vietnamese border talks
Vietnam and China held talks in Beijing on Oct. 12-17 aimed at settling outstanding border and territorial disputes, the first such talks to be held since the normalization of relations in November 1991.
In early September 1992 a dispute had arisen over territory in the Gulf of Tonkin [see p. 39094].
The official Chinese news agency Xinhua reported on Oct. 22 that the two sides had made "some headway" at the meeting.
A second round of talks would take place in Hanoi, the capital of Vietnam, but a date was not set.
Establishment of South Korean liaison office in Hanoi
South Korea formally opened a liaison office in Hanoi on Oct. 9.
The move was widely regarded as the first step towards full normalization of diplomatic relations, which had been suspended after the communist victory in the Vietnam war in 1975.
South Korean troops had fought alongside US and South Vietnamese forces during the War.
A South Korean investment feasibility study team visited Vietnam in late October.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Oct. 22 reported that South Korean companies had, to date, received 17 foreign investment licences from the Vietnamese government with a total capital of US$150,000,000.
Announcement of resumption of Japanese aid
Voice of Vietnam radio announced on Oct. 2 that Japan would resume official aid to Vietnam in early November.
Japan had halted aid to Vietnam following the Vietnamese intervention in Cambodia in 1978.
According to the report, the two countries had also agreed on a date for Vietnam to restart repaying its debts to Japan.
Foreign Minister Cam paid an "unofficial visit" to Japan on Oct. 11-14, holding talks with Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa and Foreign Minister Michio Watanabe.
Visit by Singapore's Foreign Minister
Wong Kan Seng, the Foreign Minister of Singapore, visited Vietnam on Oct. 18-21, holding talks with Cam, Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet and Le Duc Anh.
[See p. 38865 for April 1992 visit to Vietnam by Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore's Senior Minister.]
During his visit Wong announced the Singaporean government's decision to establish a US$10,000,000 "Indo-China Fund" .
According to a Vietnam News Agency report of Oct 21 the fund would "help Vietnam in personnel training, first of all in the fields of infrastructure, finance, banking and economic management" .
Visit to Europe by Vice-Premier
In late October Vice-Premier Pham Van Kai visited Belgium and France and also had talks with European Community officials.
Vo Van Kiet Prime Minister Pham Van Khai Vice-Prime Minister Nguyen Khanh Vice-Prime Minister Tran Duc Luong Vice-Prime Minister Gen. Doan Khue National Defence Lt.-Gen.
Bui Thien Ngo Interior Nguyen Manh Cam Foreign Affairs
New Vietnamese Cabinet
*Nguyen Dinh Loc Justice
*Ho Te Finance Dang Huu Science, Technology and Environment
*Tran Dinh Hoan Labour, War Invalids and Social Welfare Tran Hong Quan Education and Training
*Nguyen Trong Nhan Public Health Tran Hoan Culture and Information Ngo Xuan Loc Construction Nguyen Can Dinh Water Conservancy Bui Danh Luu Communications and Transport Nguyen Cong Tan Agriculture and Food Industry Nguyen Tan Trinh Marine Products Tran Lum Heavy Industry Dang Vu Chu Light Industry
*Thai Phung Ne Energy Le Van Triet Commerce
*Mai Ky Population Activities and Family Planning
*Tran Thi Thanh Thanh Child Protection and Childcare
*Phan Van Tiem Minister in charge of a number of government affairs
*Ha Quang Du Minister in charge of a number of government affairs Do Quoc Sam Minister, Chair of the State Planning Commission Hoang Duc Nghi Minister, Chair of the Ethnic Minorities and Mountain Region Commission
*Dau Ngoc Xuan Minister, Head of the State Co-operation and Investment Committee
*Phan Ngoc Tuong Minister, Head of the Government's Organization and Personnel Commission
*Le Xuan Trinh Minister, Head of the Government Office
*Nguyen Ky Cam General State Inspector
*Cao Sy Khiem Governor of the State Bank
*New appointment.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Announcement of Suharto's intention to seek a sixth term
Wahono, general chair of Golkar (the ruling Functional Group Centre or Golongan Karya Pusat), announced on Oct. 20 that President Suharto had agreed to Golkar's plan to nominate him for a sixth five-year term as president.
Wahono quoted Suharto as saying: "If the people want it and if I am entrusted, then it is my duty to fulfil the will." 
Presidential elections were scheduled for 1993.
Visit to China by armed forces chief
Gen. Try Sutrisno, C.-in-C. of the Indonesian armed forces, visited China on Oct. 8-12, heading the first Indonesian military delegation to China since the two countries resumed diplomatic relations in August 1990 [see p. 37612].
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Oct. 22 described the visit as "another major step in the normalization of relations" .
Gen. Sutrisno held talks with senior Chinese military figures, including Gen. Qin Jiwei, Minister of National Defence, and Gen. Chi Haotian, Chief of General Staff of the Chinese People's Liberation Army.
US freeze on defence training aid — Defence agreement with UK
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Oct. 22 reported that the US Congress had approved a foreign aid bill which, among other provisions, froze some US$2,300,000 in defence training aid to Indonesia in protest at the Indonesian army's massacre of unarmed civilians in East Timor in November 1991 [see p. 38579].
Air Marshal Sibun, Chief of Staff of the Indonesian Air Force, announced on Oct. 18 that Indonesia had placed an order for 24 Hawk jet fighters from the United Kingdom at a reported purchase price of US$500 million.
Air Marshal Sibun said that the order was in line with the long-term development of the Indonesian Air Force.
He also announced that the British Royal Air Force was currently training a number of Indonesian Air Force personnel.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Government policy statement
Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai delivered his government's policy statement to parliament on Oct. 21 [see pp. 39093 for formation of Chuan government in September].
The central plank of the new policy was rural development.
On the economy, he committed his government to support Thailand's traditional free-market system and to "carry out a policy of liberal economy by using market mechanisms and doing away with monopoly and unfair competition" .
The statement was vague on military issues; despite expectations that he would announce a detailed plan for military reform, Chuan merely promised to "improve the structure of the armed forces" .
The Nation newspaper had reported on Oct. 10 that the government was planning to review legislation covering the armed forces and the Defence Ministry, and that Chuan had assigned Defence Minister Gen. Wichit Sukmak to supervise the implementation of new defence policies.
Vote to revoke amnesty decree
The House of Representatives voted unanimously on Oct. 7 to revoke a controversial amnesty decree protecting military personnel involved in the bloody suppression of anti-government demonstrations in Bangkok in May [see pp. 38894-95]which Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon had declared before his resignation as Prime Minister in late May.
The vote raised the possibility that charges might be brought against Suchinda and other former military leaders involved in the May unrest.
The government placed the amnesty decree before the Constitutional Tribunal (the highest body for legal interpretation) on Oct. 20, asking it to determine whether criminal indictments should be lodged against military personnel.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Border incident with Thailand
Myanma's good relations with Thailand were tested in October over a border incident, when Myanman troops on Oct. 6 arrested a group of 10 Thai officials, including a district officer.
The officials had travelled into Myanma to secure the release of a number of Thai villagers detained since August.
The Bangkok Post of Oct. 7 claimed that the 10 had been detained "in order to bargain for the release of 21 Burmese [Myanman]troops detained in Thailand" .
The Thai government immediately demanded the release of the officials, but the situation was complicated by the outbreak of fighting in the area between Myanman troops and Karen rebels.
The district officer was eventually released on Oct. 13 and the other officials were released during the following week.
Formation of National Convention commission
The ruling junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), announced on Oct. 2 the formation of a commission to perform a "supervisory role" at the forthcoming convention on drafting a new Constitution [see pp. 39007; 38913].
The commission was chaired by Maj.-Gen.
Myo Nyunt, a SLORC member and Minister of Religious Affairs.
The commission created a 36-member management committee on Oct. 15 headed by Brig. -Gen.
Tin Aye, Inspector-General of the Ministry of Defence.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Rao visit
Indian Prime Minister Narasimha Rao, visiting Nepal on Oct. 19-21, agreed during talks with Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala to expand bilateral co-operation over trade and water resources.
A joint communiqué issued after the visit, the first by an Indian Prime Minister in 15 years, said that India had agreed to revise upwards, from Rs350,000,000 to Rs500,000,000, a three-year stand-by credit extended to Nepal.
In a further gesture towards improving relations between the two countries [see pp. 37531; 38630; 38681-82]India was also reported to have granted improved access to Indian markets for Nepalese goods.
Approval of IMF loan
The IMF confirmed on Oct. 5 its approval of loans totalling SDR33,570,000 (about US$49,000,000) over the coming three-year period, under the enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF), to support the government's medium-term economic reform programme.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Creation of force to combat communal rioting
An 8,000-strong Rapid Action Force (RAF), under the control of the federally administered Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF), was launched on Oct. 7.
The deployment of the new force, initially expected to be confined to Ahmedabad, Aligarh, Allahbad, Darbhanga, Delhi, Ghaziabad, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Meerut and Varanasi, came after the outbreak of some of the worst communal violence in two years between Hindus and Moslems in Bihar, which killed nearly 50 people.
In September communal rioting had spread through Kerala, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh after renewed controversy over the disputed site of the Babri mosque at Ayodhya in Uttar Pradesh [see p. 39008].
On Oct. 10 the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) claimed that the RAF had been deployed without prior consultation with state governments and that this constituted an infringement of the rights of state governments to administer law and order.
Further developments in securities scandal
Controversy over the recent securities scandal [see pp. 38913; 38967; 39008; 39053; 39099]intensified after three foreign banks implicated in the affair admitted, in evidence before a joint parliamentary committee investigating the scandal [see p. 39053], that they had contravened Indian banking regulations.
On Oct. 1 the United Kingdom bank Standard Chartered admitted to the committee that it had been aware of violations of banking guidelines by its Indian subsidiary some 18 months before the scandal erupted.
On Oct. 2 Bank of America also admitted that it had contravened central bank regulations and diverted large deposits of public funds to securities transactions.
The Australian-owned bank ANZ Grindlays, which made similar admissions, was reported on Oct. 30 to have maintained that it had acted in keeping with "normal market practice" .
Meanwhile Standard Chartered announced on Oct. 9 that it had filed a fraud claim involving US$41,000,000 against the US bank Citibank in New York over transactions in Bombay between September 1991 and March 1992.
The resignation of the 10th most senior Standard Chartered official implicated in the scandal was reported on Oct. 22.
On Oct. 4 Attorney General G. Ramaswamy denied allegations that a personal loan obtained by him from Standard Chartered in April 1991 had been "unsecured" .
Reduction of interest rate
The Reserve Bank of India (the central bank) on Oct. 8 announced a 1 per cent cut in commercial lending rates.
The cut was the first since rates were raised to record levels in October 1991 [see p. 38533], and followed a sharp decline in the annual inflation rate from a peak of 16.3 per cent in the first half of the year to 8.8 per cent at end-September.
Privatization of oil and gas fields
A decision to privatize oil and gas fields was announced on Oct. 1.
The offer, regarded as a boost to private and direct foreign investment [see p. 39099], had reportedly been prompted by an attempt to supplement the inadequate resources of the state-owned Oil and Natural Gas Commission and Oil India.
Foreign relations
Border talks with China
The Sino-Indian joint working party, first established in 1988 [see p. 37352], met for the fifth round of border talks in Beijing on Oct. 27-29.
The fourth round was held on Feb 20-21 [for earlier rounds see pp. 37352; 38192].
The latest talks, led by the Indian Foreign Secretary J. N. Dixit and Chinese Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Xu Dunxin, were officially reported as having contributed to "a certain progress" .
Talks with USA
A US army delegation headed by Lt.-Gen.
Johnnie Corns held talks on defence co-operation with senior defence officials in New Delhi on Oct. 27.
This was the second such visit by a US defence delegation in 1992 [see p. 38727].
An agreement to import 1,000,000 tonnes of US wheat during 1992-93 was officially confirmed on Oct. 6.
Relations with former Soviet republics
A military contract with the Ukraine involving the supply on a barter basis of arms and spare parts was signed on Oct. 17 following a visit to Kiev by Defence Minister Sharad Pawar on Oct. 14-17.
In September Pawar had reportedly finalized a defence co-operation agreement with Russia [see p. 39099].
Minister of State for External Affairs Raghunanadan Lal Bhatia signed trade agreements with Kirgizstan and Uzbekistan and held talks on regional security with government leaders in Kazakhstan during a tour of the central Asian republics on Oct. 9-16.
States developments
K. Vijayabhaskara Reddy was sworn in as Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh on Oct. 9 to replace N. Janardhan Reddy, who resigned after the High Court ruled that permission to open a private medical college in Nellore, granted to Reddy's wife, had been "vitiated by bias" .
Rebels belonging to the banned Bodo Security Force (BSF), seeking a separate state for the Bodo tribe in Assam, were suspected of planting a bomb on a train in the district of Barpeta on Oct. 13, killing 21 people.
Harjinder Singh and Sukhdevo Singh, convicted in 1989 [see p. 37345]of killing in 1986 Gen. Arun Vaidya, the former army chief who led the 1984 assault on the Golden Temple in Amritsar, in Punjab [see pp. 33221-24], were hanged in Pune on Oct. 9.
Talwinder Singh Parmara, a Sikh militant accused of planning the explosion which destroyed an Air India jumbo jet over the Atlantic in 1985 [see p. 33987], was shot dead by police near Jullunder on Oct. 15.
In Tripura on Oct. 12 a gun battle between police and the outlawed All-Tripura Tribal Force (ATTF) left 16 rebels reported dead.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Massacre of Moslems
Tamil separatists belonging to the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) were said to be responsible for the massacre on Oct. 15 of more than 140 people, mostly Moslems, in pre-dawn raids on three villages in the northern district of Polunnaruwa.
On Oct. 23 police in Colombo clashed with Moslem demonstrators who had responded to a strike call by the Sri Lanka Moslem Congress (SLMC) in protest against the massacre.
Appointment of army chief
Maj.-Gen.
Gerry de Silva was formally appointed army Chief of Staff on Oct. 23.
Maj.-Gen.
Denzil Kobbekaduwa, who had been due to assume the post was killed in August after being ambushed by LTTE forces off the Jaffna Peninsula [see p. 39053].
IMF loan
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) approved on Oct. 13 a loan equivalent to SDR112 million (about US$164 million) in support of the second annual arrangement under its medium-term reform programme, partially financed through a three-year Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility agreed in September 1991 [see p.
R83].
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Controversy over identity card requirements
The government on Oct. 13 ordered that all identity cards in future should indicate the holder's religion.
Demonstrations in support of this move had been organized by religious parties in Islamabad, and it was construed as an attempt by the increasingly fragile ruling coalition to win backing from Islamic parties.
In June the Jamaat-i-Islami Pakistan had withdrawn its support, accusing the government of betraying Islamic interests [see p. 38914].
Human rights groups and sections of the liberal press claimed that the government's latest measure "opened the possibilities of discrimination and harassment on the basis of religion" .
On Oct. 18, Christian organizations threatened to stage a hunger strike if the government refused to reverse its decision.
Fears of growing religious tension intensified further after reports on Oct. 22 of the fatal stabbing of a Christian school teacher near Lahore for allegedly blaspheming the prophet Muhammad.
In August 1991 the death penalty had been made mandatory for anyone convicted of defaming the prophet [see p. 38393].
Extension of army operation in Sind
The extension until January of the army operation in Sind [see pp. 38968; 39008]was officially announced on Oct. 22.
In early October the army Chief of Staff Gen. Asif Nawaz Janjua had indicated that his forces were preparing to withdraw from the province after restoring law and order.
The Sind government on Oct. 5 ordered fresh elections following the dissolution of all municipal councils, reportedly in an attempt to crush the influence of the Sind-based Mohajir Qaumi Mahaz (MQM).
A judicial commission which on Sept. 26 began a fresh inquiry into the air crash which killed President Gen. Zia ul-Haq in August 1988 [see pp. 36217]heard evidence alleging that the former army Chief of Staff Gen. Mirza Aslam Beg had plotted the crash [see p. 38289].
Foreign relations
A deal involving the supply of 40 Chinese F-7P fighter aircraft by the end of 1993, concluded during a second visit to China [for previous visit see p.
R.79]by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif on Oct. 6-10, was confirmed on Oct. 22.
The purchase of three French Agosta-90 submarines, agreed during a visit by the French Defence Minister Pierre Joxe in September [see p. 39098], was reported by Le Monde on Oct. 2 [see also p. 38726].
President Ghulam Ishaq Khan visited Turkey on Sept. 26-Oct. 2, when he denied reports that Pakistan had requested the supply by Turkey of spare parts for F-16 aircraft.
Khan met King Fahd of Saudi Arabia in Riyadh on Oct. 4.
German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel and United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd called for a resolution of the Kashmir dispute during talks with government ministers in Islamabad on Oct. 27-28 and Oct. 31 respectively.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Extension of Rabbani's term
A meeting of the Leadership Council on Oct. 31 agreed to extend the term of interim President Burhanuddin Rabbani until Dec. 15.
Under the terms of the April 24 Peshawar Accord [see p. 38847]Rabbani's term of office was to have expired on Oct. 28, four months after he assumed office [see p. 38968].
The extension provided Rabbani with more time to form a consultative assembly, the Council of Resolution and Settlement (Hal wa Aqd Shura), which would elect a permanent president and prepare for a general election.
The Leadership Council was composed of the heads of the country's main mujaheddin factions.
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, leader of the rebel fundamentalist Hezb-i-Islami faction, was represented at the meeting, but refused to attend personally.
However, on Oct. 29 Hekmatyar and Rabbani had held talks at a meeting sponsored by the Ittehad-i-Islami, the Saudi-backed fundamentalist Wahhabi Sunni group led by Abdul-Rabur Rasul Sayaf.
According to a report in the Middle East International of Nov. 6, the Hekmatyar-Rabbani meeting had been preceded by "a discreet visit" to Afghanistan and Pakistan by Prince Turki al-Faisal, the head of Saudi intelligence.
Security situation
There were sporadic clashes between rival mujaheddin groups in Kabul during October.
Heavy fighting between Hezb-i-Islami guerrillas and government forces was reported in the western city of Herat in early October.
Government reports on Oct. 5 claimed that the Hezb-i-Islami forces had been pushed some 30 km outside the city.
Unofficial figures put the number of dead and wounded in the fighting at over 300.
In late October there were reports of heavy fighting in Kapisa and Parwan provinces north of Khabul between Hezb-i-Islami guerrillas and Uzbek fighters loyal to Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostam.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KAZAKHSTAN
Formation of nationalist Republican Party
Three Kazakh opposition parties, the Azat (Freedom) Party, the National Democratic Party Jeltoksan (December) and the Republican Party, merged on Oct. 11 under the name of the Republican Party, Azat.
Kamal Ormantayev, a member of the Kazakh Academy of Sciences, was elected as chair.
A spokesman for the new organization said that national democratic forces had united in the struggle for "complete decolonization of the republic" .
[For opposition demonstrations see p. 38969.]
Izvestiya of Oct. 19 reported that prompt action by the town Soviet in Ust-Kamenogorsk in eastern Kazakhstan had prevented an escalation into large-scale violence following an incident on Oct. 14-15, when visiting Chechens were suspected of murdering four Kazakhs.
To pre-empt what threatened to become a lynching-party during a march on a nearby Chechen-populated town, the Soviet passed emergency resolutions including the eviction of Chechen residents from the area.
The resolution was repealed on Oct. 21, although some Chechen families were said already to have left for Grozny (capital of Chechnia).
Relations with Russia
Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev and Russian President Boris Yeltsin exchanged ratification documents on Oct. 10 for their friendship treaty signed in May 1992 [see p. 38973].
In a joint declaration they emphasised the importance of "full-scale economic co-operation" and co-ordinated security, arms control and science policy, especially regarding the former Soviet installations in the space station at Baikonur and the nuclear testing ground at Semipalatinsk, and territorial integrity.
A package of economic documents was signed by the two countries' Premiers on Oct. 22, in addition to a protocol on the reduction of inter-republican enterprise debt.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAJIKISTAN
Rebel attack on Dushanbe
The armed conflict between pro- and anti-government forces spread to Dushanbe, the capital, in late October.
The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) summit in Bishkek on Oct. 9, while expressing concern over the situation, failed to agree on sending peacekeeping forces, and weaponry continued to be supplied to Tajikistan through border incursions from Afghanistan, despite the reinforcment of border troops [see pp. 39097-98].
Preparations to send Kirgiz peacekeeping troops, which had been elaborated following several visits by Kirgiz Vice-President Feliks Akulov to Dushanbe and the conflict regions, were cancelled by a vote in the Kirgiz Supreme Soviet in Bishkek on Oct. 14, due to fears for the safety of Kirgiz servicemen.
The Tajik government in Dushanbe, led by Akbarsho Iskandarov, had effectively lost control over the southern provinces of Kulyab (controlled by supporters of ex-President Rakhmon Nabiyev) and over Kurgan-Tyube, scene of the fiercest fighting.
As rebel forces loyal to Nabiyev approached the capital, a state of emergency was imposed on Oct. 22.
The rebels briefly took control of much of Dushanbe on Oct. 25, including the parliament, the presidential palace, the main mosque and the broadcasting facilities, but were driven out the following day by government forces.
While the rebels were in control of broadcasting facilities, former Supreme Soviet chair Sarafali Kenjayev, an ally of Nabiyev, claimed to have installed himself as President, and broadcast an appeal to non-Tajiks not to leave the republic, denouncing the "Islamic fundamentalism" of the current leadership.
During the rebel attack, Russian troops in Dushanbe officially remained neutral, but retained control of the airport and main railway stations.
New government appointments
As announced on Oct. 19, the anti-Nabiyev activist Davlat Khudonazarov became Presidential adviser, and Maj.-Gen.
Farouk Rakhmanov took over as Defence Minister.
Alijon Selekhbayev was reinstated as Chair of the Committee for National Security, a post from which he had been removed by Nabiyev on Aug. 4.
Kadreddin Aslonov, chair of the Tajik Supreme Soviet until September 1991, became leader of Kurgan-Tyube region.
The election of Solijon Djurayev as state prosecutor was reported on Sept. 29; his predecessor had been murdered in August [see p. 39097].
Release of former mayor
On Oct. 4 Maksud Ikramov, former mayor of Dushanbe, was released from prison [for his arrest see pp. 38418; 38811].
ASIA — PACIFIC
UZBEKISTAN
Draft Constitution
The provisions of a new draft Constitution for Uzbekistan, approved by the Supreme Soviet in July [see p. 39010], were published in Izvestiya of Sept. 28 and Nezavisimaya gazeta of Oct. 1.
The draft described Uzbekistan as a secular, democratic, presidential republic, in which "there may be no official state ideology or religion" .
The President, serving a maximum of two consecutive five-year terms, could not be removed from office unless ill, whereas he could dissolve parliament.
The President in office was to suspend his membership of political parties, but the Constitution guaranteed freedom to political parties and public associations [for clampdown on democratic parties see p. 39010].
Foreign relations
An official visit to Uzbekistan by Kirgiz President Askar Akayev was reported on Oct. 1.
During the visit Akayev, and Uzbek President Islam Karimov and Premier Abdullashim Mutalov signed a bilateral friendship and co-operation treaty, and concluded a trade and economic agreement for 1993.
Included in the friendship treaty was a defence co-operation agreement, covering material provision for the armed forces and officer training.
A Kirgiz defence official characterized the agreement as part of Kirgizstan's ongoing security policy in the context of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) collective security treaty [see p. 38922].
Similar agreements with Russia and Kazakhstan were expected.
Afghan President Burhanuddin Rabbani [see also pp. 39146-47]made an official visit to Uzbekistan on Oct. 13-15.
His discussions with Karimov covered, among other matters Uzbek concerns over the conflict in Tajikistan, which was fuelled by weapons smuggled over the Tajik border with Afghanistan.
The two leaders agreed to establish diplomatic relations, and to co-operate in transport links, including civil aviation and the construction of a highway from Termez (near the border, north of Mazar-i-Sharif) through Afghanistan to Karachi (Pakistan) which would give Uzbekistan an outlet to the sea.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Reoccupation of Bougainville
The security forces of Papua New Guinea in late October began a major offensive against rebel positions on the island of Bougainville.
Reports from the secessionist Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) on Oct. 21 suggested that the town of Arawa, its last remaining stronghold, was under heavy mortar bombardment.
The first official confirmation of the offensive was a statement by Defence Minister Paul Tohian, broadcast on Oct. 22, which said that army units were within 2 km of Arawa and were continuing their drive southwards.
On Oct. 25 Prime Minister Paias Wingti confirmed the advance, but claimed not to have had prior knowledge of it.
His government, he suggested, had empowered the military to make all tactical decisions necessary to resolve the conflict.
The Wingti government also claimed that the army's advance was largely unresisted and had been in response to the invitation of local chiefs.
Government troops had been landed on the north coast of Bougainville in April 1991 for the first time since being forced to withdrew from the territory in 1990.
In a series of unspectacular and largely unreported moves the army had slowly advanced towards the interior.
Weakened by the two-year government blockade, and torn by internal dissension, the BRA proved unable to halt these localized advances.
Wingti announced on Oct. 29 that Arawa had fallen to government troops and that "government authority is now established in central Bougainville" .
He stated that he intended to visit the island in the near future in order to supervise the restoration of services and to ask remaining rebel units to surrender.
Suspension of more provincial governments — Threat of secession
As part of its ongoing anti-corruption drive the Wingti government suspended four of the country's 19 provincial governments on Oct. 13, thereby bringing the total under suspension to six.
The Prime Minister also confirmed that he was planning to introduce legislation to abolish the provincial government structure on the grounds that it encouraged patronage and corruption.
The abolition plan led to a threat by the country's five island provinces to secede from Papua New Guinea.
The threat was made in the form of a statement issued at the annual conference in Rabaul, on Oct. 23, attended by the premiers of Manus, New Ireland, and East and West New Britain, and community leaders from Bougainville.
Wingti dismissed the statement as an empty threat, although there were reports that it was being investigated to determine whether or not it constituted sedition, as defined under section 44 of the country's criminal code.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
State elections in Victoria — Report on corruption
ALP defeat in Victoria state elections
The federal ruling Australian Labor Party (ALP) suffered a crushing defeat in state elections in Victoria on Oct. 3, with an adverse swing of around 6 per cent[for 1988 state elections see p. 36296].
Although counting remained incomplete in several constituencies, it appeared that the Liberal Party had won 53 seats in the 88-member Legislative Assembly and its coalition partner, the National Party, had won nine; the ALP and the Liberal-National alliance each now controlled half of the six state governments.
With the ALP reduced to 26 seats, the new government, led by Jeff Kennett, possessed the largest legislative majority in the state's history.
Five ministers in Joan Kirner's outgoing ALP administration lost their seats.
In the Legislative Council (the upper house of the state legislature) one half of the 22 seats were up for election.
The Liberals increased their overall share to 24 seats, while the National Party retained their six seats and the ALP was reduced to 14.
The victory of Kennett, who was not considered by many to be the state's most able or charismatic politician, was interpreted as clear evidence of massive dissatisfaction with the ALP, which had governed the state for the last 10 years, and was alleged to have overseen serious financial mismanagement under both Kirner and her predecessor John Cain.
It was also seen as a stark warning for the ALP federal government which was due to face the electorate by mid-1993.
At federal level the Liberal-National opposition needed only a swing of 1.4 per cent for victory.
Report of Royal Commission on corruption in Western Australia
The ALP's discomfort was heightened by the release on Oct. 20 of a report into the party's involvement in large-scale corruption in Western Australia.
The six-volume report was drawn up by a Royal Commission established in 1990 by the state's Premier, Carmen Lawrence, in response to increasing public anger over improper dealings between the ALP state government and local entrepreneurs.
The scandal, widely known as "Western Australia Inc" , centred upon the loss of more than A$1,000 million (approximately US$690 million) of public money in a series of ill-fated ventures involving entrepreneurs including Alan Bond, the former chairman of Bond Corporation Holdings, Laurie Connell, head of the collapsed Rothwells merchant bank, and the late Robert Holmes à Court.
Brian Burke, ALP state Premier from 1983 to 1988, was singled out by the report for particular criticism for having acted improperly both in dealing with political donations from businesspeople and in his 1987 handling of the rescue of an investment bank run by Connell.The report also criticized Burke's successor, Peter Dowding, and the last Liberal premier of the state (in 1982-83), Ray O'Connor.
An appendix to the report dealing with possible breaches of the criminal law was not released to the public but was sent directly to the state's director of public prosecutions.
Abandonment of UK honours
An imperial tradition lasting for more than two centuries was ended on Oct. 5 when it was announced that federal Prime Minister Paul Keating and Queen Elizabeth II had agreed that Australian citizens would no longer be nominated for the receipt of UK honours.
The arrangement formalized a change made in 1975 when the ALP government of Gough Whitlam established the Order of Australia as an alternative award to those honours bestowed by the British monarch.
Although most state governments had switched to the new award as a means of recognizing public service, Queensland and Tasmania had continued to recommend Australians for knighthoods and lower awards.
It remained technically possible for an Australian to be knighted, but only if the Queen were to make an award within her own personal order (the Victorian order), an honour which was also available to non-Commonwealth citizens.
ASIA — PACIFIC
ASEAN
Economic Ministers' meeting
Economic Ministers from the six member states of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN — comprising Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand) met in Manila, Philippines, on Oct. 22-23 [see p. 38535 for 1991 meeting in Malaysia].
The ministers agreed to implement a common effective preferential tariff (CEPT) mechanism on Jan. 1, 1993.
This would lead to tariff reductions on a range of manufactured and processed agricultural products traded within ASEAN and the eventual creation of an ASEAN free trade area (AFTA) in 2008.
Agreement on the establishment of the AFTA had been reached at the fourth ASEAN summit held in Singapore in January 1992 [see p. 38729].
Meeting of ASEAN and EC Foreign Ministers
ASEAN Foreign Ministers held a meeting with their counterparts from the European Communities (EC) in Manila on Oct. 30-31.
The meeting ended with only broad agreement on enhancing trade and investment between the two regions.
A compromise was forged on the divisive issue of East Timor, the Portuguese colony forcibly annexed by Indonesia in 1976.
Portugal had initially threatened to block the release of a joint communiqué unless specific reference was made to East Timor.
In the event, the Portuguese accepted a compromise whereby both sides pledged their commitment to human rights and fundamental freedoms and "agreed to continue their dialogue and co-operation on these issues" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
SAARC
Premadasa's tour
Sri Lankan President Ranasinghe Premadasa, in his capacity as current chairman of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC), visited member states in September and October ahead of the SAARC summit scheduled for December.
Premadasa made "working visits" to Pakistan on Sept. 23-24 and Nepal on Sept. 24-25.
Talks in New Delhi on Oct. 1-3 between Premadasa and Indian Prime Minister Narasimha Rao focused on the elimination of terrorism and on regional trade barriers [see pp. 38684; 38918].
On Oct. 3 Premadasa met King Jigme Singye Wangchuk in the Bhutanese capital, Thimphu, and on Oct. 4-5 he held extensive discussions in Dhaka with Bangladesh Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia on ways of alleviating regional poverty.
The final phase of Premadasa's tour ended on Oct. 11 with talks in Male with Maldivian President Maumoun Abdul Gayoom on progress achieved by the South Asian Commission on Poverty Alleviation [see p. 38684].
ASIA — PACIFIC
BRUNEI
Lavish celebrations were held in October to celebrate the start of Sir Hassanal Bolkiah's 25th year as Sultan of Brunei.
In a royal anniversary statement on Oct. 5 the Sultan defended the current system of monarchical government; he also announced a personal contribution of US$1,000,000 to the "betrayed and oppressed" Moslems in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KIRGIZSTAN
A Russian delegation led by acting Premier Yegor Gaidar, visiting Kirgizstan on Oct. 7-8 for the Commonwealth of Independent States summit, signed a package of bilateral Russian-Kirgiz agreements dealing mainly with economic matters, including a single monetary system.
Russia agreed to assume Kirgizstan's US$800 million foreign debt inherited from the former Soviet Union.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
It was announced on Oct. 8 that the IMF had passed reviewed favourably its economic performance, freeing a tranche of credit up to the value of US$130,000,000 under the 1991 standby arrangement.
EUROPE
FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
Rapprochement between Croatia and FRY
President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia and President Dobrica Cosic of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY — the remaining "rump" federation of Serbia and Montenegro) signed an eight-point declaration in Geneva on Sept. 30 after talks chaired by Cyrus Vance for the UN and Lord Owen for the EC.
This provided for the withdrawal of federal forces from the strategic Prevlaka peninsula overlooking Dubrovnik by Oct. 20.
The retreat from Prevlaka (where thousands of Croatians were trapped behind FRY army lines) began on Oct. 6 under the supervision of the UN Protection Force in Yugoslavia (UNPROFOR) and was accomplished by Oct. 20 when Prevlaka was proclaimed a demilitarized zone.
As the conflict between Milosevic and the FRY intensified [see below], the Serbian delegation boycotted the first meeting in Zagreb on Oct. 12 of the committee set up under the Sept. 30 agreement to normalize relations between Croatia and the FRY.
The Croat and FRY delegations, however, discussed economic and transport relations and the return of Croatian refugees to UN zones in Serb-held areas of Croatia, and agreed to the stationing of UN monitors at Croatian and FRY airports; they also reached agreement on Oct. 19 on an exchange of prisoners of war.
UN vote to establish war crimes commission
The UN Security Council on Oct. 6 voted unanimously to create within 30 days a war crimes commission to examine evidence of "grave breaches of international humanitarian law" in former Yugoslavia (although it made no provision for further action).
The UN's special envoy on human rights, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, arrived in Croatia on Oct. 12 to resume his investigations into abuses of human rights [see p. 39035].
The war in Bosnia-Hercegovina
Relief supplies to besieged Sarajevo
The UN relief airlift to Sarajevo, which continued under heavy siege for the seventh successive month — with the exception of 10 days of relative calm from Oct. 8 to 18 — resumed on Oct. 3 after a month's suspension since an Italian aircraft was shot down [see p. 39102].
Flights took place sporadically throughout the month in a desperate attempt to build up stockpiles of supplies before the winter.
The first batch of British troops, numbering 2,400, was despatched to Croatia on Oct. 15 to support relief operations.
They were joined by 700 Spanish soldiers on Oct. 26.
Capture of Bosanski Brod
Bosnian Serbian forces on Oct. 7 unexpectedly took the strategic town of Bosanski Brod on the south bank of the Sava river separating Bosnia from Croatia.
As 8,000 refugees escaped into Croatia the last bridge was blown up.
This gave the Serbs control of most of a corridor across northern Bosnia linking Serbia proper with the Republic of Serbian Krajina (RSK — the Serb areas in Croatia) and was rumoured to have been part of a deal with Croatia in exchange for the army's withdrawal from Prevlaka [see above].
On Oct. 9 Radovan Karadzic and Mate Boban, effectively the respective Bosnian Serb and Croatian leaders in Bosnia-Hercegovina, agreed at the permanent Geneva conference on Yugoslavia to a temporary ceasefire, further fuelling rumours that Serbians and Croats were working together to isolate Moslems.
As heavy fighting took place at Orasje, Brcko and Gradacac, the three main towns in the corridor still under Croatian control, Croatian forces on Oct. 10 cut through the Serbian-controlled corridor near Brcko; the area was retaken, however, on Oct. 12.
UN ban on flights
The UN Security Council on Oct. 9 adopted by 14 votes to none with China abstaining a resolution to ban military flights in the airspace of Bosnia-Hercegovina and calling on UNPROFOR to monitor compliance with the ban.
The ban was immediately defied with the bombardment by Serbian aircraft of Gradacac and Brcko on Oct. 10.
However, under intense international pressure at the Geneva conference, supported by US President George Bush's Oct. 2 announcement that the USA was prepared to participate in enforcing the ban, Karadzic finally on Oct. 13 agreed to the grounding of all combat aircraft and their transfer from Bosnia to the FRY (Serbia being the only party to have combat aircraft).
European Community (EC) leaders warned in a declaration issued in Birmingham on Oct. 16 [see p. 39158]that they would ask the Security Council to consider enforcement measures if delays continued, and the Geneva conference was informed on Oct. 19 that all Serbian aircraft in Bosnia had been placed in hangars ready for transfer.
Meanwhile at their first direct talks in Geneva President Cosic and President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia-Hercegovina on Oct. 19 agreed in a vaguely worded statement to work towards normalizing relations and to support UN and EC peace initiatives.
The EC on Oct. 22 called on Milosevic to use his influence to end ethnic cleansing in Bosnia, for which it held Bosnian Serbs chiefly responsible, and warned that military measures could be taken if the UN flight ban over Bosnia was breached.
Fighting between Croatian and Bosnian forces
Croatian and Bosnian forces turned against each other in mid-October, and the towns of Vitez and Novi Travnik were taken by Croatian forces.
A Croatian military statement from the Hercegovian capital of Mostar rejected the authority of the Sarajevo government and of the Bosnian defence forces.
Fighting spread to Mostar which Croatian forces took on Oct. 25 and proclaimed capital of the Croatian Community of Herceg-Bosne [see p. 39103], with Boban as its president.
Boban also took control of the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) in the republic, ousting the moderate Stjepan Kljujic who had been due to become the republic's next president.
The Croatian Defence Council of Herceg-Bosna claimed on Oct. 20 that Ejup Ganic, a member of the presidency in the republic, had carried out a coup against Izetbegovic assisted by the army.
Meetings between the military commanders of all three factions in Bosnia at Sarajevo airport on Oct. 23 and Oct. 26, chaired by the new UNPROFOR commander Philippe Morillon (who took up the post on Sept. 30), failed to halt the fighting.
The town of Prozor, 70 km west of Sarajevo, was destroyed by Croatian forces on Oct. 26 and its 3,000 inhabitants forced to leave.
At the end of October Jacje fell after being under Serbian siege for five months and in the largest exodus in the war to date the entire population of 25,000 left for Travnik.
Constitutional proposals for reshaping of Bosnia-Hercegovina
On Oct. 28 the Geneva negotiators formally rejected the division of Bosnia-Hercegovina into three "ethnic-/confessionally-based republics" and presented constitutional proposals for a decentralized Bosnia-Hercegovina aimed at preserving its territorial integrity.
The reshaped republic, it was proposed, would be based on seven to 10 provincial governments with substantial power and autonomy to control education, police, health and law enforcement.
The borders of the provinces remained to be negotiated.
A central government would remain in Sarajevo with responsibility for defence, foreign policy and trade.
The largely ceremonial presidency would rotate among major groups.
Elections to a lower house of parliament would be by proportional representation and an upper house would be appointed by provincial governments.
There would be extensive international involvement in the affairs of state, especially as regards human rights.
FRY internal politics
Referendum in Serbia
The Serbian government on Oct. 11 staged a referendum on whether to amend the Constitution to allow early elections.
At 46 per cent the turnout was too low (due to an opposition boycott) to allow the required 50 per cent of the 7,000,000 voters in Serbia to approve the constitutional amendment, although 95 per cent of those who voted were in favour of early elections.
Both Cosic and FRY Prime Minister Milan Panic had called for early presidential and general elections in Serbia to remove from power the republic's hardline President Slobodan Milosevic, who was widely regarded as responsible for the continuation of the Bosnian conflict.
Panic announced on Oct. 21 that a general election would be held in the FRY on Dec. 13.
Seizure of Belgrade Interior Ministry
In what appeared to be an attempt by Milosevic to assert his power, Serbian police led by Mihail Kertes, one of Milosevic's aides, seized and retained control of the FRY Interior Ministry in Belgrade early on Oct. 19, claiming that the building belonged to them.
Both Panic and the FRY Internal Affairs Minister Pavle Bulatovic were out of the capital.
Kosovo
Panic visited the Kosovo capital Pristina on Oct. 15 for talks with Ibrahim Rugova, leader the of the majority Albanian community, on the rights of ethnic Albanians.
Panic's visit followed two days of clashes in Pristina on Oct. 12-13 between police and unarmed Albanians demanding the right to education in the Albanian language and the reopening of Albanian schools.
Panic announced on Oct. 15 that joint working groups would be set up to deal with human rights violations, the lifting of discriminatory laws, media freedom and education.
Talks subsequently took place in Pristina on Oct. 29 between Serbian and Albanian leaders, Panic, Vance and Owen, resulting in an agreement on the return of Albanian children to classes held in the Albanian language and a minimum agreement on lifting discriminatory laws.
Vance and Owen went on to Montenegro for talks on Oct. 30.
Montenegro
A new Constitution was adopted on Oct. 12 defining Montenegro as part of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The Justice Minister Momcilo Knezevic resigned on Oct. 14.
Proposed union of Serbian republics
The Republic of Serbian Krajina (RSK) and the self-proclaimed Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina [see p. 39103]agreed on Oct. 31 that they would unite after a referendum had been held and UN troops had withdrawn from the RSK.
Macedonia
In early August Greece closed its border with Macedonia and imposed an oil embargo.
The Greek action, based on opposition to the creation of an independent state using the name Macedonia, brought the republic to the verge of economic collapse.
EUROPE
CROATIA
Detailed Croatian election results
Distribution of seats following the Aug. 2 elections to the Croatian Chamber of Deputies [see p. 39064]was as follows.
Party Seats Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) 85 Croatian Social Liberal Party (HSLS) 14 Party of Democratic Change (SDP) 11 Croatian National Party (HNS) 5 Croatian Party of Rights (HSP) 5 Croatian Peasant Party 3 Serbian National Party 3 Independents 6 Regionalists 6 In the presidential elections Franjo Tudjman (HDZ) won 56. 74 per cent of the vote, Drazen Budisa (HSLS) 21.87 per cent, Savka Dabcevic-Kucar (HNS) 6. 04 per cent , and Silvije Paraga (HSP) 5. 35 per cent .
Summit meeting with Slovenia
A summit meeting was held between the Croatian and Slovenian Presidents, Franjo Tudjman and Milan Kucan, at Brdo north of Ljubljana, the Slovenian capital, on Oct. 13.
It was stated afterwards that the principles for future friendly relations had been agreed and that border and other issues would be resolved with respect for mutual interests.
External relations
Diplomatic relations were established on Sept. 28 with Cuba and on Oct. 15 with Algeria.
Trade agreements were signed with Egypt and Sudan on Oct. 9.
EUROPE
SLOVENIA
Announcement of elections — Lifting of sanctions
It was announced on Oct. 1 that Slovenia's first parliamentary and presidential elections since independence would be held on Dec. 6, with a second round on Dec. 20 if necessary.
US sanctions introduced in December 1991 against all the Yugoslav republics [see p. 38684]were lifted against Slovenia on Aug. 28.
Diplomatic relations were established with Cuba on Sept. 28, with Indonesia and Japan on Oct. 12 and with the United Arab Emirates on Oct. 15.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Iliescu presidential election victory
Ion Iliescu, the incumbent President and candidate of the Democratic National Salvation Front (DNSF), won a further, four-year, term by defeating Emil Constantinescu of the opposition Democratic Convention of Romania (DCR) alliance in a run-off election on Oct. 11.
In the first round on Sept. 27 Iliescu and Constantinescu had gained 47.34 and 31.24 per cent respectively [for first round results and background information, see p. 39104]; in the second Iliescu won 61.43 per cent and Constantinescu 38.57 per cent, with a 73.2 per cent turnout.
In his inauguration speech on Oct. 30 Iliescu reaffirmed his commitment to pluralism and to the introduction of a market economy.
(During the election campaign the opposition had criticized Iliescu and the government for not moving speedily enough towards genuine political and economic reform.)
He also pledged to resist extreme nationalist views and called for strong measures to combat corruption, violence and crime.
First sessions of new parliament — Fraud accusations
Following the general election on Sept. 27 the new 341-member Chamber of Deputies and 143-member Senate held their first sessions on Oct. 16.
The DCR on Oct. 2 called for the annulment of the elections on grounds of fraud.
It cited as evidence of irregularities reports of intimidation, the fact that official results showed that around 1,500,000 people had voted outside their places of residence, and that the electoral authorities had declared more than 3,000,000 votes (some 12 per cent of the total cast) as invalid.
It also accused the national television service of pro-DNSF bias.
Foreign observers had described the elections as generally fair, although reports of intimidation and violence were confirmed.
Attempts to form government
Iliescu on Oct. 19 opened talks with party leaders on the formation of a new government to succeed the caretaker administration of Theodor Stolojan.
On Oct. 25 the two main opposition groups, the DCR and the NSF, expressed their support for a DNSF minority government on condition that it committed itself to "the evolution of Romania towards democracy…and the pursuit of economic reform" .
New RNUP leader
The executive of the Romanian National Unity Party (RNUP) elected Gheorghe Funar as party leader in succession to Radu Ceontea on Oct. 3.
Funar had been the party's presidential candidate in September.
Democratic National Salvation Front (DNSF) 117 49 DCR alliance: 82 34 National Peasant Party-Christian Democrat 42 21 Civic Alliance Party 13 7 National Liberal Party-Youth Wing 11 1 Romanian Social Democratic Party 10 1 Romanian Ecology Party 4 0 National Liberal Party-Democratic Convention 2 0 Others 0 4 National Salvation Front (NSF) 43 18 Romanian National Unity Party 30 14 Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania 27 12 Greater Romania Party (Romania Mare) 16 6 Socialist Party of Labour 13 5 Democratic Agrarian Party of Romania 0 5 Total seats **328 143
Composition of Romanian Parliament Chamber of Deputies Senate
*For percentage results of the main parties see p. 39104.
**An additional 13 Chamber seats were reserved for ethnic minorities, making an overall total of 341 seats.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
EC grant
European Community (EC) Finance Ministers in early October allocated Albania a balance-of-payments support grant worth ECU70,000,000, conditional upon Albania concluding an agreement with the IMF and holding to its recommendations (ECU1=US$1.39013 as at Oct. 5, 1992).
An IMF delegation headed by Managing Director Michel Camdessus arrived in Tirana, the capital, on Oct. 6; on the same day the Albanian Assembly ratified an agreement on trade and economic co-operation with the EC, which would come into effect in December 1993.
It was confirmed later in October that the EC would provide further food aid worth some US$50,000,000.
Establishment of Islamic bank
A memorandum of understanding with the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) signed in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, in September provided for the establishment of the Arab Albanian Islamic Bank (AAIB), Albania's first Islamic bank.
Authorized capital of the equivalent of $100,000,000 would be provided by investors from the GCC states; the Bank of Albania would hold 60 per cent of the stock.
Relations with Italy
Prime Minister Aleksander Meksi visited Italy on Oct. 2, meeting Foreign Affairs Minister Emilio Colombo and President Oscar Scalfaro who was to visit Albania on Oct. 26.
Italy agreed to grant Albania over $30,000,000 in supplementary aid, mostly for agriculture.
On Sept. 25 Meksi had invited the Pope to visit Albania, a predominantly Moslem state.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Fall of UDF government
The Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) government headed by Prime Minister Filip Dimitrov resigned on Oct. 28 after losing a vote of confidence in the National Assembly.
The UDF coalition had narrowly defeated the (former communist) Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) in the October 1991 general election [see p. 38539].
Dimitrov formed his government in November 1991 [see p. 38583], reliant on the support of the ethnic Turks' Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF) for its working majority in the Assembly.
From September 1992 onwards there had been increasing criticism of the government not only from the BSP but from the MRF and also from President Zhelyu Zhelev [see p. 39105].
Tension between Zhelev and Dimitrov increased dramatically in October when details emerged of an alleged arms scandal involving a prime ministerial adviser, Konstantin Mishev, and the chief of the country's intelligence services, Gen. Brigo Asparukhov.
Gen. Asparukhov alleged that Mishev had attempted to set up a secret arms deal with Macedonia.
However, Dimitrov claimed that Asparukhov's allegations were part of a Zhelev-inspired effort to smear him and his government.
In mid-October Dimitrov requested a vote of confidence in his government's overall policy.
The vote took place on Oct. 28 and the government was defeated by 121 votes to 111, the BSP and MRF voting against the government, which immediately tendered its resignation.
As of Oct. 31 Zhelev had not invited anyone to form a new government so that under the terms of the Constitution the Dimitrov government remained in office in a caretaker capacity.
Opening of Atanasov's trial
On Oct. 7 the trial opened of Georgi Atanasov, Prime Minister in 1986-90, and former Minister of the Economy and Planning Stoyan Ovcharov; both were charged with embezzlement.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Setback to partition process
Both chambers of the Czechoslovak Federal Assembly — the Chamber of the People and the Chamber of Nations — rejected a constitutional reform bill on Oct. 1 which would have legalized the ending of the Federation [see p. 39105].
On the same day the Federal Assembly approved a resolution proposed by Slovak deputies and Czech leftists which would authorise the Federation's transformation into a "Czech-Slovak Union" , with a president, legislature and governing council.
The Czechoslovak CSTK news agency described this decision as unexpected, reporting that the resolution provided for the creation of a commission to draw up a constitutional law, "in an effort to accelerate the integration of the Czech and Slovak republics into the European Union provided for by the Treaty of Maastricht of February 1992" .
The rejection of the original bill was criticized strongly by Vaclav Klaus, the Czech Prime Minister and leader of the Civic Democratic Party (ODS), who had drawn it up with his Slovak counterpart and leader of the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), Vladimir Meciar [see pp. 39061-62].
Talks between the two Prime Ministers scheduled for Oct. 6 were cancelled, but at a news conference in Bratislava on Oct. 5 Meciar said that they had agreed to meet in their capacity as party leaders.
This meeting went ahead on Oct. 6 at Jihlava, Moravia, after which Klaus told a news conference that the Federation would end on Jan. 1, 1993, and that partial bilateral agreements between the two republics would then come into force.
They had agreed that it would be unrealistic to attempt to form a union of the two republics.
On Oct. 8 the Federal Assembly passed two constitutional amendments aimed at transferring federal powers to the Czech and Slovak republics, and reducing the number of federal ministries from 15 to five.
Future of economic relations
The two Prime Ministers met at Kolodeje, east of Prague on Oct. 10, and reached preliminary agreement to maintain a customs union, with provision for the duty-free exchange of goods between the republics, with effect from Oct. 28, the 74th anniversary of the creation of Czechoslovakia.
Associated Press news agency quoted Meciar as saying that agreement had also been reached on the division of Czechoslovakia's export quotas to the European Community (EC) countries.
A common currency would be used until June 30, 1993, when separate currencies would be introduced with equal exchange rates, the agency reported.
The agreement contained a provision that currency values would eventually be dictated by the strength of the respective economies.
No agreement was reported on the issue of property division.
The two Prime Ministers met again in Javorina, Slovakia, on Oct. 25 and 26, and on Oct. 29 were reported by CSTK to have signed 16 agreements on future economic and social co-operation, including that on formation of a customs union.
Meciar and Klaus had returned from the Visegrad Three talks in London the same day [see p. 39153].
Czech political developments
Officials of Czech coalition parties met in Prague on Oct. 13 and agreed on major points of their republic's future constitution.
On Sept. 23 the Czech National Council had adopted a bill to reorganize ministries, including abolishing the Trade Ministry, whose functions would be divided between the Economics Ministry and the Industry and Trade Ministry.
Slovak political changes
At a meeting of the Slovak government on Oct. 13, certain presidential powers were transferred to Meciar; the Prime Minister was recognized as C.-in-C. of the armed forces until a president was elected, would represent the Slovak Republic externally, and would have certain judicial powers, according to Bratislava radio.
CSTK had reported on Sept. 24 that the number of Slovak ministries was being reduced from 17 to 13.
Ministerial appointments were announced on Sept. 30.
On Oct. 1 it had been reported that the Slovak National Council (parliament) was to be known as the National Council of the Slovak Republic.
On Oct. 17 the Slovak Social Democrats announced at the party's congress a name change to the Social Democratic Party of Slovakia.
Alexander Dubcek was re-elected chairman, although he had been in a coma since mid-September following a serious car accident.
Jaroslav Volf, acting party leader during Dubcek's illness, was re-elected first deputy chair.
Gabcikovo dam crisis
Construction work was resumed on Oct. 23 on the Slovak side on the final stage of the disputed Gabcikovo-Nagymaros dam project, on the Danube between Hungary and Slovakia [see p. 39105].
The dispute had been complicated by tension between the federal Czechoslovak government and the Slovak government, the main advocate of the project.
The decision to proceed was taken by the Slovak authorities immediately after the breakdown of EC-sponsored talks (earlier bilateral talks having ended without agreement on Oct. 13).
The Hungarian government responded by calling for an emergency meeting of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), and announcing its intention to submit a complaint to the International Court of Justice.
In an apparent attempt to defuse the crisis, Meciar declared on Oct. 30 during a visit to neighbouring Austria: "We are willing to suspend work until an international commission checks the technical problems of the project, and we are open to further negotiations." 
EUROPE
POLAND
Socio-economic programme
On Oct. 9, Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka presented to the Sejm (lower house of parliament) the socio-economic programme which her government had drawn up since coming to office in July [see p. 39016-17].
The government's priorities were, according to the Financial Times of Oct. 9, "to cut a growing budget deficit, speed up privatization of state-owned enterprises, depoliticize pay bargaining, and to sustain the export-led recovery in industrial output without reigniting inflation" .
The new plan was formulated in consultation with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) which in September 1991 had frozen payments under an April 1991 loan agreement [see p. 38162].
The conclusion of a new IMF 18-month standby agreement was seen as essential for the successful resolution of debt reduction talks with commercial banks, to which Poland owed US$12,200 million.
Suchocka declared: "After three years of reforms, we are at a turning point.
Until now we have been reconstructing the system…
Poland, the first [country in eastern Europe]to begin reforms, is the first to start coming out of recession."
However, she warned, "the fact that we are entering the path of economic development does not mean that we can expect a quick jump in living standards" .
Industrial output, including state-sector industrial output, had begun to rise in April, after two years of decline which had reduced production to 45 per cent of pre-1989 levels.
Polish exports, made more competitive because of the decline in real wages and the lower value of the zloty, rose by 12.5 per cent to $6,880 million in the first half of 1992.
Imports fell by 8 per cent; the trade surplus reached US$976 million, with a balance-of-payments surplus on the current account of $389 million.
Inflation was running at 41 per cent in July 1992 (as compared with an average of 60 per cent in 1991).
Unemployment was 13.8 per cent at the end of September.
The new government's programme envisaged an increase in the projected 1992 budget deficit from 65,500,000 million zloty to almost 82,000,000 million zloty (US$1.00=14,199.4 zloty as at Oct. 5, 1992).
Revenue from turnover and income tax and from privatization had been less than expected.
The new programme provided for an average increase of 3 percentage points in turnover tax, the introduction of value added tax (VAT) and improved tax collection in 1993, and a temporary 10 per cent surcharge on 75 per cent of Polish imports.
Expenditure cuts of 3.5 per cent across the board were proposed, along with reduced linking of pensions to inflation.
After a 13-hour debate a motion to reject the programme was defeated early on Oct. 10 by 171 votes to 159 with eight abstentions.
On Oct. 17 the Sejm approved Suchocka's guidelines as presented on Oct. 9 by 166 votes to 163 with eight abstentions.
However, the Sejm rejected pension cuts (which would have reduced government expenditure by 1,800,000 million zloty by the end of 1992 and by 23,000,000 million zloty in 1993).
The government on Oct. 20 proposed alternative cuts in spending on housing, transport, and agriculture.
Senate approval of the programme guidelines, as amended by the Sejm, was given on Oct. 20.
New media law — Broadcasting law
On Oct. 15 the Sejm approved legislation to end the state monopoly on radio and television broadcasting.
Under preparation for three years, the bill set up the framework for the legal operation of private radio and television stations and for an independent public broadcasting system.
Independence was to be ensured by a national broadcasting council to comprise four people chosen by the Sejm, three by the President and two by the Senate.
A motion that public radio and television should "respect the Christian system of values" was rejected by a margin of one vote.
However, "viewers' religious feelings" were to be respected by both public and private broadcasting and a licence could be withdrawn if programmes threatened "national culture or state security and defence" .
The bill still required approval by both Senate and President.
[For April 1990 abolition of censorship see p. 37733.]
Communications Minister Krzystof Kilian reported on Nov. 9 that there were 41 illegal broadcasting stations operating in Poland and that temporary licences had been granted to 19 radio and television stations which were run primarily by the Roman Catholic Church.
Also on Oct. 15 the Sejm approved legislation regulating television and broadcasting and allowing for commercial stations.
Independence was to be assured by a National Broadcasting and Television Council consisting of four members appointed by the Sejm, two by the Senate and three by the President.
Russian Premier's visit — Withdrawal of last Russian combat unit
Acting Russian Premier Yegor Gaidar visited Poland on Oct. 2-3, holding talks with Suchocka and President Lech Walesa.
[For handing over in mid-October of documents concerning Katyn massacre see p. 39155.]
Agreements were signed on investment protection and cross-border co-operation and on co-operation between St Petersburg and some Polish regions.
There were also discussions about the resolution of debt claims.
Polish television stated that Poland owed Russia $1,500 million and 5,000 million transferable roubles, while Russia owed Poland $300 million and 7,000 million transferable roubles.
On Oct. 28 the last Russian combat unit stationed in Poland left the country, although 6,000 Russian non-combat troops remained to co-ordinate the withdrawal of Russian troops from eastern Germany through Poland, due to be completed by the end of 1994.
EUROPE
VISEGRAD THREE
First summit with EC
Leaders of the Visegrad Three — Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland — held their first summit with the European Communities (EC) in Brussels on Oct. 28.
Participants at the summit were the Prime Ministers of Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia — respectively Jozsef Antall, Hanna Suchocka, Vaclav Klaus and Vladimir Meciar; a Deputy Prime Minister of the Czechoslovak federal government, Antonin Baudys; John Major, in his capacity as president of the EC Council, and Jacques Delors, the President of the EC Commission.
Other senior officials also attended the summit.
The Visegrad countries stressed their wish to join the EC at the earliest opportunity and repeated their call for economic help from the EC, in particular through access to EC markets.
Both sides agreed to strengthen political ties with regular consultations at foreign minister level.
The EC agreed to prepare a report on the criteria for eventual EC membership by the Visegrad countries, but no timetable for admission was agreed.
EUROPE
COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES
Bishkek summit
Leaders of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) met in Bishkek (Kirgizstan) on Oct. 9 for the eighth CIS summit, following preliminary meetings between Defence Ministers in Bishkek on Oct. 7 and Foreign Ministers in Moscow on Oct. 5.
Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev said at the Oct. 5 meeting that the CIS "would not be a mechanism for a civilised divorce but an instrument for ever stronger co-operation between the states" .
Economic agreements
The joint sitting of the Councils of Heads of State and Heads of Government in Bishkek was chaired by Armenian President Levon Ter-Petrosyan and attended by the Presidents of Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Moldova, Russia, Byelarus, Ukraine and Uzbekistan, the acting President of Tajikistan and a representative of the Turkmen President, absent due to ill health.
No delegation from Azerbaijan was present.
Agreement was reached on a number of economic issues.
A "consultative working commission" would be set up "under the Councils of Heads of State and Government" — a watered down version of a proposed permanent Consultative and Coordinating Economic Council, and on convergence of the economic laws of commonwealth states.
The establishment of an interstate bank to co-ordinate fiscal policy in the rouble zone was also agreed to in principle by six member states — Byelarus, Russia, Kirgizstan, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan and Armenia.
According to the Financial Times, such a move represented an attempt to create a "two-speed" CIS, with states like Ukraine, which wished to go ahead in the near future with the introduction of its own currency, "pushed at least to the edge of the CIS, if not out of it entirely" .
Military matters
Military matters discussed at the summit included the situation in Tajikistan [see p. 39147], the general concept of military security in the CIS, and the status of strategic and nuclear weapons in CIS member states.
Agreement was reached on sending humanitarian assistance to Tajikistan, and on reinforcing military units present in that republic.
A statute on the CIS joint armed forces high command was also signed, which, according to the C.-in-C. of the CIS armed forces Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, would "allow the basis of military policy and the collective defence of CIS states to be determined" and "put an end to uncertainty" .
Regarding strategic and nuclear forces, Shaposhnikov claimed that the situation remained essentially unchanged after the summit, with Russia, Byelarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine in the process of negotiating bilateral agreements.
Ukraine, however, remained reluctant to relinquish control over the launching of nuclear missiles from its territory.
Tokyo aid conference
The third and last in a series of conferences under the Washington process on aid to the countries of the former Soviet Union was held in Tokyo on Oct. 29 and 30 [for previous conferences, in Washington and Lisbon, see pp. 38730; 38922-3], attended by the leaders of the 12 New Independent States (NIS — the 11 CIS states and Georgia) and more than 60 donor countries.
The conference ended with the USA and Japan pledging over US$500 million in new aid.
Acting US Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger said that the USA would be sending $274 million in food and medical aid to the former Soviet Union to help the countries through the winter, with a further $138 million promised in other loans and assistance programmes.
Japan pledged $100 million in humanitarian aid, to be concentrated in the Far East.
Delegates at the conference also agreed on fundamental structural changes in the organization of aid to the NIS.
While the Washington process had co-ordinated aid to the republics on a sector basis, with working groups in such areas as food, medicine, energy and shelter, new mechanisms to be set up under the auspices of the World Bank would seek to manage aid on a country-by-country basis.
Consultative groups for Kazakhstan and Kirgizstan would be set up in Paris on Dec. 14 and 15, and pre-consultative groups for Uzbekistan and Azerbaijan on Dec. 16.
The Russian delegation objected that the new approach was more appropriate for developing countries, and called for its newly established Agency for International Co-operation and Development to share authority with the World Bank in co-ordinating aid for Russia.
EUROPE
RUSSIA
Pressure on government — Warning of coup
October was a month of heated political activity and rumour, focusing on the conflict between government reformists and the largely conservative Supreme Soviet.
Despite President Boris Yeltsin's attempts to rally support for a postponement of the forthcoming session of the Congress of People's Deputies until March 1993, the Supreme Soviet voted on Oct. 21 by 114 to 59 to convene the Congress for its seventh session to open on Dec. 1.
Yeltsin appeared to be moving towards a rapprochement with the centrist Civic Union opposition [see pp. 38974; 39058; 39108], in an attempt to gain its support before the Congress met and to avert the danger of his government and its economic reforms being overturned by the Congress (elected in 1990 and dominated by conservative forces).
Meanwhile, government ministers faced calls for their resignation, and Yeltsin acted to ban the more blatant manifestations of opposition activity.
Creation of Council of Heads of Republics
Leaders of the constituent republics of the Russian Federation, at a meeting with Yeltsin on Oct. 15 [for "All-Russia conference" on Sept. 11 see p. 39108], established a Council of Heads of the Republics, to be chaired by Yeltsin and with its administration headed by Yury Skokov, Security Council Secretary [see p. 39019-20].
In a statement reported on Oct. 16 by ITAR-TASS, the leaders of the republics called for consolidation and clarification of federal and republican powers, and supported Yeltsin's bid to postpone the Congress of People's Deputies until March 1993.
The Constitutional Committee, meeting in plenary session on Oct. 16 chaired by Yeltsin, called on the Supreme Soviet to delay convening the Congress until the first draft of the new Constitution had been presented to the standing parliament.
Yeltsin's speech to Supreme Soviet
Addressing the Supreme Soviet on Oct. 6, Yeltsin singled out for criticism the Ministers of Foreign Economic Relations, the Economy and Industry, but gave a general endorsement of the government, saying that "under these conditions, any other government would do an even worse job" .
He encouraged the adoption of "valuable ideas" originating from outside the government, such as those in the programme of Civic Union [see p. 39108].
Yeltsin's speech also covered the issues of land ownership, the need to counter crime and corruption, for which a group had been formed consisting of Vice-President Aleksandr Rutskoi, First Deputy Chairman of the Supreme Soviet, Sergei Filatov, Security Council Secretary Skokov and State Secretary Gennady Burbulis, and the need for an arms law to combat the "blatant pilfering of military property" .
Arkady Volsky, one of the leaders of Civic Union, made a speech on Oct. 6 in Kiev (Ukraine) to factory directors (recognized as an influential constituency), praising the Chinese model of economic reform [see also p. 39108].
Later in the month, however, acting Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar and other ministers most closely involved in economic reform policy met about 60 industrialists in Togliatti on Oct. 25 and gained their support in return for undertakings to consult them in policy-making.
Warning of coup
Senior ministers warned foreign journalists on Oct. 16 of a possible conservative-led coup against Yeltsin and the reforms.
The ministers — State Secretary Burbulis, Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev (who had issued similar warnings in July — see p. 39020), Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Press and Information Mikhail Poltoranin, and Deputy Prime Minister and Privatization Minister Anatoly Chubais — alleged the involvement of Civic Union, and accused the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet, Ruslan Khasbulatov, of heavy involvement.
Summoned to the Supreme Soviet to explain their conduct on Oct. 21, the ministers read a statement repeating their warning of "the threat to the strategic course of Russia's reforms from a certain part of the deputy body" .
In a sharp exchange through the media on Oct. 12-13 Poltoranin accused Khasbulatov, who had called for his resignation, of "surrounding himself in the Supreme Soviet apparatus with exiles from the former party structures" .
In a television interview on Oct. 3, Kozyrev had warned that "there is a danger that the old structures will consolidate themselves in a new guise" , meaning communists transformed into "national patriots" .
Rutskoi was reported by ITAR-TASS on Oct. 22 as calling for the resignation of six members of the government "to stabilize the political and economic situation in the republic" .
No names were mentioned.
Banning of NSF
The most recently formed of the groups uniting neo-communist and Russian nationalist opinion, the National Salvation Front (NSF), was banned shortly after its formal constitution.
A presidential decree signed on Oct. 28, referring to the Constitution and to amendments on Oct. 24 to the Criminal Code which made illegal public calls for the overthrow of power, described the NSF's aims as "designed to fuel national dissension and…a real threat to the integrity of the Russian Federation and the independence of neighbouring sovereign states" .
The NSF, whose joint leaders were Ilya Konstantinov (who had organized opposition meetings reported in August see p. 39058) and G. Zyuganov, had been established on Oct. 24 at a meeting in Moscow attended by up to 3,000 delegates, which had called for Yeltsin's removal.
The conservative newspaper Sovietskaya Rossiya had on Oct. 1 published an appeal from the NSF organizing committee calling for nationwide committees to take power [for September "declaration" see p. 39108]; the Media Ministry responded by bringing a civil action to close the newspaper.
Disbanding of government protection directorate
An order by Yeltsin on Oct. 28 disbanded the Directorate for the Protection of the Supreme Bodies of Power and Government, which the liberal press described as an armed formation of up to 5,000 men, under the personal command of Khasbulatov.
Reformist government ministers used the press revelations to support their claims that Khasbulatov was building up a power base.
An investigation of the Directorate published in Izvestiya of Oct. 22, 1992, revealed that the October 1991 order to form it from the troops of the Russian Interior Ministry was unknown to Supreme Soviet deputies; that its personnel was armed and "in exceptional circumstances" could distribute its arms to people's deputies; that it guarded about 75 buildings in Moscow, "two-thirds of which have absolutely no relation to the parliament" ; and that it came under the jurisdiction only of the parliamentary Chairman.
However, its commanding officer, Maj.-Gen.
Ivan Boiko, was cited in Rossiiskaya gazeta of Oct. 29 as saying that the Directorate had been established at Yeltsin's suggestion.
Two incidents had drawn public attention to the Directorate in October: the first on Oct. 9 concerned an armed relative of Khasbulatov who was arrested by the police but released without charge; the second was a shooting incident on Oct. 20, involving police and three members of the Directorate.
This incident was discussed in the Supreme Soviet on Oct. 21.
There was a sensation in the Oct. 21 sitting of the Supreme Soviet when Khasbulatov left the evening sitting, claiming sickness.
Two deputies, including the First Deputy Health Minister, raised the possibility that he might be "under narcotic and alcoholic intoxication" .
Khasbulatov's doctor, however, explained that he was suffering from high blood pressure.
Media issues
One of the last acts of the Directorate of Government Protection before it was abolished [see above]was to take control of the Izvestiya publishing house on Oct. 27.
The guard was removed on the following day, but the incident exemplified the renewed struggle for control over the influential liberal daily newspaper.
The Supreme Soviet had resolved to reassume control over Izvestiya in October, but the Mass Media Committee of the Supreme Soviet decided on Oct. 27 to renew examination of the issue and to submit information to the Constitutional Court and the Court of Arbitration [for background see pp. 39020; 39058].
On Oct. 17, the federal television broadcasting service Rossiya was established, merging the St Petersburg (formerly Leningrad) and the Russian Information Agency television companies.
Bella Kurkova was appointed to head the new service.
The St Petersburg company had been criticized for increasingly right-wing broadcasting.
Health and ecology reports
Two state-commissioned reports, described by Yeltsin in his Oct. 6 speech to the Supreme Soviet as the first in 70 years to contain "nothing but the truth" about the nation's health and the state of the environment, were unveiled at a press conference on Oct. 7.
The reports revealed the serious and worsening situation in Russia's environment and health standards.
Figures cited included a fall in life expectancy, to 69 years for women and 63 for men in 1992; 3,500,000 abortions in state hospitals in 1991 (compared with 2,500,000 live births); 15 per cent of Russian territory was described as being in a situation of "ecological crisis" .
The Health Minister, Andrei Vorobyov, collapsed with a heart attack on Oct. 22, while delivering a sharply critical report to the Supreme Soviet on the reform of the Russian Health Service and on measures to introduce compulsory medical insurance.
Yeltsin signed a decree relieving him of his post on Oct. 23.
Gorbachev's refusal to testify at CPSU hearing
Russia's Constitutional Court resumed on Sept. 25 its hearing of the case brought against Yeltsin for banning the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) and the Russian Communist Party (RCP), and the counter-petition of unconstitutionality made against the CPSU itself.
[For start of hearing and Aug. 3 adjournment see pp. 38923; 39020.]
Evidence continued to be submitted relating to the CPSU's role in Soviet politics in the period since March 1990, when it surrendered its constitutionally guaranteed monopoly of power [see p. 37299], the Court having indicated that its evaluation of the party's constitutionality would relate only to this limited period.
Attention was concentrated on the situation developing around former CPSU general secretary and ex-Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev.
Gorbachev refused to comply with a summons to testify.
Observers suggested that the selective use of archival material, and the dubious legality of a travel ban imposed on Gorbachev, pointed to an attempt to humiliate him, ordered from the highest level.
They also noted the unfortunate timing and dubious legality of a July 31 presidential decree awarding a 30 per cent pay rise to the 13 Constitutional Court judges.
The Court had announced on Sept. 21 its decision to summon ex-CPSU leaders as witnesses.
With Gorbachev consistently refusing this summons, despite a 100-rouble fine, the Court had then apparently imposed an effective ban on his travelling abroad, by requesting the Foreign and Security Ministries to ensure his appearance at the hearing.
The legal grounds for restricting his freedom of movement were hazy; an article in Moskovskiye novosti of Oct. 25 pointed out that it was unclear from which country Gorbachev could not leave — the Soviet Union or Russia.
Although he was allowed to travel to Germany on "humanitarian grounds" for the funeral of Willy Brandt [see p. 39160], Gorbachev was forced to cancel other planned visits.
On Oct. 8, police surrounded the premises of the International Foundation for Social, Economic and Political Research (Gorbachev Foundation) of which he was head after a presidential decree of Oct. 7 returned control of the building to the Russian government.
Subsequently, selected documents were released from the presidential archives, apparently implicating Gorbachev in taking part in or in concealing information about various episodes of Soviet history, including the shooting down of Korean Airlines flight KAL-007 in 1983 [see pp. 32513-7], the order for the invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979, and direct orders from Stalin for the murder of Polish officers in 1940 (the Katyn massacre — for April 1990 Soviet admission of responsibility see pp. 37383-84).
As the Court on Oct. 13 shifted attention to the body of documentary evidence brought before it, it became clear that a decision on summoning the final witnesses, including Gorbachev, would be postponed until after the document stage.
Interviewed by TASS on Oct. 15, Valery Zorkin, Chair of the Constitutional Court, admitted the possibility that Gorbachev would not be called, accusing him of "seeking to become a martyr" .
North Caucasus
While Yeltsin attempted to mobilise political support from the regions against the Supreme Soviet [see above], a display of separatist militancy in speeches at the fourth Congress of the Confederation of Mountain Peoples of the Caucasus, in Grozny (capital of Chechnia) on Oct. 3-4, raised the level of tension in relations with Moscow.
About 150 delegates attended the Grozny meeting, where militant speeches directed against both Russia and Georgia harked back to the brief existence (in 1918) of an independent Mountain Republic.
The Chechen President Dzhakhar Dudayev [for whose election see p. 38582]demanded that leaders of the North Caucasus republics be pressurized to resist the deployment of Russian troops.
The Congress's final statement called on the leaders of the republics to denounce the Russian Federation Treaty, to seek real independence and to establish regional security forces, based on their national guards.
The Confederation was renamed "the Confederation of Peoples of the Caucasus" .
Reporting on the Congress, Izvestiya of Oct. 5 warned that "current events in the North Caucasus threaten to grow into a large-scale civil war" , criticizing the Russian government for inaction.
The situation in Kabardino-Balkaria which flared up during September [see p. 39108]appeared at least temporarily under control.
A 12-day demonstration in the capital, Nalchik, organized by the Confederation of Peoples of the Caucasus and the Congress of Kabardian People, ended on Oct. 5, following a compromise between government and opposition which included the withdrawal of Russian Interior Ministry forces (OMON) from Nalchik.
Yeltsin signed a decree on Oct. 16 granting extra economic support and freedoms to Kabardino-Balkaria.
However, an extraordinary session of the Congress of Kabardian People on Oct. 17 blamed recent events on the republican leadership's refusal to conduct a dialogue with opposition movements.
Policy regarding ex-Soviet states
Yeltsin, attending a session of the collegium of the Foreign Ministry on Oct. 27, criticized the Ministry for shortcomings in its policy and work.
Significantly, he identified inadequate protection of Russians living in "nearby foreign countries" (blizhee zarubezhe — the phrase describing the other former Soviet republics).
Resignations in October supported the perception that Russian foreign policy was becoming increasingly nationalistic.
On Oct. 14, First Deputy Foreign Minister Fyodor Shelov-Kovedyaev announced his resignation.
He had faced criticism, especially from the Security Council, for his handling of his area of responsibility — Russia's relations with ex-Soviet republics.
He claimed to have resigned "to free the President from excessive pressure from certain forces, both in parliament and outside it" .
Shelov-Kovedyaev's replacement was Anatoly Adamishin, hitherto ambassador to Italy.
The resignation of Valery Tishkov, Chair of the State Committee for Nationalities Policy (with ministerial rank), was reported on Oct. 19.
In explanation, Tishkov criticized recent laws concerning nationality policy, such as the law on the rehabilitation of repressed peoples, which, in some cases, "was provoking inter-ethnic tension" .
EUROPE
UKRAINE
Resignation of government — New Prime Minister
Following the resignation of Prime Minister Vitold Fokin on Sept. 30 [see p. 39109], the Ukrainian parliament passed a vote of no confidence in the government on Oct. 1 for its mishandling of the country's economy, leading to the resignation of the Cabinet of Ministers.
On Oct. 13, Parliament elected Leonid Kuchma, head of the Yuzhmash missile factory in Dnepropetrovsk, as the new Prime Minister.
Kuchma, a "technocrat" , was nominated by President Leonid Kravchuk with the approval of the opposition New Ukraine movement, and received the support of 316 of the 378 deputies present.
His appointment was seen as a triumph for the country's industrial lobby and evidence of the continuing influence of the defence sector.
Kuchma promised "evolutionary" change and progress towards the market through a "sensible combination of administrative and economic measures" .
In a move which startled some Western observers, he proposed that state enterprises — 96 per cent of the country's economy — should be transformed into joint stock companies in which the government would retain a controlling share, as a first step towards privatization.
On Oct. 27 Kuchma presented a new Cabinet to parliament.
Following talks between President Kravchuk and Rukh leader Vyacheslav Chornovil, the key posts of First Deputy Prime Minister and Economics Minister went to members of the opposition organization, respectively Igor Yukhnovsky and Viktor Pendzenik.
Other important portfolios, including Defence and Foreign Affairs, remained unchanged.
The new appointments amounted to a purge of communist apparatchiks, among them Valentin Simonenko who had taken over as acting Prime Minister following Fokin's resignation and was seen as Kravchuk's first choice for premier, in favour of nationalists and industrialists.
Disturbances in Crimea
Thousands of Tatar demonstrators stormed the building of the Crimean Supreme Soviet in Simferopol on Oct. 6, in protest against the forced dismantling of a Tatar camp.
According to Mustafa Dzhemilev, leader of the Crimean Tatars' Majlis, 600 members of the local militia on Oct. 1 forced their way into the Krasnyy Ray settlement near Alushta (where returning Tatars had started work independently on the construction of a camp after waiting in vain for local authorities to allocate land for the purpose), injuring several residents and arresting 26.
Dzhemilev described the incident as the latest in a series of "pogroms" against the Tatar people.
Partial calm was restored when the prisoners were released during the afternoon, but representatives of the Majlis continued to demand that those responsible for the attack be found and punished, and went on to declare a general mobilization of Crimean Tatars.
Meeting in session on Oct. 8 against a background of continuing large-scale demonstrations, the Crimean Supreme Soviet passed a resolution declaring the Majlis unconstitutional.
On Oct. 9, demonstrators responded by calling for the resignation of Crimea's authorities and cancellation of the new resolution.
Talks with Russia
Russian acting Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar arrived in Kiev on Oct. 3 for talks with Simonenko on economic and financial relations between the two countries in anticipation of the introduction by Ukraine of its own currency.
A number of documents concerning trading contacts between the two countries in 1993 were signed at the meeting.
Also under discussion were the former Soviet Union's foreign debt commitments.
Russia and Ukraine were united in rejecting the principle of shared responsibility for the debt on the part of all the former republics.
However, while Russia was in favour of taking on all the assets and commitments of the former Soviet Union individually, Ukraine insisted that the various republics should service the debt separately.
On Oct. 22 Kuchma visited Russia for further talks and called for "an end to the economic cold war" between the two countries.
Chernobyl restart
One of the three power plants at the Chernobyl nuclear reactor was restarted on Oct. 16.
The plant had been closed down for repairs following an explosion at the St Petersburg nuclear power station, where similar equipment was in use [see p. 38843].
On Oct. 19 the European Commission said that it was "deeply worried" by the decision.
EUROPE
AZERBAIJAN/ARMENIA
Continued ceasefire violations
Reports of fighting between Armenian and Azerbaijani forces over the disputed region of Nagorny Karabakh and other rival claims persisted through late September and the whole of October, despite the ceasefire agreements of Aug. 28 and Sept. 25 [see pp. 39059; 39108].
Russian television reported on Sept. 26 (citing Interfax news agency) that shooting had resumed in the area of the Lachin corridor [see map on p. 38925].
Itar-Tass news agency said on Sept. 27 that Armenian forces had continued shelling Azerbaijani positions along the whole front line that day; there were numerous but seemingly unreliable claims of casualties.
Each side repeatedly accused the other of ceasefire violations.
On Oct. 1 Russian observers who had arrived in Baku, the Azerbaijani capital, on Sept. 28 to monitor the ceasefire, were reported as saying that in Kazakh district there were no hostilities and that they were to move on to Kubatlin district next day.
On Oct. 12 Russian President Boris Yeltsin and his Azerbaijani counterpart Abulfaz Elchibey signed a treaty of "friendship, co-operation and mutual security" in Moscow.
According to an Interfax report an Azerbaijani attempt to cut the Lachin corridor [see p. 39109]was repulsed on Oct. 4.
An Agence France-Presse report on Oct. 8, citing the Armenian news agency Snark, said that over 100 Azerbaijani soldiers had been killed and that the attackers had also lost 10 T-72 tanks and other armour.
Interfax reported on Oct. 11 that the Azerbaijani Defence Ministry admitted that its forces had been forced to withdraw from positions in the area,
On Oct. 13 Azerbaijan was reported on Russian radio to have offered a mutual withdrawal of forces from Karabakh and the stationing of observers to be provided by the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
Sporadic fighting was reported during the rest of October, and on Oct. 26 Interfax cited the Karabakh news agency as having reported that Azerbaijani MiG-25 aircraft had bombed Stepanakert, the Nagorny Karabakh capital.
EUROPE
ARMENIA
Resignation of Foreign Minister
Foreign Affairs Minister Raffi Hovhannesyan announced on Oct. 16 that he was resigning at the request of President Levon Ter-Petrosyan over "apparent policy disagreement" .
Officials at the presidency were quoted by Agence France-Presse as criticising as "too anti-Turkish" a speech which Hovhannesyan had made in Istanbul on Sept. 21; Armenia had earlier been reported as requesting 100,000 tonnes of grain from Turkey [see p. 39109].
On Oct. 16, the Russian Interfax news agency said that the Armenian leadership feared that Hovhannesyan's criticism of President Bush for US neutrality in the Karabakh conflict might mean that Armenia would not receive similar benefits from the West.
Appointment of Defence Minister
Vazgen Manukyan, already named in September as Minister of State for Defence Issues, to whom the then Defence Minister Vazgen Sarkisyan was to be subordinate [see p. 39108], was appointed Defence Minister on Oct. 20, with Sarkisyan becoming a presidential adviser in regions bordering Azerbaijan.
EUROPE
GEORGIA
Parliamentary elections
Elections were held in Georgia on Oct. 11 for a new parliament and parliamentary chairman.
Leader of the State Council Eduard Shevardnadze was elected to the latter position — effectively a presidential role — with over 95 per cent of the vote.
Despite a boycott in parts of Abkhazia, over 75 per cent of the electorate turned out to vote in the elections, in which Shevardnadze stood as the only candidate.
The result was interpreted as destroying any residual mandate enjoyed by former President Zviad Gamsakhurdia, ousted in January 1992 [see p. 38731]after winning over 80 per cent of the vote the previous May [see p. 38206].
Shevardnadze was expected to set about forming a coalition among some of the 36 parties which had contested parliamentary seats.
Fighting in Abkhazia
The September ceasefire mediated by Russia between Georgian government troops and separatist Abkhazian forces [see p. 39110]was brought to an end on Oct. 2, when the latter overran Gagra, on the Black Sea coast.
Abkhazian troops went on to take the villages of Gantiadi and Leselidze on Oct. 6, thus establishing control over the whole of northern Abkhazia, from the capital Sukhumi to the border with Russia.
Georgian authorities announced the mobilization of a further 40,000 troops.
Russian involvement
Accusations of Russian involvement in the conflict escalated following the fall of Gagra, with Shevardnadze blaming "reactionary forces in the Russian parliament" and conservatives in the Russian military for supplying arms to separatist troops.
Russian Foreign and Defence Ministry spokesmen responded by insisting that Russian soldiers had remained neutral throughout the conflict.
However, on Oct. 3, Russian President Boris Yeltsin warned that Russia would take "appropriate measures" if the lives of Russians in the conflict area were threatened.
Relations with Russia deteriorated further when the Georgian State Council announced that Georgia would take control of all Russian weapons and military equipment on its territory.
The Russian Defence Minister, Marshal Pavel Grachev, described the move as a "flagrant violation of all earlier accords" and said that attempts to seize Russian military hardware would lead to "armed clashes" .
Talks between Yeltsin, Shevardnadze and Abkhazian leader Vladislav Ardzinba set for Oct. 13 were postponed indefinitely when no agreement could be reached on a draft document to be signed by the two sides.
While the Georgian delegation called for a return to military positions occupied prior to Oct. 1, the Abkhazians insisted on a complete withdrawal of Georgian troops from their territory.
EUROPE
BALTIC STATES
Suspension of Russian troop withdrawal
Russian President Boris Yeltsin on Oct. 29 formally ordered the suspension of the withdrawal of Russian troops from the Baltic States [see p. 39110].
The withdrawal had been temporarily suspended on Oct. 21 after the Russian Defence Ministry warned that there were no facilities to rehouse the soldiers in Russia.
According to a report from the Itar-Tass news agency on Oct. 29, Yeltsin said that withdrawals would only resume after separate agreements had been signed with Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania to regulate the procedures and to set out measures to "provide social security for the servicemen and members of their families" .
The news agency also linked the decision to Yeltsin's concern for the rights of Russian-speakers living in the Baltic states.
The President reportedly instructed the Russian government to draw up within three days temporary agreements with the Baltic states which would provide "social guarantees" for Russian soldiers on their soil.
He also made the implementation of economic agreements with the Baltic countries dependent on the observance of the rights of the Russian-speaking populations and Russian troops.
Estonian President Lennart Meri said that the suspension contradicted earlier agreements, and he called for the issue to be discussed by the foreign ministers of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) at their forthcoming meeting in Sweden.
Energy supplies agreement
On Oct. 6 the Energy Ministers of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania signed a resolution on interstate energy co-operation.
It was agreed that where possible a system of barter would operate, with for example Estonia bartering electricity for Latvian gas; where this was not possible accounting would be based on the deutschmark.
EUROPE
ESTONIA
Principal members of new Estonian government
New President
On Oct. 5 the principal nationalist candidate Lennart Meri, Foreign Minister until March 1992 and subsequently ambassador to Finland, was elected President by the Parliament, the Riigikogu.
Parliament was required to choose between the two leading candidates after no single candidate had won an absolute majority of the popular vote in the presidential elections in September [see pp. 39110-11].
Meri, supported by the right-wing Fatherland group (Isamaa), was backed by 59 deputies, against 31 for Arnold Ruutel, the former chair of the Supreme Council and effectively the incumbent head of state.
On Oct. 8 Meri named Mart Laar, a former history teacher and leader of the Fatherland group, as the new Prime Minister.
Laar's party had won 29 of the 101 parliamentary seats in the September elections and with Moderates and the Estonian National Independence Party constituted the majority in the new parliament.
The three parties signed on Oct. 19 a formal coalition agreement which included commitments to relax citizenship legislation, to establish a nationwide state broadcasting service, to reduce the number of government ministries and to cut government staff.
Laar named a new Cabinet on Oct. 21.
As he had earlier indicated, a thorough reorganization of ministries was signalled with the merger of several ministries.
Media resignation
Mart Siimann resigned as director-general of Estonian Television on Oct. 5.
The move coincided with the expiry of the mandate of the broadcasting service, which ran concurrent with that of the outgoing Supreme Council.
EUROPE
LATVIA
Motions of no confidence
Prime Minister Ivars Godmanis and all but one of his ministers won the support of the Supreme Council in votes of no confidence held on Oct. 21 at the end of a three-week debate.
Godmanis survived by 71 to 36 a vote called by members of the Satversme faction (comprising the Latvian Free Civic Conservative Party, the Latvian Rebirth Party, the Latvian Liberal Party and the Latvian Liberal Democratic Party), accusing him of authoritarianism, inconsistency and incompetence, citing the government's poor economic performance, and calling for his resignation.
There was heated debate regarding the performance of number of ministers.
The only minister who actually lost a vote of no confidence (by 74 to 23) was Arnis Kalnins, who resigned as Minister of Economic Reform, having been criticized for his inability to conduct the restructuring of the economy along free market lines.
Internal Affairs Minister Ziedonis Cevers and Foreign Affairs Minister Janis Jurkans also came under particular attack from the Satversme faction, and on Oct. 27 Jurkans resigned, saying that he had been prompted by his narrow survival of the vote of no confidence (with a tied vote of 51 for and against).
He cited among his reasons for resigning political differences with the Prime Minister, including different views on the issue of citizenship [see p. 38880].
Speaking to the press, Jurkans defended his policy of maintaining good relations with Russia, for which he had received criticism during the debate on the vote of no confidence.
EUROPE
LITHUANIA
Legislative elections
Preliminary results in Lithuania's first post-independence legislative elections, held on Oct. 25, were issued on Oct. 26.
The Democratic Labour Party (DLP) led by Algirdas Brazauskas (formerly the Lithuanian Communist Party — see pp. 37921; 38465) looked set to wrest control of the 141-seat Supreme Council (parliament) from the ruling Sajudis, or Lithuanian Reform Movement, led by Vytautas Landsbergis, which had spearheaded the nationalist movement leading to independence in 1991 [see p. 38419].
The results were met with astonishment from both Brazauskas and Landsbergis.
Partial results from the 70 constituencies, where election was by proportional representation according to party lists, gave the DLP 35 seats with 42.6 per cent of the vote, Sajudis 18 seats with 21.6 per cent and the Christian Democrats, expected to ally with Sajudis, 10 seats with 11 per cent of the vote.
Results in the 71 seats in electoral districts, where the winning candidate was required to secure over 50 per cent of the votes, were decisive for only 13 seats (10 of them won by the DLP).
A second-round run-off was scheduled for Nov. 8 for the remainder.
Commentators believed that the results reflected popular anger about the economic crisis, in particular the fuel shortage [see p. 39110], and growing disenchantment with Landsbergis's tactics of confrontation with Russia and persistent anti-communist propaganda at home.
Although unprepared for the success of his party Brazauskas called for a "government of national agreement" , adding; "We will talk to other parties and do not want to usurp power." 
Constitutional referendum
In a referendum held at the same time as the elections, 78 per cent of voters supported a new Constitution which provided for a directly elected President to appoint a Prime Minister who would in turn appoint a Cabinet, with all appointments requiring parliamentary approval.
Presidential elections were scheduled for January 1993, although under the new Constitution parliament was given the power to postpone them.
Economic agreement with Russia
Prime Minister Aleksandras Abisala and Yegor Gaidar, acting Prime Minister of Russia, signed an economic co-operation agreement on Oct. 12, under which Russia committed itself to resuming oil and gas supplies to Lithuania.
The agreement established the mechanics for the repayment of mutual debts; a further agreement was signed establishing trade missions in the two countries.
EUROPE
FINLAND
Austerity programme — Banking losses
On Oct. 14 the government announced further plans to cut its spending by FM54,200 million (US$11,700 million) over three years.
Apart from reducing the budget deficit, the cuts were intended to reassure financial markets after the European-wide currency crisis forced the floating of the markka [see p. 39080].
The crisis compounded the country's serious economic difficulties caused by the overheating of the economy in the late 1980s and the collapse of Soviet export markets.
The austerity measures affected primarily spending on health, social welfare, defence and overseas development assistance.
Specific measures included reductions in real terms of children's allowances and pensions, and the phased abolition of subsidies on agricultural exports by 1995.
On the revenue side, indirect taxes, notably on petrol, would be increased, and taxpayers would be obliged to make compulsory loans to the government (of between 2 and 4 per cent of annual income) to be repaid without interest in 1997.
On Oct. 15 five leading banks reported cumulative losses of FM6,900 million (US$1,490 million) in the first eight months of 1992.
The losses were the biggest since the 1930s and reflected the impact of the recession, which had caused record numbers of bankruptcies and credit defaults.
Local elections
The parties of the centre-right coalition suffered substantial losses in nationwide local elections on Oct. 18 in what was widely seen as the voters' initial verdict on the austerity measures.
At stake were 12,600 seats in 439 municipalities.
Compared with the previous local elections in 1988, the four coalition parties' share of the vote fell by 5.8 per cent, with the right-wing National Coalition Party (KOK) the main loser, its share falling by 4 per cent .
Support for the Centre Party (KESK) of Prime Minister Esko Aho fell to 19.3 per cent.
The main gains were made by the opposition Social Democratic Party (SSDP), which increased its share to 27.1 per cent, up 1.8 per centage points on the 1988 elections and 5 percentage points on the 1991 general elections; and by the Greens, who increased their share from 4.4 per cent to 6.8 per cent .
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Birmingham summit
Heads of state and government of the European Communities (EC) met in Birmingham, UK, on Oct. 16, for a special summit.
The meeting was held in response to a crisis of confidence following the June referendum in Denmark rejecting ratification of the Maastricht Treaty [see p. 38942], the narrow majority in the September referendum in France approving ratification [see pp. 39080-82], and the European currency crisis [ibid.].
At the Birmingham summit EC leaders confirmed their support for early ratification of the Treaty without renegotiation, and sought to introduce greater transparency into the working of the EC in order to win the support of citizens, especially in Denmark and the UK where there was greatest opposition to ratification.
However, the meeting did not manage to clarify greatly the concept of subsidiarity (which maintained that decisions should be taken at the most effective level whether at EC, national, regional or local level).
Substantive decisions were left until the December summit in Edinburgh.
Reform of the exchange rate mechanism following September's currency crisis, as originally called for by UK Prime Minister John Major, was left off the agenda and finance ministers stayed away in order not to upset the markets.
Leaders also failed to address the broader issue of the recession, which the Financial Times of Oct. 19 described as "raising questions about the common drive for economic convergence and future European monetary union" .
Presidency conclusions
Extracts from the conclusions of the presidency are given below.
The Maastricht Treaty.
"The European Council reviewed progress on ratification of the Treaty on European Union signed on Feb. 7 and reaffirmed the importance of concluding the process as soon as possible, without reopening the present text…
After a full discussion on bringing the Community closer to its citizens, the European Council agreed the attached declaration.
It noted the Danish White Paper [see below]…
Economic and monetary co-operation.
"Heads of state and government agreed that member states face common economic challenges, and were concerned at lower growth and increasing unemployment.
Strong co-ordination at Community level will help to ensure that the economy of each member state is strengthened by the success of other member states…
"The European Council underlined the importance in this context of reinforcing the convergence process among the member states' economies, which is crucial for maintaining monetary stability and for creating the framework for sustainable growth and rising employment…
The European Council reiterated too its commitment to the European Monetary System as a key factor of economic stability and prosperity in Europe [while endorsing the view]that the recent financial turbulence calls for reflection and analysis in the light of developments in capital markets and in the European and world monetary systems…
GATT-Uruguay Round.
"The European Council reaffirms the importance of a fair and successful GATT agreement for strengthening the multilateral trading systems and increasing trade flows…[see p. 39170].
Birmingham declaration.
A Community close to its citizens.
"We reaffirm our commitment to the Maastricht Treaty.
We need to ratify it to make progress towards European Union if the Community is to remain an anchor of stability and prosperity in a rapidly changing continent, building on its success over the last quarter of a century.
"As a community of democracies, we can only move forward with the support of our citizens.
We are determined to respond to the concerns raised in the recent public debate.
We must:(i) demonstrate to our citizens the benefits of the Community and the Maastricht Treaty;(ii) make the Community more open, to ensure a better informed public debate on its activities;(iii) respect the history, culture and traditions of individual nations, with a clearer understanding of what member states should do and what needs to be done by the Community;(iv) make clear that citizenship of the Union brings our citizens additional rights and protection without in any way taking the place of their national citizenship…
"We reaffirm that decisions must be taken as closely as possible to the citizen.
Greater unity can be achieved without excessive centralization.
It is for each member state to decide how its powers should be exercised domestically.
The Community can only act where member states have given it the power to do so in the treaties.
Action at the Community level should happen only when proper and necessary.
The Maastricht Treaty provides the right framework and objectives for this.
Bringing to life this principle — "subsidiarity" or"nearness' — is essential if the Community is to develop with the support of its citizens…
Declaration on former Yugoslavia.
"The European Council agreed that immediate and decisive action was needed in the face of the impending major human tragedy in former Yugoslavia as winter approached…
The European Council condemned the continuing widespread violence and cruelty and the savage breaches of international humanitarian law in the former Yugoslavia which have caused this human suffering and are now the main constraint on the delivery of essential aid…[see p. 39149].
Declaration on Somalia.
"The European Council expressed its deep concern over the appalling situation in Somalia and the continuing deaths and starvation.
It condemned the renewed fighting and called on the parties involved to observe an immediate ceasefire to allow the rapid distribution of aid to the people in desperate need…"
Danish White Paper on Maastricht
On Oct. 9 the Danish government published a 251-page White Paper outlining its options after the June referendum's rejection of ratification of the Maastricht Treaty.
Eight options were presented; the government was known to favour "amending the treaty without changing it" as stated by Foreign Minister Uffe Ellemann-Jensen on Oct. 7 after talks with German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, with clauses to allow Denmark to opt out of currency union and common defence arrangements, and to protect Denmark's high standards on social and environmental policy.
It also sought greater openness and less centralization of EC affairs.
Ratification process in other countries
On Oct. 8 the German Bundestag approved at a first reading the ratification of the Maastricht Treaty on condition that it be given the final say over the introduction of a single European currency in the final stage of European monetary union (EMU).
On Oct. 29 the Italian Chamber of Deputies approved ratification by 403 votes to 46 with 18 abstentions.
The Senate had already approved the treaty on Sept. 17 by 176 votes to 16 with one abstention.
Also on Oct. 29 the Spanish Congress of Deputies approved ratification by 314 votes to three with eight abstentions.
A final vote by a joint session of both houses was scheduled for Nov. 25.
[The situation in the UK will be covered in the November News Digest with details of the Nov. 4 House of Commons debate and voting.]
Repercussions of currency crisis
Following the dramatic upheavals of currency markets within Europe in September [see pp. 39080-81], there was comparative stability in October.
At the beginning of October, as the German Bundesbank took no immediate steps to reduce interest rates, both the British and Italian currencies fell sharply against the deutschmark, but then recovered.
During the rest of the month sterling was adversely affected by uncertainty in the UK over the Maastricht Treaty ratification process and by unrest over the decision to reduce the size of the coal industry [see this page]; the pound closed on Oct. 30 at DM2.41.
Despite industrial unrest in Italy [see p. 39162]the lira remained relatively steady.
The United Kingdom banks' base rate was cut on Oct. 16 from 9 to 8 per cent.
On Oct. 21 the German Bundesbank lowered its securities repurchase rate from 8.9 to 8.75 per cent(while retaining unchanged its discount and Lombard rates at 8.25 and 9.5 per cent respectively), the Belgian and Netherlands discount rates were cut from 8 per cent (the rate effective since Sept. 16) to 7.75 per cent and the Austrian discount rate from 8.25 to 8 per cent .
The Italian discount rate was on Oct. 28 lowered from 15 to 14 per cent following a reduction in the Lombard rate on Oct. 8 from 16.5 to 16 per cent.
Agreement to restrict toxic waste movements
The Environment Ministers of the European Communities (EC) signed an agreement on Oct. 20 restricting the transport of toxic waste across borders.
The accord, which followed two years of negotiations, was scheduled to come into force in September 1994.
The agreement endorsed the principle of "self-sufficiency" , which stipulated that waste should be treated or disposed of as close as possible to the point of production, although it provided for some flexibility in the case of smaller countries.
Exports of toxic waste to other European or Third World countries were to be banned, except for some consignments destined for recycling which could be exported under licence from the EC Commission.
Imports of toxic waste into the EC would also be banned, with the exception of shipments from developing countries destined for treatment or recycling.
The accord followed a decision reached in July by the European Court of Justice that waste was not necessarily a "commercial good" , and could thus be exempted from the principle of free movement of such goods, as enshrined in the Single European Act.
The Court had ruled in favour of an application by a Belgian village which had sought to block the dumping of waste from the Netherlands on its land.
The agreement meant that the EC would be able to endorse the Berne Convention on the international movement of toxic waste, which came into force in May.
[See also p. 37978.]
VAT and maternity benefit agreements
VAT
On Oct. 19 EC Finance Ministers gave their formal approval to an agreement in principle reached in July 1992 to apply a minimum rate of value added tax (VAT) of 15 per cent until 1996 plus minimu duty rates on such items as alcohol, tobacco and heating oil [see pp. 39021-22].
Final approval had been delayed as a result of a Spanish-UK disagreement on the rate of tax to be applied to Spanish and British sherry in the UK.
Maternity benefits
EC Finance Ministers also agreed on Oct. 19 on measures providing for a minimum of 14 weeks' maternity leave to be paid at a rate at least as high as statutory sick pay regardless of how long a pregnant woman had worked for her employer.
The agreement represented an improvement on conditions in the UK, where, although pregnant women qualified for 40 weeks' maternity leave, only six weeks were at 90 per cent of salary and 12 weeks were at £46.30 a week, and they had to have worked for at least two years (five if part-time).
In Denmark pregnant women were entitled to 26 weeks on 90 per cent of salary.
In Germany, Greece, Luxembourg, Netherlands and Portugal maternity leave was between 12 and 16 weeks at full salary.
In Belgium, France, Ireland, Italy and Spain it was between 16 and 20 weeks at 70-80 per cent of salary.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Proposed reduction of coal industry
Neil Clarke, chair of British Coal, announced on Oct. 13 that production was to cease at 31 of the corporation's 50 pits over the next five months (including four which were to be mothballed) and that up to 30,000 jobs were to be lost.
On the same day Michael Heseltine, the President of the Board of Trade, unveiled a £1,000 million package of measures designed to assist affected areas and to provide enhanced redundancy payments.
Coal had been particularly hard hit by the continuing switch to gas as a fuel by the recently privatized electricity supply industry [see pp. 38111; 38300].
The government saw it as essential to slim down the coal industry [see p. 38781]in preparation for the eventual privatization of British Coal itself.
The outcry was such that on Oct. 19 the government postponed part of the closure programme.
Heseltine informed parliament that only 10 nonviable pits were to be closed immediately, that decisions on the other mines would be deferred to the beginning of 1993, and that Lord Walker of Worcester, a former senior Cabinet minister, would advise the government on examination of the issue.
At the end of a House of Commons debate on Oct. 21 six backbench Conservatives joined all the opposition parties (except the Ulster Unionists) in voting for a critical motion, on which the government's majority was reduced from 21 to 13.
Prime Minister John Major indicated on Oct. 20, and Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont confirmed in his Mansion House speech on Oct. 29, the government's decision to pursue a policy of economic growth [for interest rate cut see this page].
Redundancies
Reductions in employment in the manufacturing sector continued during October.
As earlier in the year [see p. 38371], redundancies in September-October were concentrated particularly in the motor and aerospace industries (notably Ford, Rolls-Royce, Jaguar, Lucas and British Aerospace).
Also severely affected were shipbuilding (Swan Hunter and Yarrow) and the construction industry.
The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate for the whole of the UK was in October at a five-year high of 10.1 per cent.
Report on BCCI
The report by Lord Justice Bingham on the collapse in July 1991 of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI)[see p. 38355]was published on Oct. 22, strongly criticizing the Bank of England for failing properly to supervise and regulate BCCI, but stating that UK Treasury officials and ministers for their part were not open to criticism.
On Oct. 1, the report had been released of a US Senate investigation of the affair chaired by Democratic Senator John Kerry, which contained wide criticisms of both US and UK practices and actions.
Lamont told the House of Commons on Oct. 22 that legislation would be introduced to enable the Bank of England to refuse or revoke authorization of banks where, because of their international structure, it could not exercise proper supervision, and the government intended to initiate a strengthening of international supervisory co-operation.
Indictments on fraud charges were brought in the United States (i) on July 1 against Sheikh Khalid bin Mahfouz, chief operating officer of the National Commercial Bank of Saudi Arabia;(ii) on July 29 against Clark Clifford (US Defence Secretary in 1968-69) and Robert Altman; and (iii) on Sept. 17 against William Batastini, Ghaith Pharaon, Tariq Jamil and Swaleh Naqvi [see also pp. 38569; 38737].
It was announced on Aug. 18 that preliminary fraud charges had been laid in Abu Dhabi against 14 former BCCI executives.
A court in Luxembourg finally approved on Oct. 22 the US$1,700 million compensation settlement initialled in February [see pp. 38781; 38977].
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
London bombing campaign
A car bomb exploded in Whitehall, London, close to the Prime Minister's Downing Street residence on Oct. 30.
Responsibility for this and for 14 other explosions in the capital throughout the month was claimed by the Irish Republican Army (IRA).
The bombs appeared to be part of a renewed IRA campaign in London.
Explosive devices were planted in both central London and the suburbs; targets included the top security police station at Paddington, a number of railway stations, the theatre area of London and a club for former soldiers.
There was one fatality, when a bomb exploded in the public house in central London on Oct. 12, and a number of injuries, but the main effect was to cause severe disruption in the capital.
A number of people were detained under the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act on Oct. 28 following police raids on homes in east London.
The arrests were thought to have been in connection with the discovery of 35 kg of semtex, the explosive used in the IRA London bombs.
EUROPE
IRELAND
Announcement of abortion referendums
The government announced on Oct. 6 that three referendums on abortion-related issues would be held on Dec. 3.
As well as the two planned referendums on the right to travel and the right to obtain information on abortion services overseas [see pp. 38942; 39065], the government decided that there would be an additional vote on the "substantive" issue of whether abortion should be legal.
The government was placed under considerable pressure to persuade the electorate to vote in favour of lifting restrictions on travel and information by a judgment in the European Court of Human Rights; on Oct. 29 the court ruled that the Irish government had breached the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms when in 1988 its Supreme Court ordered two counselling services to stop giving information about the availability of abortions in the United Kingdom.
The government had on Sept. 29 committed itself to holding another referendum on divorce [for 1986 referendum see p. 34758].
Voting would only take place after considerable debate and amendments to existing family and property laws.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Political responses over xenophobia
As politicians sought an effective response to the growth of anti-semitism and violence against foreigners [for August attacks on asylum-seekers' hostel in Rostock see pp. 39065-66], differences nevertheless persisted during October both within the ruling coalition and between the government and the opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD).
Consequently, despite unanimous condemnation of such attacks, specific measures were not approved.
Attacks on asylum-seekers' hostels continued intermittently throughout the month.
On Oct. 3, the second anniversary of German unification, several thousand people took part in a protest against xenophobia at the former Sachsenhausen concentration camp, which had been fire-bombed in September [see pp. 39111-12].
However, between 500 and 1,000 right-wing protesters marched through Dresden shouting anti-foreigner slogans; there were similar demonstrations in Arnstadt (Thuringia).
On Oct. 10 at an extraordinary conference on combating racist violence, federal and Land interior and justice ministers failed to agree on appropriate measures.
SPD participants opposed proposals put forward by members of the Christian Democratic Union and Christian Social Union (CDU and CSU, which together with the Free Democratic Party — FDP — made up the ruling coalition at federal level), to criminalize the refusal to leave the scene of a violent demonstration if requested by police, and to allow longer detention in custody of repeat offenders.
The SPD maintained that existing judicial and policing powers were adequate — as had the FDP in an emergency Bundestag debate on Oct. 8.
On Oct. 15 the Bundestag voted by 364 to 24 with two abstentions in favour of altering Article 16 of the Basic Law (constitution) to restrict the right to asylum for "persons persecuted on political grounds" .
However, the SPD (which was to decide in mid-November on whether to support amendment of the Basic Law as proposed in August 1992 — see p. 39066) boycotted the vote and the motion thus failed to win the required two-thirds majority of members.
The vote followed a coalition agreement of Oct. 13 favouring a constitutional amendment which would refer to the 1951 Geneva Convention on Refugees.
Death of Willy Brandt
Former SPD Chancellor Willy Brandt died of cancer on Oct. 9 at the age of 78.
Born Herbert Ernst Karl Frahm on Dec. 18, 1913, in Lübeck, the son of an unmarried salesgirl, he began using the name Brandt while engaging in anti-Nazi activities.
He evaded arrest and escaped to Norway in 1933, taking Norwegian nationality, but returned to Germany after the War to become a member of the Bundestag in 1949.
He made his name as mayor of West Berlin in 1957-66, was Foreign Minister and Vice-Chancellor from 1966 to 1969, and became the first SPD Chancellor in 1969 [see p. 23618].
The "Ostpolitik" which won him the Nobel Peace Prize in 1971 involved the negotiation of treaties renouncing German territorial claims to the east, in Czechoslovakia, Poland and the then Soviet Union, as well as the 1972 Basic Treaty with East Germany.
Obliged to resign in 1974 when his aide Günther Guillaume was revealed as an East German spy, Brandt later headed what became known as the Brandt Commission on development issues, and from 1976 until September 1992 was president of the Socialist International [see p. 39122].
Deaths of Kelly and Bastian
On Oct. 19 the prominent Green activist Petra Kelly, 44, and her companion, former army general turned pacifist Gert Bastian, 69, were found dead in their Bonn apartment.
Police said that Kelly had been shot in the head by Bastian who then turned the gun on himself.
Their bodies were only discovered after about a fortnight; it was not clear whether Kelly's death was part of a suicide pact.
Visit by Queen Elizabeth II
Queen Elizabeth II of the UK paid a state visit to Germany on Oct. 19-23.
She met political leaders in Bonn, walked through the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin, met citizens in Leipzig, and attended a service of reconciliation in Dresden, which was destroyed by allied bombing on Feb. 13, 1945.
Some protestors demonstrated against her Dresden visit; wartime bitterness had earlier been aroused when the Queen Mother on May 31 unveiled a statue in London to Sir Arthur "Bomber" Harris, wartime head of Bomber Command, and when German plans were disclosed (but subsequently cancelled) to commemorate officially on Oct. 5 the 50th anniversary of the development of the V2 rocket technology on the island Oie off Peenemünde on the Baltic coast.
EUROPE
FRANCE
Senate elections — Government reshuffle
Triennial elections, to fill 103 of the seats in the 321-seat Senate (upper house), took place on Sept. 27 in 31 metropolitan départements, one département d'outre-mer (Réunion) and one territoire d'outre-mer (New Caledonia).
The triennial election for the Senate Presidency took place on Oct. 2.
The RPR candidate, Charles Pasqua dropped out after the first round.
On the second round, René Monory, candidate of the CU bloc, secured 200 votes against 76 for the PS candidate Claude Estier.
The RPR and UDF party leaders welcomed Monory's election which, commentators agreed, favoured the conservative alliances.
The previous incumbent, Alain Poher, stood down at the election at the age of 83, after 24 years in office [see p. 22950 for his election], but remained a Senator.
On Oct. 2 a Cabinet reshuffle was announced, after Michel Charasse, hitherto Budget Minister, and Jean-Marie Rausch, hitherto Minister-Delegate for Commerce and Artisans, were elected to the Senate.
They were replaced by Martin Malvy, and Gilbert Baumet, President of the Regional Council of Gard, respectively.
The reshuffle featured the return to the Cabinet of Jean-Marie Soisson, who had resigned from a Cabinet post in March after being elected President of the Regional Council for Burgundy [see p. 38821].
Soisson became Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development, in place of Louis Mermaz, who was appointed Secretary of State for Relations with Parliament and Government Spokesman in place of Malvy.
André Billardon (PS) was appointed Minister-Delegate for Energy.
New centrist party
The formation of a new political party, the Mouvement des réformateurs (Reformers' Movement), was announced on Oct. 10.
The new party's secretary-general was Soisson and its chairman was Jacques Pelletier (one of the UDF members, like Soisson, in the PS-led government of Michel Rocard from mid-1988 until May 1991, as Minister of Co-operation and Development).
It was formed from the Association des démocrates (Democrats' Association), Soisson's France unie (United France) and the Performance et partage (Performance and sharing) parties.
The move was generally seen as intended to draw centrist voters away from the conservative parties in the 1993 elections.
1993 budget — Censure motion
On Sept. 30, two days before start of the last session of the National Assembly before the legislative elections scheduled for March 1993, the government of Prime Minister Pierre Bérégovoy published its draft 1993 budget, predicting a record deficit of F165,400 million (about US$33,000 million).
A censure motion introduced on Oct. 26 by the conservative opposition parties to protest against an "unrealistic" budget obtained only 261 of the 286 parliamentary votes necessary to defeat the government; the Communist party abstained, rather than voting with the right as it had done in an earlier censure motion, in June 1992 [see pp. 38977-78].
The RPR and UDF parties held that the government's 2.6 per cent growth forecast for 1993 was too optimistic.
Malvy on Oct. 27 was reported to have admitted that the current year's deficit would be close to F180,000 million (about US$36,000 million, approximately twice the original forecast).
Anti-corruption law
The National Assembly on Oct. 17 adopted by 272 votes to 256 a bill introduced by Bérégovoy, banning corporate contributions to political parties.
The legislation followed scandals involving payments to political parties, including the indictment in September of the assembly's president, Henri Emmanuelli, for alleged involvement in illicit funding [see pp. 39023-24; 39066; 39113].
HIV-tainted blood scandal
Michel Garretta, director of the National Blood Transfusion Centre, and his chief assistant, Jean-Pierre Allain, were each sentenced on Oct. 23 to four years in prison for knowingly distributing blood contaminated with HIV to haemophiliacs [see p. 38978].
Two years of Allain's sentence were suspended.
Garretta, believed to be living in the USA, was additionally fined F500,000 (about US$100,000).
More than 250 French haemophiliacs were said to have died from AIDS-related diseases after receiving contaminated blood transfusions and approximately 1,500 others to have been infected with HIV.
Attempts had reportedly been made, unsuccessfully so far, to indict former ministers in the affair.
Party Change Total seats Socialist Party (PS) +4 70 Rally for the Republic (RPR) -1 90 Communist party (PCF) -1 15 Democratic and European Rally (RDE) -1 22 Centrist Union (UC) -2 66 Independents and Republicans (RI) * -4 47 Independents +4 10
French Senate elections
*The RI bloc consisted mainly of members of Valéry Giscard d'Estaing's Union for French Democracy (UDF) in alliance with the Republican Party (PR) of François Léotard.
One seat fell vacant pending a by-election after Baumet resigned to join the government.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Decision by González to stand for re-election
At a rally in Madrid's main bullring to celebrate the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) 's 10 years in power, Prime Minister Felipe González Márquez confirmed on Oct. 25 that he would stand for re-election for a fourth term.
Cordial relations between the socialist General Workers' Union (UGT) and the PSOE were resumed at a meeting, the first for five years, between UGT secretary-general Nicolás Redondo and PSOE deputy secretary-general Alfonso Guerra on Sept. 30 following a longstanding rift over government economic policy [see pp. 36359-60 for Redondo's 1988 refusal to take up the UGT seat on the PSOE executive].
1993 draft budget
The draft budget for 1993, presented to the Cortes on Sept. 29 and described by Economy and Finance Minister Carlos Solchaga Catalán as the most restrictive budget in 20 years, allowed for a central government spending increase of only 3.7 per cent in real terms (2.1 per cent of this allocated to debt servicing), with the budget deficit due to fall from 2.6 to 2.3 per cent of GDP (Pta1,421,100 million — approximately US$13,930 million).
Projected spending on defence was cut by over 9 per cent in real terms, on public administration by 3.3 per cent and on foreign affairs by 1.9 per cent, with real spending increases only in the fields of health, pensions and unemployment.
GDP growth was forecast at less than 1 per cent and inflation at 4.7 per cent.
Adoption by Basque parties of common position on ETA
At a meeting in Vitoria on Sept. 15 the moderate parties represented in the Basque region (the Basque Nationalist Party (PNV); the Popular Party (PP); the Basque Left (EE); and Unidad Alavesa but not Basque Solidarity (EA)) confirmed their joint political opposition to the separatist organization Euskadi ta Askatasuna (ETA) and the attitude of its political wing United People (HB) in reinforcement of the 1988 Ajuria Enea pact [see p. 35853].
The new agreement stated that no party should hold contacts with HB without prior consultations.
An army officer was killed by an ETA car bomb in Salamanca on Sept. 2; an off-duty policeman was shot dead in San Sebastián on Sept. 13; and a local policeman in Baracaldo near Bilbao, who had once been imprisoned for providing an ETA unit with accommodation, was killed on Oct. 21 apparently by the premature explosion of a bomb which he was handling.
An ETA leader, Alberto Aldana Barrena, was arrested with his wife in Ciboure, south-western France, in early October.
Resignations in Cantabrian government
Six PP members of the Cantabria regional government resigned on Sept. 18 in an attempt to force out of office the President, Juan Hormaechea, who faced charges of abuse of office and embezzlement.
Illegal immigrants
At least 35 people, most of them Moroccans, drowned in the Strait of Gibraltar on Sept. 26 while attempting to cross to Spain, and 38 others were arrested by the Civil Guard.
A total of 1,200 African migrants had been arrested by the Civil Guard at Algeciras in the first eight months of 1992.
EUROPE
PORTUGAL
Draft 1993 budget
A draft budget for 1993, announced on Oct. 14, envisaged restricting total expenditure to about Esc3,900,000 million and reducing the public-sector deficit to 3.9 per cent of GDP (Esc488,000 million, compared with Esc543,000 million in 1992: US$1.00=131.74 as at Oct. 19, 1992).
Individual ministries would face an average 5 per cent cut in administrative spending, and public-sector pay rises were to be contained at between 4.5 and 5.5 per cent.
Growth was forecast at 3 per cent(compared with 2 to 2.5 per cent forecast for 1992); inflation at an annualized rate of between 5 and 7 per cent (compared with 9 per cent in 1992); and privatization receipts at Esc225,000 million.
The public-sector borrowing requirement would be cut from Esc539,000 million to Esc416,000 million.
Ending of state television monopoly
Portugal's first private television station, the Sociedade Independente de Comunicaçao (SIC), headed by former Prime Minister Francisco Pinto Balsemao, was inaugurated on Oct. 6.
New charges against Carvalho
Lt.-Col. Otelo Saraiva de Carvalho, who had been released from prison on a legal technicality in 1989 [see p. 36945], in October faced new charges of involvement with the Popular Forces of April 25 (FP-25) including a bank robbery in the 1980s.
Amnesty for immigrants
A four-month amnesty came into force on Oct. 13 allowing illegal non-EC immigrants to regularize their position, provided that they had been in the country for six months and were earning a living.
Numbers were estimated to include about 80,000 Africans from Portugal's former colonies, predominantly Cape Verde.
Azores and Madeira local elections
The Social Democratic Party (PSD) retained its absolute majority on Oct. 11 in elections to local assemblies in the Azores and Madeira, winning 28 out of 51 seats in the Azores and 39 out of 55 in Madeira.
Resignation of Chief of Staff
The Chief of Staff of the armed forces, Gen. Fernando Lureiro dos Santos, resigned in September.
EUROPE
ITALY
Approval of budgetary measures by confidence votes
The government won four votes of confidence in the Chamber of Deputies on Oct. 9, and in the Senate on Oct. 22, attached to decrees reforming the health service, pensions, the civil service and local government (all of which had been announced among emergency budgetary measures in July — see p. 39025).
The Senate votes of confidence were boycotted by the opposition on the grounds that the legislative role of parliament was being restricted.
On Oct. 23 in the Chamber of Deputies the government won another confidence vote on sections of the 1993 budget freezing public-sector pay and establishing new taxes.
Thousands of people had demonstrated against the budget proposals throughout Italy on Oct. 2.
At the same time a regional general strike took place in Rome and the Lazio region, involving 3,500,000 public employees and resulting in clashes between militant demonstrators, trade union officials and police during which 60 people were injured and about 100 arrested.
The union confederations, notably the communist CGIL, staged a four-hour nationwide general strike on Oct. 13 in protest at welfare cuts, during which violence erupted in Milan against union leaders.
The public-sector and service industries had been unable to give the required 10 days' notice for participation, but 10,000,000 people employed in other sectors took part.
The government on Oct. 15 made limited concessions to the unions over welfare cuts, lifting the ceiling on pension rises slightly to a total of 3.5 per cent over the next two years, and altering the annual income ceiling for eligibility for health concessions.
Work at Italy's ports was halted on Oct. 16 at the beginning of a four-day strike by transport unions in protest at the imminent end, as required under European Community (EC) competition law, of their monopoly on dock labour.
In mid-October the dormant Armed Communist Nuclei (NCC) re-emerged, planting bombs in premises belonging to the industrialists' league and the employers' organization Confindustria in protest at "collaboration" between the government, the trade unions and the employers.
Request for EC loan
Italy on Oct. 2 requested a standby loan from the EC for balance-of-payments support and to assist its swift return to the exchange rate mechanism [see p. 39080 for September suspension of lira's participation as a result of European currency crisis].
Prime Minister Giuliano Amato said that the loan, estimated later in the month at ECU8,000 million (about US$10,600 million), was principally to secure visible EC support for Italy's financial troubles, and would not be used until the EC had expressed a "positive opinion" on Italy's budget and economic policies.
New DC officers
Mino Martinazzoli, 61, a former Justice and Defence Minister from the northern town of Brescia, was elected on Oct. 12 as the new secretary of the Christian Democrat (DC) party in succession to Arnaldo Forlani, who had remained in office in a caretaker capacity since his resignation in June.
On Oct. 27 Rosa Russo Jervolino, the Education Minister, was elected as the DC's first woman president, replacing Ciriaco De Mita who had resigned to head the new constitutional reform commission.
Formation of Democratic Alliance
At a rally of about 12,000 people in Rome on Oct. 10 DC deputy Mario Segni launched the Democratic Alliance to provide a broadly based "honest Italy" electoral alternative to the existing parties, and to remove corrupt and discredited politicians from power.
Describing the DC as "a rotten apple with a healthy core" , he proposed chiefly to build on the existing cross-party support for his proposals to reform electoral law by referendum.
Rise in Lombardy League support in Mantua elections
The Lombardy League, the core party of the Northern League grouping, won 34 per cent of the vote in local elections in the northern town of Mantua on Sept. 27, while the new Alpine League won 6.7 per cent.
The joint left programme gained the parties presenting it — the Socialist Unity Party (still commonly known as the PSI), the Social Democrats (PSDI) and the communists (PDS)— an aggregate of only 25 per cent and the government coalition parties (DC, PSI, PSDI and Liberals — PLI) an aggregate of only 23 per cent.
The League, which had already campaigned for nationwide non-payment of taxes, on Oct. 9 caused an further uproar by calling on small savers not to buy treasury bonds on the grounds that their money would be at risk.
In mid-October 50,000 supporters of the neo-fascist Italian Social Movement (MSI) marched through Rome in protest at economic mismanagement, corruption and the destruction of national unity by elements such as the Lombardy League.
Milan corruption scandal
A warrant was issued on Oct. 18 for the arrest of PSI national administrative secretary Vincenzo Balzamo.
The previous week Alberto Mario Zamorani, deputy director of Italstat, the government institute involved in the allocation of public spending contracts, had been detained on corruption charges in connection with the allocation of railway contracts in Milan.
Others arrested for corruption in other parts of Italy included the DC president of the Abruzzi regional government and eight of its members on Sept. 29, over fraudulent use of EC funds; the PDS former president of the Tuscany regional government, Marco Marcucci, on Oct. 26; and the leader of the PSDI group in the Senate, Roberto Cenci.
The PSDI mayor of Genoa resigned on Oct. 23.
Opening of P-2 trial
Licio Gelli, the former grand master of the P-2 Masonic lodge, and 15 others went on trial on Oct. 12 following 11 years of investigation by magistrates.
The charges included conspiracy, espionage, revealing state secrets and threatening the Constitution.
Revelations in 1981 about the existence of the secret lodge brought down the government of Arnaldo Forlani [see pp. 31045-47].
EUROPE
GREECE
Agreement with former King
The long legal wrangle over the settlement of former King Constantine's property rights and tax dues ended on Oct. 7 when parliament ratified an agreement between the government and the deposed monarch.
Under the controversial agreement, Constantine was allowed to keep royal residences at Tatoi, near Athens and Mon Repos on the island of Corfu as well as a forest estate in Polydendri in central Greece.
In return he agreed to pay Dr200 million (approximately US$1,100,000), one-third of his property tax dues.
He also agreed to grant to the state land at Tatoi as payment for the remainder of his debt.
The agreement, drawn up in June by Ioannis Paleokrassas, the then Finance and Industry Minister, was strongly criticized by the left-wing opposition which demanded full monetary payment of Constantine's tax dues.
Concern was also expressed in the press that the state had surrendered precious parts of the country's history, the Tatoi and Mon Repos estates both being rich in archaeological treasures.
Purchase of US aircraft
The Defence Ministry announced on Oct. 3 the purchase of 40 F-16 fighter aircraft from the USA.
The price, still subject to negotiation, was likely to be about Dr160,000 million (approximately US$900,000,000).
The purchase marked the end of an eight-year air force procurement programme which cost US$2,500 million.
Koskotas trial
The long-awaited trial of George Koskotas, the former Chairman of the Bank of Crete first charged in 1988 with forgery and embezzlement involving US$230 million [see pp. 37514; 38357], began on Oct. 19.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Fighting between Iraqi and Turkish Kurds
Iraqi Kurdish peshmerga fighters, and guerrillas of the (Turkish) Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK), engaged in fighting in northern Iraq throughout most of October as the peshmerga attempted to force the PKK out of Iraq.
In the second half of the month Turkish troops entered Iraq in a large-scale air and ground operation concentrated on two fronts, with the objective of trapping the PKK in a pincer between hostile Iraqi and Turkish forces.
The (Iraqi) Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and Kurdistan Democratic Party on Oct. 4 issued an ultimatum to the PKK to leave Iraq by Oct. 5, their aim being to force the PKK to leave rather than to kill or crush them.
The PKK was subsequently routed from its strongholds north of Zakho and Dahuk, and operations were concentrated on the Hakurk valley near the Iran-Iraq-Turkey border.
In retaliation the PKK enforced a blockade of the Iraqi border, preventing hundreds of lorries a day from crossing with crucial supplies.
The deadline for the departure of the PKK from Iraq was extended several times.
Meanwhile in Turkey itself Turkish troops on Oct. 3-4 devastated the small Kurdish towns of Kulp (Diyarbakir province) and Curkurca, causing half of the latter's population of 8,000 to flee [see p. 39114], and from Oct. 5 onwards heavily bombarded PKK strongholds in the Mount Ararat region.
The PKK had on Oct. 1 shot dead about 55 people (most of the population) in the small village of Cevizdali near Bitlis when confronted by the army.
On Oct. 20 the PKK killed 19 bus passengers and wounded six near Solhan, and on Oct. 25 a PKK mine derailed a train in south-eastern Turkey, killing two and injuring 47, most of them soldiers.
Explosions occurred at seven Istanbul banks on Oct. 24.
When the PKK failed to evacuate its bases by the end of the month Turkey, which had on Oct. 16 begun a "limited" air and ground operation in Iraq, swiftly expanded its operations.
On Oct. 31-Nov. 1 some 20,000 troops and tanks advanced down the international highway through the Iraqi town of Zakho and took control of about 160 sq km of Iraqi territory on two main fronts, in the Haftanin region north-east of Zakho and another in the Hakurk valley near the border.
The Chief of Staff of the Turkish armed forces Gen. Dogan Gures did not rule out the establishment of a Turkish security zone in the Iraqi mountains.
1993 draft budget
According to a draft budget for 1993 submitted to parliament on Oct. 17, government spending would total TL412,710 billion, borrowing would be TL140,366 billion, repayments of domestic and foreign debt would amount to TL67,056 billion, and the projected deficit would be TL73,310 billion (US$1.00=TL7,919.02 as at Oct. 26, 1992).
GNP was expected to grow by 5 per cent.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Leopold Gratz,(Socialist) Foreign Minister in 1984-86, was fined 450,000 schillings (approximately US$40,000) after being convicted on Oct. 5 of bearing false witness in connection with the Lucona affair [for details see pp. 38110; 38738]; he had denied covering up evidence on the involvement of his friend Udo Proksch in the scandal, and announced that he would appeal.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Seizure of oil assets
The UN Security Council on Oct. 2 voted by 14 votes to nil with one abstention (China) to adopt Resolution 778 impounding oil-related Iraqi assets worth an estimated US$500-800,000,000, frozen since August 1990 [see p. 37639], to pay for humanitarian relief, compensate victims of the Gulf war and finance the destruction of Iraqi weapons.
The resolution also ordered "all States in which there are funds of the Government of Iraq" to transfer proceeds to a UN escrow fund, and undertook to return to Iraq all monies so raised if it agreed to sell oil under UN supervision [see pp. 38942; 38788-89; 38838; 39026; 39115].
Described by the US permanent representative at the UN Edward Perkins as "a reasonable and proportionate response to problems Iraq itself has created" , the resolution was immediately denounced by the Iraqi government as illegal and unjust.
On Oct. 3 the Information and Culture Minister Hamid Yusuf Hammadi condemned the resolution as "a modified form of bank robbery, Texas style" .
However, reports of a more conciliatory stance appeared to be a confirmed after the Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz was quoted in the official daily al Thawrah on Oct. 5 as saying that Iraq had not "objected to the idea of selling oil to meet the necessary humanitarian and civilian needs and has not objected to the Security Council's resolution to deduct a high percentage" of "the so-called reparations fund and UN costs" .
The view that the Iraqi government was willing to resume negotiations on UN-supervised oil sales (reported in September — see p. 39115) was supported by China's permanent representative at the UN Li Daoyu who, referring to the resolution, was quoted on Oct. 3 as saying that such "extraordinary measures" were unnecessary in the light of Iraq's readiness to re-open negotiations.
In late October US President George Bush ordered some US banks to release Iraqi assets for transfer to a UN fund.
On Oct. 11 Iraq's Oil Minister, Usamah Abd al-Razzaq Hummadi al-Hithi, had warned foreign banks that they faced legal action by Iraq "if they attempt to seize or transfer the ownership of funds" .
Renewal of humanitarian memorandum
The government on Oct. 22 signed a memorandum of understanding allowing the UN to resume international relief aid and to station foreign aid workers and UN guards on Iraqi territory.
The deal, finalized in Baghdad on Oct. 17 by senior Iraqi officials and the Executive Director of the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF), James Grant, was formally endorsed in New York by the UN Under Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Jan Eliasson and Iraq's new representative to the UN, Nizar Hamdoun.
Under the agreement, necessitated by the expiry in June of an earlier memorandum [see pp. 39069; 39115], the government approved the allocation of US$200,000,000 in relief aid, including US$90,000,000 for Kurds in the north.
The pact also provided for 300 UN guards, all but a handful of whom were to be stationed in northern Iraq, and an unspecified number of aid workers.
The original memorandum of understanding worked out after the Gulf war [see p. 38598]had provided for 500 guards in the north and 600 relief workers.
US opposition to the terms of the agreement, which imposed restrictions on the free movement of UN personnel in Iraq and obliged the use of Iraqi rather UN facilities, was reportedly neutralized after the UK and France indicated that they would not lend their support.
UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali justified his endorsement of the new memorandum in a letter to the UN Security Council on Oct. 21, saying that while "the agreement does not fully meet our aspirations" , the urgent need for humanitarian assistance made it necessary "to implement it without any further delay" .
Ballistic missile inspections
A 50-member team, the 45th and largest mission yet of UN weapons inspectors, conducted a search of more than 50 sites on Oct. 16-30 but failed to locate any of Iraq's estimated 100 Scud missiles.
Claiming that assurances of safe conduct for UN inspectors had been ignored, the team's leader Nikita Smidovich alleged in Manama, Bahrain, on Oct. 30 that members had been subjected to harassment and death threats.
On Oct. 19 the jopint UN-IAEA Special Commission on Iraqi disarmament had maintained in a report to the UN Security Council that it remained constrained from going beyond preparatory work on weapons inspection and verification until Iraq agreed to comply with such monitoring "on the Council's, not Iraq's terms" .
The head of the Special Commission, Rolf Ekeus, hinted at a press conference in New York on Oct. 27 that the Security Council would consider lifting the oil embargo on Iraq in exchange for greater Iraqi co-operation with UN weapons inspectors.
In early October the UN had rejected a formal request by Iraq to postpone the forthcoming inspection "to avoid the possibility of the US administration exploiting the proposed visit for their own ends" .
The request followed a fierce denunciation by President Saddam Hussein who, on Oct. 5, had compared UN weapons inspectors to "stray dogs" intent on provoking Iraq to submit to "America and it wicked allies" .
Ekeus confirmed on Oct. 22 in London that US-made nuclear weapons equipment had been found in Iraq.
On Oct. 19 President Bush had denied any US involvement in Iraqi weapons production — a claim immediately rebutted by David Kay, a former UN weapons inspector [see p. 38451].
A US munitions expert, Clinton Adam Hall who was arrested on Oct. 9 by Iraqi security forces 1 km inside Kuwait, was released on Oct. 11.
Five other Western nationals had been arrested for alleged border offences in August and September [see pp. 39069; 39116].
Opposition agreement on democratic federalism
More than 170 delegates representing almost all opposition groups met under the auspices of the Iraqi National Congress (INC) in Salahuddin, northern Iraq, on Oct. 27-31 to adopt a strategy aimed at overthrowing the Saddam Hussein regime.
A communiqué issued after the meeting said that delegates had declared Iraq to be a "democratic federal country" , and had agreed on a federal structure based on wilayats or provinces, reportedly as a gesture to Islamic parties which had insisted on Arab-Islamic nomenclature.
Implementing decisions taken at an earlier gathering [see p. 39115], delegates also approved a "shadow government" by electing a three-member presidential council (one Kurd, one Shia and one Sunni), with rotating primacy, which then chose a 25-member executive committee (one Assyrian, one Turkoman, five Kurds, the remaining 18 seats divided between Shias, Sunnis and Arab tribes).
Subsequent reports indicated that delegates from the main Shia organization, the (Tehran-based) Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SAIRI), had objected to the composition of the presidential council by querying its one-third Shia representation in a country where Shias formed a majority.
Execution of alleged coup plotters
More than 30 military officers suspected of plotting a coup, including a Shia general, were reported to have been executed in September, according to unconfirmed reports in the Washington Post of Oct. 4.
Human rights groups had recently alleged the arrest of several senior military officers on charges of negligence [see p. 39115].
Kurdish approval of federated state
In a marked departure from their pursuit of regional autonomy, members of the Kurdish National Council on Oct. 4 approved a motion calling for the creation of a federated state within a democratic pluralistic Iraq.
The move, criticized by non-Kurdish opposition groups, was also condemned by Turkey, which reportedly feared that the evolution of a de facto Kurdish state in northern Iraq would encourage anti-Turkish activities by Turkish Kurds belonging to the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK).
On Oct. 27 a spokesman for the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) claimed that the PKK had agreed to cease attacks on Turkey from bases inside Iraqi Kurdistan.
The statement followed weeks of fierce fighting between Iraqi and Turkish Kurds [see also p. 39163]precipitated by the launch in early October of a major offensive by Iraqi Kurds to force the PKK to abandon its bases inside Iraq.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
Elections to National Assembly
Elections to the reconstituted 50-seat National Assembly took place on Oct. 5, the government having affirmed in a statement on Sept. 6 that it would remain strictly impartial during the electoral process.
The Assembly had been suspended in July 1986 by order of the Amir, Shaikh Jabir al-Ahmad al-Jabir as-Sabah, after it repeatedly criticized the government [see p. 34767].
Elections were ordered by the Amir in June 1991 in a decree derided by the opposition as "a facade of democracy" [see p. 38309].
By the close of registration on Sept. 9, a total of 278 candidates, mainly independents, had filed nominations in the 25 constituencies.
Kuwaiti electoral law restricted the franchise to men aged 21 or over whose families had been in the Emirate since before 1921, limiting the number of voters to 81,400 of the country's 606,000 nationals.
On polling day, the Information Ministry estimated turnout at 85 per cent.
Two small demonstrations were reported, by groups of women protesting at being denied the vote.
Results announced on Oct. 6 showed that 35 seats had been taken by outspoken critics of the government, described by the Washington Post as "drawn from a diverse group of Islamists, secular liberals and traditional politicians" , 15 of whom were said to be from districts which traditionally had supported the ruling family.
Resignation of government — New Cabinet
On Oct. 7 the Amir accepted the resignation of the Prime Minister, Crown Prince Shaikh Saad al-Abdullah as-Salim as-Sabah, and his government, and invited the new Assembly to convene on Oct. 20.
The Amir reappointed the Crown Prince as Prime Minister on Oct. 12, and on Oct. 17 a new 15-member government was announced which included six members of the Assembly.
Several ministries were merged.
Members of the as-Sabah family retained the Foreign Affairs, Interior, Defence and Information portfolios.
The Oil, Labour and Social Affairs, Islamic Affairs, Commerce and Industry, Justice, and Education ministries went to deputies who ran broadly anti-government campaigns during the elections.
Debate in the early days of the new Assembly was reported as more lively than previously, and opposition members were said to be testing the government's receptiveness to reform: 32 members called for the formation of a committee to investigate Kuwait's failure to anticipate or respond to the Iraqi invasion of August 1990 [see pp. 37631-41]; several members were said to have demanded an investigation of alleged mishandling of Kuwait's overseas investments; and a draft law was introduced that would widen the franchise, including extending the vote to women.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
BAHRAIN
Plans for national assembly
Reports on Oct. 6, quoting diplomatic sources, said that the government would announce plans in late November or early December to establish a 30-member national assembly.
Bahrain's first constituent assembly was elected in 1973 but dissolved two years later [see pp. 26340; 27364].
The new assembly would be appointed, not elected, the reports said.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
QATAR
Tension over Saudi border incident
A clash with Saudi border guards at al-Khofous 130 km south-east of Doha on Sept. 30 left one Qatari warrant officer and an Egyptian national serving in the Emirate's armed forces dead, and caused the government to announce on Oct. 1 that it was revoking a 1965 defence agreement with Saudi Arabia.
A Saudi statement attributed the incident to fighting between rival Bedouin in Saudi territory.
By Oct. 23 tensions were reported to have eased, following Kuwait's mediation and the two sides' apparent agreement on border demarcation by an international company, and the appointment of a joint technical committee.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SAUDI ARABIA
Israeli complaint over stationing of F-15s
Israel was reported on Oct. 6 to have demanded that the USA should limit Saudi Arabia's use of US-supplied F-15 jets [see p. 39116].
Voice of Israel radio said that Israel wanted US Defence Secretary Richard Cheney to submit a written commitment to Congress that the aircraft would not be placed at air bases close to Israel and would not, under any circumstances, attack Israel.
It was reported subsequently that Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Rabin had complained privately to the USA when it was learned that Saudi F-15 planes had been moved to Tabuk, 200 km from Eilat in southern Israel.
Executions of drug offenders
Saudi Arabia had executed more than 38 people convicted of drug smuggling in the past five years, a Saudi security official was quoted by Reuters as saying on Oct. 6.
The executions were carried out under Sharia (Islamic religious) law, the official said.
Confirmation of arms deal with UK
The Saudi government confirmed on Oct. 28 in an official statement issued in Riyadh its commitment to the Yamaha agreement on the supply of arms from the UK (the second phase of which had been signed in 1988 — see p. 36312), despite press speculation to the contrary.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Further efforts to resolve dispute with Iran
Efforts to find a peaceful solution to the dispute with Iran over possession of the Gulf islands of Abu Musa, Tunb al-Kubra and Tunb al-Sughra continued throughout — October, following the breakdown of direct negotiations in Abu Dhabi on Sept. 28 [see p. 39116].
Le Monde reported on Oct. 1 that the dispute was likely to be placed before the UN Security Council during October, while France held the presidency at the Security Council.
Quoting diplomatic sources at the UN, the newspaper said that Gulf Arab governments which backed the UAE's case increasingly perceived Iran as a threat to their security and as an argument in favour of a continued US military presence.
Iran was reported in mid-October to have indicated that it was prepared to continue negotiations only over Abu Musa, governed under an informal joint mandate since 1971.
On Oct. 18 the UAE Head of State, Shaikh Zaid bin Sultan al-Nahayan, and the Arab League Secretary-General, Ahmed Esmat Abdel Meguid, jointly called for a peaceful settlement.
Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev was reported on Oct. 18 to have sent a message to the UAE government undertaking that Russia would defend the UAE in the event of aggression.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
YEMEN
Pre-election tension
President Ali Abdullah Saleh was reported on Oct. 9 to have reaffirmed his longstanding commitment to hold elections by the end of November, despite tensions in the government and a succession of murders and bombings [see p. 38936].
Demonstrations against government policy were reported in Aden on Oct. 17, further heightening tension.
By the end of October, no date had been set for the election.
Senior officials including the Prime Minister, Haider Abu Bakr al-Attas, were said to have threatened to resign in protest at the President's alleged unwillingness to deal with violence, including failing to authorize the arrest of suspected killers of more than 30 Yemen Socialist Party members.
Border negotiations
Talks with Saudi Arabia on the border dispute, initiated in Geneva in July [see pp. 38886; 39030], resumed in Riyadh on Sept. 29, but were suspended a week later, apparently until after the Yemeni elections.
On Oct. 1 a border demarcation agreement was signed with Oman, ending a long-running dispute.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
New Lebanese Cabinet
Internal political developments
By-elections in Maronite areas
By-elections for the five remaining seats in the 128-member National Assembly were held on Oct. 11 [see pp. 39071; 39117; for details of general election held in late August and early September].
The by-elections were held in the mainly Maronite Christian area of Kesrouan where a Christian boycott of the August-September elections had been complete.
In the Oct. 11 by-elections, 24 candidates (all Maronite Christian) contested the five seats.
Among those elected was Faris Buwayz, who had resigned as Minister of Foreign and Expatriate Affairs in August in protest at the elections.
According to a report on Radio Lebanon on Oct. 12 turnout was less than 21 per cent.
Appointment of Berri as Speaker — Appointment of Hariri as Prime Minister — New government
Nabi Berri, leader of the (Shia) Amal movement, was elected as Speaker of the National Assembly on Oct. 20, receiving the endorsement of 105 of the 128 Assembly members.
By convention, the post of Speaker was reserved for a Shia Moslem.
Berri, who had held ministerial posts in a number of Cabinets during the 1980s and 1990s, replaced Hussein al-Husseini who had resigned in August after losing his seat in the general election [see p. 39071].
In his acceptance speech to the Assembly on Oct. 20 Berri appealed for national reconciliation.
On Oct. 22 President Elias Hrawi invited Rafiq al-Hariri to form a new government; this was formally appointed on Oct. 31, replacing that of Rashid al-Solh, which had been appointed in May 1992 [see pp. 38932-33].
Although born in Sidon, Lebanon, Hariri was a Saudi Arabian citizen.
A Sunni Moslem, he was reportedly one of the world's richest men and a close confidant of King Fahd of Saudi Arabia.
He was also believed to have a good relationship with Syrian leaders, especially Vice-President Abdel Halim Khaddam.
However, his appointment was reportedly opposed by the Shia Hezbollah movement which had close links with Iran.
Many of the new members of the Cabinet were so-called "technocrats" brought in by Hariri to support his plans for economic reconstruction.
However, the Cabinet also included (at minister of state level) representatives of various former militias, with the exception of Hezbollah and the —(Phalangist) Lebanese Forces.
The announcement of Hariri's appointment prompted an immediate 13 per cent rise in the value of the Lebanese pound, to US$1.00=L£1,900.
Despite a general sense of optimism surrounding Hariri's appointment, a general strike called by the General Confederation of Lebanese Workers in protest at the deteriorating economic situation had been widely observed on Oct. 14.
Meeting between Hrawi and Assad
President Hrawi held talks with Syrian President Hafez al-Assad in Damascus on Oct. 14 [see p. 39117 for September meeting also in Syria].
A statement from the Lebanese presidential office said that the discussions had dealt with "implementing all the articles of the [1989]Taif Accord" , Under the terms of which the withdrawal of Syrian forces from Lebanon was to have begun in late September 1992.
Serious fighting in southern Lebanon
There was a serious escalation in late October in the war in southern Lebanon between Hezbollah and Israel and their proxy militia, the South Lebanon Army (SLA)[see p. 39118 for details of fighting in September].
Hezbollah on Oct. 25 attacked an Israeli personnel carrier in Israel's self-declared "security zone" , killing five Israeli soldiers and seriously wounding five others.
Israel and the SLA responded on Oct. 26 with heavy shelling of Hezbollah and Palestinian-controlled areas in southern Lebanon, wounding at least five civilians.
Israeli helicopter gunships also launched attacks on "terrorist bases" in southern Lebanon.
Hezbollah retaliated on Oct. 27 by firing up to 30 Katyusha rockets into Israel, killing an Israeli civilian in the northern Israeli town of Kiryat Shemona and two Lebanese civilians in the south of the "security zone" .
At the same time Israeli military aircraft attacked Hezbollah positions in the Bekaa Valley, killing three civilians.
At the outset of the fighting, which halted on Oct. 28, both Israel and Lebanon mobilized troops along their borders.
Some reports claimed that regular Lebanese forces had fired on Israeli troops positioned within the "security zone" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
Progress of trial of Islamist deputies
The controversial trial of Laith Shbeilat and Yaqoub Qarrash, two independent Islamist members of the House of Representatives charged with plotting to overthrow the government, continued during October [see p. 39118 for start of trial in September].
On Oct. 24 a group of deputies from the House of Representatives, trade union leaders and human rights activists petitioned King Hussein to release Shbeilat and Qarrash, both of whom had started a hunger strike in mid-October.
The group claimed the trial was directly related to corruption cases raised in the House; before his arrest, Shbeilat had been head of a House committee on corruption.
Visit by King Hussein to Egypt
King Hussein paid his first visit to Egypt in more than two years on Oct. 14.
Officially, the visit was to pay respects to President Hosni Mubarak in the aftermath of the Cairo earthquake [see p. 39167].
However, its broader significance was in marking a major step in Jordan's attempt to return to the Arab mainstream in the aftermath of the Gulf war.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
Press speculation over Rifaat Assad
There was a great deal of speculation in the Western press during October concerning the position of President Hafez al-Assad's brother, Col. Rifaat al-Assad.
Rifaat, the nominal Vice-President (Security), was effectively exiled by his brother in 1984 after making a bid for power.
He returned to Syria for the first time in July 1992 to attend the funeral of his mother.
According to a report in the Sunday Times of Oct. 11 he subsequently re-emerged in charge of the country's intelligence services.
However, this report was contradicted by the Independent of Oct. 22 which, citing a Syrian source with "impeccable credentials" , claimed that Rifaat had "not been asked to handle any job" and that the powerful intelligence hierarchy remained intact.
The Middle East Economic Digest of Oct. 23 was also sceptical of the Sunday Times report, claiming that it ran counter to the "general view in Damascus that it is the president's son Basel al-Assad> who is now favoured for the succession" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
US approval of loan guarantees
On Oct. 5 both chambers of the US Congress approved a foreign-aid appropriation for fiscal 1993 which included the hitherto controversial US$10,000 million loan guarantee package covering a five-year period in support of Israel's settling of immigrants.
In September 1991 Congress had agreed to Bush's demand to delay the guarantee package in an attempt to pressurize Israel into halting settlement construction in the occupied territories, at least for the duration of the Middle East peace conference [see p. 38452].
The Likud government had refused to agree to a freeze on settlement construction and attempts to negotiate a compromise agreement failed [see p. 38787].
The new Labour government elected in June 1992 moved quickly to repair Israel's relations with the USA, announcing that it would halt large-scale government investment in settlements [see p. 38946].
Although the legislation approved by Congress made no explicit linkage between the guarantees and settlements, it stated that the money had to be used within Israel's pre-1967 borders.
However, the Middle East International of Oct. 9 claimed that the USA would "overlook" the completion of over 10,000 new housing units in the West Bank and all new construction in occupied sections of Jerusalem as well as the establishment of "security settlements" on the Golan Heights and Israel's frontiers.
US military aid package
The Oct. 5 foreign-aid appropriation included Israel's annual US$3,000 million economic and military aid package.
Of the whole package, US$1,800 million was military aid; Israel was permitted to spend almost US$500 million on procurement from its own military industries.
In early October acting US Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger wrote to Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Rabin promising him that the USA would maintain present levels of military aid to Israel.
The Financial Times of Oct. 5 reported that the letter had been interpreted by the Israeli government as proof that the USA intended to bolster Israel's regional qualitative military advantage.
In September the USA had announced details of an additional US$700 million package of military assistance to Israel, including the supply of Apache and Blackhawk helicopters and the "prepositioning" of some US$300 million worth of military equipment in Israel for use by either Israeli or US troops.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
PLO Central Council meeting
The Central Council of the PLO, convened in Tunis on Oct. 15-17, formally approved continuing Palestinian participation at the Middle East peace talks, but analysts believed that the margin of victory for the mainstream "pro-negotiation" factions was narrow, opposition coming principally from the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP).
In September these two groups had formed an anti-negotiation alliance alongside Hamas and seven other smaller non-PLO groups.
Hunger strike by Palestinian prisoners — Resurgence of intifada
The hunger strike launched by Palestinian political prisoners on Sept. 27 to protest at conditions in Israeli prisons continued until mid-October [see p. 39117 for start of hunger strike].
The reaction to the hunger strike by Palestinians in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, with strikes, sit-ins and solidarity demonstrations almost daily, gave fresh impetus to the flagging intifada.
The Israel government responded by imposing strict curfews on restless areas.
Israeli troops frequently responded to outbreaks of unrest with the use of live ammunition; 15 Palestinians were killed during October.
Fierce clashes erupted between Israeli troops and Palestinian youths on the outskirts of Rafah camp in the Gaza Strip on Oct. 7, with at least 90 Palestinians injured, many as a result of bullet wounds.
A six-day, 24-hour curfew was imposed on the Strip in the aftermath of this violence.
The majority of the hunger strikers suspended their action on Oct. 12 after Moshe Shahal, the Israeli Minister of Police and Communications, announced the establishment of a special investigative committee to look into their demands.
However, the issue returned to prominence following the death of a hunger striker on Oct. 14.
The prisoner had broken his fast on Oct. 12 and there was no evidence that he had died as a result of the strike.
However, his death triggered fresh demonstrations.
On Oct. 15, prison officials agreed to meet some of the prisoners' demands, including the improvement of conditions in isolation cells.
Inter-Palestinian fighting in Lebanon
A long-simmering inter-Palestinian feud between supporters of Yassir Arafat's mainstream PLO al-Fatah faction and Sabri Khalil al-Banna (Abu Nidal) 's radical break-away Fatah Revolutionary Council (FRC) intensified in the Lebanese towns of Sidon and Tyre in October [see p. 39029 for start of recent round of killings in June 1992].
Commentators speculated that the escalating violence between the two factions reflected differing attitudes towards the ongoing Middle East peace conference; al-Fatah supported Palestinian involvement in the process, while the FRC opposed it.
On Oct. 12 an FRC official was assassinated by unidentified gunmen in Sidon.
Later that day a bomb exploded outside the home of an al-Fatah official in Sidon's Ain Helwey camp, killing one civilian and wounding nine others.
An al-Fatah official was shot dead in the Bass refugee camp near Tyre on Oct. 16.
The following day two FRC military officers were assassinated in Sidon.
On Oct. 20 masked gunmen burst into a crowded cafe in Sidon and shot dead three al-Fatah officials.
On Oct. 23 regular Lebanese army units were deployed in Sidon and around Ain Helwey in what Radio Lebanon described as a "snap security plan to halt the series of bloody conflicts among rival Palestinian factions" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Opening of seventh round of bilateral negotiations
The seventh round of bilateral negotiations in the ongoing Middle East peace process opened in Washington on Oct. 21 [see pp. 39070; 39119 for sixth round held in Washington in August-September].
The talks, scheduled to continue until Nov. 19, went into recess on Oct. 29 pending the completion of the US presidential election.
Progress was reported on the Israeli-Jordanian strand of negotiations, and on Oct. 28 the two sides announced that they had almost finalized a full agenda.
The agenda stated that Israel and Jordan aimed to work towards a peace treaty (technically, both countries remained at war), and included items on water and land claims, the question of Palestinian refugees in Jordan, and arms control.
Diplomacy preceding the seventh round
The weeks leading up to the seventh round were busy with the launch of various diplomatic initiatives.
The French Foreign Minister, Roland Dumas, visited Syria, Egypt and Israel in early October [see p. 39119 for activities of Dumas in September], according to some press reports attempting to arrange a face-to-face meeting between Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Rabin and Syrian President Hafez al-Assad.
During the sixth round of talks in August and September the Israel-Syria strand of the negotiations appeared to have supplanted the Palestinian question as the principal issue [see p. 39119], and in an interview with Le Monde on Oct. 20 Rabin described negotiations with Syria as "promising" .
One effect of this increased optimism over was a noticeable cooling of relations between Syria and the PLO, largely as a result of Palestinian fears that Syria might be tempted to negotiate a separate peace deal with Israel.
A planned trip by PLO chair Yassir Arafat to Syria in mid-October was cancelled at the last moment.
Multilateral talks on regional economic co-operation
Shimon Peres, the Israeli Foreign Minister, announced on Oct. 8 that Israel had decided to abandon its boycott of multilateral talks on refugees and regional economic co-operation, begun by the previous government in May 1992 in protest at Palestinian plans to appoint exiles as representatives in their delegations to the two sessions [see p. 38932].
The Israeli reversal followed a meeting in Tel Aviv between Peres and Egyptian Foreign Minister Amr Mohammed Moussa.
Multilateral negotiations on regional economic co-operation were held in Paris on Oct. 29-30.
Some 40 countries or international banks were represented at the meeting, which was attended by an Israeli delegation and a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation led by Zein Mayassi, a "diaspora Palestinian" , but boycotted by Syria and Lebanon, both of which had also boycotted the May round of multilaterals.
Other multilateral talks were scheduled to take place in November.
Electricity network agreement — Water-sharing talks
Delegations from Syria, Iraq and Turkey met in Damascus on Oct. 2-4 but failed to reach a regional agreement on sharing the waters of the Euphrates and Tigris.
According to the Middle East Times of Oct. 13, Syrian officials blamed Turkey for the failure of the talks.
The three sides arranged to meet again in Baghdad in mid-December.
Electricity and energy ministers from Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Syria and Turkey signed an agreement on the implementation of a regional electricty grid network at a meeting in Damascus on Oct. 10-11.
The project was to be partly financed by the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
Earthquake disaster
An earthquake lasting approximately 20 seconds struck Cairo and the heavily populated surrounding area at 3.15 p.m. local time on Oct. 12, killing over 500 people, destroying 163 buildings and damaging 2,682, and leaving several thousand families homeless.
President Mohammed Hosni Mubarak cut short an official five-day visit to China (where he had arrived on that day) to return to Egypt.
The tremor, centred some 30 km south-west of the capital, reportedly measured 5.9 on the Richter scale, the strongest on record in the Cairo area.
Reports on Oct. 12 and 13 gave widely differing accounts of casualties.
Cairo radio on Oct. 13 said that over 300 had died and that 3,000 had been injured.
Other initial reports gave figures ranging from 145 to 370 dead.
Reported casualty estimates rose day by day to settle by the end of October at 552 dead and 2,100 in hospital.
On Oct. 12 Saudi Arabia was reported to have pledged US$50,000,000 and medical assistance.
Kuwait ordered a donation of $20,000,000 and equipment.
Libya was reported to have announced emergency aid of $60,000,000, and the United Arab Emirates $40,000,000.
Specialist personnel arrived from France, Germany and Algeria.
The pyramids and sphynx were reportedly undamaged, but Al Ahram quoted the Culture Minister Farouk Hosni as saying that 60 of Egypt's treasured monuments had severe fissures and were in need of "urgent rescue" .
The disaster highlighted the poor state of much housing, particularly in slum areas, and the government came under public pressure to provide new accommodation quickly.
By Oct. 17 rioting had broken out as people protested at the authorities' slow response.
Mubarak appealed the same day for calm and promised that new accommodation would be provided for all homeless victims within six weeks.
In apparent competition with the authorities, Islamist associations were reported to have mounted effective local relief operations.
Attacks on tourists
A British woman was killed and two British men were wounded when Moslem militants attacked a tourist bus at Dayrut, 270 km south of Cairo on Oct. 21.
A man believed to be a Moslem militant stabbed three Russian tourists in a marketplace at Port Said on Oct. 25.
Three tourists were reported to have been wounded by gunfire in separate attacks on Nile cruise ships during October.
Islamic militants were said to have targeted tourism, Egypt's largest source of foreign revenues, estimated at $3,000 million annually.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
Reorganization of Committees
A radical reorganization of the General People's Committees (Secretariats), approximating in the Libyan system to ministries, was announced following a General People's Congress (GPC — parliament) meeting on Oct. 8.
Fourteen former Committees were merged into six, and two new Committees were created; four committees were unaffected.
The Middle East Economic Digest of Oct. 23 listed the committees as follows:
New or merged.
The General People's Committee of Unity; The General People's Committee of Defence; The General People's Committee of Industry (amalgamating the former Light Industries and Strategic Industries portfolios); The General People's Committee of Energy (merging the previous Petroleum and Electricity portfolios); The General People's Committee of Planning, Trade and Finance (merging the former Planning and Economy portfolio and the Treasury); The General People's Committee of Education and Scientific Research (grouping the former portfolios of Public Education, Vocational Training and Formation, Higher Education, and Scientific Research); The General People's Committee of Health and Social Security (amalgamating the two former offices); The General People's Committee of Services, Tourism and Communications (covering the former two Committees, Utilities and Public Works, and Communications and Transport).
Unchanged.
The General People's Committee of the People's Bureau for External Liaison and International Co-operation (broadly equivalent to a foreign ministry); The General People's Committee of Justice and Public Security; The General People's Committee of Information and Culture: and the General People's Committee of Marine Wealth.
On Oct. 31, it was reported that Umar Mustafa al-Muntasir, formerly Secretary for Planning and Economy, had replaced Ibrahim Mohammad Bashari as Secretary for Foreign Liaison.
Lockerbie affair
Al-Ahram reported on Oct. 2 that a "preliminary solution" had been reached over Libya's failure to comply with UN demands for the extradition of two Lockerbie bombing suspects [see pp. 38883; 39072].
France protested to Libya on Oct. 28 after a French examining magistrate investigating the bombing of a UTA airliner in Sept. 1989 was turned back on arrival in Tripoli.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
Rejection of appeals — Arrests
It was reported on Oct. 1 that appeals by 265 Islamic leaders and activists sentenced to lengthy prison terms by two military courts in Tunis during July and August [see pp. 39071-72]had been rejected.
Those sentenced belonged to the outlawed Nahda movement, 46 of them receiving life sentences.
On Oct. 2 Radio France Internationale reported that a further 20 Nahda sympathisers had been arrested, and quantities of weapons and explosive seized, following the capture by police in September of Naceur Dhifallah, who had been sentenced in absentia during the mass trials.
On Oct. 20 the human rights organization Amnesty International called on Tunisia to order "a fair re-trial or release" of the 265.
It called on the Tunisian government to establish "a thorough, independent and impartial inquiry into pre-trial irregularities, including deaths in custody of several detainees" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Measures against terrorism
Amid worsening violence linked to Islamic fundamentalist groups [see pp. 39118-19], the government issued a decree on Oct. 1 against "subversion and terrorism" , creating three secret courts, lowering the age of responsibility from 18 to 16 years and introducing sanctions including long prison terms and execution, without right of appeal.
It offered to waive the provisions if suspects surrendered within two months and repented.
 "Intense gunfire" broke out for about an hour near the government palace in central Algiers soon after the decree was announced, Agence France-Presse reported.
Combined anti-terrorist units of troops, gendarmes and police officers were reported to be patrolling the main towns.
There were reports throughout October of shooting incidents between security forces and Islamic activists.
On Oct. 19 a police commissioner and his wife and son were shot dead.
On Oct. 23 it was reported that 40 people had been arrested in the previous 24 hours, and that some 250 arrests had been made in the previous two weeks, mostly of people said to be linked to the banned Islamic Salvation Front (FIS).
On Oct. 9 the US State Department advised dependants of US diplomats to leave Algeria, but other countries did not follow suit.
The shooting dead of a German businessman by police in Algiers on Oct. 1 was reported to have been accidental.
Arrest of airport bombing suspects — Banning of newspapers
Four alleged militants of the FIS were paraded on television on Oct. 1 and were heard to confess at length to the bomb attack at Algiers airport on Aug. 26 which killed 10 people [see pp. 39072; 39118].
Six newspapers were banned at the end of September under a presidential decree empowering the Interior Ministry to close for six months any publication judged to be against national interests [see p. 39072].
Bans on five of them were lifted on Oct. 7.
Government changes
Six junior appointments to the Cabinet announced on Oct. 25 [see p. 39029 for formation on July 19]included three women; Meriem Mihoub Zerdani, Saida Benhabyles and Malika Allab, respectively Minister Counsellor for Legal and Administrative Affairs, Minister Delegate to the Head of Government in charge of National Solidarity, and Secretary of State at the Ministry of Education.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
Local elections
The Rassemblement national des indépendants party won 18.05 per cent of votes and 21.69 per cent of the 22,282 seats in local elections held throughout the country on Oct. 16.
Independents without political affiliation but regarded as close to the government took 13.8 per cent of the vote and the loyalist Union constitutionelle 13.4 per cent.
The opposition Istiqlal and Union socialiste des forces populaires together took 20.58 per cent of votes and 19.44 per cent of seats, and accused the authorities of malpractices.
Three people were reported to have died in separate incidents of pre-election violence.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
WESTERN SAHARA
Threat of renewed insurgency
The Polisario Front alleged in a communiqué published in Algiers on Oct. 1 that Moroccan troops had killed a total of 15 people demonstrating at Assa, near Goulimine in southern Morocco on Sept. 24 and 30, wounding dozens more.
Inside Western Sahara, Polisario claimed on Oct. 9 that Moroccan security forces had arrested and tortured dozens of demonstrators two days earlier.
On Oct. 15 the Front claimed that Moroccan forces had arrested 300 Saharan demonstrators at El Aaiún, the capital, although Moroccan officials denied the claim.
On Oct. 4 the Polisario Front threatened to resume an armed struggle if Morocco failed to organize a referendum on self-determination [see pp. 38982; 39118].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
The policy of encouraging population increase, initiated by the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, had caused the national population to grow within 14 years from 36,000,000 to 60,000,000, with 45.5 per cent aged under 15, according to a report in the Economist on Oct. 3; Vice-President Massoud Roghani Zanjani had called for the policy to be reversed.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
US-Russian agreement on nuclear storage
An agreement involving the provision of up to US$15,000,000 in US technical assistance, to help Russia store safely nuclear material from scrapped bombs and rockets, was signed in Washington on Oct. 6.
The contract, which implemented provisions of a wider deal, had been formalized during a summit meeting in June between US President George Bush and Russian President Boris Yeltsin [see pp. 38985-86].
Announcing the agreement a US Defence Department spokesman said that the Pentagon had so far committed US$191,000,000 of the US$400,000,000 allocated by Congress to help Russia transport, dismantle and store nuclear and other dangerous weapons.
This included US$50,000,000 for nuclear material transport containers, US$25,000,000 for the destruction of chemical weapons, and US$35,000,000 for science centres in Moscow and Kiev (Ukraine).
On Sept. 30 the USA and Byelarus had initialled an agreement in Minsk providing for US assistance with the evacuation of nuclear missiles from Byelarus.
Other talks on the safe disposal of nuclear weapons were held in Kiev between US and Ukrainian defence officials on Oct. 12.
Extension of Russian nuclear test ban
An order extending Russia's moratorium on nuclear weapons testing until July 1, 1993, was signed by President Yeltsin on Oct. 19.
In a statement confirming the ban, first imposed in October 1991 [see p. 38553], Yeltsin said that it was a response to recent French and US cuts in testing [see pp. 38890; 39121].
He called on other nuclear powers, notably China and the United Kingdom, to follow suit, saying that it provided "a real opportunity for…a total ban for all time on nuclear tests" .
On Oct. 13 the Russian Defence Minister, Marshal Pavel Grachev, had been quoted as saying that Russia's moratorium "cannot remain in force forever" and that he would shortly propose the limited resumption of nuclear testing at Russia's test base on the Arctic island of Novaya Zemlya.
On Sept. 21 the UK reaffirmed its intention to continue nuclear testing at the US underground range in Nevada to ensure the "safety and credibility of the British deterrent" .
It was understood that the UK had been guaranteed three of the quota of 15 tests authorized by Congress over the next three years under new test-ban legislation passed in September [see p. 39121].
US ratification of START
The US Senate on Oct. 1 approved, by 93 votes to six, ratification of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) signed in Moscow in July 1991 [see 38320].
The treaty, negotiated over almost a decade, set a seven-year timetable for the reduction by 30 per cent of the nuclear arsenals of the USA and the nuclear republics of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)— Byelarus, Kazakhstan, Russia and the Ukraine.
US-Russian intelligence co-operation
 "Joint activity" between US and Russian intelligence services aimed at curbing the spread of nuclear weapons and terrorism were discussed in Moscow on Oct. 15-17 during an unprecedented visit by the Director of the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), Robert Gates.
Similar talks were held in Kiev on Oct. 19-20 between Gates and high-ranking officials from the Ukrainian security services.
Negotiations in Moscow between Russian and German intelligence services on bilateral co-operation against terrorism and drug-smuggling were reported on Oct. 19.
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
Defence Ministers' meeting
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Defence Ministers who met in the Scottish resort of Gleneagles on Oct. 20-21 approved fresh guidelines for "a reduced reliance on nuclear weapons" and agreed to draw up firm plans by December for international peacekeeping operations, first outlined in May and June [see pp. 38937; 38986].
Ministers also backed a German proposal aimed at closer military collaboration between NATO and former Warsaw Pact countries under the aegis of the North Atlantic Co-operation Council (NACC)[see pp. 38698-99; 38841; 38986].
Moves to respond to the civil war in the former Yugoslavia centred on the deployment of 5,000 troops from NATO countries in Bosnia-Hercegovina by early December, and the protection of relief convoys heading towards its embattled capital, Sarajevo.
Germany, prevented under its Constitution from sending soldiers outside NATO territory, indicated that it would contribute US$39,000,000 to provide logistical support.
Ministers were also reported to have discussed closer co-operation with France which, since 1966, had stood outside NATO's integrated military organization.
Speculation about a re-orientation in French policy had been fuelled by the French Defence Minister, Pierre Joxe, who suggested in Paris on Sept. 29 that France should "take part more fully than previously in politico-military discussions" .
Inauguration of Allied Rapid Reaction Corps
A new multinational Allied Rapid Reaction Corps (ARCC), whose establishment had been endorsed in May 1991 [see p. 38216], was formally inaugurated in Bielefeld, Germany, on Oct. 2 under the command of Lt.-Gen.
Sir Jeremy Mackenzie, formerly head of the 1st (British) Corps based in north-west Germany.
US-Turkish naval accident
NATO's Supreme Allied Commander Europe Gen. John Shalikashvili promised a "quick and full investigation" into a "friendly fire" accident on Oct. 1 involving an attack by the US aircraft carrier Saratoga on a Turkish warship, which killed five Turkish servicemen.
Defence experts indicated that the incident, which occurred during naval exercises some 80 miles west of Izmir, might have been caused by excessive stress among junior officers prompted by a long spell at sea.
Other recent cases of "friendly fire" involving US forces included air attacks on UK personnel during the Gulf war [see p. 38927; see also pp. 36169-70 for the shooting down in 1988 of an Iranian commercial airliner].
INTERNATIONAL
ARMS TRADE
German seizure of nuclear weapons material
German authorities in late October confirmed a marked increase in cases involving the sale and smuggling of nuclear weapons material from eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union; more than 100 such cases were said to have been uncovered in 1992 compared with only 29 in 1991.
In the latest incident, on Oct. 13, police in Munich arrested seven people, including two Czechoslovak nationals, after seizing 2.2 kg of allegedly weapons-grade uranium.
On Oct. 11 five Polish nationals living in Frankfurt and Bochum were arrested when police uncovered consignments of radio-active caesium and strontium believed to have originated in the former Soviet Union.
In June Austrian police had seized weapons-grade uranium reported to have been smuggled from the former Soviet Union [see p. 38987].
On Oct. 22 Polish television reported the seizure in Terespol, eastern Poland, of 1.5 kg of uranium acquired in Byelarus.
Tank sales to Kuwait and UAE
The purchase of 236 Abrams M-1A2 tanks, manufactured by the US company General Dynamics, was officially confirmed by Kuwait on Oct. 11.
The UK company Vickers, makers of the British Challenger tank which had hoped to secure the contract, said afterwards that Kuwait's decision had been prompted by pressure from the US government.
Germany was reported on Oct. 15 to have agreed to co-operate with France in an attempt to sell tanks worth US$300 million to the United Arab Emirates (UAE) in competition with UK and US tank manufacturers.
A Russian Foreign Ministry spokesman said on Oct. 2 that Russia would press ahead with the sale of diesel submarines to Iran despite reports of difficulties over payments [see p. 39122].
INTERNATIONAL
NUCLEAR ENERGY
Controversy over Japanese plutonium shipment
Plans for the shipment from France to Japan of 1.3-1.7 tonnes of plutonium [see p. 38987]aboard the Japanese freighter Akatsuki Maru received final approval from the French government on Oct. 29 amid protests by environmental groups and the imposition of transit bans by some governments.
On Oct. 28 French naval tugs had towed away boats belonging to the environmental group Greenpeace International, which had docked at the port of Cherbourg to await the imminent arrival of the Akatsuki Maru.
Meanwhile Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Singapore and South Africa said that they would refuse permission for the Akatsuki Maru to pass through their territorial waters.
On Oct. 20 Japan expressed regret over what it claimed was an alleged breach by France of an agreement not to disclose preparations for the shipment.
The statement followed a decision by the French nuclear reprocessing authority, Cogema, reportedly aimed at allaying public fears, to reveal details of the extraction process and packaging of the plutonium.
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
US-EC deadlock over farm subsidies
The prospect of a transatlantic trade war loomed closer after negotiators from the European Communities (EC) and the USA failed during September and October to break the protracted deadlock over farm subsidies in the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)[see pp. 38601-02; 38746; 38842; 38888-89].
At issue were (i) US proposals to cut EC oilseed production from 13,000,000 tonnes to 9,000,000 tonnes (500,000 tonnes below the level approved under the EC's recently reformed common agricultural policy — see p. 38931), with an eventual reduction over six years to 7,000,000 tonnes;(ii) US demands that the EC reduce its cereal exports by 24 per cent over six years; and (iii) EC insistence that the US impose export restraints on some products to "rebalance" EC concessions.
The depth of the crisis emerged in late October when the US side hinted that it was poised to levy punitive tariffs on of EC goods worth US$1,000 million in retaliation for EC intransigence over oilseed subsidies.
The threat followed a walk-out by US negotiators during talks in Brussels on Oct. 21.
These were understood to have stalled on disagreements over fresh US proposals to settle the oilseed dispute involving (i) the capping of EC oilseed production at 9,000,000 tonnes;(ii) limiting land sown with subsidised oilseeds to no more than 5,128 million hectares;(iii) setting aside, in the first year, 15 per cent of land growing oilseeds, with any oilseeds grown on set-aside land (for industrial use, for example) to be included within the 9,000,000 tonne limit; and (iv) cutting present yields of 2.36 tonnes per hectare to meet the 9,000,000 tonne limit.
Efforts to resolve the US-EC quarrel over agricultural subsidies had gained momentum in early September after talks, shrouded in secrecy, resumed in Brussels between the EC External Affairs Commissioner Frans Andriessen and the US Trade Representative Carla Hills.
GATT officials warned that failure to reach an agreement by October would jeopardise the chances of meeting the deadline of March 1, 1993 (extended from March 1991 — see p. 37930), required for US approval of the GATT agreement using the so-called "fast-track" legislation, under which the US Congress would be obliged to vote for the entire package rather than on specific amendments.
In mid-October a breakthrough seemed imminent after senior trade officials from Canada, the EC, Japan and the USA, meeting in Ontario on Oct. 17-18, claimed that they had made substantial progress in resolving the deadlock (responsible for the suspension of an earlier round of talks between US and EC officials in Brussels on Oct. 11-12).
At the same time, however, reports of a hardening in the US negotiating position appeared to be confirmed after the USA announced on Oct. 15 that it would sell 870,000 tonnes of subsidised vegetable oil worth US$377,000,000 to 11 countries.
(An earlier US plan to use US$1,000 million to subsidise the export of 29,100,000 tonnes of wheat to some 28 countries had been denounced on Oct. 5 by the EC Commission President Jacques Delors as "an aggressive act" .)
French opposition
The impasse in the latest round of negotiations was widely believed to be due to continued French opposition to US proposals for a cut in the volume of EC-subsidised cereal exports.
According to French reports, however, the main cause of the deadlock, centring on oilseed production, had less to do with France than with Germany, the EC's largest producer of rapeseed.
On Oct. 27 Germany's Food, Agriculture and Forestry Minister Ignaz Kiechle was quoted as saying that if US proposals on reducing subsidised EC farm production and exports remained unchanged "France won't be alone in saying no" .
Other reports indicated that the failure to reach agreement over farm subsidies had been aggravated by the intervention of Delors, and his opposition to what he deemed unacceptable concessions to the USA by the EC's Agriculture Commissioner Ray MacSharry.
These allegations were dismissed by Delors on Oct. 15 as "pure slander" .
On Oct. 25 the European Commission also denied reports that Delors and the US Democratic presidential candidate Bill Clinton had reached a secret understanding to block a GATT agreement which might boost chances of a Republican victory.
GATT observer status
The Kazakhstan news agency, KazTAg, reported on Oct. 1 that Kazakhstan had been granted observer status at the GATT session in Geneva on Sept. 29.
INTERNATIONAL
NOBEL PRIZES
1992 awards
The Guatemalan Indian human rights activist Rigoberta Menchu, 33, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for 1992, as announced on Oct. 16 by the Nobel Committee of the Storting (Norwegian parliament).
The citation described Menchu as "a vivid symbol of peace and reconciliation" .
Noting that the award corresponded with the 500th anniversary of the arrival of Christopher Columbus in the Americas, it said that this "was not a coincidence [but]…it was not the only factor" in the selection.
Menchu, the ninth woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize, had worked as a cotton picker and domestic servant in Guatemala before acquiring an international reputation in 1983 following the publication of her autobiography I, Rigoberta.
Translated into 10 languages, it highlighted human rights abuses against Guatemala's Indian population including members of Menchu's own family who were killed by security forces in 1980.
Menchu had recently returned to Guatemala to organize protests against the Columbus anniversary, saying that "there is nothing to celebrate" as "the rights of the Indian people continue to be violated" [see also p. 39140].
The award was criticized by the Guatemalan government which claimed that Menchu had been "supported by the enemies of Guatemala" .
The other Nobel prizes for 1992 announced by the relevant Swedish academies between Oct. 8 and 14 were:(i) Literature — Derek Walcott, the first Caribbean writer and poet to receive the honour, for his "multicultural commitment" ;(ii) Medicine — Edmond Fischer and Edwin Krebs, US biochemists, for their discovery of a muscle enzyme with implications for cancer treatment;(iii) Economics — Gary Becker, the US-born academic, for applying economic theory to everyday human behaviour;(iv) Physics — Georges Charpak, the Polish-born Frenchman, for research into particle detectors; and (v) Chemistry — Rudolph Marcus, the Canadian-born US scientist, for work on electron transfers.
INTERNATIONAL
WAR CRIMES
US report on Mengele
In a report which it described as "definitive" , the US Justice Department confirmed on Oct. 8 that Josef Mengele, the German doctor based at the Nazi death camp in Auschwitz, had drowned in Brazil in 1979 [for German announcement see p. 38891].
Although the conclusions of the seven-year inquiry dismissed claims of active US complicity in Mengele's escape, they acknowledged that Mengele had been in US custody for at least six weeks after the end of Second World War before being routinely released.
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
El Al air crash disaster
A Boeing 747 cargo plane belonging to the Israeli airline El Al crashed, laden with fuel, into an apartment complex in the suburb of Bijlmermeer, south-east of Amsterdam, the Netherlands capital, on Oct. 4.
The death toll was initially reported at around 250, but later officially estimated at around 70 people, many of them poor Surinamese immigrants believed to be living illegally in the Netherlands; a senior Netherlands police official was quoted on Oct. 13 as saying, however, that "we will never know exactly how many people were killed, and we will never know exactly who they were" .
Among those confirmed dead were all three crew members and a passenger.
Preliminary investigations by Netherlands aviation officials indicated that the disaster, the worst ever in the Netherlands, was probably caused by aircraft metal fatigue stemming from excessive stress and corrosion.
In a statement issued on Oct. 20 the Netherlands Transport Ministry said that the sequence of events leading to the crash began when part of a strut attaching one of four engines to the wing had broken off.
Officials also confirmed that checks ordered by the US Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) on other Boeing 747 cargo planes (prompted by similarities between the latest disaster and an earlier accident involving a China Airlines Boeing 747 freighter at Taipei in December 1991) had uncovered several corroded fuse pins attaching engines to the struts, and a cracked lug through which fuse pins were passed.
Earlier an El Al spokesman had refused to confirm reports that the aircraft which crashed had suffered a mid-air engine fire in late July.
Confusion about the real cause of the accident was compounded by press allegations that the crew had ignored the advice of air traffic controllers who had instructed the pilot to adopt an alternative flight path, avoiding the over-crowded suburb, to effect an emergency landing at Schiphol.
Conflicting reports on Oct. 23 suggested, however, that Schiphol air traffic controllers had in fact erred in advising the pilot to circle Amsterdam instead of heading directly for the airport before making an emergency landing.
On Oct. 29 an Israeli government commission of inquiry cleared the three crew members, saying that they had taken the right decision.
Air crashes in China, Indonesia and Russia
Fourteen people aboard a chartered Ilyushin-14 airliner operated by a Chinese tourist company died after it crashed on Oct. 8 in the north-western province of Gansu.
All 31 people aboard a CN-235 aircraft operated by the Indonesian-based Merpati Airlines were killed on Oct. 19 when it hit a mountain near Bandung on a flight from — Semarang in central Java; the accident was attributed to bad weather, according to analysis of the cockpit voice recorder.
A Russian AN-8 transport plane crashed while landing at Chita airport, east of Lake Baikal in eastern Russia, on Oct. 30, killing at least 14 people.
Surrender of data on destroyed KAL airliner
Russian President Boris Yeltsin on Oct. 14 handed over to a US and South Korean delegation in Moscow data relating to the shooting down by the former Soviet Union of a Korean Air Lines Boeing 747 over Sakhalin in September 1983 [see pp. 32513-17].
The move followed an assurance given by Yeltsin during a visit to the USA in June [see pp. 38985-86].
The South Korean news agency Yonhap quoted the South Korean delegation on Oct. 15 as saying that the information received had been "unsatisfactory" and "insufficient to clear up the incident" .
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
SETI project
The US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) initiated on Oct. 12 a US$100,000,000 10-year Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI), more prosaically named the Microwave Observing Project (MOP).
A multichannel spectrum analyser, with the capability of scanning 10,000,000 frequencies simultaneously in the microwave portion of the spectrum, would work in tandem with some of the world's largest radio telescopes in a targeted survey of solar type stars within 75 light years' distance.
A general sky survey would also be undertaken in which every degree of the heavens would be searched for extraterrestrial signals.
INTERNATIONAL
PETROLEUM
The Iranian Oil Ministry was reported in late October to have adopted an aggressive policy on crude oil production and prices after rejecting a 3,200,000 barrels per day (bpd) quota which the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) had sought to impose on Iran at its meeting in September [see p. 39120]; the Middle East Economic Digest on Oct. 30 quoted the Oil Minister, Gholamreza Agazadeh, as saying that Iranian output during October would average 3,800,000 bpd, but as denying that Iran was seeking to destabilize the international market.
INTERNATIONAL
UN
The UN Security Council on Oct. 27 elected Brazil, Djibouti, New Zealand, Pakistan and Spain to replace Austria, Belgium, Ecuador, India and Zimbabwe as non-permanent members for two-year terms beginning January 1993; the other five non-permanent members were Cape Verde, Hungary, Japan, Morocco and Venezuela.
INTERNATIONAL
WHO
The Republic of Azerbaijan joined the World Health Organization (WHO) on Oct. 2, bringing total membership to 182 [for last accessions see p. 39123].
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Victory for Clinton in presidential elections
Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton, the candidate of the Democratic Party, defeated the incumbent President George Bush, his Republican Party rival, in the presidential elections on Nov. 3.
Clinton polled 43 per cent of the popular vote and won 370 electoral college votes, compared with the 38 per cent and 168 electoral college votes won by Bush.
The main independent candidate, Ross Perot, failed to win any electoral college votes, but took 19 per cent of the popular vote, the best showing by a third candidate in presidential elections since 1912.
More than 100,000,000 voters participated in the elections, the highest number in US history.
Although final official figures were not available at time of publication, the turnout was around 55 per cent of eligible voters, the largest since the 55.4 per cent turnout in 1972.
The Bush campaign, which had had its late surge halted at the end of October by fresh Iran-contra revelations against the President [see pp. 39134-35], was unable to recover its momentum before polling day.
By contrast, the energetic and efficient Clinton campaign ended with a flourish which saw the candidate visit eight states (seven of which he later won) in the final 29 hours before polling.
The Democratic candidate made a clean sweep of the states in New England (the first time since 1964) and made inroads into the southern states which in recent years had been solidly Republican.
Although seven of the 11 states of the old Confederacy remained loyal to Bush, Clinton won Arkansas (his home state), Tennessee (the home of his running-mate, Albert (Al) Gore), Georgia and Louisiana.
Clinton also won in the key Midwestern states (except for Indiana, the home state of Bush's running-mate and incumbent Vice-President Dan Quayle), and performed well in the West, particularly on the Pacific coast where Democratic gains included the largest prize of all, California.
As usual, there were many minor candidates on state ballots.
Unusually, however, one of these, Texan billionaire Ross Perot, polled 19 per cent of the total vote, the best showing by a third candidate since former President Theodore Roosevelt's "Bull Moose" campaign of 1912.
In 31 states Perot won more than 20 per cent of the vote, and he forced Clinton into third place in Utah.
The strong showing by Perot meant that, despite his clear victory, Clinton became the 14th President to be elected with less than 50 per cent of the popular vote, and the first since 1968.
Congressional elections
In simultaneous legislative elections the Democrats maintained control of both chambers of Congress.
In the Senate the Democrats gained seats in California and Wisconsin, but these were offset by losses in North Carolina and Georgia, the latter result following a run-off election on Nov. 24 [see below].
Following a special election in December [see below], the overall composition of the 103rd Senate was Democrats 57 and Republicans 43.
In the House of Representatives, controlled by the Democratic Party since 1956, the party won 259 seats, a net loss of eight compared with the 1990 result.
The Republicans won 175 and the single independent member — a socialist who was Vermont's sole representative in the House — retained his seat.
Presidency States won Electoral votes Popular vote** % Clinton (Dem.) *32 370 43,728,375 43 Bush (Rep.) 18 168 38,167,416 38 Perot (Ind.) 0 0 19,237,247 19 Senate*** Seats won Winning incumbents Seats in new Congress Seats after 1990 election Democrats 21 13 57 57 Republicans 15 10 43 43 House of Representatives Seats won Winning incumbents Seats won in 1990 Democrats 259 195 267 Republicans 175 129 167 Independents 1 1 1
Election results in outline
*Clinton also won the District of Columbia.
**Unofficial tallies.
***Includes run-off election in Georgia on Nov. 24 and special election in North Dakota on Dec. 4.
In all, only 24 incumbent legislators lost their seats, although an unprecedented number of incum±bents — many of whom were implicated in various congressional scandals — had chosen to retire or else had been defeated in the primary elections.
In all 110 new legislators were elected, 12 of whom were Senators.
Minority groups were better represented in the new Congress than ever before.
The number of women in the Senate increased from two to six (five out of 11 female candidates were victorious), and in the House from 28 to 47.
The Senate included for the first time a black woman and a native American (Ben Campbell in Colorado).
In the House the number of blacks rose from 25 to 38 and Hispanics from 11 to 17.
Although at first sight the Democratic losses in the House appeared to indicate the absence of a presidential "coat-tail" effect — the term used when legislative candidates were swept into office by the momentum of their party's victorious presidential nominee — this was misleading, as a close comparison between 1992 and past elections was made difficult by considerable changes in the electoral map.
In addition to re-districting — the alteration of electoral boundaries within individual states — there had been a reapportionment of seats between states prior to the 1992 contest based on the population distribution revealed by the 1990 census.
While the representation in the Senate remained fixed (at two members per state), the number of House seats per state was proportionate to relative population.
With a net population gain in the South and West — regions where the Republicans had polled strongly in recent elections — it was widely believed that the effect of reapportionment would be to cost the Democrats at least 25 seats in the House.
The fact that the party's final net loss was only eight seats indicated that Clinton's popularity had gone a considerable way towards offsetting the effects of reapportionment.
Among the most significant Senate results was the election of two women for California, Dianne Feinstein and Barbara Boxer.
The former, who had served as mayor of San Francisco, defeated the Republican incumbent John Seymour, who had been appointed by Governor Pete Wilson in 1990 to serve the remainder of his (Wilson's) term.
Boxer, a renowned liberal, defeated right-wing Republican Bruce Herschensohn in a campaign noted for its level of personal invective.
Carol Moseley Braun won in Illinois and thereby became the first black woman, and only the second black person, to serve in the Senate.
In Georgia no candidate achieved more than 50 per cent and so, in accordance with state law, a run-off election was held on Nov. 24 which saw the Democratic incumbent, Wyche Fowler Jr, defeated by Republican Paul Coverdell.
One Senate election, not officially part of the Nov. 3 process, was a special election in North Dakota on Dec. 4 to fill the seat of Democrat Quentin N. Burdick, a Democrat not due for re-election until 1994, who had died in September.
The contest was won by Kent Conrad, a Democrat who had stood down as Senator for North Dakota in 1992 in line with a promise not to serve more than one term unless the federal deficit was significantly reduced.
Conrad argued that his pledge had applied only to the Senate seat to which he had originally been elected and, therefore, he was free to contest his state's other seat in the upper chamber when it became vacant due to Burdick's death.
Clinton Bush Perot House of Representatives popularvote (%) electors popularvote (%) electors popular vote (%) electors Senator elected Dem.
Rep.
Ind.
Governor elected Alabama 41 0 48 9 11 0 Richard Shelby (D) + 4 3 0 — Alaska 32 0 41 3 28 0 Frank H. Murkowski (R) + 0 1 0 — Arizona 37 0 39 8 24 0 John McCain (R) + 3 3 0 — Arkansas 53 6 36 0 11 0 Dale L. Bumpers (D) + 2 2 0 — California 47 54 32 0 21 0 Dianne Feinstein (D) * and Barbara Boxer (D) 31 21 0 — Colorado 40 8 36 0 23 0 Ben N. Campbell (D) 2 4 0 — Connecticut 43 8 36 0 22 0 Christopher J. Dodd (D) + 3 3 0 — Delaware 44 3 36 0 21 0
Election results in detail
— 0 1 0 Tom Carper (D) * Florida 39 0 41 25 20 0 Bob Graham (D) + 10 13 0 — Georgia 44 13 43 0 13 0 Paul D. Coverdell (R) *++ 7 4 0 — Hawaii 49 4 37 0 14 0 Daniel K. Inouye (D) + 2 0 0 — Idaho 29 0 43 4 28 0 Dirk Kempthorne (R) 1 1 0 — Illinois 48 22 35 0 17 0 Carol Moseley Braun (D) 12 8 0 — Indiana 37 0 43 12 20 0 Dan Coats (R) + 7 3 0 Evan Bayh (D) + Iowa 44 7 38 0 19 0 Charles E. Grassley (R) + 1 4 0 — Kansas 34 0 39 6 27 0 Bob Dole (R) + 2 2 0 — Kentucky 45 8 42 0 14 0 Wendell H. Ford (D) + 4 2 0 — Louisiana 46 9 42 0 12 0 John B. Breaux (D) + 4 3 0 — Maine 39 4 31 0 30 0
1 1 0 — Maryland 50 10 36 0 14 0 Barbara Mikulski (D) + 4 4 0 — Massachusetts 48 12 29 0 23 0
— 8 2 0 — Michigan 44 18 37 0 20 0
— 10 6 0 — Minnesota 44 10 32 0 24 0
— 6 2 0 — Mississippi 41 0 50 7 9 0
— 5 0 0 — Missouri 44 11 34 0 22 0 Christopher (Kit) Bond (R) + 6 3 0 Mel Carnahan (D) * Montana 38 3 36 0 26 0 1 0 0 Marc Racicot (R) Nebraska 30 0 47 5 24 0
— 1 2 0 — Nevada 38 4 35 0 27 0 Harry M. Reid (D) + 1 1 0 — New Hampshire 39 4 38 0 23 0 Judd Gregg (R) 1 1 0 Steve Merrill (R) New Jersey 43 15 41 0 16 0
— 7 6 0 — New Mexico 46 5 38 0 16 0
— 1 2 0 — New York 50 33 35 0 16 0 Alfonse D'Amato (R) + 18 13 0 — North Carolina 43 0 44 14 14 0 Lauch Faircloth (R) * 8 4 0 Jim Hunt (D) North Dakota 32 0 45 3 23 0 Byron Dorean (D) and Kent Conrad# (D) 1 0 0 Edward Schafer (R) * Ohio 40 21 39 0 21 0 John Glenn (D) + 10 9 0 — Oklahoma 34 0 43 8 23 0 Don Nickles (R) + 4 2 0 — Oregon 43 7 32 0 25 0 Bob Packwood (R) + 4 1 0 — Pennsylvania 45 23 36 0 18 0 Arlen Specter (R) + 11 10 0 — Rhode Island 48 4 29 0 23 0
— 1 1 0 Bruce Sundlund (D) + South Carolina 40 0 48 8 12 0 Ernest F. Hollings (D) + 3 3 0 — South Dakota 37 0 41 3 22 0 Thomas (Tom) Daschle (D) + 1 0 0 — Tennessee 47 11 43 0 10 0
— 6 3 0 — Texas 37 0 40 32 22 0 21 9 0 — Utah 26 0 46 5 29 0 Robert Bennett (R) 2 1 0 Mike Leavitt (R) Vermont 46 3 31 0 23 0 Patrick Leahy (D) + 0 0 1 Howard Dean (D) + Virginia 41 0 45 13 14 0
— 7 4 0 — Washington 44 11 31 0 24 0 Patty Murray (D) 8 1 0 Mike Lowry (D) West Virginia 49 5 35 0 16 0
— 3 0 0 Gaston Caperton (D) + Wisconsin 41 11 37 0 22 0 Russell Feingold (D) * 4 5 0 — XXXX Wyoming 34 0 40 3 26 0 -XXXX — 0 1 0 — XXXX
**District of Columbia 86 3 9 0 4 0 not applicable 1 0 0 not applicable Totals 43 370 38 168 19 0 Dem.: 21, Rep.: 15 259 175 1 Dem.: 8, Rep.: 4 In parentheses:(D) Democrat or (R) Republican.
*Change of party control.
+Re-election of incumbent ++Elected after run-off election on Nov. 24. #Elected at special election on Dec. 4.
**District of Columbia elected non-voting delegate (not included in total) to House of Representatives; no Senate representative or governor.
Gubernatorial contests
There were also 12 gubernatorial contests on Nov. 3, of which the Democrats won eight and the Republicans four.
In four states Democratic incumbents were re-elected, while in Delaware, Missouri, and North Carolina the party wrested control of the governorships from the Republicans.
The only Republican gain was in North Dakota.
Propositions
In 42 of the country's 50 states the electorate also had the opportunity to vote on a varying number of referendum questions known as propositions.
The most common proposition was that designed to limit the number of terms which could be served by legislators.
Such term-limit propositions, which aimed to limit congressional service to between six and 12 years, were passed in 15 states, although their constitutional validity remained to be decided by the Supreme Court.
Prior to the elections only Colorado had approved term limits (not due to take effect until 2002), although California and Oklahoma had imposed term limits on state officials in 1990.
Other propositions among the 232 which appeared on state ballots included anti-tax measures in Arizona, Colorado and California.
An anti-homosexual initiative was passed in Colorado but turned down in Oregon; California rejected proposals to give the Governor greater control over the budget and to allow doctor-assisted suicide for the terminally ill; an equal rights amendment to give women statutory equal rights with men was rejected in Iowa; environmental proposals on mandatory recyclable packaging and an excise tax on hazardous substances manufactured in the state were defeated in Massachusetts; and Arizona voted to observe a state holiday in memory of the Rev. Martin Luther King, the 50th state to do so, and decided to switch its method of execution from gas chamber to lethal injection.
Transitionary team — Meeting with Bush
Clinton delivered a victory speech in Little Rock, Arkansas, at around 11 p.m. local time on Nov. 3, in which he magnanimously applauded Bush for his service to the country and for his leadership during the Gulf War.
Clinton characterized his victory as a vote for a "new beginning" , and proclaimed: "I ask you to be Americans again, to be interested in not just getting but in giving, not just in placing blame but in assuming responsibility." 
Bush, the ninth incumbent President to be defeated at the polls — his 38 per cent share of the vote was the lowest score by an incumbent since 1912 — conceded defeat gracefully with a tribute to "the majesty of the democratic system" .
On the following day, on returning to the White House, he promised to "finish this job with style" and repeated his determination to "co-operate fully with the new administration" .
On Nov. 6 Clinton appointed two Democratic Party stalwarts, Warren Christopher and Vernon Jordan, to head his transition team to assist in the period leading up to his inauguration on Jan. 20.
Christopher, 67, a former Deputy Secretary of State in the Carter administration, was charged with running day-to-day operations, while Jordan, 56, a lawyer and civil rights expert, was given a role described as "chairman of the board" .
Although Clinton's campaign chairman, Mickey Kantor, was among the transition team, he was passed over for the leadership after negative press reports and reservations from within the Clinton camp concerning his style and his role as a prominent lobbyist.
Clinton announced a further 48 appointments to the transition team on Nov. 12, including that of Robert Reich of Harvard University as co-ordinator of his economics team.
On Nov. 13 Clinton unveiled a new ethics code for those in his transition team which prohibited members from lobbying for the first six months of the new administration.
The code was the first instalment of new ethics regulations which Clinton had promised would distinguish his administration from those of his predecessors.
In keeping with his promises to concentrate on reviving the country's ailing economy, Clinton announced his intention to summon a summit meeting of business leaders and economists to Little Rock prior to the inauguration (due on Jan. 20).
He also indicated that his administration would establish an Economic Security Council, with a degree of influence similar to that enjoyed by the National Security Council, in order to improve and prioritize economic decision-making.
On Nov. 18 Clinton met Bush at the White House for a two-hour session of talks which Bush afterwards described as "warm and informative" .
On the following day the president-elect met with congressional leaders from both parties and reiterated his hope to work closely with the new Congress.
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
EC-US agreement on farm subsidies
Negotiators for the European Communities (EC) and the USA reached an accord on Nov. 20 on a long-running dispute over farm subsidies, thus seemingly opening the way for the conclusion of a worldwide free-trade accord to bring to an end the six-year negotiations in the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)[see pp. 38888-89; 38939; 39170], although bitter divisions within the EC threatened to persist, with France denouncing the deal and warning of its intention to block its final approval.
The accord was reached after two days of talks in Washington on Nov. 18-19.
In a joint statement afterwards the two sides called for the immediate resumption of the GATT global trade talks in Geneva.
Key points of the accord included (i) a set-aside, in the first year, of 15 per cent of the EC farmland currently devoted to growing oilseeds, and a set-aside of at least 10 per cent in future years [see also p. 39170], in return for the lifting of punitive US tariffs on EC food and drink imports [see below];(ii) restriction of oilseed production to 5.128 million hectares [not 5,128 million hectares as given on p. 39170], thereby cutting EC production in future years to between 8,500,000 and 9,700,000 tonnes, down from a peak of 13,000,000 tonnes in 1991 [ibid.], in return for curbs on US exports of soya beans and other cereal substitutes to the EC (so-called rebalancing "ibid.); and (iii) trimming the volume of subsidised EC farm exports by 21 per cent(rather than 24 per cent as proposed in a GATT draft accord" see p. 38746), cutting EC internal price supports by 20 per cent and reducing EC export subsidies by 36 per cent .
Earlier progress of EC-US dispute
Talks in Chicago on Nov. 2-3 between EC Agriculture Commissioner Ray MacSharry and US Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan collapsed after the EC rejected US demands to cut subsidised oilseed exports below those agreed under the reformed common agricultural policy (CAP)[see pp. 38931; 39170].
The US side responded by announcing on Nov. 4 a package of punitive sanctions against food and drink imports from the EC worth US$1,000 million [see p. 39170].
The first tranche of these sanctions, affecting imports worth US$300,000,000, was due to take effect on Dec. 5 and was expected to affect French wine and food products, since the USA held France responsible for the deadlock.
The US action, announced in defiance of the GATT council which formally refused to endorse it, was described on Nov. 6 by France's Industry and Foreign Trade Minister Dominique Strauss-Kahn as "spiteful" .
Fears that the US-EC trade talks were on the brink of chaos were compounded by MacSharry's abrupt resignation as EC negotiator on Nov. 5, amid allegations that his negotiating brief at Chicago had been severely constrained by threats from Jacques Delors, President of the European Commission, that he would veto any agreement involving cuts in the volume of EC farm exports [see p. 39170].
On Nov. 7 Delors was quoted in London, however, as saying that "I never interfered with the negotiations" .
On Nov. 10 MacSharry withdrew his resignation after EC Foreign Ministers meeting in Brussels on Nov. 9 authorized him to reopen negotiations with the USA.
Simultaneous reports quoted Delors as saying that he was optimistic about a deal first with the USA and afterwards in the general framework of the Uruguay Round.
In what was construed as a conciliatory gesture, EC Foreign Ministers also agreed to refrain from early reprisals against the USA, opting instead to warn of the inevitability of EC retaliation if the US side went ahead with its "unilateral" sanctions.
On Nov. 16-17 EC Agriculture Ministers meeting in Brussels reaffirmed their confidence in MacSharry.
Claims in a leaked report circulated by French officials at the meeting, purporting to show that MacSharry had offered concessions at the Chicago talks inconsistent with the CAP, were dismissed on Nov. 16 as "fantastic" by the UK Agriculture Minister John Gummer.
On Nov. 17 France's new Agriculture Minister Jean-Pierre Soisson accused Gummer of "political manipulation" .
GATT's Director-General, Arthur Dunkel, meanwhile was mandated by a majority of the GATT's 108 member countries to begin a round of shuttle diplomacy between Washington and Brussels in an attempt to avert a transatlantic trade war.
Reactions to Nov. 20 agreement
GATT officials and political leaders in the USA and western Europe, with the significant exception of France [see below], hailed the farm subsidies agreement as a triumph.
Dunkel said on Nov. 20 that the accord allowed negotiations to be relaunched with a view to concluding the [Uruguay]Round.
Talks resumed in Geneva on Nov. 27, aimed at finalizing a new global treaty by the end of 1992.
US President George Bush said on Nov. 20 that the agreement was "fundamental to spurring economic growth…all around the world" .
UK Prime Minister John Major described it as "literally the best possible news" for the world economy.
A government spokesman in Germany said that the agreement represented "a positive impulse in the present critical phase" .
However, Spain's Agriculture Minister, Pedro Solbes Mira, who welcomed the "good news" , said that "we are concerned over France's dissatisfaction" .
French protest
The agreement provoked widespread opposition in France where pressure to reject the deal led on Nov. 25 to the approval by a majority in the National Assembly of a government motion threatening to veto its final approval by the EC.
French farmers demonstrating in Paris on Nov. 20 burned the US flag and stormed the US fast-food chain McDonald's.
More than 300 French farmers occupied the premises of the US drinks company Coca-Cola at Grigny, south of Paris, on Nov. 23, while fierce anti-US protests were reported in Amiens, Auxerre and Lille.
On Nov. 24 one of France's main farming unions, Rural Co-ordination, threatened to ban imports from other EC countries which were "too sensitive to American charms" (this being understood as a reference to the UK).
On Nov. 20 Strauss-Kahn blamed the outcome of the negotiations on the UK's current presidency of the EC, describing it as "calamitous and claiming that" the British have a way of chairing the Community which puts us in difficulty facing the Americans".
(The chairman of the special committee of the German Bundestag, Günter Verheugen, also described the UK's presidency of the EC as "a downright disaster" in comments on Nov. 20, while the German Farmers' Association (DBV) had criticized the EC for bowing to "massive pressure" from the USA.)
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Revelation of "dirty tricks" campaign
The Goldstone Commission, a judicial inquiry into political violence [see also pp. 38991; 39078], released documentary evidence on Nov. 16 which exposed a state "dirty tricks" operation sanctioned by senior figures in the South African Defence Force (SADF) against the African National Congress (ANC).
The disclosures cast serious doubt on State President F. W. de Klerk's frequent assertions that the government had played no part in political violence.
The Commission obtained secret military files which revealed that in May 1991 the SADF's most senior Military Intelligence (MI) officer Gen. Rudolf "Witkop" Badenhorst recruited Ferdi Barnard, a convicted murderer and former army hit-squad agent, to lead a covert team working with other known criminals to undermine the ANC.
His specific task was to infiltrate criminal elements into the ANC's military wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe (MK), and to compromise MK members through the use of prostitutes, homosexuals and drug dealers.
In October Barnard was accused in court of having assassinated a prominent ANC activist, David Webster, in May 1989 [see pp. 36647; 37033].
The documents were seized from an MI operational centre after the Commission heard the testimony of a former Mozambican soldier who claimed to have been paid by the security forces to carry out political murders.
Judge Richard Goldstone, the head of the inquiry, said that the MI documents showed that in December 1991 Roelf Meyer, then Minister of Defence, had ordered the dismissal of Barnard following hints of his activities in the press, although Meyer took no other action against Barnard or the senior SADF officers who had authorized his appointment.
Meyer, now Minister of Constitutional Development and the chief government negotiator in constitutional talks, denied all knowledge of Barnard and the smear campaign against the ANC.
However, his denials were rejected by Barnard who described himself as a scapegoat and claimed that there was "a cover-up going on from ministerial level down" .
The ANC said that the Commission's revelations confirmed that the state had conducted a "vicious campaign of misinformation and propaganda" against the organization since its unbanning in February 1990, and that they added weight to the widely held belief in the existence of a "third force" of agents provocateurs linked to the SADF which was engendering township violence.
The organization called for the government's resignation.
On Nov. 18, following a 10-hour emergency Cabinet meeting, de Klerk sought to defuse the growing crisis by announcing the appointment of Lt.-Gen.
Pierre Steyn, the Chief of the SADF, as head of all intelligence functions of the SADF, including the MI, with instructions to investigate the smear allegations.
The effectiveness of Steyn in such a role was questioned by several observers who noted that the former fighter pilot and close colleague of the President had no intelligence experience.
His appointment was dismissed by the ANC as a "sham" , although in a seemingly contradictory statement ANC president Nelson Mandela described it as an "encouraging step" .
On Nov. 19 the government dismissed as unfounded all the evidence of a military plot to discredit the ANC.
Judge Goldstone was himself the subject of harsh criticism from a number of senior government figures for making "wild suggestions" .
On Nov. 20 de Klerk rejected a request from Goldstone for an extension of the Commission's remit to investigate the activities of public and private security forces and armies inside and outside South Africa as recommended by the UN Secretary-General in August [see p. 39037].
Although the Commission was assigned additional police officers to assist in its inquiries it was clearly implied that they were not to be used for investigating covert intelligence activities.
ANC constitutional proposals
At the end of a three-day meeting the ANC's national executive committee (NEC) on Nov. 25 adopted a new strategic policy which offered a number of concessions to the government.
The ANC recognized that "even after the adoption of a new constitution, the balance of forces and the interests of the country as a whole may still require us to consider the establishment of a government of national unity" .
However, the NEC emphasized that such arrangements would not be allowed to "delay or obstruct the process of orderly transition to majority rule" .
It made clear that elections to a constitution-drafting constituent assembly should be held in mid-1993 or by the end of the year at the latest, and that it would not tolerate any party which lost this election "paralysing" the elected government.
The policy document also provided for placatory gestures to the security forces and civil service, including guarantees of job security, pension packages and a general amnesty based on disclosure [see also p. 39128].
Describing the ANC plan as unrealistic, de Klerk on Nov. 26 released his timetable for future constitutional reform.
Under de Klerk's proposals non-racial elections for an interim government would not be held until March 1994.
The President set February 1993 as the deadline for the resumption of multiparty talks, either in the context of a restructured CODESA (Convention for a Democratic South Africa)[see pp. 38896-97; 39128]or a completely new forum.
He said that he hoped that legislation would be approved by June for the establishment of a transitional executive council and of an election committee whose aims would be to create the conditions for free and fair elections.
The ANC later described the de Klerk timetable as unacceptable and, rejecting his view that at least nine months of administrative preparation were required for elections, continued to press for elections to be held before the end of 1993.
The Democratic Party, the Pan-Africanist Congress and the South African Council of Churches expressed similar views.
National Party resignation
On Nov. 9 Stoffel van der Merwe resigned as secretary-general of the National Party (NP), on "personal grounds" .
According to local press reports, he was suffering from exhaustion and ill-health.