

ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Communal violence
More than 1,200 people, of whom two-thirds were Moslems, were officially reported killed and a further 5,000 injured in sectarian violence which erupted across India after Hindu extremists reduced to rubble the 16th century Babri mosque at Ayodhya, in the state of Uttar Pradesh, on Dec. 6.
The savagery of the violence, the worst seen since independence, heightened fears about the survival of India's secular democracy and elicited widespread international condemnation.
The government of Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao resorted to a series of draconian measures involving the arrest of senior opposition leaders, the dismissal of four state ministries, the banning of religious organizations and the detention of thousands of their supporters.
On Dec. 27 the government announced that it intended to end the sectarian dispute by acquiring the contested site and building both a mosque and a Hindu temple.
Destruction of mosque
On Dec. 6 around 100,000 Hindu kar sevaks (construction volunteers) responded to a call by the pro-Hindu Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and militant Hindu organizations, including the Rashtriya Swayam Sevak Sangh (RSS) and the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP), to resume construction work on a temple at Ayodhya.
A small mob of Hindu zealots stormed past guards and razed the mosque on the site, using tridents, daggers and bare hands.
The Hindu militants occupied the site until the early hours of Dec. 8.
The BJP and its allies among militant Hindu organizations had called repeatedly for the mosque at Ayodhya to be replaced by a temple honouring the Hindu deity, Lord Ram [see pp. 37854; 37964; 38532; 38682; 38866; 39008; 39193-94].
In weeks of political brinkmanship leading up to Dec. 6, the BJP and its allies had wavered between open threats to erect a Hindu temple and suggestions that building work would be purely symbolic [see pp. 39193-94].
Reports said that the Dec. 6 attack on the mosque was effectively abetted by the guards, some 200 paramilitary troops of the state-controlled Provincial Armed Constabulary (PAC) which was known for its pro-Hindu leanings; they had allegedly stood aside and allowed militants to demolish the mosque's structure.
Spread of violence
Within hours of the mosque's destruction, the town of Ayodhya was gripped by fighting between Hindus and Moslems.
By the following day there were reports of numerous deaths and arson attacks on Hindu and Moslem religious shrines across India despite strict security arrangements in most states.
Some of the worst affected cities were Bhopal, Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi, Jaipur, Kanpur and Surat.
Southern states, usually less prone to sectarian violence, were also hit, with many deaths reported from Karnataka and Kerala.
The Washington Post of Dec. 12 reported that more than 1,150 people had already been killed with the daily death toll at around 200.
Government action
The Cabinet met in emergency session on Dec. 6 and ordered the immediate dismissal of the BJP-controlled Uttar Pradesh government for violating a Supreme Court order to protect the mosque [see pp. 39193-94].
The move followed the resignation earlier that day of Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister, Kalyan Singh.
The constitutional implications of the crisis were underlined by the Supreme Court which on Dec. 6 drew attention to the unprecedented failure of an elected state government to uphold court orders despite a formal assurance that it would do so [see pp. 39193-94.]
On Dec. 8 the government, having regained control of the disputed site, ordered the arrest, on charges of inciting "communal hatred" , of BJP president Murli Manohar Joshi and BJP parliamentary spokesman L. K. Advani.
Also arrested were VHP president Vishnu Hari Dalmia, VHP secretary-general Ashok Singhal, and Vinay Katiyar, head of the Bajrang Dal.
On Dec. 10 the government announced a ban on the Bajrang Dal, the RSS and the VHP.
Two Moslem religious organizations — the Islamic Swayam Sevak and the Jamaat-i-Islami — were also prohibited.
By mid-December more than 5,000 religious extremists, mainly Hindus, were reported to have been arrested under sweeping preventive detention laws; a further 3,000 Hindu militants were arrested in Uttar Pradesh on Dec. 25.
Dismissal of state ministries
On Dec. 15 the government announced the dismissal of three BJP-controlled state ministries, in Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan.
The decision, condemned by some observers as unconstitutional, was reportedly made after it emerged that the suspended ministries had failed to implement the Dec. 10 ban on Hindu religious groups.
The government was said also to have acted under pressure from hard-liners in the ruling Congress (I) who favoured the blanket dismissal of all BJP ministries.
Opposition criticism
There was fierce criticism of the government from centre-left opposition parties which accused it of aggravating conditions leading to the crisis by appeasing religious extremists.
On Dec. 9 opposition parties forced the adjournment of Parliament amid pandemonium and competing calls for Rao's resignation and a ban on the BJP.
A no confidence motion against the government brought by the BJP failed to win a majority after left-wing parties voted with the government on Dec. 21.
Members of the National Front abstained.
Disapproval of the government was compounded by its lack of clarity over plans to rebuild the mosque.
Allegations of official dithering had intensified after Rao, who had signalled his determination to rebuild the mosque, indicated on Dec. 10 that he favoured the building of both a mosque and a Hindu temple.
The government's subsequent decision to acquire the disputed site to build two shrines was attacked by Moslem organizations which claimed that such a decision pre-empted the status of the site, and by Hindu groups which threatened to block plans to reconstruct a mosque.
An application by the Uttar Pradesh government in October 1991 to acquire 2.77 acres of land adjoining the mosque, which had been allowed by a court in Lucknow [see p. 38532]was rejected by the Supreme Court on Dec. 11.
International reaction
The demolition of the mosque at Ayodhya triggered angry reactions across the Moslem world and led to the deaths of an estimated 25 people in neighbouring Moslem states.
On Dec. 7 the Islamic Conference Organization (ICO) denounced the affair as a "heinous crime" .
Official condemnation came also from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan, where violent demonstrations led to vicious attacks on the minority Hindu population and damage to Indian government property.
Mass protests were reported in the United Arab Emirates and in Iran, where leaders described the mosque's destruction as "an insult" to Moslems.
Other governments which expressed censure included Egypt, Jordan, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia and Turkey.
In the United Kingdom attacks on Hindu temples were reported in major cities including Birmingham and Manchester.
EUROPE
RUSSIA
Congress of Deputies — New Prime Minister
The seventh Congress of Russian People's Deputies (Russia's supreme legislature) met on Dec. 1-14, following months of political manoeuvring between Russian President Boris Yeltsin and the Civic Union, a grouping of centrist parties with strong representation in the Congress.
During a confused and unruly session pitting the powers of the executive against the legislature, the Congress refused to confirm the acting pro-reform Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar in the post, forcing instead the appointment of Viktor Chernomyrdin, hitherto a Deputy Premier and Fuel and Energy Minister.
Nevertheless, Congress was forced to agree to a constitutional referendum in April which threatened to curtail its powers.
In his opening speech to Congress, Yeltsin put forward a six-point plan, aimed at strengthening presidential powers temporarily, at the expense of those of the legislature, until the promulgation of a new Constitution for the Russian Federation in about 18 months' time.
The suggestions included limiting Congress's powers only to proposing amendments to the Constitution, and allowing Yeltsin to retain the right granted him at the October-November 1991 extraordinary Congress to appoint ministers without approval from the legislature.
Constitutional amendments
Despite rejecting calls on Dec. 1 for a vote of confidence in the government, Congress accepted for debate a bill to amend the law on the government.
This law, in its existing form, had been vetoed by Yeltsin as effectively subordinating the executive to the legislature.
On Dec. 3, the debate degenerated into a brawl, after the Speaker, Ruslan Khasbulatov, had proposed a secret ballot on an amendment to make parliamentary approval necessary for appointments to key government posts.
Pro-reform deputies, fearing that anonymous voting would favour conservative deputies, remonstrated against this proposal, and Yeltsin left the hall as Khasbulatov appealed for "protection" from the deputies.
The session was temporarily suspended.
On Dec. 5 the Congress voted by secret ballot on nine amendments to the Constitution.
Only three achieved the required two-thirds majority of 694 votes.
A proposal to require the President to present his nominee for Prime Minister to Congress for approval was defeated by four votes; the motion demanding parliamentary approval for other key appointments lost by only one vote.
A repeat ballot on Dec. 7, following objections from Khasbulatov of voting irregularities, again failed, but by a larger margin, to reach the required number of votes.
Appointment of Prime Minister
On Dec. 8, Yeltsin asked Congress to approve Gaidar (acting Prime Minister since June 15 — see p. 38974) as Prime Minister.
This followed a demand tabled at the Supreme Soviet in November that prime ministerial nominees be presented to Congress for approval [see p. 39202].
On Dec. 9 the Congress rejected Gaidar by 486 votes to 467, despite having voted in favour of a motion from Yeltsin to allow the Supreme Soviet the right to approve the appointments of the ministers of security, foreign affairs, internal affairs and defence.
Commentators noted that this motion had been intended by Yeltsin as a compromise to encourage approval of Gaidar as Prime Minister.
Yeltsin on Dec. 10 made a passionate speech appealing directly to the people to hold a January referendum on the dissolution of the Congress and Supreme Soviet.
Describing the Congress as "a stronghold of conservative forces and reaction" , Yeltsin claimed that "what they [conservatives]failed to do in August 1991, they have decided to repeat now by way of a creeping coup" .
Vice-President Aleksandr Rutskoi responded by openly opposing Yeltsin, blaming the President's advisers for encouraging a confrontation with the legislature.
Speeches from the main security ministers during the same session gave conflicting signals.
Defence Minister Marshal Pavel Grachev assured the Congress that "the army is outside politics" , whereas Security Minister Col.-Gen.
Viktor Barannikov gave an old-style speech warning of the threat of foreign intelligence services and rising crime.
Subsequently, the Congress voted to retake control of the parliamentary armed guard (the Directorate for the Protection of the Supreme Bodies of Power and Government), removed from Supreme Soviet control in October [see p. 39154].
After an appeal from the Constitutional Court that President and legislature settle their differences, Yeltsin and Khasbulatov reached a compromise which involved holding a constitutional referendum on April 11, 1993, and freezing all constitutional amendments adopted at the Congress.
The draft constitution, to be voted on in the April referendum, would reduce the legislature to a single, bicameral body; specify the supremacy of federal law over that of constituent republics; and retain the President as "head of state and the highest executive in Russia" .
The legislature would have a veto over appointments to key Cabinet posts, including that of Prime Minister, but would be subordinate to the President and would have little influence over economic policy.
The right to private property would be constitutionally guaranteed.
Choice of Prime Minister
Under the complex solution agreed between Yeltsin and Khasbulatov to the question of the interim appointment of a Prime Minister, the Congress won the right to nominate and vote on alternative candidates to the presidential nominee, but Yeltsin could choose his preferred candidate from among the top three, then to be confirmed in a further ballot by Congress.
Additionally, the Congress retained its newly won right to confirm the appointments of key ministers, and Yeltsin was forced to dismiss his close aide, Gennady Burbulis.
The nominees for Prime Minister included representatives of both reformers and conservatives.
Yuri Skokov, Secretary of the Security Council, was considered sympathetic to the nationalist cause; Chernomyrdin, 54, Soviet Minister of Gas in 1985-89 and a member of the central committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) in 1986-91, was seen as representing the industrialists' lobby, while Viktor Kadannikov, a relatively unknown figure, was manager of a large car plant; deputy Prime Minister Vladimir Shumeiko was a supporter of Gaidar.
Although technically Yeltsin was still able to nominate Gaidar as Prime Minister, subject to Congress's approval, and to retain him for three months even without such approval, it appeared that, realising the need for political compromise, he chose Chernomyrdin with Gaidar's acquiescence.
Chernomyrdin then gained 721 votes in the confirmatory ballot.
At his first press conference as Prime Minister on Dec. 15 Chernomyrdin emphasised his commitment to reform, but criticized the current situation as "a bazaar" .
New Cabinet
Initial fears that the change in Prime Minister would lead to mass resignations of the reformist Cabinet proved unfounded.
On Dec. 19 Yeltsin returned early from an official visit to China [see also p. 39236], apparently because of fears that conservative figures were about to be promoted to government posts.
Such fears were intensified by reports that Arkady Volsky, leader of the Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs (allied with Civic Union) on a visit to Japan, had in an interview with the Kyodo news agency, presented a list of "personnel demands" on the composition of the new Cabinet.
In the event, very few changes were made to the Cabinet, whose composition was announced on Dec. 23; only one minister, Petr Aven, Minister of Foreign Economic Relations, lost his post, to be replaced by his deputy Sergei Glazyev.
The appointment of a deputy parliamentary chairman, Yuri Yarov, as a Deputy Prime Minister, was viewed as a concession to conservative deputies.
On the other hand the new Deputy Prime Minister in charge of finance and the economy, Boris Fedorov, Russia's representative at the World Bank, was a radical reformer who had served as Russian Finance Minister in 1990.
Proving that Yeltsin had lost little by the forced resignations of some of his closest ministers during recent months, it was announced on Dec. 29 that Mikhail Poltoranin, until late November Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of the Press and Information [see p. 39202], was to become the head of a new Federal Information Service, which would distribute information about government policy.
Poltoranin's deputy, Mikhail Fedotov, became the new Press and Information Minister, but his brief was to be limited to registering and licensing new media and promoting freedom of speech, while Poltoranin was to be responsible for state-owned television and the press.
On Dec. 17 Gaidar was made presidential economic adviser and also took up the directorship of the Institute for the Problems of the Transition Period.
Political parties
Yeltsin proposed at a meeting of his supporters on Nov. 28-29 that a pro-reform party or movement should be established, offering to participate in any such movement.
Observers had identified the absence of any presidential party as complicating the power struggle between Yeltsin and the legislature.
However, the meeting, representing 33 different organizations, voted to establish a body "without rigid structures" rather than a party, to be called the Democratic Choice Bloc.
The Democratic Russia Movement, at its third congress on Dec. 19-20, described the dismissal of Gaidar as "a political mistake" .
However, the Republican Party, allied with Democratic Russia, criticized the Movement's leaders for "gross blunders" , blaming them for Yeltsin's perceived defeat at the Congress.
The Democratic Party, a member of Civic Union, which was simultaneously holding its (fourth) party congress, expressed support for the new Chernomyrdin Cabinet.
Verdict on Communist Party
On Nov. 30, immediately before the opening of the Congress of People's Deputies, Russia's Constitutional Court announced its verdict in the cases brought against Yeltsin's August 1991 ban on the CPSU and the Russian Communist Party (RCP), and also against the CPSU for having been "unconstitutional" [for progress of CPSU hearing see pp. 38923; 39020; 39154-55].
The decision, which Western commentators described as "a complicated compromise judgement" , ruled that Yeltsin had acted constitutionally in imposing a ban on the "leading and organizational structures" of the CPSU and the RCP (insofar as it was a component of the CPSU), but not in banning "primary organizations…formed on a territorial basis [the local party branches]" since these organizations…did not replace the state structures".
On the issue of CPSU property, the Court ruled that Yeltsin had been correct to expropriate party property which belonged to the state, but that the Court of Arbitration would have to rule in cases where property ownership was in doubt.
The hearing on the constitutionality of the CPSU and RCP was terminated, since the parties had effectively not existed since August-September 1991.
Court proceedings had been adjourned on Oct. 29 and reopened on Nov. 4.
In speeches summing up for Yeltsin it was claimed that about 40,000,000 people had been "eliminated" by the CPSU, and that 19,840,000 "enemies of the people" had been repressed.
Advocates for the CPSU, however, warned that to rule against the constitutionality of the party would endanger freedom of conscience, setting a dangerous precedent against "any party of the communist orientation" .
Both sides hailed the verdict as a victory.
On Dec. 3 Valentin Kuptsev, leader of the RCP until the ban, called for the parties which had emerged from the CPSU to prepare a revival of the party.
Yuri Skokov 637 Viktor Chernomyrdin 621 Yegor Gaidar 400 Viktor Kadannikov 399 Vladimir Shumeiko 283
Ballot on prime ministerial candidates Votes
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Mass deportation of Palestinians by Israel
The unprecedented mass deportation by Israel of more than 400 Palestinians to Lebanon in December cast an air of deep pessimism over the future of the faltering Middle East peace talks.
The Israeli Labour government's resort to harsh collective punishment tactics reflected its anxiety over a recent increase in guerrilla activities by Palestinian supporters of the Islamic Resistance Movement (Hamas).
Increasing support for Hamas in the "occupied territories" , and especially in its heartlands in the squalid refugee camps of the Gaza Strip, also posed a serious threat to the mainstream Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) which had opposed Hamas demands to withdraw from the peace talks and embrace its more militant approach.
Hamas attack on Israeli reservists
On Dec. 10 the intifada entered its sixth year.
In an ambush in the Gaza Strip on Dec. 7, members of Qassam, the military wing of Hamas, ambushed and shot dead three Israeli reservists on patrol — the highest number of Israeli military personnel killed in a single ambush since the start of the intifada (uprising) in the Israeli-occupied territories in 1987.
The attack reflected the recent increase in the use of arms in the intifada.
The Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) reported 340 shooting incidents in 1992, compared with 38 in 1988.
On Dec. 11 Israeli forces attacked a house in the West Bank occupied by a wanted Islamic Jihad guerrilla.
A seven-hour battle ensued in which the guerrilla, Issam Barahma, and an Israeli soldier died; three other Israeli soldiers were injured.
There was serious unrest in the occupied territories on Dec. 12-13.
Two Palestinians were killed in the Gaza Strip and one in the West Bank during clashes with the IDF; over 100 Palestinians were injured.
Qassam shot dead an Israeli soldier near the West Bank town of Hebron on Dec. 13.
Kidnapping and killing of border police officer
The confrontation between Israeli forces and Hamas had taken a fresh turn earlier on Dec. 13, when Qassam abducted Sgt.-Maj.
Nissim Toledano, an Israeli paramilitary border police officer, near his home in the central Israeli city of Lod.
Qassam immediately issued a statement threatening to kill Toledano unless the Israeli authorities released from prison Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, the founder and leader of Hamas.
Yassin had been sentenced to life imprisonment in October 1991 for ordering the killing of Palestinians suspected of collaborating with the Israeli authorities [see p. 38550].
The Israeli authorities responded to Toledano's abduction by sealing off the Gaza Strip and West Bank before conducting a widespread search throughout the territories.
Palestinians in the territories were placed under curfew and as many as 1,300 alleged Hamas sympathizers were rounded up for questioning.
Meanwhile, the Israeli government indicated that it was prepared to discuss the demand for Yassin's release if it was given assurances that Toledano was alive.
Toledano's body was discovered bound, strangled and stabbed in the West Bank on Dec. 15.
Following the discovery, Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Rabin addressed the Knesset.
He promised a "merciless" campaign against Hamas, but gave an assurance that his government would not be diverted from its commitment to the ongoing Middle East peace talks.
Deportation of Palestinians
On Dec. 16 the Israeli Cabinet approved an order to deport 415 Palestinians, all alleged Hamas supporters, to Lebanon in retaliation for the killing of Toledano and the other Israeli military personnel during December.
The 415 were overwhelmingly clerics, professionals and intellectuals.
The Labour Party's main coalition partner, the leftist Meretz, supported the move.
The main opponent was Justice Minister David Libai.
The Palestinians were kept bound and blindfolded in buses at the Lebanese border for some 20 hours while Israeli civil rights lawyers tried to win a court order to halt the deportations.
However, the Israeli High Court eventually endorsed the action and, in the early hours of Dec. 18, the Palestinians were driven to the northern edge of Israel's self-declared "security zone" in southern Lebanon and forced north into Lebanese-controlled territory.
Lebanon, which had accepted 66 Palestinian deportees since the start of the intifada in 1987, on this occasion announced that it would refuse to co-operate.
Acting on the orders of their government, Lebanese soldiers prevented the Palestinians from entering border villages and ordered them back into the strip of "no-man's land" separating the "security zone" from Lebanon proper.
The Palestinians, after applauding the actions of the Lebanese troops, set up shelters using tents provided by the International Committee of the Red Cross.
On Dec. 21 Lebanese troops pushed the deportees further south, back towards the "security zone" .
Soldiers from the South Lebanon Army (SLA), Israel's proxy militia which policed the zone, used tanks and heavy machine guns to force the deportees back to their makeshift camp.
Two of the deportees were reportedly wounded by the SLA action.
UN and US pressure on Israel
The Israeli government came under strong international pressure to allow the deportees back into Israel.
On Dec. 18 the UN Security Council unanimously approved Resolution 799 condemning the Israeli action and demanding that it be rescinded, but the Israeli Cabinet, meeting on Dec. 20, reaffirmed its decision.
The USA had earlier informed Israel of its "strong objections" to the deportations.
US President George Bush had also personally urged the delegations to the Middle East peace talks to continue their negotiations despite the Israeli action.
James Jonah, a UN Under-Secretary-General, visited Israel and Lebanon in late December.
In Israel, Jonah held talks with Prime Minister Rabin, who categorically ruled out a reversal of the decision to deport the Palestinians.
Jonah visited Lebanon for talks with Prime Minister Rafiq al-Hariri who refused to allow him to visit the deportees.
Hariri also blocked Jonah's attempt to arrange a humanitarian aid package to the deportees who were stranded in freezing conditions with little food.
Violent protests in Gaza strip — Shootings by Israeli forces
Violence erupted in the Khan Younis refugee camp in the Gaza Strip on Dec. 19-20 when Palestinians protested against the deportations.
Israeli soldiers shot dead six Palestinians, including a nine-year-old girl.
In addition, one Palestinian was shot dead during unrest on the West Bank.
On Dec. 23 two Palestinians were shot dead and more than 40 injured during fresh unrest in the Gaza Strip, the borders of which had been opened that day for the first time since the abduction of Toledano.
Rejection of appeal by High Court — Permission for 10 deportees to return
On Dec. 23 the Israeli High Court rejected an appeal to reverse the deportation orders.
Lawyers representing the deportees had submitted petitions claiming that Israel had a responsibility to take them back, on the grounds that the Lebanese government had refused to accept them and that their lives were therefore in danger.
Israel announced on Dec. 29 that 10 of the deportees would be allowed to return.
The decision to deport these 10, the government admitted, had been incorrect.
Impact on peace talks
The eighth round of bilateral Middle East peace talks opened in Washington on Dec. 7 [for details of the seventh round, held in Washington in October and November, see pp. 39167; 39211].
Little progress was reported during the talks, which were largely overshadowed by events in the occupied territories.
The Palestinian delegation reluctantly attended the eighth round after failing to persuade the other Arab delegations to press for a postponement until after the formal inauguration of US President-elect Bill Clinton in January.
The Palestinians signalled their frustration by sending a reduced delegation to Washington.
The Arab delegations withdrew from the talks on Dec. 17, the final scheduled day, in protest at the deportations.
No new date was set for a ninth round of talks.
The Palestinian delegation indicated that it would not return to the negotiating table until Israel reversed its decision on the deportations.
Commenting on Dec. 17 on the Israeli action, Palestinian spokeswoman Hanan Ashrawi said that the peace process was "on the brink of disaster" .
Palestinian representatives met with Egyptian, Syrian, Jordanian and Lebanese representatives in Cairo on Dec. 24 to discuss the deportations and the peace process.
The Palestinians pressed unsuccessfully for an Arab boycott of the negotiations.
The meeting agreed to increase pressure on the UN to take action to enforce Resolution 799.
Meanwhile, in Tunis, PLO leaders held talks with Hamas officials on Dec. 22-27.
The two sides agreed on the need to repatriate the Palestinians deported by Israel, but failed to reach agreement on a common policy towards the continuation of the peace talks.
Multilateral peace talks
A meeting of the steering committee of the multilateral strand of the Middle East peace talks (comprising economic co-operation, arms control, refugees, water sharing and environmental protection) was held in London on Dec. 3-4.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
US-led military intervention
In an operation codenamed "Restore Hope" and sanctioned unanimously 24 hours earlier by the UN Security Council, US President George Bush on Dec. 4 ordered 28,000 US troops into Somalia to ensure safe delivery of international aid to the starving.
The US intervention had been widely anticipated, following Bush's offer to the UN Secretary-General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, on Nov. 27 [see pp. 39181-82].
As early as Dec. 2, three warships were reported to be proceeding towards the Somali coast carrying a 1,800-strong US Marine task force.
The operation's precise aims were not clear, however, and by mid-December disagreement was reported between the US administration and the UN Secretary-General over whether the troops' role was to include disarming hostile factions and pacifying the country, or merely, as the US administration appeared to hold, securing the flow of aid.
No formal time limit appeared to have been set on the US military presence, although Bush was reported on Dec. 4 as saying that he wanted the troops out by Jan. 20, 1993, when he was due to leave office.
At a separate press briefing on Dec. 4, US Defence Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, indicated that troops might stay longer, a view also expressed, on Dec. 8, by President-elect Bill Clinton.
At the end of December, the time limit was still unclear.
France was reported on Dec. 4 to have offered to contribute 1,500-2,000 troops to a multinational force expected to total 35,000, and was expected to provide logistical support through its base in Djibouti.
Canada and Belgium were reported to have pledged forces of 900 and 550 troops respectively, Australia 900, and Italy 2,500.
The United Kingdom offered aircraft, but no troops.
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl announced on Dec. 17, despite a constitutional ban, that he intended to dispatch up to 1,500 German troops.
Troops were subsequently reported to have been offered by Argentina, Botswana, Chile, Egypt, Hungary, Kenya, Morocco, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda and Zimbabwe.
India dispatched three naval vessels on Dec. 17 to provide logistical support.
Japan was reported on Dec. 18 to have pledged US$100 million to a UN trust fund established the previous week to pay for the relief effort.
Clashes involving UN contingent
Amid continuing tension in the capital, troops of the 500-strong Pakistani UN contingent guarding relief supplies at Mogadishu port and airport killed at least one Somali in a skirmish at the airport on Dec. 4, the first blood shed by the force since it arrived in September [see pp. 39085; 39132].
On Dec. 6, with the US Marine force offshore awaiting orders to land, a 100-truck aid convoy with armed guards was reported to have transported the first food aid to leave the port for over a month.
Progress of US-led military operations
The first US troops, heavily armed and with faces blackened, waded ashore and dug in on Mogadishu beaches early on Dec. 9, to be met by media lights and scores of news reporters.
A further 1,800 troops came ashore during the day, and an exchange of fire was reported between US Marines and gunmen at Mogadishu port.
Robert Oakley, a former US ambassador to Somalia appointed to negotiate with Somali factions, relief organizations and UN representatives, had reportedly warned the main Somali leaders in Mogadishu-Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aydid and Ali Mahdi Mohammed, the interim President — not to interfere when US troops began arriving.
Marines backed by units of the French Foreign Legion took control of much of Mogadishu during Dec. 9, seizing weapons, although their operations were encumbered by curious crowds and reporters.
US Cobra helicopters reportedly buzzed the home of Gen. Aydid.
On Dec. 10, French forces shot dead two Somalis and wounded seven aboard a truck which drove through a roadblock.
Under pressure from Oakley and from French officials, Gen. Aydid and Mahdi Mohammed, his main rival for power in four years of civil war, held peace talks on Dec. 11 at which it was reported that they agreed to cease fighting and withdraw their weapons from Mogadishu.
A Cobra gunship was reported on Dec. 13 to have destroyed three armed vehicles in Mogadishu, killing nine Somalis.
The same day Marines seized an important military airfield at Bali Dogle, 160 km west of Mogadishu.
Away from Mogadishu, aid workers were reported by mid-December to be urging the US forces to speed up their arrival and there were reports of continuing attacks on aid centres and workers by armed looters.
On Dec. 16, US and French troops escorted a food convoy into Baidoa, securing the airport there, with no resistance from gunmen.
There were reports of atrocities by gunmen in Bardera, where 10 people were said to have been murdered at a feeding centre, and of intensified banditry at Kismayu port, ahead of the troops' arrival.
US Marines and Belgian paratroops entered Kismayu on Dec. 20 following a meeting between Oakley and local faction leaders, freeing it for use as a food distribution centre to the Juba valley.
On Dec. 23 Brig. -Gen.
Tony Zinni, operations director of the US military command, was reported as saying that US forces were about to begin seizing armed vehicles from the Somali factions, indicating, according to observers, that the US forces were adopting the more vigorous strategy advocated by Boutros-Ghali.
Doubts about peace prospects
Further peace talks brokered by Oakley led to the announcement on Dec. 27 of a reconciliation agreement between Aydid and Mahdi Mohammed, who together led a peace march on Dec. 28 across the so-called "green line" which had divided Mogadishu between their forces.
Both pledged in speeches to cheering crowds that they would work to unite Somalia.
Oakley was said to be sceptical that the peace could hold.
An anonymous US official cited by several agencies on Dec. 27 said that the increased number of troops by now present made a more aggressive approach possible.
 "From now on we're going to be doing more enforcement," the official was quoted as saying.
Two Somali gunmen were reported to have been shot dead and several others wounded the same day in an attack on a UN compound in Mogadishu, and there were further reported incidents of continuing instability in the capital and elsewhere.
Bush visit
Ahead of an anticipated 48-hour visit by Bush starting on Dec. 31, US forces on Dec. 29 began a crackdown on gunmen in Mogadishu, seizing weapons, armed vehicles and missiles.
Aircraft dropped 100,000 leaflets on Mogadishu, warning that anyone pointing a weapon at members of the multinational force would be shot.
Bush arrived on Dec. 31, flying to Mogadishu from the USS Tripoli to address troops at the start of a 48-hour visit in which he was also to go to Baidoa.
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
Total election victory for RPP — New fighting
The first multiparty elections since independence in June 1977, postponed from Nov. 20 [see p. 39181], took place on Dec. 18, with only two parties participating, the ruling Popular Rally for Progress (RPP) and the Democratic Renewal Party (PRD).
French, Organization of African Unity (OAU) and Arab League observers were present.
On Dec. 19 Radio Djibouti announced that the RPP had won all 65 seats in the Chamber of Deputies.
The RPP obtained 76.71 per cent of votes cast, the PRD 23.29 per cent.
The report also stated that more than 51 per cent of voters had failed to participate.
Fighting was reported in late November and early December around the eastern town of Tadjoura between government forces and rebels of the Front for the Restoration of Unity and Democracy (FRUD).
On Nov. 27 Radio Djibouti reported that French troops were being withdrawn from the area.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Attacks on whites
On Dec. 8 the government cancelled planned talks with the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC)[see p. 39128]after attacks on the white community by the PAC's military wing, the Azania People's Liberation Army (APLA).
The first incident occurred on Nov. 28 when four people were killed in an attack on a golf club in King Williams Town; the PAC refused to condemn the APLA activities.
Remarks made on Dec. 6 by an APLA spokesperson were widely seen as a "declaration of war" on the white community, and APLA was also believed to have been responsible for various other incidents.
By Dec. 22 at least 23 magisterial districts in the Orange Free State and Eastern Cape had been declared unrest areas as a result of the attacks, and a government inquiry into APLA activities was established.
The government said that it was concerned by press reports that the authorities in the Transkei "homeland" (bantustan) had concluded a military accord with APLA and provided training bases.
This was denied by the Transkei authorities, which established their own inquiry.
Dismissal of senior SADF officers
On Dec. 19 State President F. W. de Klerk announced that 23 members of the South African Defence Force (SADF), including two generals and four brigadiers, were being compulsorily retired or suspended, following the preliminary findings of an investigation by Lt.-Gen.
Pierre Steyn into the SADF's intelligence functions [see pp. 39177-78].
Steyn's report, which followed the exposure of SADF plans for "dirty trick" activities against the African National Congress (ANC), had indicated that there was evidence that some SADF members were involved "in illegal and/or unauthorised activities and malpractices" .
De Klerk denied that this proved the existence of a "third force" operating within the SADF with the objective of fostering violence and impeding the transition to democracy [ibid.].
However, he did concede that "there were indications that some activities and individuals might have been motivated to prevent success in constitutional goals" and that "some activities led to the deaths of people" .
The most senior of the SADF members affected by the purge were Maj.-Gen.
Hennie Roux, Chief of Staff of the Army, and Maj.-Gen.
Chris Thirion, Deputy Chief of Staff Intelligence.
Defence Minister Gene Louw emphasized that neither was linked to any illegal or criminal activities.
Resumption of ANC-government talks
At the end of three days of talks between the government and the ANC a government official on Dec. 4 expressed optimism that multiparty talks would resume by February 1993.
He said that while no dates had been decided, the two sides had discussed a timetable for the installation of an interim government of national unity.
An ANC official said later that he hoped that a transitional executive council would be in place by March or April 1993 to prepare for elections.
Further bilateral talks were scheduled for January 1993.
Rift between government and Inkatha
As the ANC-government talks began, de Klerk strongly attacked an initiative by Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, leader of the Inkatha Freedom Party and Chief Minister of the non-independent Kwazulu "homeland" , who unveiled on Dec. 1 a draft constitution for a new "state of Kwazulu-Natal" .
Buthelezi announced that he intended to submit this constitution to a popular referendum within the region and declared that if approved "the new constitution will stand in force, regardless of the direction taken by the constitutional process of South Africa" .
The proposed new entity was designed to have autonomy within a federal South Africa.
De Klerk warned that such "unilateral" initiatives were incompatible with previous agreements that constitutional reform should be the result of multiparty talks, that they could disrupt efforts to resume multiparty negotiations, and that they could cause violence to escalate.
He said that Buthelezi's approach threatened to bring him into "direct confrontation" with the government in Pretoria.The ANC said that Buthelezi's purpose was to sabotage national negotiations and that it would boycott any referendum called to test the plan.
However, Buthelezi's proposal was greeted with enthusiasm by the Conservative Party and by Ciskei's military ruler, Brig.
Joshua Oupa Gqozo.
Gqozo subsequently proposed that his territory should similarly form a republic with the Eastern Cape and that it should have an "inalienable right to terminate its ties with the central government at any time" .
AFRICA
NAMIBIA
Regional elections
In its first test of popularity since independence in March 1990, the ruling South-West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) won a landslide victory in regional and local elections held on Nov. 30-Dec. 4.
The success of the party in the regional poll ensured that SWAPO would dominate the new National Council, the upper chamber of the National Assembly, comprising two members from each regional council, expected to be inaugurated in early 1993.
SWAPO won control of nine of the 13 regional councils, including a number of areas previously considered to be strongholds of the opposition Democratic Turnhalle Alliance (DTA).
For its part the DTA secured control of three councils.
There was no clear majority in the remaining council, where the balance of power was held by the United Democratic Front.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
New government
On Dec. 2 President José Eduardo dos Santos announced the appointment of a new government headed by Marcelino Moco [for whose appointment as transitional Prime Minister see p. 39178].
Most ministers were drawn from the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-Workers' Party (MPLA-PT).
However, four smaller parties were also represented, and six posts were allocated to the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), including one of Cabinet rank and the post of Deputy Minister of Defence.
The posts of Deputy Chief of the General Staff of the Angolan Armed Forces and Chief of the Army General Staff were similarly allocated to UNITA, which subsequently announced the names of its appointees.
Moco accepted the names but said on Dec. 10 that their official appointment would have to await the full implementation of the 1991 Bicesse Peace Accord [see p. 38180].
UNITA withdrawal
On Dec. 22, following the mediatory efforts of Jeffrey Davidow, US Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, who met UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi on Dec. 19 and dos Santos on Dec. 21, UNITA announced a six-stage plan of action, beginning with its withdrawal from the northern provincial capital Uige and from the nearby air base of Negage.
On Dec. 28, officials of the UN Angola Verification Mission (Unavem 2) confirmed the withdrawal, opening the way for the re-establishment of state administration.
Dos Santos welcomed the move, but made it clear on Dec. 27 that before he met Savimbi UNITA would have to accept the September election results, withdraw from all areas occupied following the elections, and enable government administration to be extended throughout Angola.
These developments took place against a background of continuing clashes between government forces and UNITA, with a number of reports suggesting that the government had launched a major offensive.
Fighting intensified in the last week of December and was reportedly especially heavy around Caxito and Ndalatando, respectively 80 km north-east and 200 km south-east of Luanda.
Relations with South Africa
Relations with South Africa deteriorated further [see p. 39178]when on Dec. 1 the Angolan authorities announced that they were holding the crew of a South African plane which had made an emergency landing in Luena, Moxico province.
The authorities declared that this was proof that South Africa was supplying UNITA by air [see p. 39178].
On Dec. 3 the South African government announced that it was withdrawing its diplomatic representatives from Angola.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
UN support for peace process
Following the October signing of the peace accord between the government and the rebel Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo)[see p. 39129], a plan for UN supervision of the peace process was approved by the Security Council on Dec. 16.
Entitled the UN Operation for Mozambique (Onumoz), the plan called for 7,500 UN troops to disarm an estimated 100,000 soldiers from the armies of the government and the MNR, and for the integration of portions of the two forces into a national army, as well as for the organization of multiparty elections scheduled for October 1993.
The cost of Onumoz was estimated at more than US$330,000,000, most of which was committed by donors meeting in Rome on Dec. 15.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Continuing power struggle
President Mobutu Sese Seko, acting in defiance of the national conference (in session since July 1991 — see pp. 38323; 38378) and of Prime Minister Etienne Tshisekedi (elected in August — see p. 39039), attempted on Dec. 1 to dissolve the government.
Tshisekedi's refusal to accept Mobutu's order was followed by military intervention on Dec. 2, when troops surrounded ministries in Kinshasa, the capital, ordering civil servants to go home.
A sharp rise in tension was reported in the city.
France, Belgium and the USA, Zaïre's principal aid donors, were said to have stressed their backing for Tshisekedi, and on Dec. 3 the Belgian government was reported to be considering military intervention, following Mobutu's order to his Prime Minister to form a new government within 48 hours.
Tshisekedi had refused to accept ministers from outside the national conference.
The national conference was reported to have held its concluding session on Dec. 6, after electing a 453-member High Council of the Republic under the chairmanship of the Most Rev. Laurent Monsengwo Pasinya, the Roman Catholic archbishop of Kisangani, who had chaired the conference.
Mobutu did not keep a promise to attend the session.
Killing of demonstrators
Amid continuing tension, demonstrators ignored advice from opposition parties and went ahead with marches in Kinshasa on Dec. 18 which reportedly led to five deaths in confrontations with security forces.
Unconfirmed reports said that 50 people had died after troops mutinied at Kisangani on Dec. 21.
A leading opposition figure, Lambert Mende, was reported on Dec. 23 to have died in an arson attack on his house by members of the presidential guard.
AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
New government
President André Kolingba appointed Gen. Timothee Malendoma as Prime Minister on Dec. 4 following the resignation of Edouard Frank.
Malendoma had been a leading member of the Consultative Group of Democratic Forces (CFD), the opposition alliance which had demanded a sovereign national conference to determine the political future of the country.
However, he was expelled from the CFD in August after participating in the Grand National Debate organized by Kolingba [see p. 39040].
Malendoma named a new government on Dec. 9 in which the presidential party, the Rassemblement démocratique centrafricain (RDC), took seven of the 16 ministerial portfolios including the key posts of defence, foreign affairs, finance and economy.
Nine Cabinet places were assigned to opposition parties.
Following the rescheduling of legislative and presidential elections for February 1993 [see p. 39183], Kolingba extended his presidential mandate, scheduled to end on Nov. 28, to run until the elections, and a Provisional National Council of the Republic was established as the legislative organ of the transitional period.
On Dec. 1 former Emperor Jean-Bedel Bokassa had his sentence reduced from 20 years' to 10 years' hard labour.
Sentenced to death in 1987, his sentence had been commuted twice before [see pp. 36266; 38424].
AFRICA
CONGO
New government
Following the November parliamentary vote of no confidence in the government of Stéphane Maurice Bongho-Nouarra and growing political protests [see p. 39179], President Pascal — Lissouba on Dec. 6 appointed Claude Antoine Dacosta as Prime Minister.
The President had hoped that the Bongho-Nouarra administration would remain in office until elections (due within 45 days of the Nov. 17 dissolution of the National Assembly).
An agronomist who had spent 25 years working with the UN Food and Agricultural Organization and with the World Bank, Dacosta on Dec. 25 presented a government of "national unity" .
It included members of the opposition Union for Democratic Renewal (URD) and the Congolese Labour Party (PTC) as well as Lissouba's Pan-African Union for Social Democracy (UPADS).
Dacosta said that the power-sharing agreement was reached after mediation by President Omar Bongo of Gabon.
Congo cabinet: principal members
*Claude Antoine Dacosta Prime Minister
*Col.
François Ayayem Interior Gen. Raymond Damase Ngollo Defence Benjamin Bouloulou Foreign Affairs, Co-operation Clement Mouamba Economy and Budget Jean-François Tchibinda Kouangou Justice and Keeper of the Seals
*Jean-Pierre Thystere-Thicaya Mines, Energy and Oil
*New appointment.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
New Cabinet
On Nov. 27, two days after the reappointment of Simon Achidi Achu as Prime Minister, a new Cabinet was named in an apparent attempt to appease the opposition following the disputed victory of President Paul Biya in the October presidential poll [see p. 39130].
The new Cabinet included members from the National Union for Democracy and Progress (UNDP) and the Union of the Peoples of Cameroon (UPC)— hitherto the only two opposition parties in the National Assembly.
Both Hamadou Moustapha of the UNDP and Frederic Augustin Kodock, secretary-general of the UPC, were assigned senior posts, Moustapha as Vice-Prime Minister in charge of Town Planning and Housing.
Commentators noted that the only remaining serious opposition party was the Social Democratic Front (SDF), which, having boycotted the March 1992 legislative elections [see p. 38802], was not represented in the National Assembly.
State of emergency
On Dec. 29 national radio reported the lifting of the state of emergency in North-West Province, stronghold of SDF leader John Fru Ndi, who had been released from house arrest by early December but was continuing to claim that he was the real election victor [see p. 39179].
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Formation of Transitional Council
A civilian Transitional Council was appointed on Dec. 15 to form a temporary administration until the return to civilian rule now scheduled for August 1993 [for postponement of presidential elections due in December see p. 39179].
The Council included a number of former public servants as well as bankers and academics, rather than career politicians.
It held its first meeting on Dec. 23, and unanimously chose Chief Ernest Adegunle Shonekan, a lawyer and prominent industrialist, as its chair and effectively acting Prime Minister.
Earlier, on Dec. 5, President Ibrahim Babangida had formally inaugurated the National Assembly, whose members had been elected in July 1992 [see p. 38994], although it was not due to begin sittings until January 1993.
All legislation passed by the Assembly would require Babangida's approval as well as that of a new National Defence and Security Council (NDSC) comprising the President, the Vice-President, all service chiefs and the Transitional Council chair and senior members, which would replace the Armed Forces Ruling Council (AFRC) at the end of December.
The vacuum created by the postponement of the presidential elections led to a revival of campaigns for a revitalized democracy.
Prominent individuals, including Gen. (retd) Olusegun Obasanjo and Chief Anthony Enahoro, announced plans to promote new moves towards full multiparty democracy.
The chair of the Campaign for Democracy, Beko Ransome-Kuti, who had called for a campaign of civil disobedience in the New Year if Babangida did not leave office, was arrested on Dec. 31 and detained for a number of days.
AFRICA
GHANA
NDC election victory
The National Democratic Congress (NDC) of President Jerry Rawlings won an overwhelming majority in parliamentary elections on Dec. 29, largely as a result of a boycott of the polls called by four major opposition parties [see p. 39180].
Negotiations between the government and the opposition, which disputed the November presidential election results [see p. 39180], failed after the government refused to concede the principal demand — the completion of a new voters' register.
However, the date of the elections was postponed twice in an attempt to increase the number of nominated candidates.
In the run-up to the elections the four boycotting parties condemned "acts of intimidation and harassment of their members and supporters" by the government.
Prior to polling the NDC formed an electoral alliance with the National Convention Party (NCP), although each party offered separate candidates in the constituencies.
The NDC won 189 of the 200 seats, with the NCP taking eight, the Independent Party two and the Egle Party the other.
However, official figures showed that only 29 per cent of the electorate participated.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Arrival of UN envoy
The UN Secretary-General's special envoy to Liberia, Trevor Livingston Gordon-Somers, began talks in Monrovia, the capital, on Dec. 1 with Gen. Adetunji Olurin, field commander of the Nigerian-led peacekeeping troops of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG).
Gordon-Somers, a Jamaican, was appointed following the UN Security Council resolution of Nov. 20 which also imposed a mandatory arms embargo [see p. 39181].
On Dec. 12 and 13 Gordon-Somers was reported to have had two days of closed-door talks with Charles Taylor, leader of the rebel National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) which controlled much of the territory of Liberia outside Monrovia.
It had been reported in November that Taylor had left the country [see p. 39181].
On Nov. 16 Reuters news agency reported fierce fighting between the NPFL and the rival Sierra Leone-based United Liberation Movement (ULIMO) near the Bong iron-ore mines 85 km north-east of Monrovia.
AFRICA
SIERRA LEONE
Cabinet changes — Coup plot
Capt. Valentine Strasser, Chairman of the Supreme Council of State (SCS), was reported on Dec. 2 to have reshuffled his government, slimming down the SCS from 20 to five members, and making other extensive changes.
An Agence France-Presse dispatch showed that Lt. Solomon Musa had become Vice-Chairman of the SCS, and listed members and "liaison officers" responsible for supervising government departments as: Lt. Charles Mbayo (Transport, Mineral Resources, Public Works); Capt. Julius Maada Bio (Youth, Sports, Mobilisation, Information, Finance, Foreign Affairs, Maritime Resources); Lt. Samuel Kambo (Labour, Commerce, Land Matters).
Among changes to the Council of State Secretaries [see p. 38994 for previous government changes]Mohammed Lamin Kamara became Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, replacing Ahmed Ramadan — Dumbuya who had been dismissed on Oct. 30,.
On Dec. 29 Strasser was cited on national radio as saying that a group of soldiers, ex-officers and civilians had been arrested after attempting to seize power the previous day.
Several others had died in an exchange of fire, Sierra Leone Broadcasting Service (SLBC) reported on Dec. 30.
A Radio France Internationale report on Dec. 31 said that a total of 26 plotters had been executed by firing squad.
AFRICA
SENEGAL
Relations with Guinea-Bissau
Senegalese infantry forces bombarded alleged Casamance rebel bases in the Sao Domingos area of Guinea-Bissau on Dec. 12, killing two Guinean civilians and inflicting serious injuries on three others.
The attack followed an ambush by members of the rebel Movement of Democratic Forces in Casamance (MFDC) on Dec. 11 in which two Senegalese soldiers were killed.
The government had persistently alleged that the MFDC launched attacks from Sao Domingos, bordering Casamance.
However, this had been categorically denied by Guinea-Bissau, a mediator in the conflict between the two sides.
On Dec. 15 the Bissau government sent a protest note to the Senegalese authorities over the violation of its borders, reiterating that it did not provide support to the rebels.
The following day the Senegalese government offered its apologies.
On Dec. 22 the Senegalese weekly Le Témoin reported that Diamacoune Senghor, leader of the MFDC, had been expelled from Guinea-Bissau.
AFRICA
NIGER
Referendum on multiparty system
A referendum on Dec. 26 gave overwhelming approval to a new multiparty Constitution; preliminary results showed a 89 per cent "yes" vote.
As a result legislative elections were expected to take place before the end of January 1993 and presidential elections before mid-February.
The referendum had been scheduled for November but had been postponed at the request of the political parties following the transitional government's evident difficulties in drawing up a voters' register.
Release of Tuareg prisoners
The release was announced on Dec. 29 of 57 out of 129 Tuaregs detained without trial by the army since August [see pp. 39084-85].
The original detentions had been undertaken without the approval of the government, which admitted that it had failed to exert its authority over rebellious troops in the Agadez region who had taken the law into their own hands.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Agreement on aid deliveries — Human rights criticism
An agreement was reported between the government and three rebel factions at UN-supervised talks in Nairobi, the Kenyan capital, on Dec. 4, which would allow for distribution of relief supplies to those affected by war in the south.
Head of State Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir, in a speech at a rally on Dec. 7, denounced allegations of human rights violations by his government as "baseless rumours" .
Allegations by Roman Catholic bishops and some non-governmental organizations had been followed by reports of the murder of UN employees in September and October [see pp. 39132; 39181].
The UN General Assembly subsequently passed a resolution condemning Sudan, following reports that at least 300 people had been executed in the southern town of Juba.
Co-operation with Iran
Ayatollah Mohammed Yazdi, Chief Justice of the Iranian Supreme Court, arrived in Khartoum on Nov. 28 heading a 32-member delegation.
Yazdi's talks with Bashir on Nov. 30 were said to concern "strategic co-operation" .
A reported US$1,100 million Iranian aid programme to Sudan was said to include construction of a military centre in Khartoum.
Before leaving Tehran, Yazdi was quoted as saying that Iran's co-operation with Sudan was intended to "defend our militant brothers in Egypt" .
Persistent reports of an Iranian military presence in Sudan had been denied, however, by Sudanese government officials.
AFRICA
KENYA
Multiparty elections
The first multiparty legislative elections for 26 years, originally set for Dec. 7 [see p. 39182], took place on Dec. 29.
Parties contesting seats in the 188-seat National Assembly were the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU) led by President Daniel arap Moi, the Democratic Party (DP) led by the former Vice-President (in 1978-88) Mwai Kibaki, two factions of the Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD) known as FORD-Kenya and FORD-Asili, and six smaller parties.
On Dec. 10 Kibaki accused Moi of using violent methods to secure a KANU victory, alleging that candidates of the main opposition parties had been prevented by force from presenting their nominations.
In a speech on Dec. 1 Moi warned of interference by Western countries, which he accused of bias.
Numbers of Asian residents were said to have gone abroad during the election period, fearing violence, and the government was reported on Dec. 9 to have ordered the partial closure of the Ugandan and Somali borders.
Kenya Television Network (KTN) reported a large turnout on Dec. 29 amid reports of continuing violence including the stabbing of an official of FORD-Kenya.
Opposition threat to withdraw
Kibaki and Jaramogi Oginga Odinga, the veteran opposition leader, one-time Vice-President (in 1964-66) and now leader of FORD-Kenya, were reported on Dec. 31 to have threatened to withdraw their parties from the electoral process, alleging widespread irregularities which they said in a statement were "fast pushing the nation to war" .
Members of a Commonwealth observer group had been quoted on Dec. 14 as calling on the government to investigate allegations that 45 opposition candidates had been prevented by force from lodging their nominations.
In a statement reportedly approved by Commonwealth Secretary-General Chief Emeka Anyaoku, the group expressed "deep concern" about allegations of "violence, misconduct and intimidation, apart from impropriety on the part of officials" .
On Dec. 19, the leader of the group, Mr Justice Telford Georges, was reported to have expressed concern over the 45 nominations, at a meeting with Moi.
Police were reported on Dec. 15 to have adopted a shoot-to-kill policy following pre-election violence in Rift Valley Province, where at least 16 people were said to have died.
AFRICA
MALAWI
Imprisonment of Chihana
The High Court on Dec. 14 sentenced opposition campaigner Chakufwa Chihana to two years' imprisonment with hard labour for sedition.
He had been in custody since April [see pp. 38851-52; 39133].
President Hastings Kamuzu Banda announced on Dec. 31 that thereferendum on the future of one-party rule [see p. 39133]would be held on March 15.
AFRICA
MADAGASCAR
According to official results released on Dec. 22, in the first round of presidential elections held on Nov. 25, Albert Zafy of the Comité des forces vives won 45.16 per cent of votes cast, the incumbent President Didier Ratsiraka 19.22 per cent and Manandafy Rakotonirina of the Movement for Proletarian Power (MFM) 10.21 per cent(there were five other candidates); the date for the second round run-off between Zafy and Ratsiraka was set for Feb. 10, 1993.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Appointments by President-elect
Selection of Cabinet — Executive appointments
During the course of December President-elect Bill Clinton named the members of the Cabinet which would take office after his Jan. 20 inauguration.
The nomination process was completed on Dec. 24.
In addition to naming his Cabinet, Clinton also revealed his choice for key executive branch offices.
Thomas F. "Mack" McLarty, an Arkansas businessman, was chosen as the new White House Chief of Staff; Clinton stated that the post, which in the past two decades had grown massively in power in comparison with the Cabinet, would be that of "an honest broker" with few policy implications.
Of the executive branch officials Leon Panetta, 54, who entered politics as a Republican before switching to the Democrats, had built a reputation as one of the most ferocious critics of the spiralling budget deficit during the 1980s.
Anthony Lake, 53, a Massachusetts professor, was a former foreign service officer and State Department policy planning chief, who had served as a key foreign affairs adviser to Clinton during the presidential election campaign.
James Woolsey, 51, a former undersecretary of the navy in the Carter administration, was, like Clinton, a former Rhodes scholar at Oxford University.
Madeleine Albright, 55, currently teaching at Georgetown University, was a political scientist specializing in the former Soviet Union and eastern Europe.
The Clinton Cabinet nominations
Les Aspin (Defence).
Aspin, 54, had been chair of the House armed services committee for seven years.
A Democrat representing Wisconsin, he served in Congress for 22 years, during which time he built a reputation as a defence expert who was particularly resistant to Defence Department waste.
Bruce Babbitt (Interior).
Babbitt, 54, a former Governor of Arizona, was an unsuccessful candidate for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination.
Zoë Baird (Attorney General).
Baird, 40, was a corporate lawyer; she had acted as an informal policy advisor to Clinton during the election campaign.
Lloyd Bentsen (Treasury).
Bentsen, 71, chair of the Senate finance committee, had served as a Democratic senator for Texas since 1970.
He was the party's vice-presidential candidate in 1988.
Jesse Brown (Veterans' Affairs).
Brown, 48, was a disabled Vietnam veteran, with a strong record of campaigning on behalf of other veterans.
Ronald H. Brown (Commerce).
Brown, 51, was the first black chairman of the Democratic national committee during which time he revamped his party's fund-raising and research organization.
Warren M. Christopher (Secretary of State).
Christopher, 67, served in the State Department in the Carter administration.
He played a key role in Clinton's transitionary team following the 1992 presidential election victory.
Henry G. Cisneros (Housing and Urban Development).
As mayor of San Antonio between 1981 and 1989, Cisneros, 45, was the first Hispanic American to serve as mayor of a large US city.
Mike Espy (Agriculture).
Elected to Congress for the state of Mississippi in 1986, Espy, 39, was the state's only black legislator to have been elected in the 20th century.
A close ally of Clinton, he led his election campaign in Mississippi.
Hazel R. O'Leary (Energy).
O'Leary, 55, a lawyer and corporate president, served in federal energy posts in the administrations of Presidents Carter and Ford.
She was considered to be an expert on the disposal of nuclear waste.
Federico Pena (Transportation).
Pena, 45, served for two terms as Denver's mayor, the first Hispanic to hold the post.
Robert R. Reich (Labour).
Reich, 46, a Harvard professor of economics, was one of Clinton's key economic advisers during the campaign, and was a powerful advocate of economic recovery achieved through infrastructure investment and worker education.
Richard W. Riley (Education).
Riley, 59, was a former two-term Governor of South Carolina who had initiated a sales tax to assist with the financing of the education of black children.
Donna E. Shalala (Health and Human Services).
Chancellor of Wisconsin University, Shalala, 51, had served in the Carter administration, when she was assistant secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
Thomas F. McLarty White House Chief of Staff Leon E. Panetta Director of the Office of Management and Budget Anthony Lake National Security Adviser Laura Tyson Chair of Council of Economic Advisers Carol Browner Environmental Protection Agency R. James Woolsey Jr Director of the CIA Madeleine K. Albright Ambassador to the UN 
Leading executive branch officials
Holding of economic seminar
On Dec. 14-15 Clinton held a two-day televised economic seminar at which more than 300 academics, business and labour leaders presented their views on the economy to the President-elect and his economic appointees.
Clinton, directing much of the free-flowing discussion, was widely perceived to have enhanced his reputation for grasping detailed and complex issues.
Continuing scandal over search of Clinton's passport files
In a development connected to the election campaign it was revealed on Dec. 18 that the Justice Department had secretly appointed a special prosecutor to investigate whether senior White House officials had been involved in a search of Clinton's passport records.
Although Attorney General William Barr refused to comment on the appointment of former District of Columbia federal attorney Joseph diGenova or to confirm which officials were under investigation, it was widely reported that the latter included outgoing Chief of Staff James Baker.
The search of Clinton's files had been ordered in September 1992, at the height of the election campaign, in an effort to find evidence that the Democratic candidate had, while a student in the UK, sought to obtain foreign nationality as a means of avoiding being drafted for service in the Vietnam War.
It was also alleged that officials in the United Kingdom had searched immigration and naturalization files in an effort to find material relevant to Clinton.
Neither search had revealed any incriminating information.
Extension of voting rights in House of Representatives
Democrats in the House of Representatives voted on Dec. 8 to support a proposition allowing the House representative for Washington DC and four US overseas territories to vote on the floor of the chamber from January 1993.
The change would allow the five representatives to participate in votes on almost all contested issues.
Under the current interpretation of the Constitution the single representative for the District of Columbia and the two representatives for each of the territories of Guam, Puerto Rico, American Samoa and the Virgin Islands were entitled to vote only in legislative committees.
Under the new proposal the representatives would be entitled to vote in the House's "committee of the whole" , an arcane parliamentary term which covered the vast majority of the House's floor sessions.
The argument, which was accepted by the Democrats, reasoned that as the territories' representatives were permitted to vote in legislative committees they should, therefore, be entitled to vote in the committee of the whole.
The decision was taken by voice acclamation at a private session of the Democratic representatives.
Although requiring formal approval from the House when it reconvened in January 1993, the size of the Democratic majority in the new House meant that its adoption was considered to be a foregone conclusion.
Rubbergate scandal
The US Justice Department issued a statement on Dec. 16 on the so-called "Rubbergate" scandal, the revelation that in 1991 that the congressional bank had allowed legislators to write uncovered cheques and, thereby, to run up overdrafts without paying interest or penalties [see also p. 38807].
The statement said that the Justice Department would investigate "possible criminal conduct" by a small number of past and current members of Congress.
The scandal had already caused the closure of the bank and had contributed to an unprecedented number of incumbent legislators retiring or suffering electoral defeats.
A special prosecutor, Malcolm R. Wilkey, who had been empowered by Attorney General Barr to investigate the affair, was understood to have reviewed 329 separate cases.
In his subsequent report to Barr most of these were cleared of any wrongdoing.
Barr stated that he accepted the recommendations in the report and had created a special unit in the Criminal Division of the Justice Department to pursue the matter.
The unit was to be staffed by those who had helped with the preparation of Wilkey's report.
Iran-contra scandal
On Dec. 24 President George Bush exercised his executive power to pardon six people who were involved in the Iran-contra scandal.
Among those pardoned was former Defence Secretary Caspar Weinberger whose forthcoming trial, which was due to have begun on Jan. 5, had produced documentation which had suggested that Bush had been much more deeply involved in the affair than he had ever previously been acknowledged [see also p. 39087].
In addition to Weinberger, the President pardoned former National Security Adviser Robert C. McFarlane, and former Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams, both of whom had pleaded guilty to misdemeanour charges of withholding information from Congress [see pp. 36520; 38521].
Also pardoned was Clair E. George, a former executive within the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), who had been convicted on Dec. 9 on two felony charges of perjury and misleading Congress after a second trial [for ending of first trial see p. 39043].
(George's conviction made him the first high-ranking member of the CIA ever to be convicted of felony offences while conducting official duties.)
The others pardoned were two intelligence officials — Duane R. Clarridge, the former head of the CIA's European Division, who was awaiting trial on charges of having misled Congress [see also p. 38428], and Alan D. Fiers, a CIA official who had pleaded guilty in 1991 to withholding information from Congress, but who later co-operated with the authorities and served as the prosecution's chief witness at George's trial [see p. 39043].
In his proclamation pardoning the six Bush asserted that "the common denominator of their motivation — whether their actions were right or wrong — was patriotism" .
He also cited the fact that they had not profited personally from their conduct, that they had "a record of long and distinguished service" , and that all had already in terms of emotional anguish and damaged careers paid a price which was "grossly disproportionate to any misdeeds or errors of judgement they might have committed" .
The pardons provoked a salvo of accusations that Bush had abused his executive powers by seeking to prevent any further revelations concerning his own role in the affair.
Lawrence E. Walsh, the special prosecutor in charge of the Iran-contra investigation, responded to the move by suggesting for the first time that Bush was a "subject" of his inquiry.
He described the pardons as a demonstration "that powerful people with powerful allies can commit serious crimes in high office without consequence" , and that "the Iran-contra cover-up, which has continued for more than six years, has now been completed" .
Referring to "President Bush's own misconduct" in the matter, Walsh also hinted that Bush might be required to submit to questioning in connection with the affair.
Iraqgate scandal
Former Federal Judge Frederick B. Lacey ended his investigation into the "Iraqgate" scandal by submitting a report on Dec. 9 which concluded that it was not necessary to appoint a special prosecutor to examine the affair.
Lacey had been appointed by Attorney General Barr in October [see p. 39136]with the specific brief of determining whether a fuller investigation was warranted.
The Iraqgate affair centred on the allegation that the US government had covertly supplied loans to Iraq and then sought to conceal the evidence.
The conduit through which the money was allegedly channelled in the late 1980s was the Atlanta branch of the Italian Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL).
Lacey's report found that the Justice Department had conducted a "virtually perfect" inquiry into the affair and had done so in a manner which was free from political influence.
Justice Department and CIA officials had made mistakes in how they had handled certain classified information concerning BNL loans, a series of errors which Lacey characterized as "a fiasco" , but they had not engaged in any criminal wrongdoing.
The publication of the decision caused widespread consternation, not least because Lacey had informed Barr as early as Oct. 26 that there were "sufficient specific and credible allegations" to extend his inquiry.
Judge Marvin Shoob, who presided over the trial of the Atlanta BNL branch former manager Christopher Drogoul [see p. 39135], expressed surprise and disappointment at Lacey's conclusion on the grounds that there was "ample evidence not only of a cover-up, but also of government participation that was improper" .
Court rulings on abortion
The Supreme Court on Dec. 7 dealt a blow to supporters of the right to an abortion by refusing to review a Mississippi law which required women to obtain counselling and then to wait 24 hours before terminating a pregnancy.
Implicit within the ruling was the concept that once an abortion restriction had been upheld in one state, other states could implement it, an interpretation which effectively made it more difficult to challenge the imposition by individual states of restrictions as long as they were within the guidelines established by the Court's ruling in June 1992 on Roe v. Wade [see p. 38954].
A federal appeals court on Dec. 3 upheld a lower court ruling invalidating regulations introduced by the Bush administration (and implemented from Oct. 1) which had prohibited staff at federally funded clinics, apart from doctors, from advising patients on the issue of abortion.
Congress had earlier passed legislation overturning these regulations; Bush had then vetoed it, and the House of Representatives had fallen 10 votes short of the necessary majority to override his veto.
The court ruled, however, that the introduction of the regulations had not followed proper procedures.
It was reported on Dec. 1 that the authorities in the state of Louisiana had decided to ask the Supreme Court to review the state's stringent anti-abortion law.
The decision was made despite the Court's rejection on Nov. 30 of a similar law in the US territory of Guam.
The Guam law had been struck down by lower courts and the Supreme Court had refused to review these rulings.
The Louisiana legislation had also been declared unconstitutional in September by a federal appeals court.
Acquittal of Alvarez Machain
US District Court Judge Edward Rafeedie on Dec. 14 acquitted a Mexican gynaecologist, Humberto Alvarez Machain, on charges of torture and murder.
The decision ended a trial which the government of Mexico had repeatedly denounced as illegal on the grounds that the defendant had been forcibly abducted and taken to the USA in violation of the US-Mexican extradition treaty.
Alvarez was alleged to have participated in the 1985 kidnap and murder of US Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) agent Enrique "Kiki" Camarena Salazar [see p. 33967].
Specifically Alvarez was accused of having administered drugs to Camarena in order to keep him alive while he was being tortured by his drug cartel captors.
In 1990 Alvarez was abducted from his home in Guadalajara by bounty hunters and smuggled into the USA where he was delivered to the DEA.
Despite fierce protests from the Mexican government and the American Civil Liberties Union, the Supreme Court ruled in June that it was not against US law for US agents to kidnap citizens of other countries even if an extradition treaty existed [see p. 38954].
Rafeedie dismissed the case against Alvarez as "the wildest speculation" and rebuked the DEA for having been complicit in the abduction of Alvarez when there was nothing but circumstantial evidence to suggest that he had participated in Camarena's torture or death.
The case was seen as a major defeat for the DEA particularly as, by acquitting the defendant rather than merely dismissing the charges, Rafeedie ensured that Alvarez could never again be tried by a US court for Camarena's death.
On the day after Rafeedie's decision Alvarez was released from custody and allowed to return to Guadalajara.
While welcoming his release the Mexican authorities stressed that it did not resolve the issues surrounding his abduction.
As Alvarez returned home, the Mexican Attorney General's office called for the extradition of two DEA agents who, it alleged, had helped to organize the doctor's abduction.
In an earlier development connected to the Camarena case, Rafeedie had refused to acquit Ruben Zuno Arce of conspiring to plan the kidnapping and killing of the DEA agent.
Zuno had been convicted at an earlier trial but Rafeedie had set aside the verdict on the grounds that the prosecution had referred in closing arguments to matters not in evidence.
It was expected that Zuno would face a retrial, much to the embarrassment of the Mexican government as the case against him included witnesses who had alleged that senior government, military and police officers had been involved in the conspiracy to kill Camarena.
Ruling on status of Noriega
US District Judge William Hoeveler ruled on Dec. 8 that the former Panamanian leader, Manuel Antonio Noriega, was a prisoner of war; as such he was entitled to full protection under the Geneva Convention.
The decision was believed to have been the first time that a US court had extended prisoner of war status to a convicted criminal.
Noriega was apprehended in January 1990 following the US invasion of Panama.
After being returned to the USA he was convicted of drug trafficking, money laundering, and racketeering charges in April 1992 [see p. 38857], and sentenced to 40 years' imprisonment.
Hoeveler's decision appeared to make it almost impossible for the US authorities to imprison Noriega in the type of high security facility as expected, without violating his prisoner of war rights.
Indictment of Alabama Governor
Guy Hunt, the Governor of Alabama, was indicted on Dec. 28 by a grand jury in Montgomery on charges of appropriating US$200,000 from his inaugural fund and using it for personal purposes.
The 13-count felony indictment accused Hunt, Alabama's first 20th century Republican Governor, of conspiring with his inaugural fund accountant and two former aides and included charges of theft and ethics violations.
Hunt, a part-time preacher, had also been under investigation for using state-owned aircraft for profit-making preaching trips, but was understood not to have ben charged in relation to this.
The Governor, who was released on bail immediately after the indictment, dismissed the charges as "shocking, outrageous falsehoods" .
He indicated that he would plead not guilty when formally arraigned on Jan. 20.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Election of Alberta Premier
In an election for the leadership of the provincial Progressive Conservative Party (PCP) in Alberta on Dec. 5, Ralph Klein won a decisive second ballot victory with almost 60 per cent of the vote.
Klein, hitherto the state's Environment Minister, succeeded Don Getty as Premier of Alberta on Dec. 14.
The PCP, which had governed the province for the past 21 years, held 58 of the 83 seats in the legislature.
AMERICAS
CUBA
Local elections
Local government elections were held on Dec. 20 to elect 13,865 delegates to 169 municipal assemblies, with voting in electoral colleges on Dec. 27 to decide seats where no candidate secured an overall majority.
Candidates were not obliged to be Communist Party (PCC) members, but the vast majority of candidates were.
Under the reformed electoral system the assemblies would meet on Jan. 19 to choose candidates for direct national and provincial elections to be held on Feb. 24.
These would be the first direct elections under the 1976 Constitution to the second and third tiers of government.
Human rights
On Dec. 4, a commission of the UN General Assembly adopted a US-sponsored resolution condemning Cuba for breaches of fundamental human rights, following on from a condemnation of the US blockade on the island [see p. 39184].
On Dec. 10 two prominent human rights activists, Rodolfo González of the Cuban Committee for Human Rights and Elizardo Sánchez Santa Cruz of the Commission for Human Rights and National Reconciliation, were arrested by Cuban police.
Sánchez, who was alleged to have been beaten by government supporters prior to his arrest, had been reported as having urged the Cuban authorities to recognize the two UN resolutions; he was later charged with "distributing enemy propaganda" and with illegal possession of foreign currency.
Escape flights
On Dec. 29, a Cuban aircraft on an internal flight between Havana and Varadero was diverted to Miami, USA, after the pilot and passengers overpowered the co-pilot and security guard.
After landing at Miami, 48 of the 53 passengers and crew on board applied for political asylum in the USA.
The incident was condemned by Cuba as "hijacking" and "state terrorism" .
In another earlier incident, a former Cuban air force officer, Orestes Lorenzo Peres, who had fled to the USA with his MiG-23 jet in September 1991, returned to Cuba on Dec. 19 in a light plane, evading detection by air defence systems, and then flew back to the USA with his wife and two children, who had been prevented by the Cuban authorities from joining him.
AMERICAS
JAMAICA
IMF agreement
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) on Dec. 14 approved a credit under a three-year extended fund facility (EFF) to support the government's economic programme.
Under the terms of the agreement the Jamaican government would have access to credits worth SDR 109,100,000 (US$153,000,000) until December 1995.
Conditions for the facility include the curbing of inflation, the rebuilding of foreign exchange reserves to reach a positive current balance after three years, and steady annual economic growth of between 3 and 3.5 per cent in real terms over the period.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Political crisis
Tensions in the legislature between the executive and right-wing members of the ruling National Opposition Union (UNO) increased considerably during December [for growing crisis see pp. 38957; 39001; 39091].
On Dec. 30 President Violeta Chamorro de Barrios ordered police officers to seize the National Assembly building and its assets and documents, stating that an interim board of directors would be appointed prior to a meeting of the National Assembly on Jan. 9 when new officers could be elected for the Assembly.
Opposition leaders immediately denounced the seizure of the Assembly building as a "coup" against the legislature.
On Nov. 27 the Supreme Court had issued a ruling declaring all the decisions of the National Assembly since Sept. 2 null and void, as a quorum of members had not been achieved on that date.
The administration of President Chamorro upheld the ruling, but the Assembly's president, Alfredo César Aguirre, by contrast, rejected the judgment, claiming that the court had no right to interfere in a separate branch of government.
Resumption of US aid
The USA released US$54,000,000 in aid to Nicaragua on Dec. 3 to assist the country's economic stabilization and to help it to normalize relations with international financial institu-tions.
A total of $100,000,000 in aid had been frozen by the US administration in May because of lack of progress on the compensation of US citizens for property seized by the former Sandinista regime [see p. 38957].
Some US$40,000,000 of the unfrozen aid was destined to be used to replenish foreign exchange reserves, pay for oil imports and pay off arrears to international organizations.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Completion of demobilization
The 12-year civil war in El Salvador was formally brought to an end on Dec. 15 when, after a series of delays and setbacks, the planned demobilization of guerrilla forces and active army units was finalized.
The day was declared National Reconciliation Day at a ceremony held in San Salvador, the capital, and attended by President Alfredo Cristiani Burkard, senior government officials and military officers, and leaders of the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN), which now became a political party.
Also present were UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro of Nicaragua, President Rafael Leonardo Callejas of Honduras, President Jorge Serrano Elias of Guatemala, US Vice-President Dan Quayle and government representatives from Colombia, Costa Rica, Mexico, Spain and Venezuela.
The deadline of Dec. 15 had been set by the UN after Cristiani had tried to delay a purge of senior military figures [see p. 39137].
On Nov. 30 the three-member Truth Commission, formed to investigate human rights violations by the armed forces during the civil war, named 223 military personnel, including about 100 officers and the Minister of Defence and Public Security, Gen. René Emilio Ponce.
Cristiani agreed on Dec. 1 to the removal of the officers, although it was anticipated that Ponce would not be dismissed immediately.
In response, the FMLN began to destroy its weapons on Dec. 2.
The disbanding of the Atlacatl counterinsurgency battalion on Dec. 8 was seen as further evidence of the government's good faith, although Cristiani's use of the phrase "national heroes" to describe the battalion was called into question, given its reputation for human rights violations (especially the massacre at El Mozote in 1981 — ibid.).
In addition to its delay in acting against the armed forces, the government was also behind schedule in establishing a civilian police force, and in introducing judicial and electoral reform.
The new council set up to reform the judiciary fell under the control of the Supreme Court, which was generally seen as being heavily under the influence of Cristiani's right-wing ruling National Republic Alliance (Arena).
The electoral reform law passed on Dec. 13 did not include certain previously agreed provisions designed to help small parties, such as the introduction of restrictions on campaign spending.
The FMLN itself faced difficulties in meeting the initial deadlines as some of its local commanders were unwilling to hand over their weapons.
There was also concern that the government might not meet its undertakings on the integration of former guerrillas, particularly in the matter of land distribution.
After assurances from US officials that the USA would continue to monitor the peace process, the FMLN demobilized its last contingent of around 2,000 combatants and turned in the last of its weapons (including 55 surface-to-air missiles) to the UN on Dec. 14.
FMLN political party
The FMLN was formally registered as a political party on Dec. 15, and on Dec. 21 its members elected a 15-member political directorate, and voted Jorge Shafik Handal as the party's general co-ordinator.
Ferman Cienfuegos remained the party's recognized leader.
US debt forgiveness
At the demobilization ceremony US Vice-President Quayle announced that in support of the peace process the USA would forgive debts owed by El Salvador amounting to US$464,000,000, which constituted 75 per cent of debts incurred during the civil war.
In addition El Salvador would not be required to pay interest on the balance of the debt direct to the USA, but would instead be required to devote an equivalent amount to local environmental or child-survival programmes.
This move reduced the country's annual debt service by $25,000,000.
One effect of the peace process would be to end the Temporary Protective Status accorded to some 30,000 Salvadoreans living legally in the United States as refugees.
AMERICAS
PANAMA
Resignation of Vice-President
The First Vice-President of Panama, Ricardo Arias Calderón, resigned from his post on Dec. 17, declaring at a press conference that the government of President Guillermo Endara Galimany was incapable of dealing with the corruption, unemployment or poverty in Panama.
Arias, 59, leader of the Christian Democratic Party (PDC), had remained in office in order to support the constitutional reforms proposed by Endara and endorsed by the Legislative Assembly.
However, following the overwhelming defeat of these proposals in a popular referendum on Nov. 15 [see p. 39185], he had come under increasing pressure from party activists to resign.
The PDC had been in opposition since leaving Endara's government in April 1991; Arias had remained in the constitutional post of First Vice-President without attending Cabinet meetings.
Endara criticized Arias's decision as political opportunism, claiming that he intended preparing his candidature for the 1994 presidential elections.
The Second Vice-President, Guillermo Ford Boyd, leader of the Nationalist Republican Liberal Movement (Morilena), was duly confirmed as First Vice-President.
Arrest of Attorney General
On Dec. 24 the Solicitor General, Donatilo — Ballesteros, ordered the dismissal and house arrest of the Attorney General, Rogelio Cruz, on suspicion of the latter's involvement in authorizing the unfreezing of bank assets amounting to some US$38 million linked to Colombian drug cartels.
The Secretary-General for Drugs in the Attorney General's office, Ariel Alvarado, responsible for the state prosecution of drug cases, was also placed under house arrest.
Cruz's house arrest and dismissal were overturned by the Supreme Court on Dec. 29, but he remained suspended from office.
Alvarado was replaced by Norberto Castillo Perea on Dec. 28 as acting Secretary-General for Drugs.
Charges had been filed against Cruz on Oct. 26 alleging that he had ordered the unfreezing of assets belonging to 10 companies or individuals identified as belonging to the Colombian Cali drug trafficking cartel.
Cruz admitted unfreezing the bank accounts; his claim that he had the legal authority to do so was rejected by the courts on Nov. 17.
AMERICAS
CENTRAL AMERICA
Presidential summit
The 13th meeting of Central American heads of state was held on Dec. 9-11 in Panama City, attended by the Presidents of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama, with the Prime Minister of Belize and the Vice-President of the Dominican Republic as observers.
The results of the summit were contained in the "Panama Declaration" , issued by the participants on Dec. 11.
The main points of the declaration involved further measures towards greater regional integration.
Chief among these was the agreement for the consolidation of the Central American Integration System (SICA), to oversee integration, to be brought into effect by Feb. 1, 1993.
The summit also appointed a secretary-general, Roberto Herrara of Honduras, for the organization's secretariat based in San Salvador.
Panama and Costa Rica had yet to ratify the SICA protocol, but their government leaders expressed their determination to participate.
Other measures included improvements in financial integration between central American countries, the linking of regional stock exchanges, and the upgrading of banking regulations and supervision.
The heads of state gave their support to the efforts made towards peace, reconciliation and reconstruction in El Salvador, Guatemala and Nicaragua, and supported the rapprochement between Guatemala and Belize in their territorial dispute [see pp. 38432; 39184], together with the decision reached by the International Court of Justice in the territorial dispute between Honduras and El Salvador [see p. 39090].
They also gave their backing to the reincorporation of Panama as a member of the Rio Group of Latin American states.
Approval was given to Panama's decision to create a commission to pursue the actions required to bring Panama back into the mainstream of regional integration.
A draft treaty on mutual legal assistance, drawn up by Panama, was agreed and plans were approved for a summit on measures to counteract drug trafficking in the region to be held in Belize during February 1993.
Also included was the signing of a statute for a Central American Court of Justice.
The final declaration also stressed the importance of reaching agreement on the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), and of concluding satisfactory agreements on bananas and coffee to allow Central American countries fair access to international markets for their goods.
Concern was expressed about the possible impact of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA — see pp. 39045-46; 39234) in reducing preferential arrangements for US imports from central America.
The Presidents accepted the recommendations of the Central American Parliament (Parlacén) for the promotion of integration and their social development plans.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Resignation and impeachment of Collor — Inauguration of Franco
President Fernando Collor de Mello resigned on Dec. 29 as impeachment proceedings against him began in the Senate.
Vice-President Itamar Franco, who had been acting President since Collor's suspension in September, was immediately sworn in by a joint session of the Congress as President for the remaining two years of the five-year presidential term.
While the Senate had agreed after Collor's resignation that impeachment was no longer a legal possibility, it voted by 73 votes to eight to continue with the proceedings.
On Dec. 30, after finding Collor guilty of corruption and official misconduct, it voted by 76 votes to three to ban him from public office for eight years, a penalty identical to that for impeachment.
Collor still faced criminal charges [see p. 39188]and was forbidden to leave the country without Supreme court authorization.
Despite a Senate vote on Dec. 2 formally to indict him, Collor had refused to resign and had persistently tried to delay impeachment proceedings, most recently by dismissing his two defence lawyers on Dec. 21 (the day before the trial was due to begin) to gain a week's grace while the Supreme Court appointed a public defender.
On Dec. 28 Supreme Court President Sidney Sanches rejected the further postponement of the trial for one month as proposed by Collor.
Franco's inaugural speech
In his first speech as President on Dec. 30 Franco gave priority to the fight against poverty, social inequality and corruption and undertook to respect Brazil's international obligations.
He denounced Collor's "unrealistic" modernization policies which, he said, had been a step backwards for the economy and had impoverished Brazil, while high interest rates had prevented the government from investing in productive activities.
Franco said that modernization should not impoverish the middle classes or require more sacrifices from workers.
On privatization [see below], only the ethical orientation of the programme would change, and he guaranteed the stability of economic rules, promising that no arbitrary measures would be taken.
In conclusion he expressed the hope of an era of new administrative responsibility shared by the legislature, the executive and the judiciary.
Replacement of Economy minister
Planning Minister Paulo Haddad assumed the Economy and Finance portfolio in addition to his own following the resignation on Dec. 16 of Gustavo Krause after only two months in office [for his appointment see p. 39139, where his surname is wrongly given as Kraus].
Krause's resignation followed the decision by Franco on Dec. 15 to postpone the privatization programme for three months, raising fears that free-market and modernization policies would be slowed in favour of the populist and nationalist policies advocated by Franco in the past.
Introducing the broad outlines of an economic programme marking a new direction for Brazil, Haddad said on Dec. 31 that the fight against inflation, currently running at an annualized rate of about 1,500 per cent, took second place to plans to improve living standards by doubling and possibly quadrupling the minimum wage and creating 4,000,000 new jobs over the next two years through selective economic development.
Haddad said that the aim would be selective growth with the co-operation of business and labour; the government would be pleased, he said, if it could bring inflation down to an annualized rate of 60 per cent.
Other targets included the elimination of public waste, a gradual reduction of interest rates and the liberalization of investment regulations.
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Government election setback
Regional and municipal elections planned for Dec. 6 were held as scheduled and passed off without incident, despite the shadow cast over them by the Nov. 27 abortive military coup, the second attempt during 1992 [see p. 39185].
Delays in the announcing of results made the final results unclear, but the trend indicated a decisive rejection of President Carlos Andrés Pérez.
Results for the 22 state and federal territory governorships indicated that the ruling Democratic Action (AD) party had lost several governorships, while the opposition Social Christian party (COPEI) in alliance with the People's Electoral Movement (MEP) had won at least 10.
The Movement Towards Socialism (MAS) had also won at least four states.
The largest surprise, however, was registered in the Federal District, which was won by the left-wing Radical Cause (La Causa-R).
Aristóbulo Istúriz, leader of Radical Cause, became mayor of Caracas.
The elections had been promoted by the government as a popular endorsement of democracy and rejection of violence.
Sales of alcohol were banned, as was the carrying of firearms.
Yet, in spite of numerous official appeals on the media to vote, there was a high abstention rate, estimated at some 45 per cent.
The AD's defeat prompted some of the party's leaders to distance themselves from Pérez, most notably the party's president, Humberto Celli.
Coup aftermath
The curfew imposed during the coup attempt was lifted on Dec.1, and the rights of assembly and free speech which, together with other constitutional guarantees, had been suspended at the same time, were restored.
Further constitutional rights were restored on Dec. 19, but the guarantee against arrests without a judicial order was not reinstated.
On Dec. 8 Gen. Iván Jiménez Sánchez, the Defence Minister, announced that 240 people, both military personnel and civilians, would be tried for taking part in the coup attempt and would face penalties of up to 30 years' imprisonment.
The total included 40 of the soldiers who had fled to Peru after the failure of the coup attempt.
A further 41 military personnel, mostly airmen, returned to Venezuela from Iquitos, Peru, on Dec. 5.
About 600 members of the armed forces were discharged for alleged involvement in the coup attempt.
AMERICAS
ECUADOR
Deaths of army commander and minister
The Army Commander, Gen. Carlomagno Andrade, was killed on Dec. 10, when a small aircraft in which he was travelling crashed into a block of flats in the capital, Quito, while unsighted by dense fog.
In a similar fog-related accident in the capital a few days later, the Tourism and Information Minister, Pedro Zambrano, was killed on Dec. 21.
It was reported on Dec. 30 that Carlos Vera had been appointed to take over Zambrano's portfolio.
Bombing of public utilities
A group calling itself the Partido Comunista Maoista "Puka Inti" ( "Red Sun" Maoist Communist Party) claimed responsibility on Dec. 9 for a series of bomb attacks on public buildings in Quito carried out in protest against the government's privatization policy.
AMERICAS
PERU
Official election results
The official results of the legislative elections held on Nov. 22 [see pp. 39186-87]were announced on Dec. 5, confirming that the New Majority-Change-90 (NM-Cambio-90) coalition supporting President Alberto Keinya Fujimori would hold 44 of the 80 seats in the new Democratic Constituent Congress (CCD).
The first CCD session opened on Dec. 30, and in his opening speech CCD president Jaime Yoshiyama Tanaka declared that the new government's priorities would be to restore the autonomy of the judiciary, to defeat terrorism, to attract foreign investment, to generate employment and to improve the country's image abroad.
The main opposition parties had boycotted the elections.
Offers of asylum for coup plotters
It was reported on Dec. 18 that the former president of the Senate, Alberto Borea Odria, who had been involved in the abortive coup of Nov. 13 [see p. 39187], had been granted safe conduct to travel to Costa Rica, where he had been offered diplomatic asylum.
On Dec. 20 another conspirator, Vice-Adml. (retd) Augusto Vargas Prada, left for asylum in Chile.
Setbacks for Sendero Luminoso — Murder of union leader
In the continuing campaign against the Maoist Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrillas, 10 men and three women were sentenced to life imprisonment on Dec. 11.
The armed forces joint command announced on Dec. 12 that army units had inflicted heavy casualties on guerrilla forces in the previous 48 hours in the Huallaga valley, about 500 km north of the capital, Lima, and that about 100 Sendero activists had surrendered.
Sendero Luminoso was believed to be responsible for the shooting of Pedro Huillca, secretary-general of the General Workers' Confederation of Peru (CGTP), on Dec. 18.
In further Sendero attacks, three police officers and two civilians were killed in the town of Manaso, in the southern department of Puno, in the first week of December and 20 "dog bombs" (high explosives attached to dogs) were exploded in Lima on Dec. 26-27, in what was seen as a campaign aimed at local officials.
Car bombings against the Chinese, Japanese, Costa Rican and Austrian embassies on Dec. 26 and 28 were also ascribed to Sendero.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Cabinet reshuffle
President Carlos Saúl Menem reshuffled his Cabinet on Dec. 2, bringing in three close associates in an attempt to give his government a new policy focus and halt its decline in popularity.
Interior Minister José Luis Manzano (appointed in August 1991 — see p. 38388) was replaced by Gustavo Béliz (30), well known for leading a campaign against corruption.
Jorge Rodríguez was appointed as Education Minister in place of Antonio Francisco Salonia (who had also held the Justice portfolio until January 1991 — see p. 37959), and Enrique Rodríguez took over from Rodolfo Díaz as Social Security Minister.
The changes at Education and at Social Security followed a series of strikes by teachers and a general strike held on Nov. 9 [see p. 39187], both directed against government-proposed legislation.
Reappearance of cholera
The health authorities declared a fresh state of "red alert" on Dec. 28 when further cases of cholera were discovered in three northern provinces bordering Bolivia and Paraguay, although it was reported that none of the 44 people diagnosed in the space of five days had died [for outbreak in early 1992 see p. 38761].
AMERICAS
URUGUAY
Referendum on privatization
President Luis Alberto Lacalle Herrera suffered a severe setback to his privatization programme, a central plank of his free-market economic policy, when on Dec. 13 five laws providing for the sale of public companies were overwhelmingly rejected in a national referendum.
Early estimates indicated that over 70 per cent of voters, out of an electorate of 2,300,000, voted against.
After the passing by the Congress of controversial privatization legislation in September 1991, the opposition had managed to force a referendum on the issue [see also pp. 38761; 39002].
The result forced the government to freeze the sale of 51 per cent of the shares of the state telecommunications body Antel, which it had intended to offer to a foreign company for a sum of around US$500,000,000.
Despite the setback, Lacalle announced his intention to continue with the privatization programme within the next two years.
Resignation of Foreign Minister
The Foreign Minister, Hector Gros Espiell, resigned on Dec. 18, and was replaced by Senator Sergio Abreu.
Gros Espiell, who was later named ambassador to France, denied that his decision was connected with the referendum result, but his departure was seen as a further blow to the government.
AMERICAS
MERCOSUR
The third summit of Mercosur, the South American Common Market, was held in Montevideo, the Uruguayan capital, on Dec. 28 [for June summit see p. 38960].
The Presidents of the four member countries, Uruguay, Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay, agreed to set a ceiling of 20 per cent for common trade tariffs on most commodities, in preparation for the complete elimination of tariffs by the end of January 1994.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
A currency reform, reducing the units of the peso by 1,000 in order to create a new peso equivalent to 1,000 old pesos, was introduced by the Mexican authorities at midnight on Dec. 31; the measure, originally announced in June, was designed to help accounting by reducing the high figures used in daily financial transactions.
AMERICAS
NAFTA
The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the pact linking the economies of the USA, Canada and Mexico, which had been agreed in August [see pp. 39045-46], was formally signed on Dec. 17.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
DLP victory in presidential elections
Results of presidential elections
Kim Young Sam, the candidate of the ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP), won the South Korean presidential election on Dec. 18.
Kim, 65, defeated his nearest rival and erstwhile opposition colleague, Kim Dae Jung, 67, of the Democratic Party, by more than 1,900,000 votes.
Kim Young Sam, the first president without a military background to be elected in South Korea since 1960, topped the poll in every region apart from Seoul — where he won 36 per cent of the vote compared with 37.6 per cent for Kim Dae Jung — and Kim Dae Jung's home region of south-west Cholla province.
Since his election to the National Assembly in 1954, Kim had spent most of his career in opposition.
In 1979 he was expelled from the National Assembly and was subsequently banned from political activity.
Together with Kim Dae Jung he became the country's most prominent dissident but, unlike the elder Kim, he was never closely associated with the country's radical left-wing groups.
After becoming estranged from Kim Dae Jung following their inability to agree upon a single candidate to oppose Roh Tae Woo in the 1987 presidential contest, in 1990 he led his opposition party into an amalgamation with Roh's ruling party to form the DLP.
In third place in the election was Chung Ju Yung, 77, the founder of the Hyundai industrial group and the candidate of the United People's Party (UPP).
Chung ran a campaign — widely compared with that of Ross Perot in the US elections — which portrayed him as a political "outsider" with direct economic experience gleaned as the head of a giant commercial concern.
In accordance with the plan announced in November [see p. 39191], the newly formed New Korea Party (NKP) had formally merged with the UPP on Dec. 14, with the result that its candidate, Lee Jong Chan withdrew from the contest in favour of Chung.
Park Chan Jong, the candidate of the Party for New Political Reform (NPR), finished in fourth place, campaigning on an "anti-Kims" and anti-corruption platform.
There were three other candidates.
With the South Korean economy growing at an annual rate of 3.1 per cent during the third quarter of 1992, the lowest recorded level of growth since 1981, the state of the country's economy was the key issue of the election campaign.
All three major candidates agreed that the influence of the country's chaebols — large business conglomerates which had traditionally worked closely with the government — should be curbed and a greater emphasis placed upon laissez-faire economics.
Voting was freely and fairly conducted, with more than 81 per cent of the country's 29,000,000 registered voters participating in the poll and votes being tallied with abacuses in order to avoid the allegations of computer fraud which had marred the 1987 presidential elections.
Nevertheless, there were widespread claims that, despite the government's officially stated position of neutrality, the authorities had intervened in a variety of ways to support the candidacy of Kim Young Sam.
Kim's victory was widely attributed to Chung's poorer than expected showing, and his failure thereby to divert conservative votes from the DLP.
Despite his aggressive campaign against the government's economic record, Chung trailed Kim Young Sam in every region, including Chung's home province of Kangwon.
In part this failure was a function of an ongoing official campaign of harassment against the UPP.
Having already subjected the Hyundai group to rigorous financial and tax scrutiny earlier in the year, on Dec. 4 police raided the group's offices and seized documents which allegedly proved that company funds had been illegally channelled into the UPP's election campaign and that Hyundai employees had been mobilized to support Chung's candidacy.
Following the raid a number of Hyundai executives were arrested, bringing the total of UPP campaign workers detained for violations of electoral law to at least 70.
Kim Dae Jung also claimed that his supporters had been harassed and that he had been unfairly smeared as a supporter of North Korean President Kim Il Sung.
A widely cited example of the alleged harassment campaign was police action against a progressive coalition group, the National Alliance for Democracy and Unification, which had endorsed Kim Dae Jung's candidacy.
Under South Korean electoral law only officially registered campaign workers were permitted to participate formally in the campaign.
Yet, with all parties widely flouting this provision, it was claimed that the authorities had systematically overlooked DLP transgressions while acting against opposition violations of the law.
Shortly before polling it was also revealed that senior city officials had met in Pusan, on Dec. 11, to discuss ways of clandestinely supporting Kim Young Sam.
Policy statement by Kim Young Sam — Kim Dae Jung's retirement
Kim Young Sam, who was due to begin his single five-year term of office on Feb. 25, 1993, promised to maintain many of the policies of his predecessor.
He stated his intentions to consolidate ties with South Korea's traditional allies, particularly the USA and Japan, and to encourage his country to play a greater role in regional affairs.
Immediately after the election result he and Roh met to begin work on ensuring a smooth transition from the old administration to the new.
Following his defeat Kim Dae Jung on Dec. 21 announced his resignation as co-chairman of the DP and as a member of the National Assembly.
Kim, who had failed to win the presidency in 1971 and 1987, stated his intention to retire from active politics with immediate effect.
Chung Ju Yung, in contrast, responded to his defeat by dismissing suggestions that the UPP would be dissolved.
On Dec. 28 he announced that he intended to dedicate the remainder of his life to developing the party into a major political force.
However, his younger brother, Chung Se Yung, the current chairman of Hyundai, had stated on Dec. 21 that the conglomerate would "never again be swayed by political winds" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Replacement of Premier
The fourth session of the ninth Supreme People's Assembly (SPA) opened in Pyongyang on Dec. 11 and was attended by President Kim Il Sung and his son and chosen successor, Kim Jong Il.
The SPA confirmed a proposal, formulated on the previous day by the 20th plenary meeting of the sixth central committee of the ruling Korean Workers' Party (KWP), to appoint Kang Song San as Premier of the Administrative Council in place of Yon Hyong Muk.
The appointment of Kang, 67, a Moscow-trained economic technocrat who had served as Premier from 1984 to 1986, was widely interpreted as indicative of Kim Il Sung's recognition of the urgent need to reform the country's highly centralized and largely moribund economy.
In his previous period in office Kang had initiated a joint venture law which had attempted to encourage Western investment in the North Korean economy.
South Korean officials expressed the view that Kang's unprecedented return to the premiership would lead to an increase in economic co-operation between the two Korean states.
The SPA also confirmed changes to the Administrative Council (Cabinet).
These included the transfer of the Metal Industry portfolio to Deputy Premier Cho Yong Nim; the appointment of Deputy Premier Kim Tal Hyon as Chairman of the State Planning Commission; and the appointment of Yi Song Tae as Kim Tal Hyon's successor as Chairman of the External Trade Commission.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Cabinet reshuffle
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa reshuffled his Cabinet on Dec. 11.
In doing so he reduced the influence of the Takeshita faction, hitherto the largest internal faction within the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP).
Mayumi Moriyama, the new Minister of Education, was the only woman appointed to the Cabinet.
The new Director of the Economic Planning Agency, Hajime Funada, 39, was the youngest Cabinet Minister in Japan's post-war history.
The fact that one of the few unchanged portfolios was that of Agriculture was seen as indicative of the current intense foreign pressure upon Japan to end its ban on rice imports.
Whereas under normal circumstances the Agriculture portfolio was highly coveted, as it offered the opportunity to win lifelong allies within the powerful farming lobby, the current international pressure was deemed to have made it unattractive.
New Japanese Cabinet
*Kiichi Miyazawa Prime Minister
*Michio Watanabe Deputy Prime Minister; Minister of Foreign Affairs Masaharu Gotoda Justice Yoshiro Hayashi Finance Mayumi Moriyama Education Yuya Niwa Health and Welfare
*Masami Tanabu Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Yoshiro Mori International Trade and Industry Ihei Ochi Transport Junichiro Koizumi Posts and Telecommunications Masakuni Murakami Labour Kishiro Nakamura Construction Keijiro Murata Home Affairs
Ministers of State Yohei Kono Chief Cabinet Secretary Michihiko Kano Director-General of Management and Co-ordination Agency Shuji Kita Director-General of Hokkaido and Okinawa Development Agencies Toshio Nakayama Director-General of Defence Agency Hajime Funada Director-General of Economic Planning Agency Mamoru Nakajima Director-General of Science and Technology Agency Taikan Hayashi Director-General of Environment Agency Takashi Inoue Director-General of National Land Agency
*Unchanged.
LDP leadership changes
As president of the LDP Miyazawa on the same day made changes in the party leadership.
Seiroku Kajiyama was appointed secretary-general of the party in place of Tamisuke Watanuki (Watanuki had succeeded Ichiro Ozawa in the course of the government and party leadership changes in October 199 — see see p. 38558).
Kajiyama had caused widespread outrage in the USA in September 1990 when, while serving as Justice Minister, he gave an impromptu press conference in Tokyo and compared the influence of blacks in the USA with prostitutes [see p. 37715].
Hiroshi Mitsuzuka became chairman of the LDP's policy affairs research council, while Koko Sato retained his post as chairman of the executive council.
Breakup of Takeshita faction — Factional balance of new Cabinet
The Cabinet reshuffle was made within the context of a formal split within the dominant Takeshita faction.
On the same day as Miyazawa unveiled the changes, Tsutomu Hata — Hayashi's predecessor as Finance Minister — and a former LDP secretary-general, Ichiro Ozawa, announced that they were to establish a new faction.
The faction was formally inaugurated on Dec. 18.
This development had been widely predicted since the appointment of Keizo Obuchi as leader of the Takeshita faction in succession to Shin Kanemara, who had been forced to resign from the Diet in October as a result of the Sagawa Kyubin scandal [see pp. 39140-41].
Both the rump of the Takeshita faction, led by Obuchi, and the new Hata-Ozawa faction, consisting of around 44 of the Takeshita faction's 109 Diet members, were represented within the new Miyazawa administration, but together they controlled fewer and less important portfolios than had been held by the Takeshita faction prior to the reshuffle.
The disintegration of the Takeshita faction was seen as a mixed blessing for Miyazawa.
While it freed him from a form of dependency — his succession to the LDP leadership had been achieved with the faction's support — it also meant that the future of his premiership would depend on the skill with which he was able to balance the party's competing factions — including his own — all of which were of roughly equal strength.
The generational nature of the Takeshita faction's split was underlined by the fact that 19 of the 23 first and second-term lower house members of the faction were among those who transferred their loyalty to Hata and Ozawa.
Ozawa, 50, who was widely seen as seen as the real leader of the new group, firmly committed himself to comprehensive political reform.
Writing in the monthly magazine Bungei Shunju, he claimed that Obuchi and the other LDP figures of that generation were unsuited to exercise power as they had not "the slightest sense of urgency about the current maelstrom of public cynicism about politics" .
In line with Ozawa's own views the new faction committed itself to the adoption of single-member constituencies in place of the current multi-member system.
Sagawa Kyubin scandal
On the same day as the government changes were announced, one of Kanemaru's political aides was called before the Diet to testify in connection with the Sagawa Kyubin scandal.
The aide, Masahisa Haibara, described how he had handled $500 million yen (US$1.00=123.642 yen as at Dec. 14, 1993) in undeclared cash donations on behalf of Kanemaru's office.
The money had been donated by Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin, but Haibara refused to name the 60 or so politicians to whom the money was later distributed to assist with their re-election campaigns.
Prior to Haibara's testimony, Noboru Takeshita had given further evidence to the Diet concerning his role in the affair.
Despite several inconsistencies with the account which he had given in his November testimony [see pp. 39191-92], he steadfastly refused to accede to the growing demands for his resignation.
In a further development concerning the scandal, it was announced by the authorities on Dec. 22 that no further indictments would be filed either against Kanemaru — who had already been indicted on minor charges — or against any of the other Diet members implicated in the receipt of Sagawa Kyubin funds.
The decision was justified on the grounds that Haibara's refusal to identify the recipients made it impossible to prove that the Political Funds Control Law had been violated.
Numerous opposition legislators denounced the decision and stated that they would appeal against it.
On the same day LDP secretary-general Kajiyama announced that the party's internal investigation of the matter had been concluded and that no further action would be taken.
Approval of supplementary budget
Despite the continuing political ramifications of the Sagawa Kyubin affair, the further testimony concerning the scandal did appease opposition legislators sufficiently to allow a supplementary budget of 10,700,000 million yen [see pp. 39049; 39191]to achieve approval before the end of the special session of the Diet.
The measure had been approved by the lower chamber on Dec. 1, but had been held up in the upper house where the LDP lacked an overall majority.
The package, which applied to the current fiscal year (ending in March 1993), was finally passed on Dec. 10, after the special session of the Diet had been extended for a further two days.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
General election
Taiwan election results
A general election to the Legislative Yuan (the highest legislative organ of the state) was held on Dec. 19.
This was the first time since 1948 that the entire Legislative Yuan had been elected, and the first time ever that it had been elected entirely within Taiwan.
Previous elections had been partial, with "senior parliamentarians" (those elected to represent mainland Chinese constituencies in the late 1940s) simply retaining their seats [see p. 37122 for previous Legislative Yuan elections held in December 1989].
Under President Lee Teng-hui's political reform programme, all "senior" members had resigned their seats by the end of 1991 [see p. 38679].
The elections were widely regarded as a major setback for the ruling Kuomintang (KMT) and for President Lee.
Although the KMT gained a majority in the Yuan, the party's official candidates won only 53 per cent of the vote, compared with 71 per cent in elections to the National Assembly held in December 1991 [see p. 38679].
The opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) gave its best performance, winning 31 per cent of the vote, compared with 24 per cent in the 1991 Assembly elections.
During the campaign period the DPP had purposely been less strident in its controversial advocacy of Taiwanese independence.
The election results showed the KMT to be seriously divided.
KMT mavericks (the so-called "non-mainstream" faction) contested seats without official party endorsement and generally performed better than their "mainstream" counterparts, attacking alleged corruption within the "mainstream" ranks.
President Lee's own liberal "Wisdom" faction performed very poorly, losing ground to a conservative and staunchly "One China" faction, the "New KMT Alliance" identified with Premier Gen. (retd) Hau Pei-tsun.
Following the election, Hau indicated his intention to resign as Premier before the Yuan's first session in February 1993.
KMT secretary-general James Soong tendered his resignation in the election aftermath, but President Lee persuaded him to remain in his post.
A total of 161 seats were contested, of which 125 were directly elected and 36 were appointed from lists of so-called "at large" candidates in proportion to total votes in the district elections.
A total of 406 candidates contested the election and a 72 per cent turnout was registered.
Visit by US trade representative
US Representative for Trade Negotiations Carla Hills visited Taiwan on Nov. 30-Dec.4 for talks with Taiwanese officials.
Hills was the first US Cabinet-level official to visit Taiwan for 13 years.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Foreign relations
Visit by Russian President
Russian President Boris Yeltsin visited China on Dec. 17-19 (returning earlier than scheduled owing to the political situation in Russia — see p. 39223).
This was the first visit since Mikhail Gorbachev, the then Soviet President, had visited China in May 1989, when his stay was largely overshadowed the massive pro-democracy student demonstrations in Beijing [see pp. 36641-42].
During his visit Yeltsin held talks with high-ranking Chinese officials, including President Yang Shangkun, Premier Li Peng, and Jiang Zemin, general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).
Yeltsin did not hold talks with Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, who, according to Yeltsin, was "not feeling too well" .
In the course of Yeltsin's visit the two sides signed 24 joint statements, documents and memorandums of understanding in areas including military and technical co-operation, space exploration, nuclear energy development, border security and armed forces reduction, trade and economic co-operation and educational and scientific exchanges.
Lifting of German and US sanctions — Visit by US Cabinet member
In early December the German Bundestag (lower house of the German parliament) voted to end formally the trade sanctions imposed against China after the 1989 military crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators [see pp. 36720-22].
The USA announced on Dec. 22 that it also would lift a ban on sales of military technology to China enacted after the 1989 crackdown.
The move cleared the way for the delivery of radars, torpedoes and aviation electronics kits that had been purchased by China before the crackdown.
US Secretary of Commerce Barbara Franklin visited China on Dec. 16-18; her visit was the first by a US Cabinet member since the then US Secretary of State James Baker visited in November 1991 [see pp. 38574-75].
An article in the Far Eastern Economic Review of Dec. 10 said that the visit was partly to balance an early December visit to Taiwan by US Representative for Trade Negotiations Carla Hills [see this page].
Closure of French consulate
On Dec. 23 China ordered France to close its consulate in the southern city of Guangzhou within a month in protest at the recent sale of French fighter aircraft and missiles to Taiwan [see pp. 39190; 39217].
Completion of military reshuffle
The Hong Kong newspaper Wen Wei Po reported on Dec. 15 that the military reshuffle under way since the end of the 14th CCP congress in October had been completed [see pp. 39126-27; 39189].
The report said that the reshuffle had been the biggest since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KIRGIZSTAN
Adoption of draft constitution
Kirgizstan moved a step closer to adopting a new constitution, after months of wrangling between President Askar Akayev and former communists in the Supreme Soviet over the extent of presidential authority, when on Dec. 8 the Supreme Soviet supported a preamble drafted by Akayev.
The wording of this preamble specified adherence to "human moral principles, national traditions and the moral values of Islam and other religions" .
Akayev told parliament: "It is necessary to keep in the constitution references to the moral value of Islam, and no one needs any convincing that in place of a secular state we shall build an Islamic state.
The ancient teaching concentrates the best traditions of the peoples of the East, appealing to unity and peace among the people.
It will promote moral purification."
Akayev had failed to win parliamentary support for a draft version of the constitution in the summer.
A re-draft, tabled for the December session by a constitutional commission dominated by former communists, had envisaged parliament having the right to form the Cabinet and shape policy, shifting the balance of power away from the President.
The draft was submitted for public discussion until March 1.
Deputies voted to rename the Supreme Soviet the Uluk Kenesh, and on Dec. 9 accepted an Akayev amendment which described the President as head of state, and the Prime Minister as head of the executive.
Appointment of Foreign Minister
On Dec. 15 Ednan Karabayev, the head of the presidential staff, was appointed Foreign Minister.
ITAR-TASS reported that Karabayev, who had no diplomatic training and spoke neither Kirgiz nor English, was appointed because of Kirgizstan's lack of professional diplomats.
Seizures at human rights conference
An international human rights conference was held in Bishkek, the Kirghiz capital, on Dec. 6-8.
Attended by 250 activists from central Asia, Russia, the USA and Europe, it was marred by the seizure in Bishkek on Dec. 8 of three Uzbek participants, allegedly by Uzbek security police [see also this page].
The conference was also told that delegates from Turkmenistan had been prevented by the authorities from leaving that country.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAJIKISTAN
Resumption of fighting
With heavy fighting continuing despite a ceasefire agreed at the end of November, the deputy C.-in-C. of Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) armed forces, Col.-Gen.
Boris Pyankov, said on Dec. 8 that up to 5,000 CIS peacekeeping troops would be deployed in Tajikistan to prevent a "bloodbath" .
Pro-government forces in the republic took control of the capital, Dushanbe, on Dec. 10 after five days of fighting.
The former communist Imamali Rahmonov, Chair of the Tajik Supreme Soviet since the collapse of a pro-Islamic coalition government in November [see p. 39192], entered the city, and on Dec. 12 he began peace talks with Islamic opposition forces.
However, continuing heavy fighting was reported near Kafarnihan, the Islamic forces' headquarters 25 km east of the capital, and fighting also continued in Dushanbe itself despite appeals for calm broadcast by Rahmonov.
On Dec. 20 government forces took Karfarnihan after three days of heavy fighting.
Clashes continued elsewhere in areas to which opposition forces had retreated.
By Dec. 28 the pro-government Tajik People's Front had taken control of the border Pyanj region, reported to be a rebel stronghold.
Plight of refugees
More than 100,000 refugees from the fighting were reportedly stranded on the banks of the Oxus river, between Tajikistan and Afghanistan; relief agencies said that people were dying of cold in the freezing conditions.
Some 5,000 people a day were entering Afghanistan in mid-December, braving an icy river crossing.
The fighting was said to have displaced one in 10 of the republic's 5,000,000 population.
New government
Rahmonov's new government, approved by the Tajik Supreme Soviet on Dec. 1 -3, was described by the Russian daily Nezavisimaya gazeta as influenced by Sangak Safarov, the militia leader in the Kulyab region.
Imamali Rahmonov Speaker, Supreme Soviet Abdumalik Abdulojonov Chairman, Council of Ministers Munavvarsho Nazriyev Deputy Chairman Aburahamon Mustakov Deputy Chairman Aleksandr Militiyev Deputy Chairman Yusuf Salimov Internal Affairs Saidamin Gufarov National Security Rashid Olimov Foreign Affairs Ismoil Davlatov Economics
Principal members of Tajik government
ASIA — PACIFIC
TURKMENISTAN
Elections to People's Council
A turnout of 99.5 per cent was reported by the ITAR-TASS news agency in elections held from Nov. 24 to Dec. 7 for 50 of the 60 members of the Khalk Maslakhaty (People's Council), set up as the supreme body of state power under the Turkmen Constitution adopted in May, and comprising one member from each electoral district.
According to Sakhat Muradov, Chair of the Turkmen Supreme Soviet, the new council's supervisory role would not weaken presidential authority or the Supreme Soviet's legislative function; it was empowered to rule on "the most important questions" of economic and political life in Turkmenistan, and could also call for changes to the constitution and express no confidence in the President should he break the law.
Muradov said that the council should be seen as a traditional Turkmen institution.
The council held its first session on Dec. 14 and conferred the rank of general on President Saparmurad Niyazov, in his capacity as supreme commander of the armed forces.
On Dec. 20 the council established six free economic zones, within which businesses would be granted land rent exemptions for three years and preferential tax, customs and import-export regulations.
New currency
A government decision was reported on Dec. 4 to introduce the republic's own currency, the manat, in late 1993.
Turkmenistan abolished import duties on Dec. 4 to increase the amount of goods on the domestic market and to encourage foreign businesses to trade with the republic.
Luxury goods would remain liable to duty.
ASIA — PACIFIC
UZBEKISTAN
New Constitution
The Uzbek Supreme Soviet adopted a new constitution on Dec. 8 promising freedom of thought, conscience and religious convictions, a multiparty democracy and respect for human rights.
President Islam Karimov told parliament on Dec. 8 that the new Constitution guaranteed peace and consensus between citizens, created a society based on the rule of law, and recognized international law.
Clampdown on opposition human rights activists
On the day the constitution was adopted three opposition politicians attending an international human rights conference in Bishkek, Kirgizstan, were reportedly seized by Uzbek security police [see also this page].
One of those arrested was conference director Abdurakhim Pulatov (who was later reported to be in a Tashkent prison).
Pulatov had told the conference that he had been forced to live outside Uzbekistan since June for fear of repression, and he had accused the Uzbek authorities of political terror and the attempted destruction of the human rights movement in Uzbekistan.
He also claimed that other Uzbek human rights activists had been arrested without warrants to prevent them attending the conference.
The activists to whose arrest Pulatov referred included Olim Karimov and Shukhrat Ismatullayev, co-chairman of the nationalist Birlik (Unity) movement.
Both Birlik and Erk, the republic's democratic party, had claimed on Dec. 3 that their members were being arrested to stop them attending the Bishkek conference.
On Dec. 9 the Supreme Soviet voted by 383 to seven to ban Birlik for "anti-government activities." 
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Constituent assembly session — Election of President
The Shura-e Ahl-e Hal wa Aqd, the Council of Resolution and Settlement or constituent assembly, opened in Kabul on Dec. 29.
The opening of the session, called for under the terms of the April 1992 Peshawar Accords in order to elect a permanent President and prepare for a general election, had been repeatedly postponed.
The Council was attended by 1,335 members, including 959 elected from the country's 29 provinces and numerous appointees.
The assembly was boycotted by rebel mujaheddin leader Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, head of a Hezb-i-Islami faction, and by the Iranian-backed (Shia) Hezb-i-Wahdat faction.
On Dec. 30 the Council elected Burhanuddin Rabbani as first President of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan for a two-year term.
Rabbani had served as acting president since June 1992 [see pp. 38968; 39146].
Rabbani was the sole candidate for the post.
According to a report on Radio Afghanistan on Dec. 30 he received 916 votes and there were 59 votes against.
The Hekmatyar faction's Radio Message of Freedom described the election in a Dec. 31 broadcast as "a declaration of war against the nation" .
Fighting in Kabul
Fierce fighting between various groups raged in Kabul on Dec. 6-10.
The fighting apparently started between pro-government forces loyal to Defence Minister Ahmed Shah Masud (the so-called Shura-e Nazar or Supervisory Council) and Hezb-i-Wahdat forces.
Hekmatyar's fighters quickly joined the fray, launching long-range missile attacks into the city against Masud's forces.
Eventually, fighting also broke out between Masud's forces and Uzbek militiamen controlled by Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostam, Masud's erstwhile ally.
At one point Dostam used fighter bombers to attack the presidential palace and defence ministry.
As many as 100 people died in the fighting, which was attributed to a general increase in tension ahead of the constituent assembly meeting.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Controversy over nuclear weapons programme and Chinese missile sales
Allegations in December about Pakistani nuclear weapons capabilities threatened to damage recently improved relations between the USA and Pakistan [see pp. 38577; 38726; 38762; 39098].
US senator Larry Pressler said on Dec. 1 that according to the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Pakistan had the components to build at least seven nuclear bombs.
In January Pressler, sponsor of a 1985 law under which the USA had suspended economic and military aid to Pakistan in October 1990 on the grounds that it might have developed nuclear weapons [see p. 37764], had claimed in January 1992 that Pakistan could manufacture two nuclear weapons [see p. 38726], anticipating a controversial admission by Pakistan's Foreign Affairs Secretary, Shahryar Khan, who suggested that Pakistan had the expertise to assemble one nuclear device [see pp. 38762-63].
A Pakistani Foreign Ministry spokesman on Dec. 2 denied the latest allegations, stressing that "Pakistan's nuclear programme is for peaceful purposes" , but added that "in the evolution of this programme Pakistan has acquired some technical capabilities" .
On Dec. 9 Pakistan also denied reports, backed by US intelligence officials, that it had recently acquired some two dozen Chinese M-11 guided missiles, in possible violation of the Missile Control Technology Regime (MTCR).
Reports of the sale were described by Chinese officials as "groundless" .
In October Pakistan had confirmed the purchase of 40 Chinese fighter aircraft [see p. 39146].
Visit by Sharif to Japan
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif held talks on nuclear non-proliferation in south Asia with his Japanese counterpart Kiichi Miyazawa and other senior ministers during a visit to Japan on Dec. 16-19.
Pakistani officials denied reports that these talks had been prompted by Japan's recent policy of linking development assistance to nuclear and arms-related issues.
Pakistan was to receive Japanese aid worth an estimated 55,000 million yen (about US$445 million) for five projects during the fiscal year 1992-93.
IMF emergency assistance
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) on Nov. 25 approved emergency assistance equivalent to SDR 189,550,000 (about US$262,000,000) to help Pakistan meet its immediate foreign exchange requirements in the wake of floods which had caused widespread destruction during September [see p. 39098].
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Settlement of border dispute with Thailand
A border dispute with Thailand which at times threatened to intensify into full-scale fighting was settled in December following intervention by the Thai monarch, King Bhumibol Adulyadej.
Myanman troops had occupied the disputed Hill 491 along the Myanma-Thai border since clearing Karen rebels from the area in early 1992.
By November the Thai government was under heavy pressure from the opposition and the military to use the army to clear the hill.
On Dec. 4 King Bhumibol made a highly unusual intervention and called on the two sides to settle the affair peacefully.
Within a few days military delegations from Myanma and Thailand had met and Myanman troops were withdrawn by Dec. 25.
Visit by UN delegation and critical UN resolution — Reports of hunger strike by opposition leader
Yozo Yokota, a UN Human Rights Commission representative, visited Myanma in early December, holding meetings with various ministers and visiting prisons and refugee camps.
During Yokota's visit the UN General Assembly's committee on social, humanitarian and cultural issues unanimously approved a resolution condemning Myanma's ruling military junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), for refusing to surrender power to the country's democratically elected parliament [for victory of opposition National League for Democracy in May 1990 general election see pp. 37457-58; 36612].
The resolution also called for the unconditional release of opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi, who had been under house arrest since 1989.
Reports in early December which claimed that Suu Kyi had started a hunger strike to protest over her continued detention were denied by the Myanman authorities.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
General election
A general election to a newly created 85-member National Assembly, whose creation was laid down in the Constitution promulgated in mid-1991, was held on Dec. 20.
All 154 candidates were approved by the Lao Front for National Construction, the "mass organization" dominated by the ruling Lao People's Revolutionary Party.
The final election results had not been compiled by the end of December because many ballots had to be brought in from remote villages.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Seizure of UN troops by Khmers Rouges
The seizure of six UN personnel by the Khmers Rouges on Dec. 1, and similar incidents later in the month, highlighted the dramatic deterioration in relations between the guerrilla faction and the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC).
The six soldiers seized in the central Cambodian province of Kompong Thom on Dec. 1 (and eventually released on Dec. 4) had been monitoring troop movements from a boat on the Stung Sen river.
The Khmers Rouges accused them of spying "in order to help the Vietnamese and Phnom Penh forces" .
A UN helicopter attempting a reconnaissance mission to the area where the troops were seized was hit by Khmer Rouge gunfire on Dec. 2.
The Khmers Rouges seized a further 21 UNTAC personnel in Kompong Thom province on Dec. 15-16, holding them until Dec. 17.
A further 46 UN soldiers, all Indonesian, were detained in the same area on Dec. 17-18.
Another 11 UN personnel were released on Dec. 20 after being held captive for two days (and threatened with execution, according to a UN spokesman) by Khmer Rouge guerrillas in the eastern province of Kratie.
Khmer Rouge attack on ethnic Vietnamese
Khmer Rouge guerrillas attacked a fishing village in the central province of Kompong Chhnang on Dec. 27, killing at least 13 ethnic Vietnamese and two Cambodians.
The guerrillas reportedly singled out Vietnamese settlers for summary execution.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
National Assembly session
The ninth National Assembly's second session was held in Hanoi on Dec. 9-23 [see p. 39007 for election of ninth Assembly in July 1992].
In his opening address to the Assembly on Dec. 9 Premier Vo Van Kiet gave details of the performance of the economy in 1992.
Despite the cut-off in aid from the former Soviet Union and the continuing US economic embargo, the economy had performed well, he said.
Gross national product (GNP) had risen by 5.3 per cent, compared with a 2.4 per cent rise in 1991.
Industrial output increased by 15 per cent and agricultural output by 4.4 per cent.
Inflation fell to an annualized figure of 15 per cent, compared with about 70 per cent in 1991.
State revenues increased by 82 per cent, largely as a result of more efficient tax collection.
On Dec. 23 the Assembly approved a number of amendments to foreign investment legislation in order to attract more foreign companies.
The amendments included an increase in the maximum duration of joint ventures from 20 to 70 years and authorization of the opening of overseas bank accounts by joint venture companies; in addition tax concessions already provided to joint ventures were extended to selected wholly foreign-owned investment projects.
Visit by Chinese Premier
Li Peng, the Chinese Premier, visited Vietnam on Nov. 30-Dec. 4; the visit was the first by a Chinese Premier in 21 years.
Vietnam and China had normalized diplomatic relations in November 1991 [see p. 38574].
Vietnam and China signed agreements during Li's visit, guaranteeing foreign investment in each other 's countries and encouraging economic, cultural and scientific co-operation.
China also agreed to provide Vietnam with an interest-free loan equivalent to US$14,000,000.
Despite the signing of the four agreements, a report in the Dec. 17 edition of the Far Eastern Economic Review said that the two sides had failed to resolve territorial disputes which had strained relations since normalization [see pp. 39094; 39144].
The article said that Vietnamese Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh Cam had been "blunt" in detailing his country's views about the disputes.
Easing of US trade curbs
On Dec. 14 US President George Bush authorized US companies to open offices, conduct feasibility studies and sign contracts in Vietnam.
Bush refused, however, to lift outright the US trade embargo against Vietnam.
Any contracts signed by US companies in Vietnam could only be executed should the embargo, put in place 17 years previously, be lifted.
Diplomatic relations with South Korea
Vietnam and South Korea restored diplomatic relations on Dec. 22 during a visit to Vietnam by the South Korean Minister of Foreign Affairs Lee Sang Ock [for establishment of South Korean liaison office in Hanoi in October see p. 39144].
Relations had been severed in 1975 after North Vietnam defeated the South Korean-backed South Vietnamese regime.
North Korea responded to the announcement by cancelling a scheduled visit to Pyongyang by Vietnam's National Defence Minister Gen. Doan Khue.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SINGAPORE
Leadership changes
Goh Chok Tong, the Prime Minister of — Singapore, was elected as secretary-general of the ruling People's Action Party (PAP) on Dec. 2.
Lee Kuan Yew, the former Prime Minister and current Senior Minister who had held this post for some 35 years, would continue to serve as a member of the party's central executive committee.
Lee Kuan Yew's son Lee Hsien Loong took over Goh's post as PAP first assistant secretary-general and remained a Deputy Prime Minister; however, he had given up the Trade and Industry portfolio in mid-November after announcing that he was undergoing treatment for cancer.
It was also announced at the same time that Ong Teng Cheong, the other Deputy Prime Minister, was suffering from cancer.
In early December Goh announced that Suppiah — Dhanabalan would take on temporarily the post of Minister of Trade and Industry.
Dhanabalan, an ally of Goh, had resigned as Minister of National Development in September 1992.
Goh's by-election victory
On Dec. 19 Goh Chok Tong won a resounding victory for the PAP in a by-election held in his own constituency of Marine Parade.
Three other PAP members were returned in the four-seat constituency.
Goh had formally resigned as a member of parliament (while remaining Prime Minister) on Dec. 1 in order to contest the by-election.
The by-election was not legally required but Goh had announced during the campaign period for the 1991 general election that he would use by-elections to provide voters with a chance to renew his mandate.
The Marine Parade constituency had returned four PAP members in 1991.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Developments concerning rebels
Signature of truce by military dissidents
Former military officer Gregorio "Gringo" Honasan and six other leaders of the dissident Rebolusyonaryong Alyansang Makabansa (Nationalist Revolutionary Alliance) signed an accord with the government on Dec. 23 in which they agreed to "suspend hostilities" .
The agreement paved the way for the opening of talks on Jan. 11, 1993, and was followed by a goodwill gesture on Dec. 24 in which the armed forces released from military detention three generals and 40 other officers who had been imprisoned for involvement in coup attempts.
President Fidel Ramos welcomed the accord as a step towards restoring political stability to the country, a precondition for economic revival.
Honasan, who had been implicated in several coup attempts against Ramos's predecessor, Corazon Aquino, had been in hiding since 1988, after escaping from a prison ship moored in Manila Bay [see p. 36428].
Incidents involving Moslem rebels
Separatist Moslem rebels killed 18 Catholic church workers on Dec. 25 in Carmen, North Cotabato province, 900 km south of Manila.
The attack was believed to have been in revenge for the killing by government militia of several Moslem farmers worshipping in a mosque in the neighbouring town of Pikit.
On Dec. 30 a Moslem separatist unit freed an American missionary, Augustine Frazczack, whom it had held hostage for more than two months.
The unit, believed to be from the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF)— the largest of the insurgent Moslem groups —
had originally demanded a ransom of 5,000,000 pesos (US$212,000) but was understood to have settled instead for the receipt of food.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Earthquake
An earthquake measuring 6.8 on the Richter scale struck Flores and surrounding islands in the eastern province of Nusa Tenggara on Dec. 12.
President Suharto declared a national disaster on Dec. 15.
As many as 2,500 people died as a result of the earthquake and the ensuing tidal waves.
There were fears that the death toll could reach 4,000 when all reports were received from the more remote areas devastated by the earthquake.
Talks with Portugal on East Timor
Ali Alatas and José Manuel Durao Barroso, respectively the Indonesian and Portuguese Foreign Affairs Ministers, held a round of talks on East Timor at the UN in New York on Dec. 17.
The meeting was the first of a series sponsored by the UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
A second meeting was scheduled for April 20, 1993, in Rome.
Alatas and Durao Barroso both acknowledged that no significant progress had been achieved at the meeting.
Statement by captured East Timor resistance leader
José Xanana Gusmao, the military commander of the Front for an Independent East Timor (Fretilin), who was captured by the Indonesian authorities in November [see p. 39196], appeared in a televised interview released by the Indonesian authorities on Dec. 1.
He made statements renouncing the independence struggle and calling on his fellow guerrillas to surrender.
On Dec. 2 Portuguese President Mario Soares accused Indonesia of torturing and threatening Gusmao.
During December the Indonesian government reported the surrender of large groups of East Timorese rebels in response to a government offer of clemency.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NIUE
Sir Robert Rex, the Prime Minister of Niue, died on Dec. 13 at the age of 83, having served continuously as Premier of the New Zealand Pacific dependency since 1974.
EUROPE
FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
FRY elections
Presidential and parliamentary elections took place on Dec. 20 in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY — comprising Serbia (including Kosovo and Vojvodina) and Montenegro).
Elections had last been held as recently as May 1992 for a nominal four-year term [see pp. 38919; 38970].
At stake were (i) the Serbian presidency;(ii) the 250-seat Serbian republican assembly and local assemblies;(iii) the presidency of Montenegro;(iv) the Montenegrin republican assembly and local assemblies; and (v) the 138-member directly elected lower house of the federal parliament, the Chamber of Citizens.
(The federal upper house, the Chamber of the Republics, comprised 20 delegates each elected by the Serbian and Montenegrin republican assemblies.)
The hardline Socialist Party leader Slobodan Milosevic was re-elected to the Serbian presidency with 56.3 per cent of the vote, while Prime Minister and opposition leader Milan Panic won only 34 per cent; there were five other candidates.
Attempts to block Panic's candidacy by claiming that he did not fulfil the one-year residency requirement had been overruled by the Supreme Court on Dec. 9.
Panic demanded fresh elections on the grounds of large-scale fraud; international monitors from the CSCE confirmed that at least 5 per cent of voters had been prevented from voting.
Turnout was 67.4 per cent of the electorate of 7,300,000.
The legislative elections in Serbia resulted in gains for Milosevic's Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS) which finished with 101 seats and the extremist Serbian Radical Party (SRS) led by Vojislav Seselj (73 seats).
The main opposition Serbian Democratic Movement (Depos)— a coalition of 14 parties including the Serbian Renewal Movement (SPO) and the Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS), a splinter party of the Democratic Party (DS)— won 49 seats.
The remaining 27 seats were won as follows: Democratic Community of Vojvodina Hungarians (DZVM) nine, DS seven, Group of Citizens of Kosovo-Metohija five, others six.
A second round of voting was required for the Montenegro presidency, as a run-off between the incumbent, Momir Bulatovic (42.2 per cent on first round), and former federal Vice-President Branko Kostic (23 per cent).
The Democratic Party of Socialists of Montenegro (DPS), the ruling party in Montenegro and successor to the local League of Communists, won the majority of seats in the Montenegrin republican assembly with 42.5 per cent of the vote.
The 138 seats in the federal parliament were distributed as follows: SPS 47, SRS 34, Depos 20, DPS 17, DS five, Socialist Party of Montenegro five, People's Party four, DZVM three, the coaliton of the DS and the Reformist Democratic Party of Vojvodina (RDSV) two, and the coalition of the DS, RDSV and the Civic Party one.
Vote of no confidence in Panic
Panic was effectively removed from office on Dec. 29, when both houses of the federal parliament passed a vote of no confidence tabled by the Radical Party.
Voting was by 30 to five with one abstention in the Chamber of Republics and by 95 to two with 12 abstentions in the Chamber of Citizens.
The lower house appointed Radoje Kontic, a Deputy Prime Minister, as caretaker head of government, but Panic refused to go until a new government was formed.
Bosnia-Hercegovina
The re-election of Milosevic to the Serbian presidency disappointed Western hopes for the election of a leader more disposed to compromise over Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Meanwhile Western countries remained divided over whether to intervene militarily in the conflict.
Foreign Ministers of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), which was preparing contingency plans for intervention, agreed on Dec. 17 to support any future UN resolution enforcing the existing flight ban over Bosnia, on condition that such a resolution provided for continued humanitarian efforts.
The United Kingdom had consistently expressed reservations over intervention, in contrast to the stance of the USA which called for preventive bombardment of Serb positions; however, on Dec. 20 outgoing US President George Bush and UK Prime Minister John Major agreed in Washington to support a UN resolution enforcing the flight ban.
Bush warned Milosevic in a letter delivered on Dec. 25 that if Serbia provoked conflict in the largely Albanian-populated province of Kosovo, or if the Security Council voted to enforce the flight ban, the USA could unilaterally use military force against Serbia.
French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas said on Dec. 27 that France would participate in UN efforts to enforce the flight ban.
Military situation
At the end of December a major offensive around Sarajevo appeared imminent as some 10,000 Bosnian Moslem reinforcements gathered on Mount Igman above the capital.
Sarajevo airport was closed on Dec. 1 after a UN plane was hit by small-arms fire and remained closed for three weeks due to fighting.
Serbian forces tightened their hold on the capital with the capture on Dec. 6 of the strategic western suburb of Otes.
Heavy fighting continued notwithstanding yet another ceasefire agreement signed by the warring factions on Dec. 13, providing also for humanitarian corridors to be opened to evacuate the Sarajevo population.
Some 10,000 Serbs fled across the river Drina in the last two weeks of December as Bosnian Moslem forces advanced towards Bratunac on the eastern border.
A UN Security Council resolution unanimously adopted on Dec. 18 vehemently condemned the detention and mass rape of Moslem women by Serb forces in Bosnia and called for EC observers to be allowed into the detention camps under armed escort to assess the situation.
Peace negotiations
At the Geneva peace conference on Yugoslavia, leaders of the three warring factions in Bosnia presented on Dec. 8 maps for the "cantonization" of the republic along ethnic lines.
Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadjic claimed that his proposal, giving Serbs 60 per cent of Bosnian territory, was based on the situation in 1931 when Bosnia contained greater numbers of Serbs.
Karadjic was elected "president" of the self-proclaimed Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina (SRBH) at a session of its assembly on Dec. 18.
A special meeting of the Geneva conference was convened on Dec. 16 under the continued co-chairmanship of Cyrus Vance for the UN and Lord Owen for the European Communities (EC) to review the situation; it brought together Foreign Ministers from the Western and Islamic worlds.
US Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger proposed that an international war crimes tribunal should be established to prosecute those accused directly or indirectly of atrocities; among the nine men named by the USA were Milosevic, Karadjic, Seselj and Gen. Ratko Mladic (commander of the Bosnian Serb forces).
The US State Department had on Dec. 7 provided the UN commission investigating war crimes in Bosnia with documented information on atrocities committed largely by Serbs against Moslems in Bosnia.
UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali met separately in Geneva on Dec. 28 with Presidents Dobrica Cosic of the FRY, Franjo Tudjman of Croatia and Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia-Hercegovina, urging Cosic to use his influence with Serbia to avoid international intervention.
Government reshuffle
The Bosnian government was reshuffled on Dec. 23 with the following new appointments: Bozo Rajic (Defence), Branko Bilic (Finance), Husein Ahmovic (Supply), Josip Jukic (Transport and Communications), Mustafa Dizdarevic (Town Planning, Construction and Environmental Protection) and Lukic Zlatko (Religion).
Macedonia
President Kiro Gligorov informed the Macedonian Assembly on Dec. 9 that if the EC recognized Macedonia as the Republic of Macedonia (Skopje), Macedonia would formally accept that name.
Over 1,000,000 Greeks demonstrated in Athens on Dec. 10 against the international recognition of Macedonia under its existing name.
EC Foreign Ministers in Brussels on Dec. 8 criticized Greece for allowing Greek companies to violate UN sanctions by shipping oil to Serbia while at the same time withholding oil from Macedonia.
UN sanctions against Serbia had already cut off Macedonia's main trade route.
The UN Security Council on Dec. 11 authorized the dispatch to Macedonia of a UN peacekeeping force of 700 troops plus 35 military observers and 26 civilian police.
EUROPE
SLOVENIA
Elections
Slovenia's first presidential and parliamentary elections since independence in 1991 [see p. 38274]took place on Dec. 6.
The incumbent President and former leader of the Slovene League of Communists, Milan Kucan, standing as an independent, was re-elected as President for a five-year term with 64 per cent of the vote.
Ivo Bizjak of the Christian Democratic Party (SKD) came second with 21 per cent, and Jelko Kacin of the Democratic Party (DS) took third place with 7 per cent .
There were four other candidates.
In simultaneous legislative elections the Liberal Democratic Party (LDS), led by Prime Minister Janez Drnovsek, emerged as the strongest party but failed to win a majority in the new 130-member bicameral parliament.
Turnout amounted to 76 per cent of the electorate of 1,500,000.
There were 25 parties and coalitions contesting the election.
Those winning representation in the National Assembly besides the LDS, SKD and DS were the Associated List (including the former League of Communists), the extreme right anti-foreigner Slovene National Party (SNS) led by Zmago Jelincic, the Social Democratic Party of Slovenia (SDSS), the Slovene People's Party (SLS) and the Greens (ZS).
Of the 90 members of the National Assembly, serving a four-year term, 40 were directly elected; the remaining 50 were distributed by the Republican Electoral Commission according to a proportional representation system among those eight parties which had reached the threshold for parliamentary representation by winning 3 per cent or more of the vote.
Of the 40 members of the State Council, serving a five-year term, 22 members were directly elected on Dec. 6, and the remaining 18, representing professional and other interest groups, were chosen on Dec. 10.
The third chamber, the Chamber of Associated Labour, was abolished.
Seats in National Assembly* % of valid vote Directly elected Total LDS 17 22 23.7 SKD 8 15 14.5 Associated List 8 14 13.6 SNS 3 12 9.9 SLS 2 10 8.8 DS — 6 5.0 ZS — 5 3.7 SDSS — 4 3.3 Others — 17.9 Total 38 88 100
Slovenian legislative elections
*Two of the 90 seats in the Chamber were reserved for non-elected representatives of the Hungarian and Italian minorities.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Shkodër trials
Five former Communist Party (ALP) and police officials were sentenced on Dec. 27 to prison terms of between 15 and 20 years for ordering the shooting of demonstrators on April 2, 1991, in Shkodër, where four people were killed and 57 injured [see p. 38160].
New Attorney General
Alush Dragoshi was appointed Attorney General on Dec. 7 [see p. 39103 for his predecessor's dismissal].
Visit by Italian President
Italian President Oscar Scalfaro paid an official visit to Albania on Dec. 18 [originally envisaged for Oct. 26 — see p. 39151], accompanied by Foreign Minister Emilio Colombo.
Talks focused on the former Yugoslavia, especially Kosovo and Macedonia.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
 "Government of experts" 
The formation of a new Bulgarian government on Dec. 30 ended a two-month long crisis caused by the collapse of the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) government in late October [see p. 39151].
The UDF and the (former communist) Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) had both failed in their efforts to form a new government in November and December [see p. 39199; see p. 38539 for strength of various parties in National Assembly following October 1991 general election].
President Zhelyu Zhelev had accordingly invited the remaining party represented in the National Assembly, the (ethnic Turkish) Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF), to seek to put together a government, and the programme and Cabinet as eventually formed were backed by the MRF and the majority of the BSP, as well as by some elements of the broad UDF grouping.
Described as a "government of experts" , it was headed by Lyuben Berov, 67, a professor of economics and a former adviser to Zhelev, and its members were all, ostensibly, non-party figures.
However, a number of ministers had until recently been members of the UDF.The UDF leadership described the new government as "the product of a shady political deal" between the MRF and the BSP.
The MRF, it pointed out, had supported a vote in the National Assembly on Dec. 29 approving the release from detention of former Prime Minister and BSP member Andrei Lukanov.
The National Assembly on Dec. 30 approved Berov as Prime Minister by 124 votes to 25.
In another ballot later in the day the Assembly voted by 127 to 17 to approve the composition of Berov's Cabinet.
Although the majority of UDF deputies abstained, about 20 voted in favour — the members of the Alternative Social Liberal Party, expelled from the UDF on Dec. 29, and a group led by a former Defence Minister, Dimitur Ludzhev.
The majority of votes against the new government were cast by dissident BSP deputies grouped around former leader Aleksandr Lilov.
Lyuben Berov Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs (on acting basis pending a new appointment) Valentin Karabashev Deputy Prime Minister; Trade Neycho Neev Deputy Prime Minister; Transport Evgeni Matinchev Deputy Prime Minister; Labour and Social Welfare Georgi Tanev Agriculture Valentin Bosevski Environment Stoyan Aleksandrov Finance Dancho Gogulov Health Valentin Aleksandrov Defence Col. Viktor Mikhaylov Interior Misho Vulchev Justice
New Bulgarian Cabinet
*Rumen Bikov Industry Khristo Totev Territorial Development and Construction Marin Todorov Education, Science and Culture
*Held same post in outgoing Cabinet.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Czech Constitution
On Dec. 16 the Czech National Council adopted, by an overwhelming majority, a Constitution for the Czech Republic to come into effect after the split of Czechoslovakia into two independent countries on Jan. 1, 1993.
(Slovakia had adopted a new Constitution in September — see p. 39105.)
The Constitution provided for a 200-member lower house and a 81-member upper house; the former would be identical to the current Czech parliament, while the latter was likely to be filled by Czech members of the federal parliament.
A key provision was the need for a three-fifths parliamentary majority for constitutional amendments.
Most of the 16 "no" votes were cast by Moravian members who demanded greater autonomy for their region and advocated the adoption of "Czecho-Moravian Republic" as the country's official name.
In a related development the Council had voted on Dec. 15 to continue to apply Czechoslovak federal law in the Czech Republic, but that in case of a conflict between Czech and federal law the former would prevail.
Wounding of CP leader
On Dec. 5 Jiri Svoboda, the leader of the Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia, was stabbed in the chest by a man wearing a mask.
On Dec. 22 a 19-year-old student, Petr Wollmuth, was arrested and charged with the attempted murder of Svoboda.
Wollmuth was known to be a member of an anarchist group.
Bugging of US consulate in Bratislava
Several electronic listening devices were discovered in the US consulate in Bratislava, the Slovak capital, in early December.
The Slovak government initially claimed that they had been planted by the federal authorities in the 1980s and had not been functioning since 1989.
It was later confirmed, however, that the devices were active and had probably been installed during 1991.
The Deputy Minister of the Interior, Stefan Lastovka, was asked to investigate the affair.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Media developments
The increasingly bitter dispute over the role of the media [for June Constitutional Court ruling see pp. 38971-72]took a new turn on Dec. 31 when the opposition parties in the National Assembly joined forces to deprive the government of the two-thirds majority it needed for the passage of a new media bill.
The bill, which had been under consideration for more than two years, would have ended the state monopoly on broadcasting and reorganized the radio and television services as independent public bodies.
The opposition parties argued, however, that it gave the government too many powers, particularly with regard to the allocation of frequencies and senior appointments.
The head of national television, Elemer Hankiss, initiated legal action in December to reverse Antall's Dec. 9 decision to suspend him pending an investigation of charges of financial misconduct.
New abortion law
After months of debate the National Assembly on Dec. 17 adopted a new abortion law replacing that in force under communist rule (and suspended in 1990) which effectively allowed abortion on demand.
Approved by 193 votes to 39 with 33 abstentions, the new law permitted a termination during the first 12 weeks of a pregnancy which was the result of rape or which endangered the life of the mother, if the foetus was malformed, or if the pregnancy would cause a "psychological crisis" or a "social problem" .
The right to abortion on psychological or social grounds had not been included in a more restrictive earlier draft.
Budget — Introduction of VAT
The 1993 budget was adopted by the National Assembly on Dec. 17.
It provided for a record deficit of 185,340,000 million forint (US$2,260 million), representing just under 6 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) and slightly less than the deficit expected for 1992.
Revenue was expected to rise by around 40 per cent to 1,090,460 million forint compared with 1992, while expenditure was expected to rise by around 30 per cent to 1,275,830 million forint.
Servicing of the foreign debt accounted for most of the increase in spending.
The budget assumed that GDP would grow by between 0 and 3 per cent in 1993, the first increase since 1989; that unemployment, which reached 11.9 per cent of the labour force in November, would remain high; and that inflation, which had fallen from 38.6 per cent to 20.1 per cent from mid-year 1991 to 1992, would level off at around 21 per cent.
In a related development, the National Assembly on Nov. 30 approved the introduction of value added tax (VAT).
From Jan. 1, 1993, a basic rate of 25 per cent would be charged on most goods and services.
A lower rate of 6 per cent would apply to foodstuffs, fuel, water, public transport and literature, while medicines and domestic electricity would be zero-rated.
HSWP name change
The central committee of the Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party (MSMP or HSWP) decided on Dec. 12 to change the party's name to the Workers' Party.
The party was founded in 1989 by members of the ruling communist party who disagreed with its transformation into the Hungarian Socialist Party (MSP).
EUROPE
POLAND
Miners' strike in Silesia
An almost total strike by the country's coalminers during the second half of December presented a serious challenge to the Polish government's economic and industrial policy.
The government had on Dec. 2 announced its plans to restructure the coal industry.
The workforce was to be cut by nearly half, with 150,000 miners losing their jobs over 10 years, although coal extraction would remain constant at 135,000,000 tonnes due to doubled productivity.
Mines would be grouped into seven holding companies to force profitable pits to support loss-makers, which made up two-thirds of the 63 mines.
Leaders of the Solidarity trade union on Dec. 8 announced the failure of talks with the government on measures to offset the rising cost of living, including relaxed wage controls, and increases in the minimum wage and pensions.
A two-hour "warning" strike by members of Solidarity followed on Dec. 14.
The protest action in the Silesian coal mines changed over the following days into a continuous strike supported by most unions, aimed at changing the government's restructuring policy, securing the creation of a fund to rescue the coal industry and halting the fall in real wages.
By Dec. 17, 66 out of 70 pits in Silesia had ceased working.
The miners were joined by striking railway workers, who halted freight traffic.
The Sejm (lower house of parliament) on Dec. 17-19 held an emergency debate on the situation in the mining industry, finally voting by 166 votes to 165 to reject the government's report on the issue.
The railway strike was settled on Dec. 28 (having been suspended on Dec. 22).
The government on Dec. 30 suspended coal exports from Jan. 1, 1993, in order to conserve supplies for domestic power generation.
On Dec. 31 the government and Solidarity reached agreement on ending the strike.
Under the agreement the government would help the coal industry to reduce its indebtedness and provide more funds for restructuring, although it was stressed that the miners' wage demands, such as ending pay differentials between pits, had not been conceded.
The ban on exports was lifted.
The ending of the strike depended on acceptance of the agreement by the miners on Jan. 4.
Entry into force of "small constitution" 
The interim "small constitution" , signed by President Lech Walesa on Nov. 17 [see p. 39200], came into force on Dec. 8.
On the same day Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka said that she would firmly use the increased powers given her by the small constitution, including giving orders to ministers, which had not been possible before.
Formation of Conservative Party
The Forum of the Democratic Right (FPD — which had split from the Democratic Union in September — see p. 39106), the Republican Coalition and the Upper Silesia and Zaglebie Conservative-Liberal Group on Dec. 6 merged to form the Conservative Party (PK).
Aleksander Hall, leader of the FPD, was elected chair of the new party, which was dedicated to upholding traditional values, reviving civil society and freeing the economy.
In a letter to the PK's founding congress, Suchocka expressed the hope that the new party would prove a stable member of the government coalition, as part of the Polish Convention.
(This grouping now consisted of the PK — as successor to the FPD — together with the Peasant Christian Alliance and the Christian Democrat Party, both of the latter being members of the government coalition.)
EUROPE
VISEGRAD THREE
Free-trade agreement
The Foreign Ministers of Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia signed the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) on Dec. 21 in Krakow, Poland.
Its aim was to eliminate by the end of the century tariff barriers between the "Visegrad Three" (which would consist of four countries after the split of Czechoslovakia) and to ensure compatibility with European Community (EC) and European Economic Area (EEA) regulations.
Tariffs on raw materials and exports which did not compete with locally produced goods would be removed on March 31, 1993; those on agricultural and most industrial goods would be removed between 1995 and 1997; and those on certain sensitive goods like cars, textiles and steel by 2001.
EUROPE
ARMENIA
Energy crisis
The Armenian government announced its intention on Dec. 6 of reopening the country's nuclear power station, situated near the border with Turkey and closed due to public pressure following the earthquake of 1989.
The decision came in response to an acute fuel shortage which worsened during December.
According to an ITAR-TASS report of Dec. 29, the republic was receiving less than 4,000,000 cubic metres of gas per day, as compared to a daily requirement of 7,500,000.
The shortages were primarily a consequence of a blockade by Azerbaijan — itself a result of the dispute over Nagorny-Karabakh — which had forced the closure of pipelines bringing Turkmen gas to Armenia via Azerbaijan.
Supplies from Russia via Georgia were down by one-third, due to a combination of pressure from Azerbaijan, pilfering, and local disruption as a result of fighting in the area.
Azeri pressure was also said to be behind Turkey's decision not to go ahead with scheduled daily deliveries of 30-35 Mw of electricity, due to begin on Dec. 1.
Problems were compounded by severe food shortages, with the introduction of bread rationing at a level of 250g per person per day.
Emergency grain deliveries from Syria and the USA were reportedly held up on the Turkish border.
UN response
On Dec. 11 the UN High Commissioner for Refugees established a US$6,000,000 six-month emergency relief programme.
Two teams were dispatched to the area to bring aid to those displaced by the conflict over Nagorny-Karabakh, which continued throughout December with heavy fighting on the border between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
On Dec. 15 Armenian President Levon Ter-Petrosyan declared a national emergency warning that 30,000 people would die unless they received help.
EUROPE
GEORGIA
Russian protest over helicopter incident
Relations between Georgia and Russia deteriorated sharply following Russian reports that a Russian Mi-8T helicopter had been shot down on Dec. 14, on its way back from delivering humanitarian aid to the town of Tkvarcheli in the Abkhazia autonomous region.
All three crew members were killed, as were more than 60 passengers, including women and children refugees.
Subsequent Georgian investigations produced a different version of events.
A survey of the wreckage was said to have proved that the helicopter had been carrying combat weapons and armed personnel as well as civilians; the Georgian side attributed the crash itself to overloading, with 64 passengers on a 24-seat helicopter.
On Dec. 15 the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued an "emphatic protest" .
Russian Defence Minister Pavel Grachev on Dec. 16 threatened "decisive measures of a military nature" .
The incident was discussed at a session of Georgia's parliament on Dec. 17 when Georgian Prime Minister Tengiz Sigua spoke of "crisis relations" between Georgia and Russia but denied that the two countries were "at war" .
On Dec. 18 the Georgian parliament issued a statement suspending the second round of Russian-Georgian talks on bilateral relations currently under way in Moscow and recalling Georgia's delegation.
In an interview published in Izvestiya of Dec. 19, Georgian President Eduard Shevardnadze denied that this meant the severing of all relations with Russia, but went on to condemn Russia's "unconcealed interference in the internal affairs of sovereign Georgia" .
Grachev met his Georgian counterpart Tengiz Kitovani in Moscow on Dec. 31 to discuss demands by the Georgian parliament for the withdrawal of Russian troops from Abkhazia.
At the meeting, Grachev emphatically denied that Russian troops were involved in the conflict.
Meanwhile, fighting continued in the area throughout December, culminating in Georgian claims to have seized the town of Ochamchire on Dec. 27.
EUROPE
UKRAINE
Economic policy
On Dec. 22 the Ukrainian Cabinet of Ministers adopted a resolution on price regulation.
Price controls were lifted on some basic foodstuffs but tightened on sugar, meat, eggs, oil and cement and on goods produced in the metallurgical, machine-building and chemical industries.
The new resolution would come into force on Jan. 1, when public transport fares would also go up, and some other services would become more expensive — water supply and sewage charges increasing fivefold and heat and electricity sevenfold.
On Dec. 26, in an address to the nation, Ukrainian Premier Leonid Kuchma announced that direct payments would be made to the poorest members of society to protect them against the worst effects of the price rises.
On Dec. 28 Deputy Premier and Economic Reform Minister Viktor Pynzenyk pledged that the planned price increases would be the last, and that the measures would reduce inflation from the current monthly rate of 50 per cent to 3 per cent.
The co-chairman of the opposition movement Rukh, Vyacheslav Chornovil, described the government resolution as a "necessary measure" while the New Ukraine leader Vladimir Filenko agreed that such a step was "absolutely necessary and justifiable" .
There was criticism of the price increases from the Socialist party of Ukraine and from the Federation of Trade Unions.
Rukh congress
On Dec. 4 Rukh held its fourth All-Ukrainian Assembly in Kiev.
Chornovil, assessing the current socio-political situation in Ukraine, laid the blame for past problems not only on those in power but also on the divided democratic opposition forces.
Rukh's future tasks included continuing with the campaign for a pre-term dissolution of the Supreme Council.
Resignation of Black Sea Fleet commander
On Dec. 4 Adml.
Igor Kasatonov resigned from his position as commander of the Black Sea Fleet.
He was replaced by Vice-Adml.
Vitaly Larionov, first deputy commander, who would hold the post until an agreement on joint command had been signed between Ukraine and Russia.
EUROPE
LITHUANIA
New government
On Dec. 2 the newly elected acting Lithuanian President Algirdas Brazauskas [see p. 39205]issued a decree appointing Deputy Premier Bronislovas Lubys as the country's new Prime Minister and charging him with the formation of a Cabinet.
On Dec. 10 Lubys announced the key members of his new government.
The government was expected to be in office only until the holding of presidential elections, set by parliament on Dec. 3 for Feb. 14.
Three candidates were expected to contest the election, acting President Brazauskas, former President Vytautas Landsbergis and the Lithuanian ambassador to the USA, Stasis Lozaraitis.
Opposition Sajudis members objected, without effect, to the timing of the election on the grounds that it gave them inadequate time for preparation.
A meeting of the Sajudis sejm was held on Dec. 12, at which the sejm Council was dissolved and a fundamental reorganization of Sajudis structures was initiated.
New policy directions
Speaking at a session of the Seimas (parliament) on Dec. 16, Prime Minister Lubys announced that economic reform would continue "with certain corrections" , involving a return to price regulation on basic foodstuffs "during the transitional period" and a reassessment of the "negative consequences" of privatization.
The latter move came in the wake of parliament's decision of Dec. 11 temporarily to suspend the privatization process.
Lubys also called for an early introduction of the litas, Lithuania's new currency.
Bronislovas Lubys Prime Minister Julius Veselka Economy Eduardas Grikelis Finance Povilas Gylys Foreign Affairs Romasius Vaitiekunas Internal Affairs
Principal members of Lithuanian government
*Audrius Butkevicius Defence Jonas Prapiestis Justice Rimantas Karazija Agriculture Albertas Sinevicius Industry
*Held same post in outgoing government.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Edinburgh summit
At a meeting of the European Council of the European Communities (EC) in Edinburgh, the Scottish capital, on Dec. 11-12, EC heads of state and government reached agreement on a range of complex, interlinked issues.
They thus salvaged the process of European integration which had been stalled since the Danish "no" vote in a referendum in June 1992 on ratification of the Maastricht Treaty on European Union [see pp. 38942-43].
This "unblocking" of the Maastricht process, together with the "Delors package" agreement on future EC financing, opened the way for negotiations on enlargement, to begin with Austria, Sweden and Finland in early 1993 and with Norway soon after that.
John Major, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, which held the presidency of the EC Council of Ministers for the second half of 1992, declared that Edinburgh would "be remembered as the summit that put the Community back together" .
 "Danish problem" and ratification of Maastricht
In order to resolve the "Danish problem" EC leaders approved one legally binding "decision" and three clarifying "declarations" [see "conclusions of the presidency" below].
These prompted Danish Prime Minister Poul Schlüter to declare that "all the Danish requests have been satisfied" ; on Dec. 13 the three main Danish opposition parties reportedly accepted the deal struck at Edinburgh.
Central to Danish concerns about Maastricht were (i) greater subsidiarity, whereby decisions were to be taken at the level "closest to the citizen" [see also p. 39158], and (ii) greater transparency or openness in the operation of EC institutions.
It was hoped that this would lead to a positive referendum result in Denmark in late April or early May 1993 and to the subsequent completion of the Maastricht ratification process.
Ratification by all other EC member states except the UK was completed by end-1992 [see below]and ratification by the UK would, according to Major, follow "hard on the heels" of a positive Danish vote.
There was, however, no mention of a Belgian and Spanish proposal to apply a deadline of July 1, 1993.
 "Delors package" on future financing
The agreement on the future financing of EC activities, known as the "Delors package" , was described by Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany (which currently contributed a net ECU 9,000 million to the EC budget annually — ECU 1=US$1.24787 as at Dec. 14, 1992) as "a solid compromise…between the poor and the developed countries" .
EC expenditure was projected to rise from ECU 66,800 million in 1992 to ECU 84,100 million in 1997 (at 1992 prices).
As a percentage of joint gross national product (GNP) this represented an increase from the existing ceiling of 1.2 per cent(although 1992 expenditure was calculated to come to only around 1.14 per cent ) to 1.27 per cent by 1999.
[For Commission's original February 1992 proposal which envisaged an increase to ECU 87,500 million (1.37 per cent of joint GNP) by 1995 see p. 38785.]
Central to this compromise was an agreement to increase support to "southern" countries for which Spain argued with particular vehemence and success.
Under this, expenditure from the structural funds was to rise to ECU 27,400 million yearly by 1999 and a new cohesion fund would be formed to provide funding of ECU 2,600 million yearly by 1999.
This fund would only benefit member countries with a per capita income of less than 90 per cent of the EC average (i.e. Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain).
The UK rebate of some ECU 2,000 million a year on its budget contributions remained unaffected.
Other agreements
The European Council approved a growth initiative, with new lending by the European Investment Bank (EIB) for infrastructure projects and the creation of a new European Investment Fund, which would direct money towards loan guarantees rather than loans.
On the sites of EC institutions, existing arrangements for the European Parliament were confirmed.
The number of seats in the European Parliament was to be increased from 518 to 567 to take account of German unification.
Foreign policy declarations
There were numerous declarations on foreign policy issues, but, under pressure from the Greek government, EC leaders did not recognize the independence of the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia.
However, the European Council allocated ECU 50,000,000 for assistance there.
On Bosnia-Hercegovina they declared that "the primary responsibility for the conflict, and its brutality, lies with the present leadership of Serbia and of the Bosnian Serbs" ; in particular they were "appalled by the systematic detention and rape of Moslem women" [see also p. 39240].
Conclusions of the presidency
Extracts from the 56-page conclusions of the presidency are given below.
 "The European Council reached agreement on the following major issues:(i) the problems raised by Denmark in the light of the outcome of the Danish referendum on June 2, 1992, on the Maastricht Treaty;(ii) guidelines to implement the subsidiarity principle and measures to increase transparency and openness in the decision-making process of the Community;(iii) the financing of Community action and policies during the rest of this decade;(iv) the launching of enlargement negotiations with a number of EFTA countries: and (v) the establishment of a plan of action by the member states and the Community to promote growth and to combat unemployment." 
On the Treaty on European Union the European Council agreed on an annexed decision and three declarations which were to apply "exclusively to Denmark and not to other existing or acceding member states" .
The decision concerned Danish requests [see also pp. 39205; 39158]for exemption from citizenship of the Union, the introduction of a single European currency, defence policy co-ordination, and co-operation on justice and home affairs issues.
The three declarations concerned (i) "social policy, consumers, the environment, distribution of income" ;(ii) defence; and (iii) justice and home affairs.
Denmark also made unilateral declarations on issues such as citizenship and the right to vote at municipal elections.
On subsidiarity, "the European Council received a report from the President of the Commission [reviewing]existing and proposed legislation in the light of the subsidiarity principle" .
An "institutional accord" was to be drawn up jointly by EC institutions to establish appropriate procedures to be followed when considering EC measures.
The Commission's sole right to propose legislation remained untouched.
Addressing the problem of finding a clear definition of the principle of subsidiarity, an annex declared that it "contributes to the respect for the national identities of member states and safeguards their powers" and that "it aims at decisions within the European Union being taken as closely as possible to the citizen" .
Another annex listed examples of existing and proposed legislation which could be dropped, or had been dropped, in accordance with this principle, although their number was much reduced from the 71 measures suggested by the UK.
On openness and transparency "major new legislative proposals" would be "the subject of a preliminary open debate" .
When a formal vote was taken by the Council of Ministers (a rare event since they usually sought to reach consensus), the record of the vote would be published.
On the accession of new member states to the Union, they "agreed that enlargement negotiations will start with Austria, Sweden and Finland at the beginning of 1993" .
Those with Norway would begin "as soon as the Commission's opinion on its application is available" .
 "In preparing its opinion on the Swiss application" the Commission was "to take into account the views of the Swiss authorities following the Dec. 6 referendum" [see this page].
On GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) the European Council "reaffirmed its commitment at Birmingham to an early, comprehensive and balanced agreement" on the Uruguay Round of negotiations.
On promoting economic recovery in Europe an annexed declaration provided (i) for member governments to "implement in a concerted way economic measures, tailored to national requirements, which would boost confidence and promote economic recovery" ;(ii) for the EIB to establish "a new, temporary lending facility of ECU 5,000 million…to accelerate the financing of capital infrastructure projects" , and (iii) for the establishment "as quickly as possible" of a European Investment Fund with ECU 2,000 million capital.
On the internal market the European Council "noted with particular satisfaction that the White Paper programme for creating the internal market will in all essential respects be successfully completed by Dec. 31, 1992" .
However, on the free movement of persons within the Community, it "had to take note of the fact that [this]cannot be completely assured on Jan. 1, 1993" .
The European Council took note of the co-ordination taking place on justice and home affairs and, expressing its deep concern at "the intensification of episodes of intolerance" , it "underlined that there must be no room for racism and xenophobia in today's Europe" .
A declaration on "principles governing external aspects of migration policy" was annexed.
On the size of the European Parliament, member states were from 1994 to be allocated seats as follows: Belgium 25 (currently 24); Denmark 16 (16); France 87 (81); Germany 99 (81); Greece 25 (24); Ireland 15 (15); Italy 87 (81); Luxembourg 6 (6); Netherlands 31 (25); Portugal 25 (24); Spain 64 (60); United Kingdom 87 (81), representing a total of 567 seats (518 previously).
The existing seats of the institutions were confirmed, while decisions on "the seat of other bodies and departments set up or to be set up" were to give "appropriate priority to member states who do not at present provide the sites for Community institutions" .
Ratifications of Maastricht
During December three more EC countries completed ratification of the Maastricht Treaty, leaving only Denmark and the UK still to do so.
In Germany the Bundestag (lower house of parliament) gave its approval on Dec. 2 by 543 votes to 17 with eight abstentions and the Bundesrat (upper house) did so unanimously on Dec. 18 [for Bundestag's first reading in October see p. 39158].
The Bundestag also approved a declaration obliging the government to respect a parliamentary vote in 1996 on whether to proceed to the third stage of economic and monetary union, involving the introduction of a single currency.
All future transfers of sovereignty to the EC would require approval by a two-thirds majority of both houses.
In Portugal, the unicameral Assembly of the Republic on Dec. 10 approved ratification of the Treaty by 200 to 21 votes.
Relevant constitutional changes, including the enfranchisement of EC citizens in municipal elections, had been approved by parliament on Nov. 17.
In the Netherlands the First Chamber approved ratification of the Treaty by acclamation on Dec. 15 [for November approval by Second Chamber see p. 39205].
Flotation of Norwegian krone
Against a background of uncertainty on European currency markets and continuing pressure on the French franc following the November realignment of the exchange rate mechanism (ERM), the Norwegian central bank floated the krone on the exchange markets on Dec. 10.
The move meant that the krone, which had been pegged to the European currency unit since October 1990 [see p. 37782], was effectively devalued by 5 per cent.
[For flotation of Finnish and Swedish currencies in September and November respectively see pp. 39080-81; 39206; 39207.]
EUROPE
EFTA
Swiss referendum rejection of EEA agreement with EC
The agreement signed on May 2, 1992, to create a 19-member European Economic Area (EEA — see p. 38931), embracing the 12 countries of the European Communities (EC) and the seven countries in the European Free Trade Area (EFTA), did not enter into force as intended on Jan. 1, 1993.
A Swiss referendum vote on Dec. 6 against ratification, while it did not dissuade the other participants (including Liechtenstein) from proceeding, did necessitate "technical" modifications to provide for an 18-member EEA.
It also threatened to upset the substantive agreement on the "cohesion fund" for the benefit of poorer EC member states; under the May 2 agreement EFTA countries were to contribute ECU 2,000 million, 27 per cent of which was Switzerland's share.
EC Foreign Ministers meeting on Dec. 7 said that the EEA should go ahead without Switzerland, while expressing regret over the outcome of the Swiss referendum.
The EFTA Ministerial Council met in Geneva on Dec. 10-11, when it was agreed that a "diplomatic conference" would be necessary in early 1993, with a target date of mid-1993 for the modified EEA to come into force.
Switzerland stood down from taking on the rotating EFTA presidency in the first six months of 1993, taking up instead the vice-presidency (in charge of negotiations with third countries, including eastern Europe); the presidency passed instead to Sweden.
Swiss referendum "no" vote
By the end of September both houses of the Swiss parliament had voted in principle in favour of the EEA.
The complex "Eurolex" package of necessary legislative changes was finally passed on Oct. 21, subject to a referendum scheduled for Dec. 6.
The federal government strongly favoured approval, which would have required both an overall majority, and a "yes" vote in a majority of cantons.
The proposition failed on both counts, however.
In an exceptionally high turnout of 78.3 per cent, the "no" majority was 23,000 (1,786,000 to 1,763,000, or 50.3 per cent to 49.7 per cent ).
The cantons were split 16 "no" to seven "yes" , underlining the depth of the linguistic divide on this issue: all six majority French-speaking cantons voted "yes" , as did Basel, but all the other majority German-speaking cantons and half-cantons voted "no" (including Zürich, notwithstanding the relatively greater support for the EEA in urban areas), as did the majority Italian-speaking Ticino.
Economy Minister Jean-Paul Delamuraz confirmed on Dec. 11 that Switzerland was not withdrawing its application for EC membership [see pp. 38930; 39244].
Liechtenstein referendum "yes" vote
A referendum in Liechtenstein on Dec. 13 produced a "yes" majority by 6,722 votes (55.8 per cent) to 5,322 (44.2 per cent ) in a record turnout of 87 per cent .
Parliament had voted 19 to five on Oct. 21 in favour of ratification, but had resisted the demand of the pro-EEA monarch, Prince Hans-Adam II, that the necessary referendum be held before that in Switzerland to ensure that it was not influenced by the Swiss result.
Liechtenstein would now need a modification in the legal basis of its relationship with its Swiss neighbour; under the 1923 agreement creating a customs union, it could not join any treaty to which Switzerland did not also adhere.
Parliamentary ratification in other EFTA countries and in EP
No other countries required ratification by referendum, and parliamentary processes were completed, with substantial majorities in favour, as follows:
Austria: the Nationalrat on Sept. 22 and the Bundesrat (upper house) on Sept. 30 achieved the required two-thirds majority with the backing of both governing coalition parties, but with the Greens and right-wing FPÖ voting against.
Finland: the Eduskunta, voting on Oct. 26, exceeded the required two-thirds majority with 154 in favour, 12 (Finnish Rural Party and Greens) against and 32 abstentions.
Iceland: the Althing, which began to discuss the agreement on Aug. 17, eventually voted in favour of ratification — requiring only a simple majority — on Jan. 12, 1993.
Norway: the Storting's ratification debate on Oct. 15-16 ended with a vote of 130 to 35, exceeding the three-quarters majority necessary for approval.
Sweden: the Riksdag debate and vote took place on Nov. 18-19, requiring only a simple majority for approval; it was passed overwhelmingly by 308 to 13 (former communists in the Left party, Vänsterpartiet), with six abstentions.
The European Parliament voted on Oct. 28 by 351 to 16 (mainly Greens and former communists) to approve EEA ratification.
EFTA free trade agreements
A free trade agreement with Israel initialled in July [see p. 39025]was signed on Sept. 17; it was designed to enter into force (subject to ratification) on Jan. 1, 1993 — EFTA's first such agreement with a non-European country.
Developing its role in fostering relations with the former communist countries of central and eastern Europe, EFTA concluded free trade agreements on Dec. 10 with Poland and Romania; signed a declaration on co-operation with Albania; and took note that both the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic had declared that they would apply on an interim basis from Jan. 1 the EFTA-Czechoslovakia free trade agreement signed on March 20 [see p. 38834].
An agreement with Hungary was expected in early 1993, and talks with Bulgaria had begun on Nov. 23.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Banning of far-right groups
The government continued its crackdown on extreme right-wing organizations in December, following the racist killings in Mölln in November which had caused outrage in Germany and abroad [see p. 39208].
The main parties also agreed on constitutional changes to stem the influx of immigrants, one of the main reasons for the rise in attacks on foreigners.
The following groups were banned in December: the German Alternative (DA), with around 350 members and regarded as the fastest-growing far-right group; the Nationalistic Offensive (NO), with around 140 members based in Bavaria and Saxony; and the Alliance of German Comrades, with around 60 members based in the northern port of Wilhelmshaven [see p. 39208 for banning of Nationalist Front in late November].
Each of the bans was based on proscribed material, including propaganda literature, weapons and ammunition, seized from the groups' headquarters.
On Dec. 17 Interior Minister Rudolf Seiters asked the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution to investigate the democratic credentials of the Republicans, the country's largest far-right party.
Unlike the banned groups it had a large membership and was represented in several state legislatures.
Its platform was explicitly anti-immigration, although it denied any sympathy with neo-Nazis.
The police began giving higher priority to investigating attacks on foreigners, and the courts began to impose harsher sentences; the prison term of two years and eight months imposed on Dec. 9 on a prominent neo-Nazi leader in eastern Germany, Thomas Dienel, was the longest sentence imposed thus far for the offence of inciting racial hatred.
Indicating a growing public backlash against racism and right-wing violence, several large rallies were held in December [ibid. for November demonstrations].
Some 350,000 people took part in a candlelight procession in Munich on Dec. 6, and demonstrations on a similar scale were held in Berlin, Frankfurt, Hamburg and other major cities on Dec. 13 and 20.
Political and church groups and sports- and businesspeople also launched campaigns to express solidarity with foreigners and opposition to violence.
In a wide-ranging parliamentary debate on right-wing violence on Dec. 10, Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl said: "The use of violence must remain a taboo in our society.
Those who break it must expect to face the full force of the law."
Neo-Nazi attacks nevertheless continued to be reported, including firebomb attacks on refugee hostels, beatings of foreigners and desecrations of Jewish cemeteries.
Asylum law developments
The intense political debate on whether and how to amend Germany's liberal asylum law, which had allowed the influx of hundreds of thousands of mainly economic migrants since 1990, was resolved on Dec. 6 when leaders of the main political parties agreed on the terms of a constitutional amendment [see also pp. 38544-55; 39066; 39206], subsequently approved (on Dec. 15) by the parliamentary party of the Social Democratic Party (SPD).
[For November SPD congress which agreed on the need to tighten the law see p. 39208.]
The new regulations, requiring a two-thirds majority in both houses of parliament, were expected to be enacted in the first half of 1993 and would bring German immigration and asylum provisions broadly in line with those of other West European countries.
Immigration officials would be empowered to refuse entry to foreign nationals deemed to be economic migrants, while processing of applications for political asylum would be speeded up.
Considerable concern focused on the effect the change would have on neighbouring countries.
In future most of the immigrants arriving from surrounding "safe" third countries, primarily Poland, the Czech Republic and Austria, would be turned back.
As part of the cross-party compromise the government agreed to negotiate agreements with Poland and the Czech Republic which would provide them with financial help to deal with the migrants.
Claims agreement with Russia
During an official visit by Kohl to Moscow on Dec. 14-15, Germany and Russia agreed in effect to cancel a series of financial claims each had on the other.
Germany agreed to suspend its claims for the payment of debts incurred by the former Soviet Union to former East Germany until the year 2000, while in exchange Russia abandoned all claims for compensation for Soviet military property and installations in former East Germany.
Most observers agreed that the German side would eventually write off the Soviet debts.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Ruling on pit closures
On Dec. 21, following an appeal by mining unions, the High Court ruled that the government's decision as announced on Oct. 13 to close 31 pits [see p. 39159]was illegal, and that it had "unlawfully and irrationally" ignored the right of mineworkers and trade unions to be consulted.
The court also overturned an Oct. 19 decision by Michael Heseltine, the President of the Board of Trade, taken following a public outcry, to postpone the closure of 21 of the pits subject to a review and to close the remaining 10 after 30 days of consultation.
The court ordered that British Coal should in respect of each of these 10 pits follow a procedure including some form of independent scrutiny.
Separation of Prince and Princess of Wales
Prime Minister John Major announced to the House of Commons on Dec. 9 that the Prince and Princess of Wales, who married in 1981 [see p. 31116], were to separate but that they had no plans to divorce and that their constitutional positions were unaffected, adding: "There is no reason why the Princess of Wales should not be crowned queen in due course." 
EUROPE
FRANCE
Indictment of Fabius over infected blood scandal
The Socialist Party first secretary Laurent Fabius requested on Dec. 17 that he should have the opportunity to clear himself, by facing trial before a parliamentary high court, over the HIV-infected blood scandal [see pp. 38544; 38978; 39161; R106].
He faced accusations that in 1984-85, while he was Prime Minister, he was responsible for failing to stop the use in blood transfusions of blood which carried the HIV virus.
The National Assembly on Dec. 19 and the Senate on Dec. 20 voted almost unanimously in favour of a Socialist Party motion that Fabius should stand trial, together with the former Minister for Social Affairs, Georgina Dufoix, and the former Secretary of State for Health, Edmond Hervé, on charges including manslaughter.
In November President François Mitterrand had proposed the convening of the High Court, the only body which could try politicians for offences committed while in ministerial office.
The Senate initially voted, on Dec. 10, to bring Dufoix and Hervé but not Fabius before the court.
However, on Dec. 17 a motion which the Socialists had helped to draft, to indict Hervé and Dufoix but not Fabius for "failing to assist people in danger" , was blocked when the Socialists changed their minds and refused to vote on the motion as it stood.
Later on Dec. 17 Fabius requested the National Assembly to convene a special session to vote on his indictment, which he said he himself would vote for.
Voting in the National Assembly on Dec. 19 was by 518 to one and in the Senate on Dec. 20 by 281 to one with two abstentions.
Reappointment of Tapie
Bernard Tapie was reappointed on Dec. 24 as Minister for Towns, a post from which he was dismissed in May 1992 after being charged with misappropriation of funds and false accounting [see p. 38928].
Gaullist deputy Georges Tranchant, his former business partner, withdrew the charges against him in early November, and the case was dismissed in late December.
Police shooting of Moroccan
A policeman was charged with manslaughter following the shooting in Béziers on Dec. 21 of a Moroccan teenager in the course of his arrest for stealing a car.
The shooting provoked a night of rioting in the town.
EUROPE
ITALY
Setbacks for major parties in local elections
In municipal elections held in 55 communes and in provincial elections in La Spezia (Liguria) on Dec. 14-15 the federalist Northern League rose to become the largest party in northern Italy, and increased its support in central Italy, at the expense of the Christian Democratic and Socialist parties, whose support was halved in the north.
In Varese (the home town of Northern League leader Umberto Bossi) it won 37 per cent of the vote compared with 27 per cent in the April 1992 general election, and in Monza its share of the vote increased from 20 to 32 per cent.
In the south the neo-fascist Italian Social Movement (MSI) trebled its vote to 17 per cent in Reggio Calabria and became the city's second-largest party, proposing a coalition with the anti-Mafia Network (La Rete) which took 8.2 per cent, with the Democratic Party of the Left (PDS — formerly the Communist Party) and with the hardline Marxist Communist Refoundation Party to challenge the traditional parties.
Overall, compared with the 1992 general election results, support for the DC dropped by 4.8 per cent, for the Socialists by 3.6 per cent and for the PDS by 1.9 per cent , while the Northern League increased its share of the vote by 3.4 per cent , La Rete by 2.7 per cent and the MSI by 1.7 per cent .
Official investigation of Craxi
The secretary-general of the socialists (PSI) Bettino Craxi on Dec. 15 received a cautionary warrant advising him that he was under investigation by Milan magistrates for 40 instances of receiving money illegally since 1985 in violation of the law on party finances.
The Minister for Urban Affairs, Carmelo Conte, also a Socialist, received a similar warrant.
Craxi vehemently denied the allegations and refused to resign at a closed meeting of the party executive on Dec. 17.
The executive deferred a decision on Craxi's future until mid-January.
Over 70 national and local politicians had been charged with corruption since February 1992 in the context of the Milan corruption investigation [see pp. 38896; 39025; 39162].
In the first sentencing in the Milan affair, Mario Chiesa, the (Socialist) administrator of a Milan old people's home, received six years' imprisonment on Nov. 29 for embezzling L 6,000 million, some of which went to party funds.
On Dec. 10 the Chamber of Deputies voted to lift the parliamentary immunity of the Socialist Party's deputy secretary-general and former Foreign Minister Gianni De Michelis to allow Venice magistrates to investigate corruption charges against him.
Vote of confidence — Budget cuts
The government on Dec. 15 won by 309 votes to 256 with one abstention a vote of confidence attached to a bill on regional aid to the south.
On Dec. 22 parliament approved budget cuts of about L 93,000,000 million (about US$6,600 million) for 1993, this being immediately followed by a 1 per cent cut in the discount rate to 12 per cent.
New Palermo public prosecutor
On Dec. 17 Giancarlo Caselli was appointed as the new chief public prosecutor of Palermo —(Sicily) in succession to Paolo Borsellino who was murdered on July 19 [see p. 39024].
EUROPE
GREECE
New Cabinet
Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis, who faced dissent over his austerity policies and his moderate stance on the Macedonia issue, on Dec. 2 dismissed the entire Cabinet.
Agriculture Minister Sotiris Hatzikakis had already resigned at the end of November.
A new Cabinet was appointed on Dec. 3.
Constantine Mitsotakis Prime Minister, Aegean Tzannis Tzannetakis Deputy Prime Minister Andreas Andrianopoulos Minister of State, Government Spokesman Sotiris Kouvelas Minister to the Prime Minister
New Greek Cabinet
**Ioannis Varvitsiotis National Defence Michalis Papaconstantinou Foreign Affairs
*Ioannis Kefaloyiannis Interior
**Anna Psarouda-Benaki Justice Stefanos Manos National Economy, Finance
*Vassilis Kontoyiannopoulos Industry and Commerce
*Christos Koskinos Agriculture
*Dora Bakoyiannis Culture Aristidis Kalantzakos Labour Giorgios Souflias Education and Religion
*Dimitris Sioufas Health, Welfare and Social Security
**Nikolaos Gelestathis Public Order Achilleas Karamanlis Environment, Town Planning and Public Works
**Theodore Anagnostopoulos Transport and Communications Panayiotis Hatzinikolaou Macedonia and Thrace
*Alexandros Papadongonas Merchant Navy
*New appointment.
**Changed responsibilities.
Attacks by November 17 — Approval of budget
A New Democracy deputy was shot in the leg in Athens on Dec. 21 by the left-wing November 17 organization in protest at corruption and the government's privatization policy.
Despite his absence from the Vouli (parliament) which deprived the government of its one-seat majority, an austerity budget for 1993 was approved on Dec. 23 after the opposition Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok) withdrew one of its own deputies.
November 17 was also held responsible for a bomb attack on a tax office on Nov. 30 (the third in two weeks), coinciding with the presentation of the budget in parliament.
Giorgos Balafas, who had been sought for seven years in connection with crimes committed by November 17 and another urban guerrilla group, Anti-State Struggle, had been arrested on Nov. 1.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Split in ANAP party
Some 70 deputies on Dec. 1-2 defected from the main opposition Motherland Party (ANAP, founded by President Turgut Özal but in opposition since the October 1991 legislative elections).
They claimed that the party was in the grip of militant right-wing extremists, and proposed to form a new party led by Özal.
The prospect of Özal's renewed direct involvement in party politics had reportedly been a key issue at a special ANAP congress on Dec. 1, with the first 16 defections occurring after the failure of an attempt to unseat party leader Mesut Yilmaz and replace him with the more conservative Ahmet Kececiler.
Meanwhile the government's majority had been reduced in the past year from over 40 to five following defections from various coalition parties.
Bomb attacks
One person was killed on Dec. 27 in a bomb attack by the extreme left-wing Revolutionary Left which sank a luxury yacht anchored in Istanbul.
President François Mitterrand of France had been on board the yacht two days previously during a private visit.
Earlier, three policemen were killed and 25 people injured on Dec. 8 in an attack on a coach in Antalya, where two members of the People's Labour Party (HEP) had been assassinated the previous week.
EUROPE
BLACK SEA STATES
Foreign Ministers of the 11 participating Black Sea Economic Co-operation countries (BSEC) met in Antalya (Turkey) on Dec. 6-10.
They agreed to grant observer status to Poland and established a business council.
Jacques Attali, the president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), who attended the meeting, promised to extend funding worth ECU 3,000 million (US$3,750 million) for BSEC projects.
EUROPE
CYPRUS
Canada announced on Dec. 11 that it would begin withdrawing on June 15, 1993, its contingent of 575 troops serving with the UN peacekeeping force in Cyprus (UNFICYP — which had had a Canadian element since its establishment in 1964); the 341-member Danish contingent began to pull out on Dec. 16.
EUROPE
LATVIA
On Dec. 14 Sergei Parfyonov, the former deputy commander in Riga of the Soviet Interior Ministry troops, the OMON, was sentenced by a Latvian court to four years' imprisonment in a corrective labour camp for "exceeding his authority" during events in Riga in January 1991 [see p. 37945].
EUROPE
PORTUGAL
Alvaro Cunhal, 79, resigned on Dec. 4 after 32 years as secretary-general of the Portuguese Communist Party and was appointed head of the party's new national council; Carlos Carvalhas was elected as his successor.
EUROPE
SAN MARINO
Erratum: The minority party in the coalition formed on March 19, 1992, was the San Marino Socialist Party (PSS), not the San Marino Social Democratic Party (PSDS) as given on p. 38824.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Laureano Ortega, leader of the extreme left-wing October 1 Anti-Fascist Resistance Group (GRAPO), was rearrested in Santander on Dec. 5 after escaping from Granada prison during 1992.
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
The Federal Assembly (Bundesversammlung) on Dec. 9 elected Adolf Ogi and Otto Stich as President and Vice-President for 1993 respectively (Ogi had been Vice-President for 1992).
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Shooting-down of Iraqi MiG by US aircraft
US F-16 fighter aircraft shot down an Iraqi MiG-25 on Dec. 27 within the "no-fly zone" south of the 32nd parallel.
The Iraqi plane was one of four to cross the parallel that day; the first two had flown north when challenged, but the second two (one of which escaped) had turned to confront the US fighters, in what US officials considered a deliberate attempt to test the resolve of the allies — the USA, the United Kingdom and France — in policing the "no-fly zone" established in August [see pp. 39068-69].
After the incident, the US aircraft carrier Kitty Hawk was redeployed from Somali coastal waters to the Gulf.
The Iraqi government announced that it would respond to "this aggression…in the appropriate manner at the appropriate time" .
Two more Iraqi fighters crossing into the zone on Dec. 28 were chased north without damage.
UN chemicals weapons inspection
UN chemical weapons inspectors, led by World Health Organization expert Johan Santesson, left Baghdad on Dec. 14 after a 10-day visit.
Santesson said that no weapons-related material had been found but that the Iraqi side had refused to give details of the chemical weapons used in its 1980-88 war with Iran.
Santesson refused to comment on press reports that, during a meeting with Lt.-Gen.
Rahid Amer, head of the Iraqi Military Industries Commission, Amer had made threats against UN personnel and against any Iraqi national co-operating with UN inspection teams.
UN nuclear weapons expert Maurizio Zeffirero declared on Dec. 8, following an inspection visit to Iraq, that the government had expressed its willingness for the first time to open discussions regarding foreign suppliers of its nuclear weapons programme.
Murder of Iraqi nuclear scientist
The Jordanian authorities arrested two Iraqis in connection with the murder in Amman on Dec. 8 of an Iraqi nuclear scientist, Muayad Hassan Naji Janabi.
Janabi failed to return to his job at the Ministry of Military Industrialization after a vacation in Jordan.
Having reportedly failed in attempts to obtain political asylum in the USA and UK, he had accepted a teaching post at a nuclear institute in Libya.
Failure of alleged coup and assassination attempts
A statement issued in Vienna by the information bureau of the opposition Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SAIRI) and reported on Dec. 16 announced that senior officers of the Republican Guard had been executed following an alleged coup.
Orders were issued for the arrest of the families of three officers who had escaped.
Prime Minister Muhammad Hamzah al-Zubaydi escaped an assassination attempt in Nasiriya in early December, but several security guards were killed.
Inauguration of Saddam River
The Saddam River or Third River, a 565-km canal running between the Tigris and Euphrates from Mahmudiya south of Baghdad to Qurnah, was officially inaugurated on Dec. 7.
Its main purpose was to remove saline water from an eventual total of 1,500,000 hectares of land, of which 300,000 hectares had been reclaimed.
It was claimed by opponents of the scheme that its true purpose was to drain the southern marshes, the refuge of the Shia opponents of the government of President Saddam Hussein.
Drainage of the marshes would also enable the development of proven oil reserves, about one-third of Iraq's total oil reserves, adding 2,500,000 million barrels per day (bpd) to production.
Ban on sale of imported goods — Budget
On Dec. 11 the government banned the sale of imported consumer goods, including cheese, cigarettes, canned vegetables, frozen chicken, furniture, electrical equipment and Christmas trees.
Traders were allowed to store unsold items and the Trade Ministry offered to buy them at reasonable prices.
The aim of the measure was to stem the outflow of foreign currency and to stop profiteering.
The 1993 budget was approved by the Council of Ministers meeting on Dec. 19, but no details were broadcast.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Human rights — Divorce law
Iranian officials rejected a report by the UN Committee on Social and Humanitarian Issues adopted on Dec. 4 together with a resolution condemning Iran for abuse of human rights.
The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Ayatollah Mohammed Yazdi, was quoted in a report on Dec. 15 as saying that the resolution was "unprincipled and biased" .
The report had alleged torture of prisoners, rigging of trials, and excessive use of the death penalty.
It said that Iran had executed 224 people between January and July 1992, at least 66 of whom had been put to death for political reasons, and that at least 199 members of the minority Baha'i community had been killed during "systematic" persecution of their sect.
Yazdi had been quoted as saying on Nov. 27 that Iran would continue to implement Islamic-based laws, including the death penalty.
The report also described repression of Iranian women, stating that they were barred from 19 of 169 fields of university study, and that 89 per cent of rural women were still illiterate.
New divorce legislation reported on Dec. 9 was said to grant unprecedented rights to women, allowing divorcees to seek compensation through the courts for housework which husbands had ordered them to do during the marriage.
Draft budget
Iran's 270-member legislature, the Majlis ash-Shoura, began debate on Dec. 15 on President Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani's draft budget for the Iranian year starting on March 21, 1993.
The draft had received Cabinet approval on Dec. 7.
Full details were not available but it was reported that it would be a balanced budget despite a doubling of general government expenditure to R 24,000,000 million (about US$16,500 million at the floating rate).
The draft contained a foreign exchange component of US$5,000 million for essential imports.
The rest of the budget, which reportedly provided for a partial devaluation, was denominated in rials.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CO-OPERATION COUNCIL
Summit conference
The heads of state of all six member countries (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE)) attended the 13th summit of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC), in Abu Dhabi, UAE, on Dec. 22-23.
Apparently because of a border dispute with Saudi Arabia in October [see p. 39165], Qatar's Foreign Minister had failed to attend the November conference of foreign affairs ministers of the GCC states [see p. 39214].
The Amir of Qatar's attendance at the December summit, however, was interpreted by observers as a move to support the efforts of the Gulf Arab states to show a united front in the face of supposed Iranian expansionism [see pp. 39116; 39165].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
Scandal of missing KIO funds
Grupo Torras, a Spanish investment subsidiary of the London-based Kuwait Investment Office (KIO), filed for receivership in Madrid on Dec. 4; it was reported that losses in Spain might total approximately US$4,000 million between 1986 and 1992.
Reports stated that the collapse meant the prospective loss of 35,000 Spanish jobs,
There had reportedly been no profit from Kuwait's total $5,000 million investment in Spain, and KIO's worldwide losses were said to be estimated at $5,000 million in 1992.
According to the New York Times of Dec. 29 the KIO, which had managed an investment portfolio of $100,000 million from London, had seen "nearly 80 per cent of its huge Fund for Future Generations…used up to pay for bad investments and Gulf War expenses" .
It was reported on Dec. 18 that KIO had promised to inject new funds into other major Spanish companies threatened by the Grupo Torras collapse, after the Torras-owned property group Prima filed for receivership.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
BAHRAIN
Announcement of limited political reform
The Amir, Shaikh Isa bin Sulman al-Khalifa, announced on Dec. 16, Bahrain's national day, that he would appoint a consultative council of "elite and loyal men" [see also p. 39164]to "contribute in giving advice and opinion, based on the Islamic tradition of consultation" .
Observers said that the members were expected to be named in late January.
Bahrain previously had an elected constituent assembly, but it was dissolved in 1975 after two years [see pp. 26340; 27364].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
YEMEN
Riots over high cost of living
Rioting erupted in Sana'a (the capital), Taiz and Hodeida on Dec. 9 and 10, spreading to Aden and other centres the following day.
The riots followed a sudden escalation in consumer prices by a reported 80 per cent in several days.
Inflation had been estimated as running at 100 per cent a year, and Yemen's economic difficulties had reportedly been exacerbated by the withdrawal of some Gulf countries' economic support as a consequence of the government's pro-Iraq stance in the Gulf War.
Interior and Security Minister Col. Ghalib Motahar al-Qomesh told parliament on Dec. 20 that 15 people had been killed and 98 injured and that 661 arrests had been made.
Opposition estimates of casualties were said to be much higher.
Security forces were reported to have fired over the heads of hundreds of demonstrators apparently bent on storming the official residence of President Ali Abdullah Saleh in Sana'a on Dec. 11.
A committee of shaikhs representing Yemen's highly armed traditional leaders was reported to have given a warning on Dec. 15 that the tribes would intervene unless order was restored.
Prime Minister Haider Abu Bakr al-Attas was reported on Dec. 15 to have resigned, but it was later reported that the President had rejected the resignation.
Opposition sources were cited as saying that the Vice-President, Ali Salem al-Bid, was in seclusion, having effectively resigned.
A French radio report of Dec. 15 said that the Education Minister, Muhammad Abdullah al-Jayfi, had resigned in protest at the government's handling of the economy.
Approximately 100 US soldiers, in Aden since mid-December under a bilateral agreement to provide facilities in support of "Operation Restore Hope" in Somalia [see p. 39225], were withdrawn on Dec. 31 after bombs exploded at two Aden hotels on Dec. 29.
An Austrian tourist was reported killed and his wife seriously injured.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
National Assembly session
King Hussein inaugurated the final session of the 11th National Assembly on Dec. 1.
In his speech Hussein covered a variety of subjects relating to Jordanian domestic and international affairs, including the Middle East peace process.
He outlined a programme of legislation dealing with publications, labour, youth care and the establishment of teachers' associations.
He also issued a firm statement in support of Iraq's "territorial integrity" .
After the King's speech, Abd Al-Latif Arabiyat of the Moslem Brotherhood was elected for a third consecutive term as Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Assembly's lower chamber.
New political parties
During December the Interior Ministry processed applications to register as political parties by eight groups, of which three were rejected and five accepted.
They had applied under legislation passed in July 1992 permitting the formation of political parties [see p. 39027].
The three groups rejected were the Jordanian Communist Party; the Arab Ba'ath Socialist Party; and the Jordan People's Democratic Party.The five groups approved were the Jordan National Alliance (a coalition of central and southern Bedouin tribes); the rightist Pledge (al-Ahd) Party; the Islamic Action Party (which was backed by the Moslem Brotherhood); and two pan-Arab centrist groups, the Popular Union Party and the Future (Mustaqbal) Party.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
First step towards legalizing contacts with PLO
The Knesset on Dec. 2 approved by 37 votes to 36 the first reading of an amendment to legislation which would permit meetings between Israeli citizens and members of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
The amendment, which had to pass two more legislative votes to take effect, sought to revoke a 1986 law which banned meetings between Israelis and members of "terror organizations" .
On Dec. 3 Palestinian spokeswoman Hanan Ashrawi described the vote as "a positive sign which will serve the peace process and create a better climate" .
She believed it to be an "implied recognition of the PLO" and hoped that the next step would be an official meeting between the Israeli government and the PLO.
Foreign visits
Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Rabin visited the United Kingdom Dec. 8-10.
His talks with Prime Minister John Major focused on bilateral relations and relations between Israel and the European Communities (EC).
At the end of his visit Rabin confirmed that Major had agreed to lift an embargo imposed 10 years previously on Israeli arms sales to the UK.
However, the UK would still refuse to supply any arms to Israel.
Israeli Minister of Foreign Affairs Shimon Peres visited Japan on Dec. 14-17, for talks which centred on the Middle East peace process.
Prior to the Peres visit, Japan had on Dec. 4 issued a call for an end to the Arab economic boycott of Israel, as a response to recent Israeli guarantees to curb the building of Jewish settlements in the occupied territories.
Israel had previously accused Japan of largely complying with the Arab boycott for fear of jeopardising its oil supplies.
President Chaim Herzog of Israel visited China on Dec. 24-30, the first Israeli head of state to do so.
The two countries established diplomatic relations in January 1992 [see p. 38741].
On his return from China on Dec. 30 Herzog stopped over in Kazakhstan when he met with that country's President, Nursultan Nazarbayev.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Deployment of army in Beirut's southern suburbs
Regular Lebanese army units moved into Beirut's southern suburbs on Dec. 29-30, for the first time in eight years.
The suburbs were strongholds of the Hezbollah movement, which, unlike other Lebanese militias, had refused government demands to disarm in 1990.
The army units, numbering about 2,000 men, met no resistance from Hezbollah members, and the group's leaders issued statements welcoming the deployment.
Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq al-Hariri had held a meeting with leaders of Hezbollah in Beirut on Dec. 21.
According to press reports, during the meeting Hariri had successfully allayed Hezbollah fears that a large number of buildings in the southern suburbs were to be demolished to make way for a new hospital.
Arrest of Aoun supporters
The Agence France-Presse news agency reported on Dec. 2 that the Lebanese security authorities had recently arrested around 50 supporters of the rebel Maronite leader Gen. Michel Aoun, in exile since August 1991 [see pp. 38405-06].
The arrests took place after anti-Syrian pamphlets were circulated in east Beirut on Nov. 22, Lebanon's independence day.
In an interview with the Lebanese newspaper Al-Anwar on Dec. 20 National Defence Minister Muhsin Dallul denied that the government was "liquidating" Aoun's supporters, but stressed that the security of the homeland was of primary importance.
Visit by Prime Minister to Saudi Arabia and France
Hariri visited Saudi Arabia on Dec. 6-8.
He claimed that the visit was "private" and not linked to the issue of Lebanese aid programmes, but the Voice of Lebanon radio reported on Dec. 8 that Hariri had "ensured a Saudi donation" of US$200,000,000.
Hariri and Lebanese Minister of Foreign and Expatriate Affairs Faris Buwayz visited France on Dec. 10-12.
Discussions were reportedly held with French officials on the rescheduling of old loans to Lebanon and the possibility of new ones.
Hariri denied reports that he had met with Lebanese opposition figures in France.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Imposition of curfew — Intensification of violence
An Interior Ministry communiqué cited in broadcasts on Dec. 2 announced a curfew from Dec. 5 in Algiers and in the provinces of Tipaza, Boumerda, Blida, Medea and Bouira between 10.30 p.m. and 5 a.m, in a further crackdown on Islamic militants [see p. 39215].
Over the next two days, 30,000 troops and police were reported to be engaged in searches for suspected militants.
According to some reports approximately 9,000 suspected Islamic activists or sympathizers had already been arrested since a state of emergency was imposed in February [see pp. 38790-91].
Violence nonetheless intensified during December, with five policemen and six Islamists reported killed in a gunfight in the Algiers suburb of Kouba, a stronghold of the banned Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), on Dec. 14.
Security forces claimed to have killed 13 "terrorists" next day.
Rezzag Bara, chairman of a commission of inquiry into the assassination in June of President Mohammed Boudiaf [see p. 38981, said on Algerian television on Dec. 10 that the killing had been part of a wider conspiracy serving the interests of radical Moslem movements.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
Renewal of sanctions
Following a Security Council meeting of Dec. 9, the UN extended for a further 120 days the application of limited sanctions against Libya, in force since April [see p. 38839].
On Nov. 27 a warning had been issued to the government by France, the United Kingdom and the USA, to hand over two men suspected of blowing up a Pan Am airliner over Lockerbie, Scotland, in December 1988, and to co-operate in bringing to trial suspects in the bombing of a French UTA airliner over Niger in September 1989 [see p. 39215].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
Death sentences on militants
Eight Islamic activists were sentenced to death by a special military court in Alexandria on Dec. 3, seven in absentia.
All were said to be members of the Jihad group behind the assassination of President Anwar Sadat in 1981.
Three others were imprisoned for life and 18 received lesser terms in two sedition trials, the first such cases under anti-terrorism legislation introduced in July [see p. 39030].
Police announced on Dec. 13 that they had arrested 600 suspected Islamic activists in a six-day operation centred on Cairo's Imbaba quarter and involving some 14,000 paramilitary troops and police officers.
Those arrested were said to include a wanted fundamentalist leader, Shaikh Gaber Ahmad Mohammed Ali, who had admitted ordering his followers to carry out bomb attacks.
The police said that five of those arrested had explosives.
Further arrests were reported in the ensuing days, and on Dec. 30 the Cairo-based Middle East News Agency reported the first of a series of "intensive" police campaigns against "hotbeds of terrorism and extremism" in other areas of Cairo.
At a press conference on Dec. 16, President Hosni Mubarak accused Western media of damaging Egypt by exaggerating the threat represented by Islamic militants.
Observers noted that the Egyptian press, apparently reflecting public opinion, had recently taken to challenging Islamic zealotry.
Relations with Sudan and Iran
President Mubarak was reported to have received an envoy from the Sudanese Head of State, Lt.-Gen.
Omar Hassan Ahmed al-Bashir, in late November, who gave assurances of Sudan's desire for good relations.
The visit followed accusations by Egyptian officials over several weeks that gunmen who attacked foreign tourists in Egypt, damaging the lucrative tourism industry [see pp. 39168; 39214-15], had been trained in Iranian-run camps in Sudan.
Egypt recalled its chargé d'affaires from Iran in early December.
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
Ministerial meetings
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) said on Dec. 17 that it was prepared to step up its contribution to peacekeeping in Bosnia-Hercegovina [see p. 39240; for declarations at CSCE and ICO meetings see pp. 39250; 39251].
NATO Defence Ministers, meeting in Brussels on Dec. 10-11, were reported to have discussed contingency plans for increased involvement in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
These were understood to stop short of deployment of major ground forces.
NATO Foreign Ministers, meeting in Brussels on Dec. 17, placed the main responsibility for the conflict on the leaders of Serbia and of the Bosnian Serbs.
They called for a negotiated settlement restoring the republic's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Serbian leaders, they said, were responsible for "gross violations of human rights and international humanitarian law" and for harrassment of relief convoys.
Noting that NATO members were contributing individually and as an alliance to implementing UN resolutions in the area, they said that they would respond to further requests from the UN.
The ministers backed the UN decision to send peacekeeping forces to Macedonia, said that they favoured a "UN preventive presence" in Kosovo, and called for further preventive steps by the UN or the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
NATO was already providing staff and equipment for the headquarters of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) near Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital.
NATO ships were in the Adriatic Sea to help enforce the UN arms embargo, and NATO "early warning" (AWACS) aircraft were providing the UN with information to monitor the ban on military flights over Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Consultations on peacekeeping with former Warsaw Pact countries
Representatives of 37 countries from NATO and the former Warsaw Pact, meeting in Brussels on Dec. 18 in the North Atlantic Co-operation Council (NACC), said that their consultations would lead to "co-operation among interested members in preparation for peacekeeping activities" .
These included planning, training and possible joint peacekeeping exercises.
NACC members were ready to contribute on a case-by-case basis to peacekeeping operations under the authority of the UN or of the CSCE.
Guidelines for Franco-German corps
NATO representatives approved on Dec. 22 an agreement (still requiring formal signature) on the use of a 35,000-strong corps to be set up by France and Germany.
In an emergency the new European corps would come under the operational command of NATO's Supreme Allied Command Europe (SACEUR).
This appeared to resolve a controversy in which the USA had expressed misgivings about the effect of the new corps on NATO.
Albanian application to join NATO
Albania became on Dec. 16 the first former Warsaw Pact country to apply formally for NATO membership.
Albanian President Sali Berisha visited NATO headquarters in Brussels on Dec. 15-16, when he said that NATO provided a pillar of stability in Europe.
He warned of the likelihood of a Balkan war, if the Serbian leadership attempted to extend "ethnic cleansing" to drive ethnic Albanians from "houses they have occupied for millennia" in Kosovo; a peacekeeping force in Kosovo, he suggested, was the only way to prevent conflict spreading there.
Reappointment of Wörner
NATO Foreign Ministers decided on Dec. 17 that Manfred Wörner should be re-appointed as NATO Secretary-General for a further three years.
His current term had been extended for a year until mid-1993 [see p. 38601].
INTERNATIONAL
CSCE
Foreign Ministers' meeting
A meeting of the Foreign Ministers' of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), held in Stockholm, the Swedish capital, on Dec. 14-15, was dominated by the search for measures to deal with fighting in Bosnia-Hercegovina and tensions in other potential flashpoints in eastern Europe.
The final declaration on Dec. 15 deplored brutality against civilians and "ethnic cleansing" , the term which was increasingly commonly used to describe displacement of civilian populations by Serbian forces in particular.
The CSCE warned of sterner action by the international community unless Serbian policies changed.
The meeting was unable to reach a consensus on requests by some members that the government of Bosnia-Hercegovina be exempt from the arms embargo applied to the area [see also p. 39240], In a compromise, the final declaration noted these requests and called on the UN Security Council to continue to consider the question.
The meeting called for the establishment of safe areas for civilians in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The CSCE would consult with the UN on how individuals could be brought to trial for war crimes committed in the area [see p. 39240 for US Secretary of State's Dec. 14 proposal for war crimes prosecutions].
Among measures to strengthen CSCE machinery for conciliation and problem-solving, the meeting named Max van der Stoel of the Netherlands as the CSCE's High Commissioner on National Minorities.
It established a monitoring mission to Estonia, where ethnic Russians, backed by the Russian government, were accusing the authorities of discriminating against them.
Other ethnic and national tensions aired in discussions included conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan and in Georgia and Moldova.
Russian "shock diplomacy" 
Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev prompted surprise and confusion when he delivered an aggressively hardline speech to the meeting on Dec. 14.
He later took the floor again to explain his remarks as "shock diplomacy" , intended to illustrate the tone which Russian policy could adopt if the political opponents of President Boris Yeltsin were to come to power.
In his speech Kozyrev had accused Western powers of interfering in the former Soviet Union, claimed the right to use military action in the area, and threatened to come to the aid of Serbia.
He subsequently described this as merely a "rhetorical technique," and underlined that these remarks did not represent Yelsin's views or his own.
Voluntary arbitration tribunal
An agreement was signed on Dec. 15 by 29 of the 51 CSCE member countries at the Stockholm meeting, to set up a tribunal to arbitrate and mediate disputes.
Use of the tribunal would be voluntary and its findings would only be binding if both parties had agreed in advance to accept them.
The USA and the United Kingdom were not among the signatories.
Admission of Czech and Slovak republics
On Dec. 15 the meeting admitted the Czech and Slovak republics as CSCE members, effective on Jan. 1, 1993, on the break-up of Czechoslovakia, bringing membership to 52.
INTERNATIONAL
ARMS TRADE
US helicopter sales to Turkey — US equipment to Hungary — Arrest of alleged plutonium smugglers in Germany
The US helicopter manufacturer Sikorsky signed an agreement with Turkey reported to be worth US$1,100 million on Dec. 8 for the sale and co-production of Black Hawk helicopters; 45 were to be delivered in 1993 and 50 produced in Turkey over four years.
Turkey, which had agreed on Nov. 6 to buy Russian military equipment [see p. 39217], was also buying 50 US A-10 fighter aircraft and 100 Cobra helicopters.
Air defence equipment to Hungary
The Financial Times of Dec. 9 reported that the USA had agreed to supply Hungary with four radar stations and electronic equipment for military aircraft in a deal worth US$12,900,000.
The agreement was described as the first US arms sale to a former Warsaw Pact country.
Hungary was also getting military equipment from Germany and Russia against a background of tension with neighbouring Romania, Serbia and Czechoslovakia, and alleged breaches of Hungarian air space during fighting in former Yugoslavia [see p. 39217].
Plutonium smuggling reports
German and Austrian police on Dec. 8 reported detaining 16 people alleged to be involved in smuggling radioactive material from the former Soviet Union.
The material was said to be plutonium and caesium from Ukraine.
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
Protests against farm agreement
Some 50,000 farmers from more than 15 countries marched in Strasbourg, France, on Dec. 1 in protest against the Nov. 20 agreement between negotiators for the USA and the European Communities (EC) on new trade rules for farm products [see pp. 39176-77].
A similar number protested in Bonn on Dec. 8.
Possible change in Japanese policy
Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa said on Dec. 13 that Japan, while protecting its farmers, should not cause the breakdown of GATT negotiations.
His statement was widely interpreted as confirming that his government was moving toward relaxation of its ban on rice imports.
Extension of Multifibre Arrangement
The GATT Textiles Committee decided on Dec. 9 to extend the Multifibre Arrangement (MFA) for another year, until the end of 1993, because the Uruguay Round of GATT talks had not yet been completed.
Observer status for Byelarus
The Belinform agency reported that Byelarus was granted observer status at GATT on Dec. 14.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Oil spill off Spain
A Greek-owned oil tanker, the Aegean Sea, ran aground and exploded off the north-western Spanish port of La Coruña on Dec. 3, spilling an estimated 70,000 tonnes of oil into the sea, with serious ecological consequences.
The tanker had been transporting oil from the United Kingdom North Sea terminal at Sullom Voe to La Coruña's refinery, when it was driven on to rocks during a sudden squall.
Strong winds and heavy seas subsequently helped disperse much of the oil.
Conservationists criticized the Spanish authorities for failing to take sufficient measures to rescue oiled seabirds, and suggested that they were covering up the extent of the damage.
INTERNATIONAL
OECD
DAC meeting
The Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) held its annual meeting in Paris on Nov. 30-Dec. 1 [for 1991 DAC meeting see p. 38699].
Luxembourg was admitted as the 22nd DAC member; Greece and Turkey also participated in the meeting.
Ministers and heads of aid agencies received the DAC Chairman's annual report on the flow of aid, showing official development assistance (ODA) up by 3.3 per cent overall in 1991, mainly because of increased Japanese aid.
Concerning basic rationales for aid, they stressed the need to review the definition of ODA and to adjust further the orientation of aid flows, notably "to assist developing countries to participate constructively in the solution of common global problems" .
They agreed, as preliminary steps in revising their list of developing countries, to include Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan from January 1993 and to omit, from 1996, Bahamas, Brunei, Kuwait, Qatar, Singapore and the United Arab Emirates.
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
International Conference on Nutrition
The first International Conference on Nutrition (ICN) was held in Rome on Dec. 5-11, when ministerial delegations from 160 countries met with representatives of another 160 food and health organizations to consider ways of developing a better global food and medical aid policy.
The conference had been organized jointly by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Health Organization (WHO).
The 1,400 delegates approved a resolution on Dec. 11, declaring that it was no longer correct to blame the global hunger problem on a chronic shortage of food.
Instead, they declared, the root causes were poverty, poor education and poor co-ordination of resources.
Wars and civil disturbances not only disrupted food aid and medical aid to needy areas, but also created refugee problems which worsened the situation.
They therefore called on all parties to co-operate in allowing the safe passage of aid [see p. 39225 for Somalia aid crisis].
The conference had been told on Dec. 5 that some 780 million people in the world's developing countries had insufficient food for their daily needs, that 190 million children aged under five suffered from malnutrition [see this page for UNICEF report], and that up to 2,000 million people were suffering less serious dietary shortages.
In the developed world, on the other hand, over-consumption was now a serious threat to health.
Pope John Paul II, addressing the conference on Dec. 5, had called on the world to address this "paradox of plenty" .
INTERNATIONAL
UNICEF
 "State of the children" report
The annual "state of the children" report, published on Dec. 17 by the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF), urged governments to make available an additional US$25,000 million a year for a drive to eliminate the worst effects of poverty on children and to save the lives of 4,000,000 children a year.
James Grant, Executive Director of UNICEF, contrasted the target figure with estimated annual global military expenditure which, he said, was a sum 30 times larger.
UNICEF said that its target could be met if both developing countries and donor governments increased to 20 per cent the proportion of their spending devoted to basic needs and health care.
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
Air crashes in Libya, Portugal and Vietnam
A Libyan Boeing 727 crashed on a flight from Benghazi to Tripoli on Dec. 22, killing all 158 people aboard.
The crash occurred about 60 km from Tripoli, near Souk al-Sabt.
An official of Libyan Arab Airlines said that reports of a mid-air collision between the airliner and a Libyan military aircraft were being investigated.
The Libyan airline had flown only domestic flights since aviation sanctions were imposed in April [see p. 38883].
On Dec. 31, Col. Moamer al Kadhafi was reported to have said that the Boeing might have been blown up by the Irish Republican Army (IRA) in retaliation for Libya's disclosures to the United Kingdom government of its former IRA links.
A Netherlands DC-10 crashed as it tried to land during a storm at Faro, Portugal, on Dec. 21, killing 54 people.
More than 200 others were reported injured among the 327 passengers and 13 crew.
The chartered DC-10, carrying holiday-makers from Amsterdam to the Algarve region of southern Portugal, was operated by Martinair, a charter company partly owned by KLM (Royal Dutch Airlines).
In mid-November a Vietnam Airlines Yakovlev-40 crashed in central Vietnam, en route between Ho Chi Minh City and Nha Trang; 30 people died, according to an Agence France-Presse report issued after the wreckage was found on Nov. 19.
INTERNATIONAL
ISLAMIC CONFERENCE ORGANIZATION
Extraordinary meeting on Bosnia-Hercegovina
A special conference of Foreign Ministers of the Islamic Conference Organization (ICO) was convened in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, by King Fahd on Dec. 3-4 to discuss the situation in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Those present included President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia-Hercegovina, President Sali Berisha of Albania, and the co-chairmen of the international Geneva peace conference on Yugoslavia, Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen.
A conference declaration called on the UN Security Council to take measures against Serbia and Montenegro including the use of force in accordance with the UN Charter to repel aggression against Bosnia.
The ICO offered to support such action financially and militarily.
It urged the UN to lift the arms embargo against Bosnia-Hercegovina to enable it to defend itself, and to send peacekeeping forces to Bosnia's borders with Serbia and Montenegro.
It also urged the Security Council "to review the situation before Jan. 15, 1993, in order to implement relevant [UN]resolutions" , and called for the establishment of an international tribunal to try those accused of war crimes.
Both Iran (which had already sent arms) and Saudi Arabia expressed their readiness to send troops to Bosnia.
The Turkish parliament had on Dec. 7 authorized the Turkish government to send troops to Bosnia and Somalia if necessary.
New members
Albania, Kirgizstan, Tajikistan and Zanzibar were admitted as ICO members.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Myanma acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), Radio Burma reported on Dec. 3; it said that the instrument of accession was deposited with the US State Department on Dec. 2, making Myanma the 154th state to sign the treaty.
INTERNATIONAL
G-77
South Korea was elected to chair the developing countries' Group of 77 (G-77) for 1993 at the Group's General Assembly in Vienna on Dec. 14.
INTERNATIONAL
HUMAN RIGHTS
The UN General Assembly approved by consensus on Dec. 16 a resolution noting concerns about the human rights of Russian-speaking residents of Estonia and Latvia.
INTERNATIONAL
IMF
The International Monetary Fund on Dec. 15announced that it found that Bosnia-Hercegovina, Croatia, Macedonia (provisionally designated by the IMF "former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia" ), Slovenia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia were the successors to the assets and liabilities of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the IMF.
Each would be asked to notify the IMF within one month whether it agreed to its share as determined by the IMF; each successor could formally accede to the IMF once it had met the formal conditions specified.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE
The US space shuttle Discovery returned safely to Earth on Dec. 9 after a seven-day mission which included the deployment of a top secret US Air Force reconnaissance DOD-1 satellite and unclassified experiments with an Army laser receiver and US Navy camera system.
INTERNATIONAL
UN SECURITY COUNCIL
The UN General Assembly decided on Dec. 11 to ask states for written comments on a possible review of Security Council membership, in what was seen as a step toward possible expansion of the 15-member Council.