

at the meeting of the accounts and the reports o an of the directors and auditors for the year ended thirty first December eighty nine  and the final dividend for nineteen eighty nine.
Secondly, the re-election of directors retiring  er, and thirdly  the appointment of the audit auditors and their remuneration.
The A G M will be followed, er, directly after this meeting, er, by an extraordinary general meeting  erm  to propose, er, an increase in the authorized share capital  to seek authority to create new preference share capital  to renew the board's power to allot shares  to  seek authority to purchase our own shares  to reduce share capital by repaying existing preference shares  to make some amendments to the employee share schemes  to increase the  aggregate amount available for directors' fees and to enable the company to issue summary financial statements.
I'll now call upon David  of Coopers and  Lybrand to read the report of the auditors to the members.
Thank you David.
Erm  next, er  I shall be proposing a resolution to receive the report and accounts and to declare a dividend.
Then  before putting the resolution to the vote  I shall say a few words and ask whether, ah, there are any questions.
The report and accounts have been in your hands for the statutory period  er, and you've had the chance to read my statement.
I therefore propose that the report of the directors and the audited accounts for the year ended thirty first December nineteen eighty nine now submitted to this meeting  be and are hereby  er, received and that the final dividend of twelve point five pence, er, net per share, recommended by the directors  be and is hereby declared payable on first June nineteen ninety, to holders of ordinary shares of the company on the register, three P M  on fourth of May nineteen ninety.
We are entering the nineteen nineties as a well-defined  well-balanced company  both in the spread of our businesses and the geographical spread of our markets.
We now generate sixty five percent of our sales outside the United Kingdom.
We had another excellent year in nineteen eighty nine  with a twenty percent increase in earnings per share and a nineteen percent increase in dividends per share.
Since eighty two  er, when we merged the two Pearson public companies  we have increased Pearson's earnings per share and dividends four-fold.
We have achieved this by selling top quality products and services expertly and aggressively in the international marketplace  by acquiring businesses which complement and support our four chosen areas of operation  and by disposing of businesses which had no obvious place in those areas.
I explained in my statement in the annual report about the management reorganisation which occurred at the end of nineteen eighty nine.
Although Frank  has been a director of Pearson since nineteen eighty six and those of you been to this meeting in the last few years will have seen him before  I'd like to introduce, ah, Frank to you in his new capacity  Managing Director and Chief Operating Officer at Pearson.
Frank, will you take a bow.


Erm, many of you will also have seen Jean-Claude  at previous meetings  which he attended in the capacity as  to Michel .
I'd like to welcome Jean-Claude to this his first A G M as a full member of the board.


Er, now to move on to events that have happened since the, er, annual report was printed  many of you will no doubt have seen in the press that the same time as we announced our results at the end of March that we agreed to buy, er, the Alton Towers theme park  er, in Staffordshire, from John , for sixty million pounds  er, the purchase has now been completed.
Erm, Alton Towers is a really marvellous addition to the  Group  er, which intends to develop the business further both by attracting more visitors  er, with new and exciting rides and also, er, by, through their unique knack of increasing visitor spending levels.
Er, we also announced at the same time as the Alton, er, Towers acquisition that Longman had acquired Rank Training for eleven and a half million pounds.
Er, this company has a leading position, er, in the fast expanding field of video training products for the corporate market  and that's an area which Longman has identified, er, as a new area for expansion.
Longman is already one of the U K's leading providers of business education  materials and will use this base to develop and expand the Rank Training business.
If the early nineteen nineties are as testing a time for U S and U K markets as many people predict  I'm nonetheless confident that Pearson is better placed than most companies to withstand this.
In the first quarter of this year  we've seen more moderate growth in those geographical areas  but in nineteen eighty nine nearly forty percent of Pearson's trading ca profit  came from economies outside the U K and North America  and we expect our activities in these other areas to continue to grow at a satisfactory rate.
Well, I think that concludes, er, the, er er, remarks that I'd like to, er, make.
I've already put the, er, resolution to the shareholders but, erm  er, before voting on it I'd be pleased to answer any questions.
And could you, could you say  your name  and 
My name is Mr , I am an ordinary shareholder of some years' standing.
I welcome your speech because you have a quite a good habit of  optimistic outlook  future which is contrary to what a lot of other chairmen are saying.
it does, it does the company very very  no chance in the following year  share prices have dropped enormously.
I noted you  that the company bought Alton Towers.
Now I'm not  I'm asking is whether its shareholders could write in to apply for a concessionary ticket to Alton Towers and  get a reduced price if they so wish.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr .
Er  er, I've, er I just  I'm just saying that, er, that, that last year  er, when I made a few remarks  that they were misquoted by Reuters and we did leave the meeting and the share price dropped by  er, several P  and we had to send out a correcting statement so this year we've taken the precaution of issuing a press release  er, at the same time as er, er, I'm making these remarks so I hope at least they won't be misinterpreted.
Erm  as to I think I heard you say  er, ask about concessionary prices to Alton  Towers, was that correct?
 

Ya.
Well  er  we, we've taken a, a, a policy view over the years because the group has a number of er very attractive er products and, and, and, and shareholders have frequently asked if was possible  erm, to have concessions in all sorts of areas and the view we've taken  is that  it involves a, a, a, a, a great deal of administration  and that our real job is to  er  increase the profits of the business  er,a as well as we can and then to pay dividends to the shareholders  erm  who will  er, er, then use that money  er, hopefully to buy a good number of our products.
Yes sir.
Good morning.
My name is   and, er  it appears to me, sir  that you like to make life difficult for the managers to negotiate wage settlements with the employees of the company  I note that your salary has increased by more than fifty percent  in one year.
That I don't think will please John Major or Mrs Thatcher  for being, er  seeing you fuelling and other directors and all the directors of our public companies  fuelling inflation with their inflationary wage rises  doesn't seem reasonable whatsoever  and I think that er  one should consider this in a different light.
Thank you for  er, question.
There's been quite a lot of comment in the press  erm, on high levels of, of salary  of, of remu remuneration for directors and I think it might be helpful  er, if I was  were t were, were to make some general remarks on the background  er, of how we  er, approach directors' remuneration.
On the question of my own  er  er, er, position  I think I would ask, er, in a minute to have Sir Simon  to say something  because er, er, er, I don't, I  I, you know, I don't set my own remuneration.
Er, and  in general we have a, er, panel of the non-executive directors who set the directors' salary  in relation to the other directors I am also on that panel  er, but obviously not in relation to my own salary.
Erm  we have, er, access to the advice of professional advisers, namely  and Co  our policy is to keep base salaries at the mid-point of market competitive range  erm, and provide bonus opportunities that can lift total take home pay into the upper quartile.
Erm  the bonus element of the Pearson scheme is highly leveraged  we are very keen to achieve above-average performance for our shareholders  and let me give you an example, if in nineteen ninety  erm  Pearsons as a company achieved say five percent  growth in earnings per share  erm  the directors' remuneration, and by the way that's not a forecast so I want to make that absolutely clear, it's just an illustration  if earnings per share increase by five percent and you could say, er, therefore we would expect directors' remuneration to be perhaps increased by five percent  that wouldn't be the case at all  our directors' salaries would actually halve  erm, Ill say that again, directors' total take home pay would halve because the salary element wouldn't, wouldn't alter.
Erm  so  er  i i i er, I think that erm, er er er y you'll see that erm th th the the situation isn't, erm, er, perhaps quite as simple a a as you might, erm  as you might think  erm  and, er, next year if that happened  er, perhaps there'd be headlines saying Pearson directors  er, half their remuneration.
Erm  and the reason we set this is that we are  erm  er  the  er, er  we believe that this above average er growth in the  in the, erm, er, earnings per share of the company is what shareh increases in shareholder value really depend on  and  er  again to give an example  erm, if you take the, the, the, the, the, the F T S E a hundred companies  erm, and you do analyses of their  er, growth rates and earnings per share you will find that the average growth rate was eleven and a half percent  and ours  er, was  er, twenty, twenty percent  so it's above average remuneration  erm, er, er, for above av for above average performance.
And I don't think I can say much more than that but perhaps Simon
I hardly feel, sir, that erm  erm  you don't have some influence on your salaries and the other directors' salaries, I've heard a lot of directors and chairmen say that they have no influence on their own salaries.
This doesn't cut any ice with me because I believe that  none of these directors would be in on the board if they weren't invited there by yourself.
So  erm 
Erm  well, I, I, I beg to correct you.
Er  these directors are the bosses of international, erm, companies themselves.
They have no, they have no personal, erm, relationship with me  er, I'll give you the example of one of our, erm  er, er  er  erm, er  most recent directors who's, who's just joined the board, Mr Ruben , who's the head of Colgate Palmo Palmolive, and I just described to him  to you how we, erm  how  we, er er er er er selected him.
We went to, er, we felt that we needed, er, a U S director because much of our business is in the U S  with wide marketing experience  we went to, erm, headhunters  er, in America  who drew up  er, a list of sixty people, culled from their own research  erm  we narrowed that down as an executive to twelve.
We presented these twelve names, er, to the board of Pearsons  erm, the board selected three  er, we kept one in reserve and I was sent out to America by the board to see, er, the two, er, leading candidates.
Erm, I met Mr  for the first time in the airport lounge at, erm  er, er, Kennedy Airport  erm, we discussed at great length and had a very interesting discussion  erm, er, Pearsons  erm, he accepted  er, the job  and h I, he has no obligation to me whatsoever  and he is one of the  er, members of the  er, remuneration committee, and I actually take offence at what you're saying.
Simon 
I'm very sorry you take offence, sir.
no offence meant and I  I really hope that you do not take offence in that way.
Erm 
This may be out of order but, er, personal experience is that  the, er, non-executive directors who were involved in the compensation  made a recommendation that, er  Michael  's salary be higher  erm, than he in fact a agreed with, he requested that we lower it  and in fact that was what was done.
Well, I do hope that our public companies take into consideration inflation in the future.
Er, thank you very much.
I'm very 
Ladies 
sorry, sir, that if you took offence at anything I said.
There was no offence meant.
Thank you.
La ladies and gentlemen 
 
Lord  has asked me to say a few words about erm  er, directors' salaries and particularly about his own.
Now I don't stand here in any sense of defending these salaries, in fact I think our policy is entirely right  and it is not inflationary.
Ergo, we have to look, I think, at the record of this company over the last few years and as the chairman said in his introductory remarks  the growth in the company, the growth in the earnings per share, has been very remarkable.
The, er, credit to that goes to the chairman and chief executive  and the executive directors  and they are responsible for the business  and it is right, in my view, that they should be rewarded for it and encouraged to take risks  to work very hard on our behalf  to ensure that that growth continues  er, er, that benefits the, er, company, it benefits the country  it benefits the  er  ergo, people who are working for it, it is not inflationary because we are looking at productivity and the productivity in the company has increased significantly.
Now, as the chairman said  we base the salaries of directors on two elements  an element of base salary which looks at market levels and we  ergo, have a fair base which reflects a sort of medium to upper level of companies of this size  we then leverage, very carefully, a bonus scheme related to performance  and I believe that is the right thing to do and I believe and so do my fellow directors who sit on that committee  believe that it is one of the reasons that we've seen the great growth in this company over the last five years which you've achieved  and which actually the Chancellor of the Exchequer would very glad about because it is increasing the wealth and the benefit of this country, particularly as a lot of those earnings are coming from overseas  and will in, in time be repatriated in Britain.
So I believe we're doing the right thing, I think it's for the good of the country  I think it's for the good of the company and the shareholders.


I'd just like to add  er, that I didn't take offence at the question, I think it was a perfectly qu fair question, it was the, the inference of, of rigging salaries.
Er  right, could we go on to perhaps a less emotive issue.


Er, my name's John .
Could I make a constructive suggestion  in this context of board salaries or remunerations  or compensation packages  or bonuses  I'm saying that in a slightly tongue in cheek way because I believe that the majority of shareholders don't understand the differences between these concepts, as you gentlemen evidently do.
Most ordinary shareholders have never  had a total remuneration package and have never been part of a  performance-related bonus scheme.
Would you be prepared, er  chairman and gentlemen  to consider Pearson giving a lead in spelling out, in the next annual report  the precise relationship between the bonus element  and  some parameter which I gather from your earlier remarks is probably earnings per share.
I think this might help to  defuse the whole situation which is getting a little bit hot, I've been 
 
to a lot of A G Ms recently and this topic is coming up at most and one feels that it almost may become an issue at the next general election.
W would you be prepared to consider this at another, at, at a future board meeting?
I think that's a very constructive suggestion and we'll certainly  er, consider it  er, in drawing up the  er, annual report and accounts next year.
Yes, lady at the back.
Erm  er, my name's , an ordinary shareholder for long-standing  erm, it would be very interesting, I don't know whether this is possible now or maybe following on from what the speaker has said, if we had some idea of the American system which is  er, I only know very little about it  er  I, just how that works because we have presidents and vice presidents and, er  I think it work rather differently.
So  it would be rather interesting if we could have some sort of comparison.
Would one of our American directors  like to  
I would have to confess that by American standards the er  er  the, er, directors of Pearson, the executive directors of Pearson and  er, the chairman of Pearson and I think that the directors of most English companies are significantly underpaid by U S standards  that's not to say it's right but, er, that seems to be the, er  ha  the current trend.
Actually, I, I didn't mean that, er  regarding the actual amounts because I'm fully aware of the fact that the American ones are very much higher, it's merely the method by which they are  erm   
My own feeling is that there is a great similarity and that there is a  a base salary normally which is  set on a competitive level with a target as in this case  perhaps at the mid-point, perhaps at the sixty percent  level or whatever it would be  and that a significant uplift in compensation can be obtained by a bonus scheme, if the performance of the company as measured in earnings per share, return on capital, return on equity or any m other measure  if those objectives are met.
So I think that th the scheme that  erm  Pearson uses is  er, not at all dissimilar to what would be a fairly standard practice in the United States.
and people like that, but  er, I believe that the, the way it's actually organized is different.
It, again I have to, I have to say 
 
that  talk about the company of which I'm chairman  is that there is a  personnel and compensation committee  which in the absence of a chief executive  sets the chief executive's remuneration and with the presence of the chief executive, although he's not, I'm not a member of that committee  we work on the other senior executives of the company, it's quite similar to the process used here in your company.
Yes sir.
My name is   I have been a shareholder and other members of my family for many years  much has already been said about directors' and your particular  erm, fees in particular.
But er it, it, it er it appears to have been overlooked that, erm  some of the directors who were in the bracket in nineteen eighty eight of two hundred and thirty thousand to two ninety five thousand  have been increased from three hundred and fifty five thousand this year to a top of four hundred thousand.
Er, you have also erm mentioned about the bonus  er, can I take it from what you have said that this is profit-related?
If not  I suggest it should be  and, er, therefore if unfortunately the profits of the company did go down in the foreseeable future  the salaries of yourself and your directors would be reduced.
As regards the salaries of the U S A  we've read and seen about so many companies that pay sky-high for v various salaries and other schemes, we don't want that in this country  but we do want a degree of evenness and I would repeat as somebody has already said, that your salary has gone up fifty six percent  which is very, very high.
Now there was one other thing if you would care to take it  is that you said that it would involve a great deal of organization for concessionary tickets  for Alton Towers or Tussauds  or any others.
Erm  Ready Mix have a theme park  in Th Thorpe Park and there's no problem there of issuing tickets to shareholders for  erm, entertainment of their, their families.
They d don't make so much fuss about it  they distribute it  and it gets on very satisfactory and people  er, are very happy to receive these tickets.
I think the question of turning it down, that a lot of work is  er, forgive my bluntness  nonsense.
Er  one other thing is the  the share capital is sixty five billion pounds.
It's true that we had a  issue  erm  nineteen eighty five  but the reserves are now six hundred and fifty million.
Whether you have given this the same consideration of the increase in, er, directors' salaries  I don't know, but I think y it's worthy of, er, a further consideration.
Er  one last thing  er, do we need so many as eight non-executive directors  which also to be paid?
You've got five executive directors  I should think that's adequate with one or two outside directors to  bring outside knowledge or experience  but, er  thirteen is too many I suggest.
Er  well there are a number of, of points there and I'll, I'll try and cover them all.
The first you asked again about, er, directors' salaries  er, or directors' er  er  remuneration  erm, and I would only say that all the directors are  er  bonuses are linked to earnings per share.
Er, I hoped I'd made clear that if the profits of Pearsons  erm  er not only if they went down  but even if er, there was only a small  erm, increase in earnings per share  er  next year  that the  the directors' salaries would be very considerably reduced  and I thought I'd already made that  erm, er, directors' erm remuneration total take home pay would be considerably reduced  thought I'd already made that point.
Erm  on  er, Alton Towers which you brought up again  er  the question is where do you stop?
Er, it isn't just Alton Towers, it's whether you should get discounts on Penguin Books  it was whether you got, er, bottles of Chateau le Tour  erm  it, it  requests for many different things  and, er,you know, alright  er, it  we could, we could, if Alton Towers seemed to be what, er, all shareholders wanted  er, perhaps we, we could consider that  but, but, but we do have a number of a attractive products.
Erm  er  your third point was about the balance sheet and I think I'd ask the finance director 
Yes  we, we will give consideration to that of course erm 
Sorry, can I
 

Apologies.
Erm  we will, course we will give consideration to erm  a further  issue which I think is what you were asking us to do.
All that does, in effect, as you know is  i i is reduce the unit price  share price, it has no other  effect  erm  a and I think it's purely cosmetic myself and nowadays I think a share price of around seven hundred P which is, er  where the shares are currently hovering, is not  e enormously disproportionate  but of course we'll keep it under consideration.
Erm  and your last point was about, erm, er  the number of directors and particularly  er, outside directors, non-executive directors.
Well all I can say is that, erm  Sir Simon was being extremely modest when he said that the development of this company  er, has been due  er, entirely to the executive directors.
That  that isn't actually the case  erm  the non-executive directors have been enormously helpful in, er, the field of strategy  in giving the executive advice  er  they play a very full  er, role in the develop er m development of the company  and erm  they also  er, keep the er executives, er, in order.
Who would sack me?


Ch chairman, I wonder if I may just add to that 
I'm sure you know that  the Bank of England  the Bank of England have made a very strong point that on balance there should be more non-executive directors than executive directors in the company  and, er  it is felt very strongly that  to get a good mix of non-executive directors really does protect the shareholders' interests  and, er  I think we're very much following the lead, er, of the Bank of, of England, erm, in this particular respect.
And I think that we are very lucky in the very high calibre of non-executive directors we've been able to attract.
Name, sir.
On Saturday afternoon last 
 
What?
Your name!
Oh sorry.
, same as jam!


Er, it's very difficult, yes you all laughed when I asked a question last year from over there to get a capital P in Pearson  because you all laughed  it took twenty weeks to get it  in The Times, do you remember?
Right.
Now we've got a company secretary  he is  er, an F C I S  Chartered Institute Secretaries  that's much better than a chartered accountant, they're no damn good as secretaries, right!
And the 
 
L L B people  really they're not up to much, are they?
Now this chap is supposed to have constructive commonsense  forensic ability, what do we mean,the police?
Affability  to laugh off his twenty week delay in getting my capital P!
Right.
Now can we look at his pay  cos you all been busy on the directors' pay and this chartered secretary is really important  and so that he could be available on a Saturday afternoon if he was wanted.
Well now, the problem  you say it's emotional  shall I say it was blasphemous, it was Rushdie.
Now, erm, the situation there was  that my vicar came to see me  and, erm, what happened was that we've got three churches  well luckily, one of them  only has about twelve in it  another has eighty and another sixty  and he said  well what did he do about Rushdie?
And so  well I didn't like what he was doing  but at any rate it happened on Sunday morning  er, somebody read the lesson  and it was Saint, Saint John and there were chapters  and of course it was skipping about the verses all over the place, you just got fed up with verses.
Right  he then went to the pulpit  and he said  that he was gonna preach about Lazarus actually  but  he's a quiet fellow and he shouted at the top of his voice  I'm speaking about satanic bondage!
Er, Mr  
Yes, is 
er 
that blasphemous?
er,n what, what, er, er, I think you need to do is ask your question because  er 
Oh right 
to have a narratable speech is not in order 
I'm so sorry.
yes, yes  right.
Is  erm  do we know anything about Rushdie or anything?
Another point is, up in Hull in October  er, somebody wrote a book about Mahatma Ghandi  and he got death threats  so the vice chancellor of Hull University  he's in  Fenners he's a director of J H  Fenners in industrial.
So I suggest the secretary rings up the secretary of  Fenners don't say you're listed in newspapers cos industrial people don't like that  but have a word with  Fenners and they'll tell you what's gone on.
So, what is your question?
The question is can a small shareholder do anything for Rushdie, am I doing damage for Pearson?
I'm trying 
Mm.
to help Pearson 
Mm.
not pick it to bits over its directors' salaries.
Er, well  thank you for your offer of help  it is, er  i i i i it's er  er clearly a very difficult issue, there are  erm, there are important issues of principle  er, in, er  conflicting directions  it is not an easy one  and erm  er er er I don't  er, really know that there is anything  er  that, er  any shareholder of Pearsons is able to do about it.
Thank you.
Are there any further questions?
Thank you.
Well I will now put the resolution to the meeting  those in favour  would they raise their hands  thank you  those against  there is nobody so I can declare it carried unanimously.
Thank you very much.
Erm  the next matter is the re-election of the retiring directors  and a separate resolution is required for each one  er  I've asked Mr  to propose the first resolution.
I propose that Mr J H , a director, retiring by rotation  be  and if hereby re-elected a director of the company.
Right.
Thank you Mr .
I put the resolution to the meeting.
Those in favour  any against?
Thank you.
I declare the resolution carried.
Mr  to propose Sir Simon .
I propose that Sir Simon , a director retiring by rotation  be and if hereby re-elected a director of the company.
Put the resolution to the meeting.
Those in favour  any against  thank you.
I declare the resolution carried.
Er  Mr 
I propose that Mr  , a director retiring by rotation  be and if hereby re-elected a director of the company.
I put the resolution to the meeting.
Those in favour  any against  I declare the resolution carried.
Mr .
Er, I'd like to propose that Mr J C , a director retiring in accordance with article eighty of the company's Articles of Association  be and is hereby re-elected a director of the company.
I put the resolution to the meeting.
Those in favour  any against  thank you.
I declare the resolution carried.
Erm  we now come to the appointment of the auditors and the question of their remuneration.
Under the provisions of the Companies Act Nineteen Eighty Five  their appointment  er, requires the annual approval of the shareholders.
I therefore propose that  Coopers and Lybrand  be and are hereby appointed auditors to the company, to hold office from the conclusion of this meeting until the conclusion of the next meeting  er, of the company  at which accounts are laid for the company in accordance with section two four one  Companies Act Nineteen Eighty Five  and that their remuneration for this period be fixed by the directors.
I put the resolution to the meeting.
Those in favour  any against?
Thank you.
I declare the resolution carried.
Well, that concludes the business of the A G M  and, er  it's now twelve forty  and  er  we can move straight on to deal with the business of the extraordinary general meeting.
Erm  you already had, er, the opportunity to read my letter of the eighteenth of April  er, circulated with the report and accounts, which fully explains the proposals being put forward and which are for firstly increasing the authorized share capital of the company  creating two new classes of preference share  er, renewing the board's authority to allot shares  renewing the board's power to modify preemption rights  authorizing the company to purchase its own  er, ordinary shares  reducing the company's share capital by repaying the existing preference shares  er, making certain amendments to the company's employee share schemes  increasing the aggregate sum available for directors' fees  and authorizing the company to issue summary financial statements.
Erm  I  hope that the, er, circular  er  pretty fully explains  er, these proposals  but, er  if there are  er, questions  er, I would be very pleased to answer them.
Well, if there aren't any questions  er, I would return to the resolutions, er, separately  and I would propose the first one which is an ordinary resolution  namely it's resolution one, set out in the notice of meeting  to increase the authorized share capital of the company.
I put the resolution to the meeting  those in favour  any against?
I declare the resolution carried, it's an ordinary resolution.
Erm  secondly  I propose a special resolution, resolution two, set out in the notice of the meeting  to create and allot fifty thousand preference shares of U S dollars, a hundred  er, each  and a hundred billion  er, preference shares of one pound each  er, I put the resolution to the meeting  those in favour  any against?
I declare the  er, er  special resolution  er, carried.
Erm  I propose that ordinary resolution, resolution three set out in the notice of the meeting  to grant authority to the board to exercise the powers of the company to allot ordinary shares  er, this is an annual  er, event  I put the resolution to the meeting, those in favour  any against?
I declare the, er, resolution carried as an ordinary resolution.
Erm   next I propose as a, er, resolution four which is a special resolution  and s set out in the notice of the meeting and is  to modify  to a limited extent, the obligations relating to the allotment of shares for cash  contained in section eighty nine of the Companies Act.
Er  I put the resolution to the meeting, those in favour  any against?
I declare the resolution carried as a special resolution.
Next resolution five which is an ordinary resolution  er, set ou set out in the notice of the meeting  which is to authorize the company to make market purchases of the ordinary shares of the company.
This again is an annual.
I put the resolution to the meeting  those in favour  any against  I declare the resolution, er, carried  er,as an ordinary resolution.
Er  resolution six  is a special resolution set out in the notice of the meeting and is to reduce the company's share capital by   repaying the five  erm  hundred and one thousand, three and a half percent cumulative preference shares of one pound, er, each at par.
I put the resolution to the meeting  those in favour  
 
S I  well I asked for questions before, Mr , but erm  what is your question?
Why is there a need, sir, to repay the five hundred and one thousand pounds of the three and a half percent cumulative pref shares  it's  quite a low interest involved.
What  a low interest share?
Well this gives us the ability  er, for a tidying up operation but the finance director will give more details.
Thank you very much.
It's helpful in the context of the  dollar preference shares we want to issue  because one of the factors of this very small, and as you say cheap  er, historic issue of preference shares is that, er  no preference shares other than those can be repaid prior to that  and the dollar shares we wish to issue which are permanent shares, can be  er, can be erm  repaid at our option and we do want to keep that flexibility in the context of either if interest rates get very high or if the tax treaty between the U S and the U K changes to make them more onerous on the company  and in those circumstances we would be inhibited by the existence of this small historic issue of preference shares  and therefore  it is on balance, although you're quite right there, a cheap  er, source of capital in themselves  it is helpful to the company in the wider sense I believe  if they are repaid.
I put the resolution to the meeting  those in favour  any against  declare the resolution  er, carried as a special resolution.
Er, next is resolution seven which is an ordinary resolution set out in the notice of the meeting, and it is to authorize the directors to amend the company's employee share schemes in the manner set out in the circular dated eighteenth of April nineteen ninety  to members of the company.
I put the resolution to the meeting  those in favour  any against  I declare the resolution carried as an ordinary resolution.
Erm  resolution eight  er, set out in the notice of the meeting  to increase the aggregate annual sum available for directors' fees to two hundred and fifty thousand pounds  I put the resolution to the meeting  those in favour  any against  I declare the resolution carried as an ordinary re resolution.
Erm  finally, resolution nine which is a special resolution set out in the notice of the meeting  er, and it's to alter the company's articles to enable the company to issue summary financial statements.
I put the resolution to the meeting  those in favour  any against  thank you very much, I declare the resolution carried as a special reso resolution.
Erm, that concludes the business of the extraordinary general meeting  erm, thank you very much for attending and making it a lively meeting  and, erm, my colleagues and I will be pleased to, erm  meet you in the foyer  er, where refreshments are being served.
Thank you very much.