

Good morning, everyone.
I think  we have nearly a full house but there may be one or two more people to come.
Erm  taking part within the presentation this morning  ah  are Frank  who is the fr managing director of Pearsons, and James   er, who's the finance director.
Er  we're going to take questions at the end  er  the camera there is for internal use only  and at the end we'll hand out copies of the slides to anyone who wants them.
Our profits are disappointingly small in relation to, er  er, the, er  first half of last year  er then, we had buoyant conditions and we made  more money than we ever had before.
Recession had already promised a slow start to this year  er, but in January when worry about the Gulf actually gave way to the war itself  erm, the trading climate which was already weak  erm  worsened still further.
Er, consumer confidence fell away and U K consumers kept more of their cash in their pockets  er, in fact, erm, they saved over two and a half billion pounds more in the first quarter of ninety one  than they had in the same  er, quarter of last year.
One immediate casualty of the change in conditions was advertising.
Recruitment adversiding advertising for example virtually ground to a halt as businesses started to shed  er, people, rather than to look for them.
So what happened to our trading profit?
In this analysis  er, if you set aside the effect of our sale of  Elsivir er, the variance was forty nine million  seventy percent of which relates to the U K. The drop in profits from our newspapers was the biggest  and probably the  most  widely expected  a substantial proportion of their costs are fixed  and, er, they therefore are particularly sensitive to, er  changes in volume.
Fine china and investment banking inevitably  er, er er er er suffered from the economic conditions  so did entertainment  er, which also brought two extra burdens  er, firstly the er marked reduction in tourism  and, er, for the first time, a three and a half million pound  er, bill for Alton Towers' loss-making winter quarter  which I think we, we've flagged  er, quite consistently.
After newspapers, books showed  the largest decline  er, and the fifteen million variance is shared roughly one fifth by  Addison Wesley and two fifths apiece by Penguin and Longman.
Two of the abiding characteristics of these businesses are first that like newspapers  a high proportion of their costs are fixed  and secondly, unlike newspapers  er, their main selling season is in the second half of the year.
Outside AW's erm, specialists books  er, er, markets  er, book sales have been almost universally slow  there were very high returns as book sellers everywhere reacted to reduced  er, demand by replacing or winding down their stock.
This particularly affected Penguin  substantially increasing its spec i its expected first half loss.
Penguin also incurred losses of two million on  Smithmark its American remainder book businesses  er, before selling it.
Longman  the least seasonally biased of the three  struggled to break even in the first half and this removed the normal pattern of Longman's half-year profits helping to offset the first half losses of the other two businesses  but before we get too depressed  er  I  point out that  Addison Wesley s sales were up by eleven percent and the size of the first half loss reflects the company's decision to gear up in advance  er, for what we w believe will be a very strong  er, second  er, half performance.
Er, overall  I think it's right to say that we're disappointed by these results but we're not downhearted.
All of our businesses have maintained or improved their market shares  as managers  we concentrate on the full year rather on either half  and because of our seasonal bias  er, those of you who've been, er, to our interim presentations before  er, will remember that without fail I tell you  our results at the half-way stage are not a clear guide to the outcome of the year as a whole.
The major part of our profits are made in the second half  er, and this year  er  will certainly be no exception.
To underline the point I thought I'd show you this four year average  one thing that the exercise shows is that between them  our book, entertainment and fine china businesses normally account for about seven percent of Pearson's annual profit in their first half  and for about thirty three percent of our profit in the full year.
This year their net first half contribution was negative  which will strongly exaggerate the seasonal bias towards the second half  er, conditions will still be far from ideal  but with the Gulf factor out of the way and some visible improvement in our overseas markets, particularly North America  we think the trading environment will be broadly equivalent to that of the second half of last year.
Now, er, before I hand over to Frank  er, a word about the dividend  er, in recent years we've paid an interim dividend which was half the total of the previous year's dividends  and so, er, had a built-in increase.
This year we thought it right to reserve our judgment  er, until the end of the year so we matched last year's interim.
Frank.
Well  as Michael says, we're not proud of the results  er, and we're not going to try and dress them up, Michael hasn't tried to do that and I certainly don't intend to.
But nevertheless I do want to  er, bring home to you the underlying strength of our businesses  there's no question, we're very wel very well faced for, for an upturn.
But before doing that  er, you may reasonably ask what action we've taken  er, during this year when it's been such a difficult year.
Do you remember  at the announcement of last year's results we erm  we mentioned that we were concentrating on four themes  one's cost reduction  er  driving for cash  erm, improving our market share  and investing for the future.
Starting with cost reduction  any cost reduction programme always involves a lot of redundancy  and, and  this is no exception  and from the slide you'll see that we've er  we've had a staff reduction  er, from the  the plan for this year  of one thousand and thirty three  er  and that's the, that will save us in a full year something like fifteen point nine, sixteen million pounds.
This year  er, there's been a negative benefit in the first half of two million  and there'll be a positive benefit  in the second half  of two million.
Incidentally, it doesn't include the disposal  of  Smithmark We've also  er  we've also gone in for other cost reduction  exercises, for instance at er Dalton  with a review of warehousing and distribution  er, we should save about a million pounds in a full year  and we've been ramming home to our chief executives  the need for annual payroll reviews  to be geared  to the profitability of the company  rather than t rather than to the rate of inflation  er, or even, er  in, even the market place.
Driving for cash  er  well an indication of how strongly we, we've been driving for cash is that er  the reduction i in er operating cash flow  is less than the reduction in profit.
We've been telling our chief executives that even though you can't get the sales then at least try to work on your working capital, try and get your working capital  er, ratio down.
And there's been quite a bit of success in  in that area  both of the newspaper companies  er, are doing better than last year  and er  Longmans for instance expect er  expect their operating cash flow  erm  their working capital rather to be lower this year than last year by  by year end.
Erm  improving market share, well all of our businesses have improved their market share during this recession  and I'll, I'll mention them as I go through the individual companies.
Investing for the future  although, although we've been keen to drive for cash  er, we really wanted to, to use the benefit of having a strong balance sheet  and so where investment has seemed sensible and sound, we've made those investments, of course we've put er, cash in the B Sky B  er  and we've also invested further in the er  Spanish group, the  Recollectors Group  taking our stake in expansion, adding some cash and getting a stake in the bigger  bigger grouping.
If we look at the individual businesses  there we er see the individual profits.
If we start with the Financial Times  well by their standards it's not a good result  er, but again  let's get it in context, the newspaper's trading margin is just, just under ten percent, it's er it's about nine point six percent  er, and on the circulation front  they've done well in market share terms  where we've marginally improved our  our market share in the quality market.
Er  in Europe we've gone up six percent in circulation  and in Japan we're on target there  and under budget.
In advertisement, er  in the advertisement volume area, again we've increased our market share  amongst the qu er, quality dailies  a marginal increase  er  but  it's nationally we've done very well  and for instance in Europe  we're sixteen percent head, ahead of last year in volume and revenue terms.
On the cost side, apart from the redundancies I mentioned, well including the redundancies I mentioned  er, the non volume related costs are only three percent ahead of the previous year.
East India Dock is now  er, virtually fully utilized  printing the Basildon papers in the daytime and the Financial Times at night and the Observer on Saturday night  and we've got high hopes of getting the contract to print   the Japanese er, European edition of the Japanese daily  and that, that will fill the morning slot so that really will be  er, great utilization of, of that er installation.
has been affected on the revenue front  mainly in the medical publishing but to some extent  in the erm  in the financial sector  although we're still absolutely market dominant in that sector  but we've increased the circulation there by ten percent.
The F T magazines have all increased their market share  and Profile, our electronic, er  erm, information business has grown in revenue terms by twelve percent.
Turning to Westminster Press  the cost  Westminster Press in a full year  er, will amount to three point eight million pounds  and er .
all of our paid fors have  er, done very well  this year in circulation terms  all but two of them have increased their circulation in the first half, despite quite high price rises, for instance the York county newspaper, the weekly there, we have a daily but the weekly there went up by five P  and the weekly in Bath where again we have a daily  that went up by six P.
And every single Westminster Press centre has increased its market share.
Turning to er books  and starting with Longman.
Well there  as I mentioned a staff reduction of a hundred and ninety two  and significant er staff reduct er cost reduction in other, other areas  we, we analyze every single er publishing unit and where the erm  where they were marginally profitable or less than marginally profitable  er  we've taken appropriate action.
And as I mentioned earlier  Longman expect the cash flow this year to be better than last year despite the  the reduction in profits.
Last year I told you  Alhambra er, was receiving the treatment.
This year it's on profit, on budget at the half-way stage  and I expect it to be on budget by the end of the year.
We mentioned a small acquisition in Japan last year,medi on the medical side of Longman, P P S K K  it cost us about four million pounds and we were reckoning on a profit of about half a million a year   pleased to say that its er, its profit looks like getting to a million pounds by the year end.
And English Language Teaching at Longman which is of course the biggest er  biggest profit contributor  erm  their blueprint sale is expected to exceed nine hundred thousand this year.
 Addison Wesley our American college publisher  as Michael mentioned th at the half-way stage their sales were eleven percent ahead of er, last year, and you may remember last year they had record sales and record profits  and er  they're forecasting  er something like fourteen percent a head by the year end in sales terms  and they are expecting to maintain their  their margins  and last year was a very good margin indeed.
Once again there's been great emphasis on  cash maintenance.
Penguin  the staff reduction there doesn't look particularly er high but then we were reducing staff there last year  and we've er, we've disposed of  Smithmark and the travel guides  er, the  warehouse and distribution system is working very well and we've been adding distribu distribution clients there  er  the autumn list looks very strong indeed particularly in the U S especially  and er, we've shipped  er, over two million of Stephen King's latest book  and there's another one due in the autumn and we're expecting to ship about two and a half million of er  of, of that one.
Er  in the U K we've held our market position and it's been a  a pretty desperate market  we were one of the  few if not the only book seller who refused to er  to yield better discount terms  er, on the threat of er  every, every book seller was every er publisher was threatened with erm not being stocked unless we gave bigger discounts.
We held our position against that and I'm pleased to say  er, we will continue, we will continue to be stocked.
Er  our distribution system has got great press recently and it's regarded as one of the three best distribution systems in the U K. One of the things we're trying to do is to pay less for our books, it's very easy to pay very very fancy prices for, for  er  mid-range authors and for them not to earn out, so we're looking for much cheaper books.
A good example is Dances With Wolves which cost us four thousand  as a and has already sold over a hundred and twenty thousand copies.
Penguin continues to try and develop its merchandising  and is quite successful and the latest success is to get the Flower Fairies adopted by Marks and Spencers for their  sleepwear range which will also be marketed in the U S A as well.
Federal and Capital is a small  er  but high quality er  new er newsletter business in the States and er  it's done very well indeed to improve its profits.
On the entertainments side  er, last year of course we had that one-off benefit with not having to absorb the first quarter's loss  and this year the er  first quarter  was pretty disastrous because we had an er er an er amalgamation of, of A the Gulf War  B the recession  and in London I R A bombing  and that really stopped tourists coming to London  from overseas and from the rest of the U K. But I'm pleased to say that er  we, we're coming back very strongly  and for instance in July  at virtually all of our centres attendances were either up to last year  very nearl very nearly up to last year  or ahead of last year  and er  at Chessington our revenue was thirteen and a half percent up on last year  which I think justifies our investment there.
Some of our competitors in the north have been er  really struggling and erm  offering four pounds off on a seven pound fifty entrance fee  so  bearing that in mind we're v v very confident that we've im improved our market share  in that area too.
We opened our Amsterdam, our new exhibition in Amsterdam in June  and er, up to now audiences have flocked there  many weeks they've been thirty percent ahead of er  ahead of budget.
Moving on to B Sky B  well it's making excellent progress  by the end of July we had over two point three million homes connected  and over half of those are subscribing to one or two movie channels.
Costs are well down and will continue to fall  and I'm more confident than ever that we're on to a winner.
If we move to oil  well our oil business obviously operates in a cycle different to our publishing businesses  and er, at the end of the first half it had record sales and profits  fifteen percent ahead in dollar terms  ten percent ahead in, in sterling terms which may surprise you slightly, but I think James probably will talk about that later.
This is a particularly good performance, specially in the U S A where there's been a very serious downturn in natural gas.
We've increased our market shares virtually everywhere  er  two very strong  er  improvements  Venezuela and Nigeria  and the  the initiative we've taken with the Soviets to rework their wells  er  should be onstream by the end of the year  and we're hoping that may lead to other  opportunities  er, both in Russia and er  and there's the possibility from that of some business in Eastern Europe as well.
Investment banking  although this year it's a very different difficult environment for investment banking particularly a house that concentrates on, on corporate finance  er  there hasn't been a great deal of M and A activity and if, if there has it hasn't been a very high erm very high ticket.
Er but there have been a lot of issues and we've done well in that field but of course it doesn't produce the same kind of  fee income as the M and A activity.
 Lazzards New York managed to maintain their figures of last year in dollar terms  and if we take the  Lazzard houses as a whole  we're second only to  Goldman Sachs now in the erm  in the M and A table internationally  and that's on the value of bids on which we've advised.
Fine China  we had a very poor first four months  but then in May world sales were nine point nine percent ahead of last year  and in the U S A over the last ten weeks we've actually been ahead of nineteen ninety.
One factor in this is our exporting the very successful Bridal Collection that we developed in the U K, we've exported that to Canada and the U S and that's gone down very well indeed.
We've also had significant growth in our chain store business  in this country  we've signed a new two-year contract with Air Canada  and we're much more optimistic about the rest of the year  we've got orders, production and sales all nicely in equilibrium  ready for the second half.
Now I'll pass you to er  James.
I'd just like to make  two or three points  first of all the exchange factor which Frank touched upon when, when talking about  profits  you probably all totally familiar but I have forgotten quite how much the dollar has strengthened recently  beginning of the year it was nearly two dollars  and the result of that is that for the erm first half as a whole  the impact of er exchange translation was adverse for our profits compared with last year to the tune of about one and a half million pounds.
It's not enormous but it's perhaps  er not the way people er were thinking.
Now the consequence of the fact that the dollar end of June  er relatively strong at around one sixty of course did impinge on er our  er borrowings since we do have a considerable percentage of our gross  in dollar terms  and if we turn to the next slide  er we can see  er the summary of the balance sheet at thirtieth of June.
Now  you'll be familiar with the fact since we went through it in April  that there has been a sharp jump in our known assets  brought about by the sale of  Elsivir and the fact that it had a very substantially written down value in our books, seventy five million pounds.
So you've had a sharp increase in our shareholders' funds during the six months  and a reduction in our net debt which may not be quite as er  substantial as you expected but it is the combination of on the one hand the proceeds of  Elsivir less some reinvestment which Frank mentioned, we put a little more money in B S B and the minority interests and   we do have traditionally in the first half an adverse net movement of funds from operation  about ninety five million  and then we had thirty two million odd  er of simply revaluation as a result of translating our dollar debt  at er  the one sixty as opposed to the  year ending rate.
So  net debt is two sixty four million  er and therefore the pro forma debt equity ratio's halved from fifty seven percent to twenty eight percent  we do of course expect it to be somewhat lower by the year end as our working capital  which is coming to its peak season, unwinds.
I'd like to go into a little more  the composition of the net debt which again is something that er interests some of you  we have er a reduction both on gross debt and equally an increase in cash as you would expect as a result of the  Elsivir sale  the increases are not fixed  debt  fixed term fixed rate debt is a function again of the exchange rate we haven't in issued any more  the whole of the reduction of debt therefore is confined to our floating rate or variable debt and that amount's ready to the repayment of the gilder drawings we had under our  to hedge  or partially to hedge our holding in  Elsivir We have increased our cash holdings and they remain concentrated in sterling as part of our sterling er asset er portfolio which is managed from Millbank and which we regard as our investable funds as and when needed.