

Capital market theory
Introduction
Chapter 4 showed the basic principles of the analysis of securities and portfolios initially developed by Markowitz, and the embellishments added by Black, Tobin, etc.
Markowitz's two-parameter model spawned an academic industry engaged in exploring the ramifications of the investor behaviour implied in the original formulation.
Capital market theory is not a single theory, rather it is a collection of theories which try to explain and predict market behaviour.
The two basic variants presented in this chapter are the capital asset pricing model and what has become known as the market model, developed by Sharpe and Lintner.
In Chapter 6 the variant known as the arbitrage pricing model will be presented.
The original formulation of the theory by Sharpe and Lintner made the following  assumptions :
1.
Investors are risk averse and maximize their return (as measured by the rate of return) over a one period time horizon.
2.
Investors are rational price takers who make their selection of wealth-producing assets using risks (standard deviation of expected returns) and the expected returns.
3.
Wealth-producing assets are assumed to be infinitely divisible and taxes and transactions costs are both zero.
Investors conforming to the above assumptions will be Markowitz efficient and will prefer efficient portfolios (i.e. those portfolios dominant in their risk or their return classes) to all other portfolios.
In addition, Sharpe and Lintner made certain assumptions about the nature of the market:
4.
There is a risk-free borrowing and a risk-free lending rate which are equal and available to all investors whatever their status.
5.
All capital assets can be bought and sold (long or short without restriction), including human capital (i.e. investment in education and skills).
6.
Capital markets are perfect in that there are no barriers to exit or entry and information is freely available to all.
7.
A one period time horizon and homogeneous expectations on the part of investors — all investors have the same perceptions of expected returns, risks (standard deviations), and covariance's.
These 7 assumptions are similar to those that underpin the analysis of Markowitz presented in Chapter 4 but they also make important extensions — principally assumptions 4 and 7.
Although these assumptions may seem too numerous and overly restrictive it is worth restating that this is essentially a deductive economic model which abstracts from reality.
This process of abstraction is intended to focus on those elements which are the most important in explaining what happens in the real world.
In one sense it is a simplification, but also it is a clarification which is intended to provide understanding and prediction.
The alternatives to this approach fall into two distinct and equally unsatisfactory categories:
1.
Anecdotal evidence, interpretation and prediction.
It might be said that this constitutes the bulk of market lore and wisdom.
It is an unstructured corpus of independent observations which rarely go beyond what seems to have happened in the past.
Each component forms an independent contribution and nowhere are these drawn together to explain the operation of the market in any overall sense.
Hence, prediction is reduced to a repetition of what has occurred before in similar circumstances.
2.
Statistical experimentation, observation and interpretation.
The ubiquitous tools of this form of inquiry are a multiple regression computer program and a data bank of all variables that might be relevant.
The process is simply to find the combination of variables which gave the best fit in the past and then to extrapolate the equation to make predictions.
This has been called ‘econometric strip mining’ and again contributes very little to our understanding of how markets actually work.
This is not to say that profitable trading strategies have not been devised using this method.
However, it is axiomatic that if such successful strategies have been so developed they have not been published and therefore cannot be commented upon here or in any other similar text.
Sharpe has summed this up succinctly as follows:
Capital market theory is an exercise in positive economics.
Assuming that people act in certain ways, what is implied about prices, quantities held, etc'?…the realism of the assumptions matters little.
If the implications are reasonably consistent with observed phenomena, the theory can be said to ‘explain' reality.
More important, it may provide useful predictions.
The starting point dictated by the foregoing assumptions is that all investors envisage the same opportunity set, efficient frontier, capital market line and market portfolio (the Tobin position described in Chapter 4).
Given different investor preferences they will all obtain maximum utility somewhere along the CML.
They will have varying proportions of the market portfolio and the risk-free asset to the extent that there will be lending and borrowing portfolios (see Fig. 4.5).
However, the main conclusion is that each investor, whatever his or her preferences as to risk aversion (or otherwise), will have an investment in the market portfolio.
This implies that the problem of the selection of the risky securities to include in the investor's portfolio has been solved and the only question to be answered is whether to lend or borrow, and how much to lend or borrow.
Therefore, it is appropriate to start at the market portfolio and consider it in some depth.
The market portfolio
The specific portfolio chosen by an investor will depend on his or her particular risk-return preferences.
However, if homogeneous expectations and portfolio opportunities are assumed there will be only one optimum portfolio when the market is in equilibrium.
It must be stressed that this equilibrium involves no excess demand or supply of any investment asset.
Therefore it follows that the optimum portfolio (which is called the ‘market’ portfolio) will consist of all investment assets in the market and that each asset will be held in proportion to the ratio of its own market value to the total market value: where W i is the weight of asset i in the market portfolio.
The assumptions made earlier in this chapter may be used to derive what has become known as the ‘separation theorem’ which underpins the foregoing conclusion.
Assuming a risk-free borrowing and lending rate, that all investment assets are marketable, that capital markets are perfect and that investors have homogeneous expectations, all investors will envisage the same efficient investment opportunities as described by the efficient frontier.
Initially, they will all choose different efficient portfolios on the frontier according to their risk return preferences.
However, when the risk-free asset is introduced to this situation investors will all either borrow or lend at the risk-free rate.
By seeking to maximise their expected utility from their investments, investors will, perforce, select the one portfolio of risky assets.
Thus, the separation theorem holds that there are only two portfolios in equilibrium; the first composed of n risky assets and the second composed of  the risk-free asset.
Hence, all investors will hold a proportion of their investment in the risky portfolio, M, and adjust their risk return combination by going either long or short in the risk-free asset (in equilibrium there will be no net borrowing or lending for the market as a whole).
This proposition may be illustrated by considering a situation in which an investor creates a portfolio consisting of share I and the market portfolio M. If the proportion invested in I is defined as W i (in effect W i measures the excess demand for asset I when positive and excess supply of asset I when negative; when W i is zero then the capital market is in equilibrium as there is neither excess demand nor excess supply of asset I) and the proportion invested in M as (), an infinite number of portfolios may be created where the weights for I may vary between +1and -1.
The loci of these sub-optimal portfolios may be represented by the curve IMI  in Fig. 5.1.
IMI  is depicted as lying below the efficient frontier EMF as the investor is engaged in the construction of a series of sub-optimal portfolios by the definition of the efficient frontier itself.
Position I indicates a weight W i of +1 in which the investor has placed all of his investment in security 1.
At position M the weight of investment in security1 is zero (i.e. ) and the investor has concentrated his investment solely in the market portfolio (where the investor has only invested in I to the extent of the share's capitalization compared to that of the market as a whole).
Moving from M towards I  the investor is engaged in selling I short and reinvesting the proceeds in M; therefore .
Given the above assumptions none of these portfolios apart from M can exist as they are all sub-optimal, being dominated not only by combinations of M and the risk-free asset but also by other portfolios on the efficient frontier itself.
When the market is in equilibrium there can be no excess demand for, or excess supply of, any investment asset.
This implies that for any investment asset the marginal rate of exchange between the expected return and the risk (standard deviation) of that asset must be equal to the marginal rate of exchange for the market as a whole.
Hence, equilibrium is uniquely achieved in the above case when the slope of the curve IMI  is equal to the slope of the capital market line at position M (when W i is equal to zero).
This may be demonstrated algebraically as follows:
let the slope of the CML be defined as: let the slope of IMI  at point M (where the market is in equilibrium and there is no excess demand for, or excess supply of  be defined as follows: therefore in equilibrium Eq.
(5.1) is equal to Eq.
(5.2): cross multiplying: dividing both sides by  and rearranging the results: Adding  to both sides and redefining  and solving .
Multiplying out the brackets on the right-hand side and rearranging: Equation (5.7) is the capital asset pricing model.
It states that the expected mean return of security1 is equal to the risk-free rate of return plus a weighted market risk premium.
The market return minus the risk-free return is the risk premium that investors expect for investing in the market portfolio.
Equation (5.7) merely states that the risk premium that holders of security 1 should expect is a function () of the market risk premium.
To show this more clearly, subtract r f from both sides of Eq.
(5.7):.
The process of development between Eqs (5.1) and (5.8) have transformed the Markowitz Tobin model, and the expected return of a security can now be thought of solely in terms of its relationship with the expected market rate of return.
Therefore, it is now time to look at the concept of beta (Β) a little more closely.
In Eq.
(5.6) beta was defined as the ratio of the covariance between security1 and the market, and the variance of the market:.
It should be recalled that the covariance may be defined as follows:.
Hence, Eq.
(5.9) may be rewritten thus: and when simplified:.
So beta merely uses the correlation coefficient to weight the ratio of the risks of the security and the market.
As such it gauges the extent to which the expected return of the security is affected by the expected return of the market itself.
Equations (5.7) and (5.8) may be depicted on a graph (see Fig. 5.2).
As such they have been called the ‘securities market line’.
The first thing to notice about Figs. 5.2(a) and 5.2(b) is that the value of beta for the market in   each case is shown as 1.
This follows directly from the definition of beta as the covariance of the security with the market divided by the variance of the market.
In the case of the covariance of the market with itself, it is going to be equal to the market variance  where  by definition).
The horizontal axis is now calibrated in units of beta rather than the standard deviation of expected returns.
Instead of all the securities forming an opportunity set they are now ranged along the security market line according to their individual beta values.
Securities with betas less than 1 are called defensive shares as a 1 per cent increase in the expected market rate of return is likely to yield a less than 1 per cent increase in the expected rate of return of the security.
However, in the event of a 1 per cent fall in the market rate, the return of the security is expected to decrease by  less than 1 per cent.
Hence, the investor is partially shielded from the full force of any general market decline.
On the other hand, those securities with betas which are greater than 1 are called aggressive shares.
In these cases a 1 per cent increase (fall) in the expected market rate of return is accompanied by an increase (fall) in the security's expected return of greater than 1 per cent.
Consequently, aggressive shares have a higher expected rate of return than the market during a general increase but the return falls equally sharply when the market turns.
These relationships may be clearly seen if betas are considered as proxy measures of security volatility relative to that of the market.
Diagrammatically, these relationships may be plotted as ‘characteristic’ lines (Fig. 5.3).
Included in Fig. 5.3 is a beta equal to -0.5.
This is merely a hypothetical possibility as in practice there are few if any securities with negative betas.
A negative beta implies a company which does well when the rest of the market is doing badly.
What is more, it implies that the worse the market does the better is the performance of the underlying company.
The market model
Sharpe's 1963 article put forward the idea that the return of any security could be related to the return of the market.
He specified the relationship as a simple least squares regression as follows: where 
In Eq.
(5.13) a i may be interpreted as an estimation of  and b i an estimation of Β.
The last term e it , is the error term of the equation and in the case that the equation has been specified  correctly and is unbiased then the sum of the error terms should be zero which would reduce Eq.
(5.13) to an empirical (ex post) version of the CAPM given the above  interpretations of a i and b i .
It is also assumed that the variance of the error term is constant and that the error terms themselves are uncorrelated with any other firm's error term () and uncorrelated with the independent variable,.
The market model permits a practical implementation of the CAPM.
As noted above, the two models are very similar to the extent that the market model may be regarded as the ex-post version of the CAPM.
This means that there is data available to estimate betas, expected returns and risks.
However, it should be stressed that this implementation requires the assumption that the distribution of returns in the past is stable and an accurate proxy for future returns.
The precise definition of Eq.
(5.13) has important implications for the risk of a security's returns.
In Chapter 4 the standard deviation of returns is a total risk proxy.
However, beta is a measurement of the volatility of a firm's returns compared with that of the market.
As other factors may influence company returns it may be assumed that beta is not a measure of total risk.
Rather, it is market risk as opposed to non-market risk.
Taken together market and non-market risk must equal total risk.
As it stands the CAPM does not allow the estimation of total risk, but the market model does: i.e. the sum of the squares of the observations minus the mean expected value.
Hence, the total risk of the security is the sum of market (or non-diversifiable) risk, and nonmarket (or diversifiable) risk,.
Put another way, market risk is the portion of total variance explained by the specification of the model; i.e. the variance of the distribution of r i explained by the independent variable r m .
The non-market risk is the portion of total variance left unexplained by the model and is the variance of the error term.
The covariance between the returns of two different securities may be estimated in a similar manner:.
Using ex-post data the job of the financial analyst is now considerably easier than using the full mean-variance model presented in Chapter 4.
It will be recalled that for n securities, the total number of calculations was .
For example the number of calculations that should be made to analyse portfolios from 10 securities is 45, and for 100 securities, 4,950.
Using the market model, only a i , b i and  have to be calculated as well as the market return and the market risk.
Therefore, only  have to be calculated.
For example, in the case of 10 securities only 32 calculations have to be made and in the case of 100 securities, only 302 calculations.
The market model gives a considerable simplification in the analysis of portfolios — whatever the number of securities contained therein.
The return of the portfolio is a weighted average of the constituent security returns, the weights used being the proportions of the total investment made in each security:.
The portfolio beta is calculated in a similar fashion:.
The systematic or market or non-diversifiable risk of the portfolio is calculated in a similar way to that of an individual security (see Eq.5.16)): variance due to the market  (5.21) The unsystematic or non-market or diversifiable risk is calculated as follows: non-market variance .
Therefore, following Eq.
(5.16) once more, the total variance of the portfolio's returns is the sum of the two types of risk: total portfolio variance=market variance + non-market variance .
To get back to Markowitz's original proxy for the risk of a portfolio (or for that matter an individual security), the standard deviation of the returns, one only has to find the square root of the total portfolio variance.
Using the market model
It was emphasized above that the market model is essentially an ex-post version of the CAPM.
As such the statistical inputs needed to evaluate securities and portfolios are readily available.
However, the work involved in generating enough statistical observations to produce a reasonable  sample size for an examination of 10 potential shares is still considerable and beyond the means and inclination of most private investors and quite a few  professional investors/fund managers.
As modern portfolio theory has become widely accepted the necessary inputs are generated in the UK by the London Business School (LBS) on a commercial basis.
The LBS produces a quarterly publication called the ‘Risk Management Service’(RMS) which provides all the necessary inputs for all the shares with a full listing on the London International Stock Market and for those currently being traded on the USM.
For the majority of the RMS estimates the sample size is 60 observations consisting of 5 years worth of monthly returns.
The betas themselves are the products of simple linear regression calculations as first suggested by Sharpe (see Eq.
(5.13)).
A typical quotation from the RMS would be as follows:
1.
Sedol; Stock Exchange daily official list number.
2.
Name; the r m S lists companies in alphabetical order.
3.
FTA Ind; this is the FT Actuaries industry classification which in this case is insurance composite.
This enables investors to compare the performance and characteristic data of the security under scrutiny with that of the industry to which it belongs.
The mean beta of the insurance composite sector is 0.91 with a standard deviation of returns of 20 per cent.
The actual return earned by this sector in the previous 12 months was 31 per cent.
Hence, the investor might conclude that Commercial Union was slightly more volatile than comparable firms and earned slightly less than the average for the sector.
4.
Mkt Cap; this is the market capitalization of the share in question which in this case is 1106 million.
5.
Mkt-ability; the number at the beginning of this code is the number of days that are likely between transactions.
A value of zero as in the case of Commercial Union means that the share is continuously traded.
The first letter, which is T in the quote, denotes that the company has trustee status.
The second letter, which can be either A or F, indicates whether the share forms part of the FT All Share Index (A) and if the company is also a constituent of the FTSE 100 (F).
6.
Beta.
7.
Variability; the standard deviation, in percentage terms, of the security's returns.
8.
Spec Risk; specific risk (per cent), this is the standard deviation of the non-market risk of the security ()
9.
Std Error; this is the standard error of the beta estimate and the lower this figure is the better the estimate of beta.
10.
R Sq-rd; R-squared (per cent), this is a measure of the extent to which the market model as used by the RMS has explained the security's returns.
For Commercial Union the market model explained 25 per cent of the variability of its returns.
This particular measure is the square of the correlation coefficient which has been used throughout Chapters 4 and 5.
Therefore, taking the square root of this measure we get the correlation coefficient; i.e. .
11.
Qly Ab Return; quarterly abnormal return (per cent), this represents the difference between what the share might have been expected to earn over the previous quarter given its beta value  and the risk free rate of return, and the return of the market over the same period (; where the expected return is equal to ).
12.
Ann Ab Return; annual abnormal return (per cent), this is calculated in the same way as the last measurement, the only difference being the time period under consideration.
13.
Ann Act Return; annual actual return (per cent), this is the actual return earned over the past year and includes both capital appreciation (depreciation) and any dividend paid .
14.
P/E Ratio: price/earnings ratio.
15.
Price 30.9.86; the price in pence of the shares on the date specified.
This last datum may be accompanied by one of the following letters: S = the company's shares have been suspended, A = company has been acquired, L = company has been liquidated, e = non-voting shares have been enfranchised for some reason, and lastly F = the shares have been withdrawn from the official list for some other reason than those already mentioned.
Using the above information for Commercial Union we may calculate both betas and covariances from first principles.
For example, using Eq.
(5.12) we may estimate the beta of Commercial Union:.
The usual proxy for the market in the UK is the FT All Share Index and this may also be found in the r m S. For October-December 1986 the return on the market was 28 per cent and the standard deviation of this was 14 per cent.
. Given a standard error of 0.17 for the market model's estimate of beta in this case the ‘true’ value is likely to lie between 1.21 and 0.87.
This process does not work so well in all examples.
Using the quotation for British Petroleum in the same issue of the r m S we observe a market model estimate of beta of 1.05, an R2 of 19 per cent and a standard deviation of 35 per cent, and using this data a beta of 1.0897 is estimated, a small difference and well within the standard error limits of + -0.2.
Using the equations for the expected return (5.7), actual return (5.19), beta (5.20), variance due to the market (5.21), non-market variance (5.22), and total variance (5.23) we may construct and analyse any portfolio of equities.
For example, consider a portfolio composed of the shares making up the FT 30 using data from the r m S of October-December 1986 (see Table 5.1).
There are several points to note about the above portfolio analysis:
1.
The portfolio's estimated risk (i.e. the standard deviation of returns) is lower than any of the constituent securities.
At just over 15 per cent it is 6 per cent lower than the least variable of the constituent shares (BTR).
2.
Over the previous 12 months the portfolio underperformed its expected rate of return by just over 2.5 per cent.
From the data above this can be mainly ascribed to the returns of British Telecom (BT) which had an abnormal return of -50 per cent.
However, this does not imply that BT will underperform during the next 12 months or that those shares which overperformed (e.g. ICI with an abnormal return of +40 per cent) will repeat their past performance.
3.
These calculations can be easily set up on a computer spreadsheet and variations may be performed to determine the best-looking selection according to the investor's risk-return preferences.
For example, the above portfolio was re-evaluated using equal weightings instead of capitalization-based weightings and the following results were obtained:
4.
The coefficient of diversification measures the extent to which the portfolio has been diversified.
In modern portfolio theory this is defined as the extent to which the construction of the portfolio has eliminated non-market risk.
As such it is measured by the ratio of the variance of nonmarket risk to the total variance and expressed as a percentage.
In the above example using capitalization-based weights, the coefficient of diversification is 12.21 per cent.
In other words just over 12 per cent of the total variance is still accounted for by non-market factors.
Diversification
The coefficient of diversification used in the above analysis reintroduces the concept of security selection for portfolios.
Two of the most important implications of the Markowitz analysis and the Tobin-Markowitz model presented in Chapter 4 were that:
1.
In the absence of the risk-free asset, efficient diversification depended on the covariances between securities and ‘financial interior decorating’ was no longer sufficient to create a portfolio with the requisite risk-return characteristics.
2.
In the presence of the risk-free asset the market portfolio may be identified and diversification was reduced to a process of investment in the market portfolio and the risk-free assets to derive the required risk return attributes.
However, given the practical difficulties of identifying the risk free asset and identifying the market portfolio with the existence of brokerage and taxation, security selection and portfolio construction remains important.
Therefore, it remains to draw the relevant lessons about such practices in the light of the CAPM and the market model.
The first implication to draw from these models is that diversification within a national market cannot eliminate the risk due to the market.
Although defensive (low beta) securities may be chosen, the market risk will still be present to some degree unless the investor decides to move his or her capital into another form of investment in which case he or she will be faced with another set of risks.
Assuming the investor does decide to remain within the equity market then the second implication of MPT is that the process of diversification is essentially an effort to combine shares in such a way as to eradicate non-market risk.
That is to say, all those specific causes of fluctuations in returns should offset each other leaving the majority of risk inherent in the portfolio's return being solely due to the market.
In a study by Evans and Archer it was shown that random selection of securities would eliminate most of the non-market risk once the number of securities in the portfolio had reached 10–15 shares.
Random diversification allows the reduction of non-market risk because the error terms from the market model's estimation of each security will tend to cancel each other out and sum to zero because they are uncorrelated.
For each portfolio size (in terms of the number of constituent securities) Evans and Archer took the average portfolio risk of 60 randomly generated sets.
As beta values were also randomly assigned to portfolios it was assumed that in each case the average beta value would approach unity.
Therefore, as the number of securities increased the portfolios would increasingly approximate the market portfolio and the total level of risk would asymptotically approach the market level.
This was indeed observed and the results are plotted in Fig. 5.5.
However, other research has shown that in addition to the mean level of risk observed   from a sample of portfolios containing the same number of randomly selected shares, the standard deviation also has to be taken into account.
By allowing for the distribution of results in random diversification, reductions in the overall risk of a randomly selected portfolio of shares may continue until the number of constituent securities reaches about thirty.
This study also suggested that the maximum number of shares suggested by Evans and Archer should in fact be regarded as the minimum.
The effects of random diversification may be further illustrated by using the data presented in Table 5.1.
The characteristics of two, 30-share portfolios were presented earlier.
If the list of shares in the portfolio was progressively reduced by 1 then 29 multiple security portfolios could be observed.
This was done by first starting at the top of the list with Allied Lyons and working down the list.
The process was repeated by starting at the bottom and working upwards.
In each case the coefficient of diversification was taken to illustrate the effect of size on the reduction of non-market risk.
Even with such a small number of observations and an inherently biased sample such as the FT 30, the results are quite plain to see (Fig.5.6).
The small number of observations and the biased nature of the sample did not produce average betas of unity and the effect on the overall portfolio risk was less dramatic, the lowest being 15 per cent for one of the 27-share portfolios and the highest being just under 26 per cent for one of the 2 share portfolios.
Despite the above, it still remains valid that the importance of the covariances between the returns of securities is the mot effective method of reducing risk where the number of shares in a portfolio is necessarily limited.
So far we have only considered diversification within a national market where the stock market and the shares listed therein are going to be affected by the same macro- and microeconomic forces and developments.
This limitation forces the investor to accept the level of market risk and the only ways in which this can be avoided are to select defensive (low beta) securities or to move out of the equities market into alternative investments or to reduce the market influence by combining equities with the risk-free asset.
However, if the national limitation is removed and the investor can invest in foreign securities there arises the possibility that market risk itself may be effectively reduced.
Of course this possibility is dependent on national markets being ‘segmented’ or uncorrelated with each other.
Much is heard and read in the media of essentially anecdotal evidence about the apparent interdependence of markets and the existence of a global securities market.
But is this the case?
The activities of fund managers would suggest otherwise.
Since the liberalization of exchange controls in 1979 a considerable proportion of their capital has found its way abroad (see Table 1.1) to other national stock markets.
This may be in part a search for higher returns but it must also be a function of the desire to diversify away from the risk of the domestic market.
The principal additional complication inherent in international equities investment is the exchange rate risk — that the returns of the investments made on the NYSE by British fund managers will be subject not only to the vagaries of the securities involved but also to the uncertain movements of the exchange rate between the US dollar and sterling.
However, it is possible to construct hedges (completely in theory but only partially in practice) against most exchange risks by using the futures markets.
An international version of the CAPM has been developed by Solnik using the assumption of complete hedging against exchange rate risk.
One of the first attempts to use MPT to assess the potential of international investment was published by Levy and Sarrat in 1970.
They converted the annual stock market returns for 20 countries into US dollars.
These observations were used to generate an international efficient frontier (with no short selling) and the market portfolios were identified by using risk-free rates of returns of 2,3,4 and 6 per cent.
The weights, mean rates of return and standard deviations were as shown in Table 5.2.
Levy and Sarrat argued that as the US market index had a mean return of 12.1 per cent and a standard deviation of 12.1 per cent, international diversification improved portfolio characteristics by reducing risk.
In 1974 Solnik published results of study similar to that done by Evans and Archer, in which he measured the risks of different-sized randomly selected portfolios consisting of (a) US stocks and (b) US and other national stocks.
(The results are shown in Fig. 5.7.)
It is noteworthy that this study not only found internationally diversified portfolios less risky than domestically diversified portfolios but also that the gains from hedging against exchange rate risk were minimal.
Conclusions
In their distinctly separate ways both the market model and the CAPM have taken the rather cumbersome analysis developed by Markowitz and the CML model developed by Tobin to a point which is of practical use for professional portfolio management.
In addition, they have extended our understanding of the nature of portfolio risk and exactly what is achieved by diversification.
In Chapter 6, MPT is extended further to include the practical difficulties of implementation, testing portfolios, its implications for market efficiency and finally the  latest development — arbitrage pricing theory.
Appendix A: Complete algebraic derivation of the CAPM
The explanation of Fig. 5.1 and of the derivation of the CAPM was shortened in order to avoid unnecessary difficulties.
This appendix now presents the complete development of the model from first principles.
The return on the portfolio consisting of security1 and the market portfolio may be expressed as, and the risk of the portfolio return as,.
The slope of IMI  may be defined as follows:.
However, this may be expanded as follows: and, and,.
If , equation (5A.6) simplifies to:.
Assuming , we may now substitute equations (5A.6) and (5A.7) into (5A.4), and hence .
If , then we must be at point M in Fig. 6.1.
Therefore, the slope of IMI  is now equal to the slope of the CML which may be defined as, Hence, at M we have   Cross-multiplying, dividing both sides by  adding  to both sides in order to isolate , and defining  as B i we have, multiplying out the bracket, therefore .
Equation (5A.17) is the capital asset pricing model.
Notes
Questions
1.
What is superfluous diversification and explain what problems can often result from it.
2.
Evaluate the following portfolio using equal weights.
The risk-free rate of return is l3% and the return on and risk of the market are estimated at l9% and 21% respectively.
3.
Re-evaluate the above portfolio using weights based on relative capitalization.
Which version appears to be preferable and why?
4.
Compare and contrast the CML with the SML.
5.
Are the CML and the SML substitutes or complements to each other?
6.
Why should the export of capital from the UK after 1979 have been expected?
7.
What are the non-market factors which may increase the risk of an investment and how may they be minimized if not eradicated?
8.
Demonstrate that a non-convex efficient frontier is both sub-optimal and a transient phenomenon.
9.
Critically discuss the concept of the coefficient of diversification and show how it might be argued that it is in direct contradiction to the theoretical conclusions of the CML.
10.
What are the implications for the CAPM if the market could not be assumed to be perfect?
CAPM extensions
Introduction
Chapters 4 and 5 described the foundations of modern portfolio theory which are underwritten by the efficient market hypothesis presented in Chapter 3.
In Chapter 6 we will look at the following related topics:
1.
A selection of the empirical research on the validity of the CAPM.
2.
Strong form market efficiency and the performance of professionally managed portfolios.
In this section we will consider the possibility of being able to ‘beat the market’ using professional advice.
3.
Finally, the possible successor to the CAPM and the market model, the arbitrage pricing theory (APT), will be presented.
Testing the market model
Although we have already made use of the market model in the construction and evaluation of portfolios, we have not evaluated the model itself.
How much of the variation in a security's returns does it actually explain?
How reliable are its estimates of security betas?
A complete and rigorous example of testing the results of the market model is given by Fama.
1 Taking the monthly data for IBM between July 1963 and June 1968 (inclusive), Fama proceeds first to calculate the market model equation as follows (see Fig. 6.1):
During the period under consideration, the mean monthly returns for IBM and the market were 0.0212 and 0.0162 respectively (2.12 and 1.62 per cent).
The sample variances of the returns for IBM and the market were 0.002,25 and 0.001,52 respectively and the variance of the error term was 0.001,58.
The explanatory power of the model in this case may be estimated by expressing the unexplained variance () as a proportion of the total variance in IBM's returns ():.
Hence the equation leaves unexplained just over 70 per cent of the total variance, or conversely it explains just under 30 per cent of the variance [].
From the equation of the market model for IBM we can see that the estimation of .
However, it should be borne in mind that this is the estimate derived from one random sample of a true but unknown population.
Therefore, it is necessary to have some sort of measure to gauge the quality of the estimate.
The standard statistical technique is to calculate the standard deviation of the estimate (standard error) and use the cumulative normal frequency distribution to set confidence limits.
The standard deviation of the estimate of, B is calculated as follows: therefore, the standard deviation is:.
Using the unit cumulative normal frequency distribution we may compute confidence limits for our estimate of beta.
For example, we may estimate the values of beta at the limits of the expected value plus and minus one standard deviation,.
Therefore, there is a probability of 0.68 that the true value of beta will lie between 0.541 and 0.807.
We may go further and specify confidence limits such as 95 per cent.
That is to say, the range within which the true value will lie with a probability of 0.95.
Using the cumulative normal distribution table, we know that this range will be within plus/minus 1.96 standard deviations of the expected mean.
Hence.
Fama notes that this result is typical for samples consisting of 60 monthly returns.
Fama carried out similar tests for 30 randomly selected firms quoted on the NYSE.
On average he found that the model explained 27 per cent of the total variance of returns.
The best results were for the Ford Motor and the Dana corporations which predicted 45 per cent of the total variance of returns.
The worst case was Canadian Breweries for which the model explained none of the variance of the returns.
Fama also tested for changes in the model's explanatory power over time.
Thus, for 19 randomly selected larger firms the average amount of the variance of the returns explained was 52 per cent(for 16 smaller firms over the same period the degree of explanation was 56 per cent ) for the period January 1934 to December 1938, significantly higher than in the post-war period.
The CAPM specifies a relationship between market risk and the expected return on a security.
However, expected returns cannot be observed.
Hence, tests of this relationship have had to use historical data and have had to assume that the distribution of returns has remained stable over  time.
The second piece of work presented here relies on this assumption.
It was done in 1972 by Black, Jensen and Scholes,2 who took a random sample of shares quoted on the NYSE and calculated the betas from 60 consecutive monthly returns.
They repeated this process for 35 overlapping 5-year periods from 1926 to 1964.
For this process they used the risk-premium version of the CAPM:.
This equation may be respecified to define a i ,.
If the CAPM is valid, then a i must not be significantly different from zero.
However, the authors rejected this possibility of testing the CAPM as the data could produce biased estimators in certain cases.
3 Having estimated the security betas, they then proceeded to construct 10 portfolios in various risk classes ranging from the highest with a value of 1.56 to the lowest with 0.5.
In order to avoid any bias resulting from the selection process (originating from measurement errors which may tend to put shares which had positive discrepancies into the high beta portfolios and vice versa) the return was calculated using the data from the sixth year following the beginning of the period in which the betas had been estimated and chosen.
Thus, betas were calculated for the period 1926–31 and portfolios selected from these results; then the returns were estimated for these portfolios using data from the period 1932.
This was repeated for 10 portfolios over the 420 months between 1931 and 1965.
These results were then subjected to both time series and cross-section tests.
The time series tests showed that apart from the period 1931 39, the high beta portfolios tended to earn less than expected and the low beta portfolios more than expected.
The cross-sectional test took the form of the following equation:.
The term on the left-hand side of the equation is the risk premium of the portfolio which is described as a linear function of beta where y o and Y i are the intercept and slope of the regression line respectively.
The cross-sectional results are summarized in Table 6.1.
All the intercepts are significantly greater than zero except for the first sub-period when it is significantly lower than zero.
In addition the estimate for the slope (substituting 1 for  in Eq.
(6.5) was found to be less than the market risk premium ().
These results confirm those of the time series test in which high and low beta portfolios earned less than expected and more than expected respectively.
The authors interpret these results as supporting the zero-beta version of the CAPM.
In this variant the risk-free asset is replaced by the zero-beta portfolio.
Hence, y o should be equal to  and Y i (the estimated value after substituting the value of 1 for  in Eq.
(6.5)) should be equal to .
However, Black et al.did not follow this interpretation of their results with more    empirical testing.
In addition to suggesting the validity of the zero-beta version of the CAPM, their results also showed the model (both versions) to be unstable over time.
This can most easily be appreciated from Fig. 6.2.
A similar test of the CAPM was conducted in 1973 by Fama and MacBeth 4 who constructed 20 portfolios from NYSE listed stocks over the period January 1926 to June 1968.
Betas and returns were estimated using methods which were similar but not identical to those used by Black, Jensen and Scholes.
The data was fed into a cross-sectional model with the following specification: where:
Fama and MacBeth proposed three hypotheses which could be tested by the model:
1.
If the relationship between risk and return is linear then the value of  should not be significantly different from zero.
2.
If beta is the relevant measure of portfolio risk then the value of  should not be significantly different from zero.
3.
If the acceptance of increased risk is rewarded by a greater return as predicted by the model then  should be positive.
The results are summarized in Table 6.2.
Fama and MacBeth also found that the intercept () was significantly different from the risk free rate for the entire period and for the first of the sub-periods, which tends to lend support to the zero-beta version of the CAPM rather than the risk-free rate variant.
They also found that the average value of  was significantly different from y i which implies that the empirical version of the CAPM had a smaller slope than that predicted by the risk-free rate version of the CAPM.
Despite these discrepancies between the theoretical and empirical versions of the CAPM, the lack of significance of any of the coefficients except those for y i means that none of the hypotheses can be rejected.
Hence, there is a positive and linear relationship between risk and return and the relevant measure of risk is shown to be systematic rather than unsystematic.
In 1977 Richard Roll 5 published an article which cast doubt on the validity and methodology of the CAPM tests which had been done up to that time.
Roll argued that the true market portfolio is   a mean variance efficient portfolio and cannot be observed.
This is because it must include all assets which might be acquired for investment purposes.
Hence, it must include such assets as property, objets d'art, shares, debentures and other physical investment assets and collectables.
As the risk and returns of most of the assets cannot be observed the tests hitherto had been biased.
In other words, by restricting tests to just one equity market, the tests had built into them a bias which meant that they were not valid tests of the CAPM.
In effect, Roll argued that the tests reduced the CAPM to a model of partial equilibrium in which all other factors, such as the returns on other investment assets, must be held constant before its prescriptions can be applied.
Moreover, as most of these tests have been conducted on a single national market, they impose an arbitrary segmentation on the model in which the effects of even other equity markets are arbitrarily ignored.
However, if the above criticism of the partial equilibrium model is put to one side, the implication of Roll's work is that the only valid test is one in which the various market indices, which are used as proxies for the market portfolio, are examined to see if they are mean variance efficient.
Taken to its logical extent, this point implies that even such indirect tests as those previously described are invalid.
Roll pointed out that tests which used a market index as a proxy for the market portfolio could suffer from two types of error:
1.
The proxy might be efficient when the market portfolio is inefficient.
2.
The proxy might be inefficient when the market portfolio is efficient.
Most market indices are highly correlated with each other, for example , the FT 30, the FTSE 100 and the FT All Share Indices.
6 However, this does not mean that it does not matter which of the indices is used as the proxy in estimating the CAPM.
Roll showed that if Black et al.had selected another proxy for their tests, the results would have supported the traditional risk-free rate version of the CAPM rather than the zero-beta variant.
It is important to appreciate that Roll's critique does not reject the theoretical model.
It merely argues that the CAPM is untestable.
In addition, it is worth noting that Markowitz has argued that the inconclusive nature of the empirical research does not mean that the CAPM cannot be sensibly used for portfolio analysis and assessment.
Using the market model to evaluate portfolio performance
In Chapter 1 we saw how institutional investors have come to dominate shareholding in the International Stock Exchange.
Some 60 per cent of UK securities are held in professionally  managed portfolios.
The CAPM and the market model provide a means to test the performance of these portfolios and in doing so have given indications of the extent to which the market is strong form efficient in assessing the ability of managers to consistently beat the market.
There are four basic types of fund managers in the UK financial  services market:
Pension funds
These may be self-administered by employees or corporate trustees.
They may also be independent funds managed by insurance companies.
For example, at the end of 1986 a small fund owned and administered by a group of workers in a nationalized industry which we shall call ‘The General Sickness and Funeral Fund’ had the following investments: Notes: The figures for the gross yield on equities takes into account the time over which the investment has been held (unstated) and cannot be used as a holding period return for CAPM as the periods are unequal.
This fund was set up during the 1880s as a means of providing sickness benefit for employees.
Since the advent of the Welfare State the members, through their trustees, have decided to freeze the sickness benefit and concentrate on a terminal benefit at retirement.
Source: Stockbroker's Report.
Insurance companies
These companies through their business of providing life assurance have to create and manage portfolios of financial assets.
Indeed, the investment of the premiums from their general insurance business has made significant contributions to their overall profitability.
In those years in which claims have exceeded premium income, the profits on the investment of premiums have been sufficient to produce an overall profit.
Investment trusts (US terminology ‘closed-end funds’)
These are public limited companies whose sole purpose is to invest their shareholders' funds in the shares of other companies.
It is a distinctive feature of these companies that their shares usually trade on the stock market at a discount to their net asset values.
Being public limited companies, the investment trusts can raise debt capital and gear their portfolios.
Unit trusts (US terminology ‘open-end funds.)
Unlike the investment trust, the unit trust is not a company.
It is merely a fund which is managed by a company.
The management company may be dedicated to the purpose or this activity may be just one of a number of related activities.
Hence, unit trusts are offered by specialist companies such as M & g or Save & prosper , or the high street banks like Barclays, Lloyds, the Midland and the NatWest.
The management company makes an initial investment charge when it sells a unit to an investor and makes an annual charge on the value of the fund.
Unlike the investment trust, the unit trust cannot raise capital by selling debt, its capital rises (falls) with the sale (redemption) of units to the public.
Because the capital of unit trusts can vary constantly with the sale or redemption of units, the actual size of the fund is not an accurate indicator of investment performance.
It has to be adjusted for cash flows before any analysis is done.
On the other hand, the units themselves are subject to market prices as they each represent a share of the fund's net asset value.
The unit prices are published daily in the form of an offer-bid spread (the price at which units are offered to the public and the price bid by the management for redemption which differ by around 6%).
Typical unit trust quotes are shown at Table 6.3.
Notes:
(1)
Cancellation price.
The maximum spread between the bid and offer prices is fixed by a government formula.
It is usual practice for the management of the trust to set the bid price above the limit set by the formula.
Hence, the cancellation price represents the minimum price which the management must offer to repurchase the units.
When the demand for units is strong the management has no need to destroy units as they may be sold within a short period.
However, when demand is slack and there is an excess of supply over the demand for units, the bid price may equal the cancellation price.
(2)
H. This stands for historic pricing and indicates that unless there has been an intervening revaluation investors may deal at the prices quoted in the newspaper on that day (which were set at the closing levels of the previous day).
(3).
F. This stands for forward pricing and indicates that investors can be given no firm price before the transaction takes place.
(4)
The gross yield is calculated having taken all costs into consideration.
Source: Financial Times, 21 October 1988
The return to the unit holder may be calculated by taking into account the three basic income streams:
1.
Dividends or interest payments (d).
2.
Cash disbursements from capital gains (c).
3.
The selling price, based on the net asset value per unit (bid price).
This is then compared with the purchase or offer price (which includes the initial management fee),.
By concentrating on the return to the unit holder the problems of adjusting the net asset value of the fund for capital inflows and outflows may be avoided.
The performance and performance resting of selected unit trusts are shown in Tables 6.4 and 6.5.
The returns published in Tables 6.4 and 6.5 are inadequate without the associated measures of risk.
The mean-variance analysis and the CAPM provide the means to make risk-adjusted assessment of fund performance.
In doing so they also indirectly test the strong form efficiency of the stock market by measuring the ability of the market professionals to consistently make excess profits (on a risk-adjusted basis).
Three tests have been developed to estimate the risk-adjusted performance of portfolios:
Sharpe's risk premium/standard deviation ratio (S)
Sharpe 7 analysed the performance of 34 mutual funds between the years 1954 and 1963 (inclusive).
His measure consisted of the risk premium divided by the funds’ standard deviation of returns.
This may be derived from the CML.
The total risk on a security or portfolio may be described as follows:.
If ex-post and ex-ante returns are equal, then we may rewrite this equation as follows, where  and  are the ex-post measures of the standard deviations of the portfolio and market returns.
This may be manipulated by subtracting the riskless rate from both sides and dividing the result by the standard deviation of the portfolio's returns to obtain, This may be interpreted as saying that, in equilibrium, the ex-post risk premiums per unit of risk on well-diversified portfolios should be the same as the risk premium per unit of risk for the market portfolio.
The left-hand side of this equation is Sharpe's measure of performance (see Fig. 6.4),.
The right-hand side provides a benchmark against which all portfolios may be assessed.
Sharpe calculated a benchmark ratio using the Dow Jones Industrial Average as a proxy for the market portfolio.
This gives the slope of the CML and hence the measure could be used to position portfolio performance in the risk return space.
The ratio for the Dow Jones Industrial Index was 0.6673 while the average for the 34 funds was 0.633 and only 11 of the funds had ratios higher than that of the index.
The highest fund ratio was 0.7784 and the lowest 0.4311.
If the sales commissions (averaging 8 per cent) had been included in the calculation the results for the funds would have been concomitantly worse when compared to a buy-and-hold strategy.
Treynor's risk premium/beta ratio (T)
Sharpe's measure was a ratio which compared the risk premium with the total variability of the portfolio's return.
Treynor 8 used the CAPM to devise a ratio which measured the risk premium against the portfolio's systematic risk,.
This may be manipulated by subtracting the risk-free rate from both sides and dividing by the portfolio beta to obtain, and as  we may rewrite this equation as,.
As in the case of the Sharpe measure, the right-hand side provides the benchmark risk premium and the left-hand side is the ex-ante measure of the portfolio risk premium per unit of systematic risk.
All that remains is to assume an equilibrium in which investors' expectations are realized on average and we have the ex-post version of Treynor's measure,.
Instead of plotting the ratios in risk-return space, Treynor's measure is plotted in a return systematic space.
Intuitively, we should not expect widely differing results from these two measures in the assessment of portfolios.
In Chapter 5 the concept of diversification was discussed in the CAPM framework.
What emerged was that a well-diversified portfolio (or in this case a well diversified fund) should have eliminated the greater part of non-market risk.
Therefore, total and systematic risk should not be too different in a well-diversified portfolio.
This result was observed by Sharpe.
7 Comparison between the Sharpe and Treynor ratios is shown in graphical form in Fig. 6.5.
Both measures use the risk-free rate to obtain the risk premiums for the funds under analysis.
The implicit assumption is that investors can borrow and lend at the riskless rate of interest.
Friend and Blume have shown that this assumption is critical to the rankings produced by both measures.
9 
Jensen's differential return measure
Jensen 10 has developed an absolute measure of portfolio performance based on the risk premium version of the CAPM: This may be estimated by an ex-post linear regression, where the sum of the error terms is expected to be zero.
Jensen's measure may now be defined as, Essentially, it is an estimate of the difference between the actual risk premiums and the premiums predicted by the ex-post CAPM and may be interpreted as an abnormal return.
The Jensen measures J 1 and J 2 in Fig. 6.6 measure the vertical displacement from the ex-post CAPM.
Hence, in the figure, portfolio P 1 has a positive value for  and portfolio P 2 has a negative value for .
As the Jensen measure is an absolute measure it is not as appropriate as the Sharpe and Treynor measures for the relative comparison of portfolios with different levels of risk.
Table 6.6 is an illustration of the three measures in practice and illustrates the differences in rankings between them.
Some of the discrepancies between the three measures can be ascribed to the use of random hypothetical data which has not produced well-diversified portfolios.
The best is P 4 with a coefficient of diversification of 0.19 while the worst is P 5 with a coefficient of 0.57.
We would expect these figures to be much lower for a randomly diversified portfolio with more than 10 — 15 shares (see Chapter 5).
Table 6.6 includes 3 different risk-free rates to illustrate the point made by Friend and Blume that these measures are sensitive to the rate of return on the risk-free asset.
In the second part of Table 6.6, slight adjustments have been made to the portfolios to reduce the levels of non-market risk in order to illustrate the effect of diversification on the evaluation measures.
In part(a) of Table 6.6, five hypothetical portfolios (P 1 to Ps) are compared using the three  principal yardsticks.
It is clear that in all three measures, changes in rank can be induced by altering the riskless rate of return.
It is also clear that due to the differences in construction, the measures do not provide the same ranking.
In the second part of Table 6.6(b) all of the variables have been held constant except for, the correlation coefficient between the various portfolios and the market.
The first 5 portfolios (P 1 to P 5 ) use the data from the first part of Table 6.6(a).
Portfolios P 1a to P 5a are varied by making changes in the correlation coefficients.
The general result is that the higher the correlation coefficient the lower the CD score and the better the diversification of risk.
This will naturally change the Sharpe, Treynor, and Jensen scores and rankings.
All three measures were used in a study of the performance of 123 mutual funds between 1960 and 1969 by McDonald.
11 The yields on high grade commercial paper were used as a proxy for the risk-free rate of interest and the funds were divided into groups by their investment objectives.
The results obtained are summarized in Table 6.7.
In 1976 Ward and Saunders published the results of their application of MPT-based performance measures on UK unit trusts.
12 They calculated the continuously compounded annual rates of return for 49 unit trusts between 1 January 1964 and 31 December 1974.
They used the 12 month deposit rate for local authorities as their estimate of the riskless rate of return and the FT 650 index as a proxy for the market portfolio.
The results of applying the market model to these data are shown in Fig. 6.7, where the ex-post returns have been plotted against betas which have been adjusted for the changes in the cash holdings of the unit trusts: Ward and Saunders argue that these managerial decisions are particularly important in determining unit trust performance.
They found that on average the unit trusts had increased their investments in short-term assets from 9 per cent in 1972 to 27.9 per cent in 1974.
The authors provide three possible explanations:
1.
Despite the adjustment there are 40 trusts performing better than expected.
The interpretation they suggest is that the compositions of the trusts were changing too quickly for the adjustment procedure.
2.
They also suggest that their choice of index was incorrect but justify it by pointing out that it included both industrial and financial sectors and so could not have any undue bias.
3.
Lastly, they point out that although transactions costs are taken into account when unit trusts returns are calculated, they are omitted when estimating the returns on the market portfolio.
They also point out that when the SML has a negative slope it is quite conceivable that inefficiently diversified trusts could outperform the market portfolio.
The performance ranking of a selection of unit trusts is shown in Table 6.8.
Ward and Saunders conclude:
If Unit Trust Managers maintained the level of risk (p) then investors might reasonably use Unit Trusts as a mechanism for buying into an effectively diversified portfolio.
If, as we found during 1973 and 1974, the risk characteristics were changing, then the ‘usefulness’ of the Trusts would be diminished, unless of course managers have a more accurate forecasting ability than the market price makers.
In the light of 1964–72 empirical results this view appears insupportable.
13 
These conclusions were echoed by Moles 14 in a study of unit trust performance between 1966 and 1975.
He noted that unit trust managements were unable to consistently outperform the market on a risk-adjusted basis.
However, Moles suggested that unit trusts were a useful and cost-efficient method for private investors to acquire a well-diversified portfolio.
The foregoing conclusions regarding the inability of the professional participant in the stock market to consistently produce excess returns is at variance with some of the work on the performance of brokers' advisory services.
Dimson and Marsh 15 summarized these various studies in an article published in 1981 (see Table 6.9).
Dimson and Marsh analysed the recommendations made by a UK stockbroker during 1983.
Using cumulative average residual methodology, they found that a portfolio of the recommendations showed a 0.7 per cent abnormal return during the first week after recommendation, and   -0.8 per cent after 26 weeks (with a standard error of 0.97 per cent).
It is worth noting that the correlation coefficient between realized and forecast returns for this broker was 0.12 which is unexceptional by the standard of other studies.
16 (see Table 6.10).
The evidence of Table 6.10 strongly supports the case that in a competitive and semi-strong form market, few investment advisors can be consistently successful.
Arbitrage pricing theory (APT)
The arbitrage pricing theory was developed in 1976 by Stephen Ross as an alternative to the CAPM and the market model.
18 Ross argued that an asset's average long-term return is dependent on its sensitivity to unanticipated changes in a few economic variables.
These were later identified by Roll and Ross 19 as:
1.
unanticipated changes in inflation;
2.
unanticipated changes in the growth of industrial production;
3.
unanticipated changes in the risk premium;
4.
unanticipated changes in the slope of the term structure of interest rates.
These four factors may be justified intuitively by putting them in the context of the discounted cash flow (DCF) valuation model.
The first two are determinants of the numerator in the DCF model.
The growth in industrial production may be seen as a proxy for the real growth in cash flows from an investment in a financial asset.
The rate of inflation is included as the growth rates of nominal cash flows are not necessarily equal to the rate of change in retail prices.
The last two factors refer to the denominator in the DCF model.
Given that an investment in a financial asset is expected to yield a stream of cash flows into the future, the term structure of interest rates enters the APT equation because it describes the relationship between the cost of money and the period in which cash flows are expected.
However, the investment in all assets except for short-term government debt involves some degree of risk.
This is reflected by the inclusion of the risk premium factor.
The APT makes fewer assumptions than does the CAPM.
Like the CAPM it assumes that investors prefer more wealth to less, less risk to more risk, and that they are rational decision makers.
Similarly, it assumes a perfect capital market in which there are no barriers to entry or exit, free information available to all investors, an absence of both transactions costs and taxes, and homogeneous expectations on the part of investors.
However, the APT is not restricted to
1.
a one period time horizon;
2.
the requirement that returns conform to a normal distribution;
3.
the necessity of a uniquely desirable portfolio;
4.
the requirement for a riskless asset which may be used to set equal lending and borrowing rates.
However, the APT does make the rather unrealistic assumption that portfolios of desirable assets are financed by short selling of undesirable assets.
Despite its apparent lack of reality, this last assumption raises the possibility of an investor making a risk-free return in a market in disequilibrium without having to lay out any of his personal capital.
A perfect market in equilibrium will not allow two prices for identical assets to coexist.
In this case the identical assets are defined by their risk-return characteristics.
Therefore, any pair of securities having the same level of risk cannot have two different levels of expected longterm return when a perfect capital market is in equilibrium.
Arbitrage between the two assets will ensure that equilibrium is maintained.
If two assets have the same risk but one of them has a lower return than the other, then it is sold and the proceeds are invested in the other.
This will have the effect of raising the demand and, ceteris paribus, the price of the high return security.
On the other hand the short sales will have the effect of increasing the supply of the low return asset and, ceteris paribus, cutting the price and increasing the expected return.
19a 
Risk sensitivity factors
In the CAPM the returns on an individual security are related to a single index, the performance of the market portfolio.
The model is couched in ex-ante terms as it specifies expected security returns as a function of the expected return on the market portfolio.
Furthermore, the model can be adapted so that it can express the risk premium (expected return less the riskless rate of return) of the security as a function of the risk premium of the market portfolio.
The APT takes this principle a stage further and enables us to define the expected risk premium of the security as a function of the risk premium of any index.
The total return from a security in a future time period is dependent on a series of anticipated and unanticipated events.
Those anticipated by the market will form its expectation of return and be incorporated into the market price of the security.
Investors realize that it is highly improbable that   events will turn out as expected.
However, even though the unexpected is likely to happen, the APT maintains that it is possible for investors to estimate the sensitivity of assets to the likely variety of events that may take place.
As is the case with the CAPM, the APT does not claim to explain all of the variance of a security's return.
There are still idiosyncratic factors which are specific to both industries and firms.
However, as in the CAPM, the APT argues that these idiosyncratic influences can be minimized, if not entirely eliminated, through a process of creating a diversified portfolio.
Figure 6.8 shows the effect of holding systematic factors 2, 3 and 4 at zero.
The vertical axis measures the actual return from the security and the horizontal axis measures the return on the first systematic factor.
The intercept is the expected return on the security which implies that even if the return on this factor was zero (as in the case of the other three), the actual return would be equal to that expected, there have been no deviations in reality from what had been expected.
Therefore the value of f1 represents the deviation of the factor's return from what was expected.
The return on any security may be expressed as follows: where 
This equation merely states that the actual return is the sum of the expected return, the response of the security to any change in the return on the systematic factor, and any idiosyncratic return.
Figure 6.9 shows the relationship between the expected return on the asset and its sensitivity to factor 1.
The risk-free rate of return has been set at 9 per cent and two security returns (14 and 21 per cent) have been indicated on the line representing the relationship between expected return and sensitivity.
The locus of Z is mid-way between r f and Y and shows the sensitivity-return combination of a portfolio constructed by investing one-third of the investor's capital in the riskfree asset and two-thirds in the risky security Y. The portfolio expected return and sensitivity may be calculated as follows:
The position of the portfolio Z dominates (in the terminology of Chapter 4) the sensitivity return combination of security X. Furthermore, this dominance will persist whatever the value of the expected return on systematic factor 1.
It is a disequilibrium situation which cannot survive as it offers investors a profitable arbitrage opportunity.
By selling security X short and investing the proceeds in a portfolio made up of the risk-free asset and security Y, a riskless return may be obtained.
The arbitrage process will ensure that the supply of security X and the demand for security Y will both be increased, thus reducing the return on Y and increasing it on X. The process will continue until there are no more profitable arbitrage opportunities.
On its own the APT does not specify either the number or the nature of the determinant factors.
Although Roll and Ross have subsequently identified 4 factors,19 it is more convenient for the purposes of exposition to assume that there are only 2 as follows:.
Two additional conditions must be noted for this multi-factor return generating process.
First, the unexplained residual returns between all assets must be independent of each other and second, the factors and assets must be independent; i.e. .
The APT may now be derived from the above return generating processes.
Using Eq.
(6.8) we can develop the APT by assuming the creation of a portfolio of n assets which must exceed the number of determinant factors.
The portfolio return may be defined as  where  and in a well-diversified portfolio .
Equation (6.9) now simplifies to .
The systematic or explained risk is , and .
This may be transformed into the formal APT model as follows: where  is a constant which will have a positive value if there is a risk-free asset and  are the factor risk premiums.
Hence, from Eq.
(6.10) it may be seen that the risk premium for any asset is the sum of the risk factor premiums weighted by that asset's sensitivity to each of the determinant factors.
Figure 6.10 plots the arbitrage pricing line (APL) which shows the position of the market equilibrium.
If the returns of all securities lay on this line there would be no opportunities for profitable arbitrage.
The opportunity to create a zero-investment, perfect hedge is shown by the two disequilibrium returns X and Y. The two securities have the same risk; i.e. the same level of sensitivity to factor f 1 and equilibrium should lie on the APL at point Z. The return on security X is higher than that of Z implying that X is underpriced and Y is overpriced.
Y may be sold short and the proceeds invested in X yielding a riskless return for no investment.
Arbitrage
Suppose that there are 3 portfolios of n assets each with the following returns and factor loadings in a two-factor APT model as follows:
From Eq.
(6.10) we know that there will also be a vector of factor premiums (A, where A o is the model's estimate of the risk-free rate of return).
Using matrix algebra we may arrive at a numerical solution for the factor premiums, where F -1 is the inverse matrix of F,.
These results may be checked by putting the values into the right-hand side of Eq.
(6.10).
Thus for the first portfolio we have .
If a portfolio were constructed from the above investments with weights of  and  the return and factor weightings would be as follows:.
By constructing a portfolio of efficiently priced assets, the investor can create opportunities for profitable arbitrage if there are assets or portfolios that have been underpriced or overpriced.
In the situation where the investor has spotted an asset with factor loadings of 0.71 and 0.82 which has a return of less than 12.9 per cent, an arbitrage portfolio may be created by short selling the overpriced asset and investing the proceeds in the above efficient portfolio.
On the other hand if the investor has spotted an underpriced asset with the same factor loadings as the above portfolio, the portfolio may be short sold and the revenue invested in the underpriced asset to obtain a risk-free return without the investor having to use his own capital.
Testing the APT
The first major test of the APT was carried out by Roll and Ross and published in 1980.
They used a two-stage process to test the APT.
The first consisted of estimating expected returns and factor scores () from historical data.
This process analysed a matrix of the returns of n assets for t + 1 periods.
This first stage produced a smaller matrix  of explanatory factors which were analogous to the beta of the CAPM.
The second step used these estimates to test Eq.
(6.10).
This second stage yielded a set of () which were the factor risk premiums.
Daily returns were used from 1260 securities over the period July 1962 to December 1972.
This data was divided into 42 groups of 30 securities each.
The results are summarized in Table 6.11.
Roll and Ross concluded that at least 3 factors were significant and that no more than 4 were significant.
Regarding Part 1 of Table 6.11 they concluded, ‘As can be seen, all factors are significantly greater than the chance level (5 %) with particularly heavy weight on the first two.
The remaining three are significant, but this may be more a consequence of mixing the order of factors across the groups than of anything important.
However, they went on to comment that the assumed riskless rate of 6 per cent in Part 1 of the results may have been an over estimate, as Part II shows only the first 2 factors to be significant while the fifth factor lost all explanatory power.
The explanatory power (coefficient of multiple determination R2) of this test was found to be 0.743 on average over the 42 groups.
Burmeister and Wall; have identified 5 significant macroeconomic factors,
1.
Risk of unexpected changes in default premium.
This is measured by the difference between the yields on twenty-year government and corporate debt.
2.
Risk of unanticipated changes in the term structure of interest rates.
This is measured by the total monthly spread between government debt and treasury bills.
3.
Risk of unanticipated price changes.
4.
Risk of change in the expected rate of long-term growth of the economy.
This is measured by the difference between the expected long-term rates of growth in real sales at the beginning and end of each month and is used as a proxy for  profits .
5.
That part of the Standard and Poor 500 market index not explained by the first 4 factors.
In a second article Burmeister, McElroy and Berry; used these factors to test the APT.
The first test consisted of setting up portfolios of equally-weighted stocks in the seven main macroeconomic sectors in the American economy.
The coefficient of multiple determination (adjusted R 2 ) varied between 0.5 for the oil sector and 0.84 for the ‘growth’ sector.
It was found that the financial, growth and transportation sectors were especially sensitive to the default factor because the firms in these sectors tend to be highly geared.
On the other hand, utilities were found to be insensitive to both unanticipated inflation and the unanticipated changes in the expected real long-term rate of growth of sales because this sector is highly regulated.
Lastly, the authors noted that, as expected, the growth and transportation sectors were both highly sensitive to unanticipated inflation and changes in the expected real long-term rate of growth of sales.
The authors concluded, ‘APT provides effective means for managing the different types of risk to which investors are exposed.
Its use in the investment community is certain to increase as managers become more familiar with the new strategic investment opportunities it offers.’;
The APT has been applied to British data by Diacogiannis,; who used 302 monthly observations for 200 securities between November 1956 and December 1981.
Five master groups of 40 securities each were randomly chosen and the observations were split into 5 sub-periods, 3 with 100 observations each and 2 with 150 each (11/1956 — 2/65, 3/1965 — 6/73, 7/1973 — 12/81, 11/1956 — 5/69, and 6/1969 — 12/81).
The power of the tests was increased by generating 7 subgroups (containing 5,10,15,20,25,30,35 securities) from each master group.
The results, shown in Table 6.12, may be summarized as follows:
1.
In 93 out of 100 cases the number of relevant factors increased with the size of the sub-group.
2.
The number of relevant factors and their explanatory power changed between sub-periods.
Diacogiannis points out that the APT specifies neither the number nor the identity of the explanatory factors and that this problem is not solved by the use of the factor analysis methodology and therefore:
1.
it is difficult to determine the appropriate group size for analysis, and therefore
2.
the unique return generating model of the APT is unobservable.
These implications were first raised by Shanken:;
Roll argues that the empirical investigations of the CAPM which use proxies for the true market portfolio are really tests of the mean-variance efficiency of those proxies, not tests of the CAPM.
The CAPM implies that a particular portfolio, the market portfolio, is efficient.
The theory is not testable unless that portfolio is observable and used in the tests.
Similarly, it is argued here that factor-analytic empirical investigations of the APT are not necessarily tests of that theory.
In the case of the APT, we are confronted with the task of identifying the relevant factor structure, rather than the true market portfolio.
Whereas we have a reasonably clear notion of what is meant by ‘the true market portfolio’ it is not clear in what sense, if any, a uniquely ‘relevant factor structure’exists.
Shanken goes on to argue that the factor analysis methodology may be manipulated by merely recombining a given set of securities and that therefore on its own the factor model is inadequate as it is incapable of economic interpretation.
A second study of the APT using UK data was published in 1987 by Abeysekera and Mahajan.; They used monthly returns on individual securities with a continuous listing on the London Stock Exchange between January 1971 and December 1982.
The 90 day treasury bill rate was used as a proxy for the risk-free rate of interest.
Seven portfolios were constructed, each consisting of 40 randomly selected securities.
They found that they were unable to specify a unique number of determinant factors across the 7 portfolios.
However, they did find that the APT correctly predicted the risk-free rate in 6 out of the 7 portfolios.
However, their tests found only 2 out of the 183 possible risk premiums to be significantly different from zero.
Conclusion: the APT and the CAPM
The CAPM measures risk with one variable, the market index.
The APT allows any number of explanatory variables.
Roll and Ross have produced a diagram (Fig. 6.11) which admirably illustrates the difference between the two theories.
The CAPM beta is measured along the ray from the origin OZ.
The axes represent the factor loadings (or betas) of the APT.
In this case two have been chosen arbitrarily, inflation and productivity.
The diagonal represents a value of 1 for the CAPM beta.
Portfolio M is the market and has a value of 1.0 and is situated on the ray OZ by definition.
However portfolios A, B and C  also have CAPM betas of but do not lie on the ray OZ.
Roll and Ross argue that these portfolios may have desirable qualities for the potential investor.
For example, portfolio B being more sensitive to inflation than to production may be desirable to certain investors while portfolio A has the opposite qualities.
It may be that these portfolios both have the same level of expected return but the APT points out they are subject to very different types of risk.
Roll and Ross state that ‘To argue that there is one best strategy for everyone — such as‘buying the market’— is simply wrong.;
However, Jarrow and Rudd; have shown that if  and where  while  to  the APT may be reduced to the CAPM, where .
Hence, in this interpretation, the CAPM is merely a special case of the APT.
Even so, there is one essential difference which is that the determinant factor is specified in advance of testing by economic theory.
In the case of the APT, the approach is diametrically opposite in that although it derives a causal relationship, it does not identify the determinant factors.
These are discovered in the empirical tests and economic interpretation and justification is supplied afterwards.
The APT is a relatively new model and is still subject to considerable investigation which will undoubtedly yield greater insights into the pricing of investment assets in the future.
Notes
Questions
1.
Is the stability over time of a portfolio beta affected by the number of constituent securities and if so why?
2.
Why might it be claimed that of all the criticisms of the CAPM, only that of Roll constitutes a serious theoretical attack?
3.
Explain why you might expect security betas to change over time.
4.
Given the following information about the quality of estimators used in questions 5.2 and 5.3 in the previous chapter,
would your assessments of the portfolio remain the same?
5.
How has modern portfolio theory been used to evaluate portfolio performance and show how and why you might expect to find different performance rankings from the different measures.
6.
Explain and critically discuss cumulative average residual methodology and explain how it has been used to test a whole range of market phenomena from semi-strong efficiency theory to the efficacy of stockbrokers' tips.
7.
Show how the CAPM can be regarded as being a special and restrictive case of the arbitrage pricing theory.
8.
Critically discuss Shanken's argument that factor analysis methodology is open to manipulation and is not amenable to economic interpretation.
9.
Suppose we have data for the expected returns for three portfolios and the factor loadings in a two-factor APT model as follows 
(a)
If a portfolio is constructed from the three above securities with weights of w 1 =0.3, w 2 =0.3, and w 3 =0.4, what would the factor weightings be and what would be the expected return?
(b)
How would you interpret your findings?
10.
Critically discuss the apparent inability of academics to arrive at a universal set of determinant factors for the APT.
Options
Introduction
Options are rights rather than assets or claims on assets.
An option may give the holder either the right to buy or sell a share at a predetermined price from or to the issuer of the option, which is another individual rather than the firm underlying the security.
A warrant, which is usually a longterm version of an option, confers on the holder the right to buy a share directly from the issuing company at a price calculated with a previously agreed formula.
The essential difference between these two types of rights is that options are short-term, having lives of up to 9 months in the case of traded options and 3 months in the case of non-traded options.
On the other hand warrants invariably start out with much longer lives and are exercised on dates predetermined by the issuing company.
The first part of this chapter will be devoted to a description of the modern Traded Options Market (TOM) in the London International Stock Market and a general discussion of the factors which influence option prices.
The second part is an overview of the trading strategies which may be created using traded options.
The last part describes the binomial and Black and Scholes models of option pricing.
Options
The modern theory of option valuation began with the publication of an article by Black and Scholes in 1973.
The model which they developed has become a valued tool of analysis in both academic and professional circles.
Although only a recent feature of modern financial systems, options have existed at various times in the past.
They were certainly known during the European markets of the seventeenth century but came into disrepute in England with the collapse of the South Sea Bubble (see Chapter 1) in 1720.
They were subsequently banned by law from 1734 until 1860; they were also banned between 1939 and 1958 as part of the measures deemed necessary for the prosecution of the Second World War.
Between 1958 and 1978, traditional non-traded options were available in the London Stock Exchange.
Traditional options were and still are offered in three forms:
1.
Calls.
Rights to buy a share at a specified price within a specified time (usually 3 months).
2.
Buts.
Rights to sell a share at a specified price within a specified time (3 months).
3.
Doubles.
Rights to either buy or sell at a specified price within a specified period (3 months).
In the case of traditional options the commission charges are based on the value of the underlying shares rather than the option price itself.
Hence, if 10,000 call options are bought for 10p each on Hanson shares which are priced by the market at 200p each, the total cost of the options will be 10,000(o0.1)= 1,000 and the commission (at a rate of 1 percent) will be (l0,000)(2)(0.01) = 200 (rather than 1 per cent of the value of the options; i.e. 10).
However, should the purchaser of the option exercise and buy the shares at the preset price the commission on the transaction will have already been paid.
On the other hand, if the option is not exercised, the purchaser not only loses the initial value paid for the options themselves but also the commission paid on the shares he or she did not buy.
Having paid the commission on the shares at the time when the options were bought, the investor is deemed to be the ‘retrospective’ owner of the shares so that no further commission is due.
The modern success of the option as a financial instrument arrived with the opening of the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) in April 1973.
The CBOE began with option contracts on only 16 blue chip shares, but within 10 years it and 3 other exchanges offered about 9500 different option contracts on 350 securities (out of a total of about 6,000 US listed stocks).
The European Options Exchange (EOE) in Amsterdam offers contracts on 20 listed Dutch companies as well as the EOE index, gold and the US guilder exchange rate (Fig. 7.1).
The London Traded Options Market (Fig. 7.2), established in 1978 with options written on 10 shares, now offers over 1,000 contracts on 63 shares, 2 gilts and the FTSE Index (August 1988).
The success of the traded option is due to the existence of a regulated secondary market in which contracts may be bought and sold and positions opened and closed without the need to enter the securities market.
The organization of the London Traded Options Market
The purchaser of an option contract is referred to as the ‘buyer’ while the originator of the contract is called the ‘writer’.
This avoids any confusion when the buyer sells the option to another investor as the obligation remains with the writer.
The market price of an option contract is called the premium, but the price at which the underlying shares may be bought or sold by the investor is known as the ‘exercise’ price (and sometimes the ‘striking’price).
Each option contract will also have an ‘expiry’ date on which the rights of the investor and obligations of the writer cease.
The maximum life of a traded option is 9 months and the expiry dates are arranged in a quarterly cycle so that at any one time there will be contracts on the underlying share with 3 different expiry dates.
The first cycle of options have expiry dates in January, April, July, and October, the second in November, February, May and August, and the third, December, March, June and September.
In Fig. 7.2 prices are quoted for October, January and April.
When the October options expire the clearing house for the market will create a new series of options for July expiry.
Traded options usually cease on the third or fourth Wednesday of the month in which they are due to expire.
Invariably, this also coincides with the end of the Stock Exchange settlement period.
However, unlike the Stock Exchange's organization of transactions in securities, the TOM requires cash settlement of all contracts by 10.00a.m. the day after the bargain has been struck.
Each option contract consists of the rights to buy or sell 1,000 of the underlying shares.
This is the case for every class (the term for all the contracts written on a particular share) of option except those for Vaal Reefs, the two gilts and those on the FTSE Index.
With a new series, exercise prices are usually created; one at or near the ruling share price and one each at a level some 10 per cent above/below the middle price.
A new series of option contracts (all the contracts for any particular class with the same exercise price) will be introduced when:
1.
The share price exceeds the highest exercise price for 4 consecutive days or when the share price rises to a level halfway between the highest current exercise price and the next potential series.
2.
The share price falls below the lowest current exercise price for 4 consecutive trading days or halfway between the lowest exercise price and the next potential series.
Hence, looking at the contracts quoted on Hanson shares in Fig.7.2, we can see that the highest exercise price is 160p and if the price of Hanson shares rose to 161 p for 4 consecutive trading days or rose to 170p the clearing house would create a new series of options with exercise prices of 180p.
Even though the London TOM has expanded greatly, the number of different securities on which options are written is still a very small proportion of the total number of securities in existence.
The criteria used for the selection of suitable shares are as follows:
1.
The security must be listed on the Stock Exchange.
2.
The company must have experienced no default within the previous 5 years.
3.
The company must have a ‘substantial’ market capital.
4.
The market for the share must be liquid in the sense that there is a constant stream of bargains struck for the securities every day.
5.
There must be at least 10,000 different shareholders.
In addition, once a class of options has been created there are restrictions on the writing of the contracts:
1.
The number of option contracts cannot exceed 10 per cent of the number of securities in issue.
2.
The number of uncovered options written cannot exceed 5 per cent of the shares in issue.
3.
Any one investor or writer cannot hold or sell more than 1,000 contracts of any one series of a particular class or 2,000 contracts in all the series of any particular class.
These criteria and restrictions are meant to ensure that the market for the options in any one class cannot be manipulated or controlled by any individual or concert party.
In selecting a new class of options the clearing house attempts to ensure that at all times contracts may be exercised without any undue influence on the share market itself.
Thus, the situation should not arise in which the writer of an option contract cannot fulfil his obligations by buying securities in the stock market, or that an investor cannot buy shares in order to sell them to the option writer.
Hence the clearing house ensures that the underlying securities form a large market capitalization and that there are a large number of shareholders.
The restrictions on trading are designed to limit the potential impact of the options market on the stock market.
Therefore, no investor through the exercise of either put or call options can hope to influence the market for the underlying shares.
Lastly, commission is charged on the following reducing scale (Fig. 7.2(b)):
1.
2.5 per cent on the value of option contracts up to 5,000.
2.
1.5 per cent on the value of option contracts between 5,001 and 10,000,
3.
1.0 per cent on the value of option contracts in excess of 10,000.
For small bargains there will be a minimum charge which will vary between the different broking firms.
In addition to the commission the clearing house also charges 1.50 per contract.
If contracts are closed (i.e. sold) by the investor, commission is usually charged at half the rate of that for purchases.
It should also be borne in mind that the closing prices quoted by the FT are mid-prices between the bid and offer prices offered by the market-makers.
Motives for buying options
There are 5 broad reasons for buying options:
1.
Equity gearing.
Traded options allow investors to enjoy (or otherwise) the price movements of the underlying security at a fraction of the cost of buying that security.
For example, suppose an investor has correctly anticipated a rise in the price of his or her chosen security.
The investor could back his or her judgement by either buying the share itself or if it exists, the option on the share.
On 26 September 1985 an investor could have purchased BP shares for 526p (end of trading mid-price) and some 6 weeks later on 11 November sold that same share for 560p.
Ignoring transactions costs this represents a profit of 6.5 per cent(which in all probability would have been more than accounted for by brokerage etc.).
However, the investor could have purchased call options with an exercise price of 550p and an expiry date in January 1986, for 25p each.
On 11 November these could have been sold for 35p each, a profit before transactions cost of 40 per cent.
Each contract involving 1,000 rights would have cost 250; if the investor purchased 4 such contracts the total cost would have been 1,000.
The commission at 2.5 per cent would have been 25, and a fee of 4 (1.5) = 6 would have been payable to the clearing house.
On the sale of the 4 contracts the investor would have received a revenue of 1,400 less a sales brokerage of 12.50.
Therefore, total transactions cost would have been 43.50 and the net profit after costs would have been 366.50.
Over the same period similar and greater profits could have been gained on other securities.
For example, Bass shares could have been bought for 567p and sold for 652p, a gross return of 15 per cent (about 7 per cent after costs).
On the other hand the December options (exercise price 550p) could have been bought for 42p and sold for 115p, a gross profit of 174 per cent.
In addition to the profits made on a rising market the TOM permits investors to try to make profits on a falling market.
Again using the same period as the previous two examples, the price of LASMO shares fell from 268p to 240p (due primarily to the falling crude oil price), a fall of 10.4 per cent.
However, the investor who had the luck or foresight to predict the fall could have bought November puts with an exercise price of 260p for 10p and sold them for 25p making a gross profit of 150 per cent.
It is worth emphasizing here that because an option has a finite life and expires it can involve the investor in a 100 per cent loss.
The above examples have all assumed some prescience on the part of the investor.
However, it is very possible that the investor may incorrectly forecast the market as many did in the crash of October 1987.
2.
Limited risk to capital.
Many options may be purchased at a very small fraction of the cost of the underlying security.
If the investor is a purchaser, the risk to capital is therefore limited and known (the case of the writers of options is not so clear cut and will be examined later).
3.
Anticipating cash flows.
Traded options can be used to secure a predetermined price for a security within a given period in the anticipation of a certain cash inflow.
If a specific sum is anticipated in 6 months time, and today's price of the share in which it is intended to invest is considered low or is forecast to rise, then the price may be fixed now by the use of a call option.
On the other hand, if an individual or organization already owns a share on which options may be purchased, and a liability is expected to rise within the near future which can only be met by the sale of the shares, the cash flow from that sale may be secured by the purchase of put options.
These two motives may be especially important to the investing institutions such as pension funds and insurance companies which have large inflows and outflows of the capital under their stewardship.
4.
Portfolio insurance.
In the same way that cash flows may be anticipated, the value of the existing portfolio or investment may be secured by buying put options.
Favourable movements in share prices may be secured for up to 9 months by buying put options in the relevant securities or by buying put options in the FTSE index.
If the portfolio consists of gilts either wholly or in part, options may be purchased in the two gilts on offer: Conv 92% 2005 and Treasury 12% 1995.
Thus any adverse price movement in the stock market or the gilts market will be partly or wholly (depending on the degree of insurance purchased) offset by the increase in the value of the put options.
5.
Interest rates.
By enabling the investor to secure the price for future investment at a fraction of the security's price, the TOM allows the investor to invest the majority of his or her capital in the money market in order to take advantage of high interest rates.
Existing or anticipated high interest rates may in fact depress share prices and hence call prices thus permitting the investor to buy the option contracts at very favourable prices while at the same time benefitting from the attractive rates on offer in the money markets.
In addition to the above motives we must recognize that the TOM provides a very convenient place for pure speculation.
However, before taking any adverse moral position it should be borne in mind that it is only the existence of such risk takers that allow risk-averse (such as those described in motives 4 to 5) investors to effectively sell the risk of their portfolios or investments.
The factors that influence option premiums
Before describing and assessing the binomial and Black and Scholes option pricing models it is appropriate at this point to examine the factors which are expected to influence option premiums and in the next section to have a brief look at the various investment strategies that may be created with options and securities.
In Fig. 7.2 the premiums quoted for options on BP shares are as follows:
In Fig. 7.2 the end of trading price of the underlying security, which in this case is 237 p, is to be found in brackets under the name of the share.
The TOM has a convenient set of jargon to describe the relationship between the security price and the exercise price.
Given that this relationship is the determinant of whether the investor has made a profit or loss (ignoring transactions costs for the moment), it is of primary importance in determining the option premium.
The options market has coined three expressions to describe the relationship between the exercise and security prices as follows: where Ps is the security price and Pe is the exercise price.
An in-the-money option allows the investor to exercise immediately and make a gross profit (forgetting premiums, spreads and commissions for the moment).
Using the quotation for BP options it can be seen that the 220p calls are in-the-money as the security price is 237p.
In the absence of transactions costs and the option premium this series of contracts would permit the investor to buy the shares at 220p from the writer and sell them in the market for 237p thus gaining a gross profit of 17p per share.
However, the existence of the option premiums of 20p, 29p and 31.5p for the October, January and April expiry dates eliminates any gross profit.
Once the marketmaker's spread and the broker's commission are taken into account the investor will face a sizeable loss if he or she buys and exercises at these prices.
However, it remains that in-the-money options are more expensive than at-the-money and out-of-the-money options as the potential for profit is greater.
A convenient way of gauging the extent to which an option is in-the-money is to calculate the ‘intrinsic’ value.
This is simply the security price minus the exercise price for calls (and the exercise price minus the share price for puts).
In the case of 220p October BP calls this is 237 -220 = 17p.
It should be noted that TOM practice does not recognize negative intrinsic values.
By definition, all at-the-money and out-of-the-money options have intrinsic values of zero.
The intrinsic value of an option cannot be greater than the premium itself as this situation would provide investors with an instant arbitrage profit.
For example, if the price of BP October calls with an exercise price of 220p were only 10p then investors could buy the calls and exercise by buying the shares at 220p making a total purchase price of 230p and selling them back to the market for 237p thus making a profit of 7p per share.
In such a situation the demand for the options would rise and, given the restrictions on the creation of option contracts, the price would rise until the profit opportunity disappeared.
However, intrinsic value never accounts for all of the option premiums in the case of in-the-money options and none of the premiums in the cases of at-the-money and out-of-the-money options.
The balance is known as ‘time’ value.
This is the price that an investor has to pay for the possibility that the share price may change to make the option in-the-money.
For example, taking the October calls and puts we may make the following division between intrinsic and time values:
At the time of writing there are 5 weeks before these options are due to expire.
Hence, time value is the price paid for the chance that the share price will move sufficiently during the following 5 weeks in order to make the investment profitable.
This aspect of option premiums may be seen more clearly if we look at calls and puts with the same exercise price but with different expiry dates.
Using the premiums quoted in Fig. 7.1 for BP options with an exercise price of 240p the effect of time can be seen as follows:
The time value components of the option premiums quoted get larger as the time to expiry lengthens.
However, it should be noted that the relationship between time value and the term to maturity is neither linear nor is it the same for both types of contracts.
The difference between the time values for calls and puts may be taken as an indicator of market sentiment about the future progress of the share price.
Thus in the above example, investors are willing to pay slightly more in terms of time value for calls than for puts but the difference is so slight that the indicator is in this case quite inconclusive.
The determinants of the time value component are primarily the volatility of the underlying shares and the prevailing and expected interest rates in the money markets.
1.
Interest rates.
One of the motives mentioned was the actual and expected levels of interest rates.
As the TOM allows investors to avoid purchasing shares, the higher the actual and expected levels of interest rates the greater the incentive to use options and delay the acquisition of shares in order to benefit from the rates of return prevailing or expected in the money markets.
It is also worth noting that as rates rise in the money markets equities by comparison may be seen in a less favourable light, and if this produces a greater level of uncertainty about prices, options combined with the money markets may constitute a refuge for those investors wishing to avoid such doubts.
2.
Volatility.
Despite the influence of interest rates, the movement of the underlying share price is the principal determinant of changes in option premiums.
Therefore, the extent to which the share moves in response to stock market, macroeconomic, industrial and company stimuli is very important.
Hence, the greater the volatility, the greater the chance, within any given term to expiry, that share price and option premiums will change, thus increasing the probability of a profitable investment.
So the greater the volatility of the underlying share, the greater the time value for any given term to maturity is likely to be.
3.
Other influences: In many cases the absolute size of the price of the underlying share may play a part in determining the option premiums.
Hence, shares trading in the region of 10 are likely, ceteris paribus, to have larger time values than those trading at 1.
Secondly, dividend policy may have an important effect on both the level and degree of volatility of option premiums.
It is shown in Chapter 8 that the declaration of dividend payments tends to have a depressive effect on share prices and that the larger the dividend payout relative to the share price the greater the impact on the price.
From the foregoing discussion it follows that high dividend payouts are likely to have a larger negative effect than low dividend payouts on option premiums.
Lastly, option premiums are likely to be affected by the expectations about the company which issued the underlying shares.
Hence, companies which specialize in oil field exploration and development (e.g. LASMO) will be affected by crude oil prices to a greater extent than those companies which, although dependent on oil, have diversified into other areas (e.g. BP and Shell).
Another specific influence on both share prices and option premiums is the expectation and likelihood of a contested takeover.
These various factors which influence the value of an option may be summed up in the following functional statement:.
This will be developed further in a later section which describes the binomial and Black-Scholes option pricing models.
Investment strategies using options
Having taken a look at the nature of, and influences upon, options, we can now examine the investment strategies which may be created using traded options.
If we restrict ourselves to puts  and calls on a single security there are 4 simple types of investment strategy to look at:
1.
‘Naked’ or uncovered positions.
These involve the purchase or sale of a single security or option; i.e. long or short shares, long or written calls and long or written puts.
2.
Hedged positions.
A hedge position is a portfolio consisting of a long or short share and one or more of the available options on that share.
The most common type of hedge is the written call combined with an investment in the security itself.
Where there are as many options written as there are shares held, the hedge is completely ‘covered’.
Where the number of shares is exceeded by the number of options written, the position is known as a partially covered hedge.
These and the other two hedge positions are described in Fig. 7.3.
3.
Spread positions.
These are portfolios consisting of 2 or more options with different expiry and/or exercise dates and rights;
(a)
those with different exercise prices but the same expiry dates are known variously as ‘money’ or ‘vertical’or ‘price’spreads;
(b)
those with the same exercise prices but with different expiry dates are known as ‘time’ or ‘horizontal’or ‘calendar’spreads;
(c)
lastly there are those portfolios which have all 4 types of option in a single class all with the same expiry date but with 3 different exercise prices, known as ‘butterly’ or ‘sandwich’spreads.
4.
Combinations.
These are portfolios of written calls and puts or bought calls and puts with the same exercise price and expiry date on the same underlying security.
Although there is almost an infinite variety of such combinations only 3 have specific names:
(a)
the ‘straddle’, consisting of an equal number of puts and calls on the same share, either bought or written;
(b)
the ‘strap’, made up from bought or written options in a ratio of 2 calls to 1 put;
(c)
the ‘strip’, composed of written or purchased options in a ratio of 2 puts to 1 call.
The objectives of these various strategies is most clearly illustrated by the use of profit diagrams which show profit or loss at expiry (when all time value disappears) in relation to the price of the underlying share price.
There are 6 basic diagrams of unhedged position which, when combined in various ways, give the possible results of the strategies outlined.
The two diagrams in Fig.7.4 are quite straightforward.
In the case of a ‘long’ share (in which the security is purchased and held), each lp in the share price above the purchase price (S) yields 1p of profit (ignoring transactions costs for the moment).
Conversely, each 1p the price drops below the purchase price (S) increases the loss borne by the investor by 1 p per share held.
The profit diagram of the ‘short’ share investment reveals the exact opposite relationship between price and profit as the long share investment.
An investor selling short is selling shares which he or she does not own.
The shares will have been borrowed and sold in the hope and expectation of buying them back at a lower price.
For example, an investor might sell for 100p per share one week and if he or she has been proven correct in their expectations may buy the share for say 80p each the following week, thus netting a profit per share of 20p before transactions costs.
It is worth noting that although the profit on a long share can be infinitely large, this is not so in the case of a ‘short’ investment.
The lowest price for which shares can be repurchased is zero pence so that an investor can only hope to double his or her investment at the most.
However, as there is no limit on the level to which the price of shares may rise, the potential losses are also limitless.
The profit diagrams for options (Figs 7.5 and 7.6) are a little more complex than those for securities as the profit is dependent on more than just the share price at expiry (S).
It is also dependent on the exercise price (E) and the option premiums (C for calls and P for puts).
The price paid for each option is indicated by the distances OC and OP on the vertical axes for calls and puts respectively.
If at expiry the options are out-of-the-money S < E (calls) and S > E (puts) they are worthless and the maximum loss in each case amounts to the option premium itself (C, P).
The investments will only be profitable when the following conditions apply:.
It is worth noting once again that calls have an unlimited profit potential similar to that of the long   share while that of the puts is limited to E — P; i.e. the maximum is reached when the share price S has reached zero.
No more profit may be had as the maximum revenue per option is E — P — S whereas the maximum revenue (S — E — C) for a call is unconstrained.
The only limitation on the value of a call option before the expiry date is the price of the underlying security.
(Why should anyone pay more for the right to purchase a share than the price of the share itself?)
The profit positions for the writers of options at the point of expiry are the exact opposite of those for the purchasers.
The maximum profit in both contracts is the original option premium.
The writer of calls faces potentially limitless losses while the writer of puts has a maximum potential loss of E — P (i.e. the price at which the writer has contracted to buy the shares less the option premium).
The simple hedges described in Fig.7.3 are essentially insurance operations in which profits and losses on each investment tend to offset each other to some extent.
For example the covered call is a combination of a written call and a long position in the underlying security.
If we assume that exercise price is equal to the purchase price of the shares then diagrams 7.4(a) and 7.6(a) may be combined.
If S > E the investor starts to earn profits on the long investment before making losses on the written call.
When  the losses incurred on the call are exactly matched by the   profits received from the shares.
The net result is a profit equal to the option premium.
If S < E the losses incurred on the purchased shares will be offset by the premium received by selling the option.
Therefore, losses will only arise when  and will be at a maximum when S = 0 and will be equal to E — C. The result is shown by the hatched line in Fig. 7.7(a) and is the equivalent of a written put.
Figure 7.7(b) shows the profit position of a ‘reverse hedge’.
The investor having gone short in a security takes out insurance in the form of a purchased call whose exercise price is equal to the price at which the shares were sold.
The cost of the call reduces the profit position when S < E and limits the maximum profit to E — C. On the other hand the potential unlimited loss on the short share when S> E is almost exactly offset by the potentially unlimited profit of the purchased call.
The net position indicated by the dashed line is the equivalent to that of a purchased put.
There are two remaining hedges which may be constructed using combinations of options and securities.
The first is a long share and a purchased put which produces results similar to those of a   purchased call and the second is a short share with a written put which gives the profit profile of a written call (Fig. 7.8).
Profit diagrams can only be intelligibly drawn for strategies involving investments with the same expiry dates.
Therefore, the potential profitability of time spreads cannot be illustrated.
However, those for money and butterfly spreads which involve positions with a uniform time of expiry can be drawn.
Money spreads are either ‘bullish’ or ‘bearish’.
They correspond to the investor's balance of expectations about the movement of the share price during the period up to the expiry date.
The bullish spread, as its name suggests, indicates an optimism about the future of the share price whereas the bearish money spread is pessimistic in that the balance of expectations is that the share price is more likely to fall.
These spreads consist of written and purchased calls (or puts).
The bullish money spread consists of a purchased call with a low exercise price (E L ) and a written call with a high exercise price (E H ).
Thus as the share price rises above E L the purchased call starts to earn profits before the written call makes losses when S > E H .
The net result, shown by the dashed   line in Fig. 7.9(a), gives a profit in the case of the share price rising above the lower exercise price and a loss if the share price falls below the lower exercise price.
However, in each event the result is strictly constrained.
The bearish money spread (Fig. 7.9(b)) reflects the profit and loss potential of an investor who gives a higher probability to the security price falling than rising but who takes out insurance in case of being wrong.
A call is written with a low exercise price (E L ) to make the profit when prices fall as expected.
As it has a low exercise price (and is very probably in-the-money) the premium will be high.
On the other hand the purchased call with a high exercise price (E H ) which constitutes the investor's insurance policy will have a low exercise price as it is probably out-of-the-money and has no intrinsic value.
The resultant profit-loss line shows a maximum profit of P — C and a loss which is determined by the difference between the high and low exercise prices.
The written call having the low exercise price starts to make a loss before the purchased call starts to make a profit.
As the share price exceeds the high exercise price the profit made on the purchased call exactly offsets any more losses incurred from the written call leaving a constant residual loss.
The rationale for the bearish money spread is easy to see; it limits the potential losses that might be incurred by writing a call.
On the other hand the only reason for constructing a bullish money spread is to reduce the premium of a call with a high intrinsic value because of its low exercise price.
However, bullish and bearish money spreads can be combined to create a potential profit in a situation where the share price is not expected to move and in a situation where the price is expected to move but has equal probabilities of rising and falling.
These are known as the butterfly spreads.
The first spread is used where small or no price movements are expected.
Three exercise prices are used.
The bullish spread has a purchased call on the low exercise price (E L ) and a call written on the middle exercise price (E M ).
The bearish spread has a call written on the E M and a call purchased on the high exercise price (E H ).
Hence there are two written calls on E M and two purchased calls on E L and E H The combined effect is shown in Fig. 7.10(a) where the profit-loss line is shown as an unbroken line.
The butterfly spread can be reversed (Fig. 7.1 0(b)) to cater for the investor who cannot decide on the balance of his or her expectations.
In this situation the investor purchases two calls at E M and writes two calls, one each at E H and E L .
The net effect is to produce a loss if the share price does not move beyond the limits set by the high and low exercise prices but a small and limited profit if it does.
Two similar profit-loss lines can be produced with what were earlier called combinations.
These are the purchased and written straddles.
Figure 7.11 (a) shows the effect of purchasing both a put and a call with the same expiry dates and exercise prices on the same share.
The profit-loss line clearly shows that this should be used when  the investor has no clear expectation of the direction of movement of the security's price, only that it will move.
The maximum loss (C + P) is incurred if the share price is equal to the exercise price at expiry but profits will be made if it is lower than E -C -P and if it rises above E + C + P. This is plainly superior to the reverse butterfly spread illustrated in Fig. 7.10(b) as there are no restrictions upon the potential profit (only in the case of a security price fall where the maximum profit will be E -P -C, but which is still superior to the profit made in the same event with the reverse butterfly spread).
The written straddle shown in Fig. 7.11(b) may be used when little or no movement in the underlying security price is expected.
Profit is maximized at C+P when S=E.
However, the investor faces potentially unlimited losses if the share price moves beyond the range of .
The strategy of the written straddle offers an inferior set of potential returns to the investor compared with the ordinary butterfly spread (Fig. 7.10(a)) as losses can be unlimited.
The binomial valuation model
Having looked at the various strategies for using options it is now time to look at the valuation of options.
The above section used the limiting case of value at expiry to illustrate the profit and loss potential of various investment strategies, but given the ability of investors in traded options to sell or exercise before maturity it is essential that there is some way of evaluating options before expiry.
We have already seen that the options market is symmetrical in that only one form of contract is   needed, either calls or puts.
The existence of either permits the creation of the other.
However, this ability to mimic financial contracts may be extended to all such using calls, puts, shares and riskfree debentures.
At expiry the value of an option may be expressed as follows:.
We may define the present value of a pure discount risk-free debenture as follows:.
Riskless and pure discount debentures, shares, calls and puts may now be combined as follows: The right-hand side of the above equation, the combination of a long share and a purchased put, is a manufactured purchased call.
This is combined with a written call.
The outcome of this combination (shown in Fig. 7.13) is the pay-off on a riskless pure discount debenture.
From the above relationship we can derive the price relationship between calls and puts.
For example, suppose the shares of ABC pty are selling for 400p and that options may be purchased and written with an exercise price of 400p.
Following Eq.
(7.3) we may purchase an equal number of shares and put and write a similar number of calls.
Three months after these transactions, suppose the share price will be either 500p or 300p.
The pay-offs will be as follows:
Regardless of the share price our net wealth will be 400p which according to Eq.
(7 .3) is equal to the terminal value of a risk-free pure discount debenture.
We can now, using the debenture, discount the value of this hedge to the present by using eq.
(7.2):.
Rearranging Eq.
(7.3) we have:.
The relationship holds that, whatever the price of the call, the price of the put must be 11 .84p less.
Therefore, if the call was priced at 20p then the put must be priced at 8p (the prices in the traded options market being quoted to the nearest half-penny).
Equation (7.4) is known as the put-call parity relationship for European options and in the special case where the share price (S o ) is equal to the exercise price the equation reduces to the following:.
In valuing option contracts before maturity, we may intuitively draw the limiting boundaries by observing that a purchased call (Fig. 7.14) never has a negative value so that:.
On the other hand a call cannot exceed the value of the underlying share:.
Lastly, the value of the call option cannot be less than the difference between the share price and the exercise price:.
We may follow a similar intuitive process for the limits of the value of purchased puts (Fig. 7.15).
As in the case of calls, puts can never have a negative value, hence:.
The maximum value of any put is set by its exercise price:.
Lastly, the value cannot be less than the difference between the exercise price and the share price:
Although in chronological terms the Black Scholes option pricing model came first in 1973, the binomial analyses developed by Cox, Ross and Rubinstein and Rendleman and Bartter provide a conceptually easier introduction to the problem of valuation.
The assumptions underlying the binomial approach can be summarized as follows:
1.
Perfect capital markets with no taxes or transactions costs.
2.
Information is costless and universally available.
3.
Short sales permitted;
4.
Share prices follow a random walk without any underlying trend.
5.
The risk-free rate is constant over the life of the option.
6.
No dividends.
7.
A one-period time horizon.
Assume that at the end of the investor's time horizon there are two possible end states, the first in which the share price has doubled and the second in which it has halved.
Assume also that each of these states has a probability of 0.5.
The investor may purchase shares in his chosen company for 200p so that the two states are 400p and 100p each with an equal probability of occurring (Fig. 7.16).
Lastly, assume that the prevailing risk-free rate of return for the duration of the investor's time horizon is 10 per cent.
In effect this process describes the existence of two independent multipliers (h, L) which affect the share price.
There is no need to specify , and as long as, it is quite feasible to permit an infinite upper level for the share price while restricting the lower limit to zero (shares cannot have a negative value as they have limited liability).
The only requirement for the upper multiplier is that,.
This allows the construction of a riskless hedge in which the pay-offs are the same regardless of the outcome.
A portfolio must be constructed by going long in the security and short in the call options so that, where m is the number of calls that must be written to produce a riskless hedge.
This equation may be solved for m as follows:.
Using the hypothetical data we may calculate a riskless hedge for the investor:
Hence, given these probabilities and outcomes the investor may construct a riskless hedge by buying 1 share and writing 1.2 calls.
However, as this is a riskless hedge the investor should expect to receive the riskless rate of return.
The initial investment is, so the return should be,.
This should be equal to either of the outcomes, Therefore we can write, may be solved to find the value of C, the option at the beginning of the investor's time horizon: Substituting for m and rearranging we obtain:.
To simplify Eq.
(7.9) assume,.
Therefore, Eq.
(7.9) reduces to, p is known as the hedging probability and is always greater than zero and less than 1,.
Hence, p has all the values of a probability and in the situation where all investors are risk averse it can be shown that it is equal to the probability with which we started.
The results of the hypothetical example are as follows:.
Using Eq.
(7.9).
Now we can calculate the initial investment,.
Given that this was a risk-free hedge we can make a check on the process by comparing the outcomes from states 1 or 2 with the result of investing the initial capital at the risk-free rate of return:.
The critical assumption in this model is that the risk-free hedge can earn the risk-free rate of return.
Given the price of the underlying security, the risk-free rate of return and the exercise price, the price of the call represents the factor which brings the system into equilibrium.
If the risk-free hedge is seen to produce a greater return than the risk-free rate then arbitrage will take place as investors offer to write more calls and so bring down the price of the option.
If on the other hand the risk-free hedge's return is inferior to the risk-free rate the supply of investors offering to write calls will contract thus reducing supply and, ceteris paribus, reducing the price of the call option.
Hence, the price of the option does not depend on the probabilities of the share price rising or falling or by how much it is likely to rise or fall.
Even with heterogeneous expectations on the part of investors the process of arbitrage will ensure that they will be in agreement on the price of the option in relation to the parameters S o , h, L, rf and t even though the average values of h, L and p cannot be observed.
For the binomial model to be valid we need only assume that investors prefer more wealth to less wealth (see Chapter 2) so that, given the opportunity, they will engage in arbitrage, and secondly that investors have the ability to construct the risk-free hedge.
The binomial model may be extended by increasing the number of time periods (n) and at the limit where n equals infinity it approaches the deterministic Black and Scholes option pricing model.
The Black and Scholes option pricing model
Black and Scholes make the following assumptions:
1.
All markets for securities, options and gilts are frictionless; i.e. no taxes, no transactions costs, no restrictions on short sales, and all securities are infinitely divisible.
2.
The risk-free rate of return is constant over the life of the option and is equal to (rf) per unit of time.
3.
No dividends .
4.
The standard deviation () of the security's return is constant over the life of the option, for all t.
5.
The distribution of security prices at expiry is log-normal with a mean equal to the risk-free rate and a standard deviation of .
6.
The prices of securities follow a random walk.
Given the above assumptions Black and Scholes developed a pricing model as follows: N (d 1 ) and N (d 2 ) are cumulative probabilities of a normal distributed variable (z) with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of 1.
N (d 1 ) may be interpreted as the rate of change of the option price divided by the rate of change of the share price.
Therefore, we may estimate the share price elasticity of the option by multiplying N (d 1 ) by the share price divided by the call price:.
This measures the percentage change in the value of the call in response to a given change in the price of the share.
It is graphically depicted in Fig. 7.14.
N (d 2 ) may be interpreted as the probability of the option contract being in-the-money at maturity.
The estimation of call values can now be done using a hand-held calculator.
Using the information in Fig. 7.2 for BP and assuming a risk-free rate of interest of 10 per cent we may estimate the call values for an in-the-money option expiring in October with an exercise price of 220p, and an out-of-the-money call with an exercise price of 260p expiring in April: Using Table A1.2 (page 269) we may convert d 1 and d 2 into cumulative probabilities:(the figure of 0.1819 is arrived at by using the two values in the table that bracket the real value and employing straight-line interpolation).
Now the call is estimated using Eq.
(7.11): rounding to the nearest half-penny, 22p, which is equal to the market value given in Fig. 7.2. , therefore,, hence, rounding to the nearest half-penny, this produces a value of 18.5p.
The market value given in Fig. 7.2 is 9.5p.
This means that there is a discrepancy of 8p.
Using the put call parity relationship described in Eq.
(7.5) we can now produce estimates for the equivalent puts: rounding to the nearest half-penny, 2p.
This is equal to the market value given in Fig. 7.2.
The market value in Fig.7.2 is 31 and therefore there is a discrepancy between the market and the model of 7.5p.
Empirical evidence
Black and Scholes tested their own model using US data.
They noted that the prices indicated by the model differed in various systematic ways from market prices.
They came to the following conclusions:
1.
The model tends to overestimate the prices of calls on securities that have volatile returns and underestimate the call values of those with non-volatile returns.
2.
Options well in-the-money tend to be overpriced and those well out-of-the-money underpriced.
3.
Options with lives of less than 90 days tend to be overpriced.
There is, however, little consensus about the direction of these biases.
For example, MacBeth and Merville report that the model overprices in-the-money options and underprices out-of-the money options.
On the other hand, Merton has found from practitioners that the model consistently underprices regardless of the option's intrinsic worth.
Jarrow and Rudd have advanced two tentative explanations of these apparent discrepancies:
1.
The model's performance is better at some times than at others.
2.
The model is failing to pick up important determinant characteristics.
In individual cases there may be the possibility of specific characteristics or expectations playing an important role in causing temporary discrepancies between those prices indicated by the model and those set by the market.
For example, in the case of BP, LASMO or Shell the expected changes in the price of crude oil can play an important part in determining market prices for options.
Hedging with the Black and Scholes model
In the previous section it was explained that N (d 1 ) and N (d 2 ) were cumulative probabilities of a unit normal variable.
In addition the section indicated that the intuitive explanation of N (d 1 ) was that it was equal to the rate of change in the cell price divided by the rate of change in the share price:.
From our discussion of the binomial model we also know that the value of the hedged portfolio is, hence the change in the value of the hedged portfolio per unit of time may be written, then Eq.
(7.16) may be rewritten,.
This reduces to, Hence, by defining N (d 1 ) as the reciprocal of the hedge ratio we can ensure that the value of the hedged portfolio does not change during the next time period.
Using the estimates for the BP options, the hedge ratios work out as follows: therefore, for the options expiring in October we should write 1.1886 option contracts per 1000 shares held and for the options maturing in April we should write 1.9279 contracts per 1000 share held.
As fractional contracts cannot be written it is almost inevitable that the hedge will not be perfect.
In these two examples, the first would be slightly under-hedged if one contract was written against 1000 shares and in the second case over-hedged as two contracts might be written against each 1000 shares held.
This example illustrates an important consideration which is that not only does the risk of any position increase dramatically with the length of time to maturity but also that the hedge ratio is only valid for very small increments of time.
Hence, the use of options to hedge any long position in shares involves a continuous reassessment as time and the share price change.
Evidence on the UK market
Although the TOM was opened in 1978 it was not tested until 1986 when Gemmill and Dickens used the Black and Scholes model to test for mispricing.
Gemmill and Dickens argue that such tests examine both the validity of the model and the efficiency of the TOM and that they would have the following implications:
1.
If the market was efficient then the model could not produce above normal profits for the user.
2.
If the model is an accurate description of the way in which option prices are set and if the market is efficient, then it should produce good predictions of future option prices given the various parameters.
3.
On the other hand if the model is good at predicting future option prices and the market is not efficient, then the model should produce above normal profits for the user.
Gemmill and Dickens used 5000 observations of option prices for 16 companies which were traded continuously from May 1978 to July 1983.
They then analysed over 800 one-month spreads for 62 months and came to the following conclusions:
1.
The model successfully identified under — and overpriced options.
2.
The model successfully identified trading spreads which earned statistically significant profits above the risk-free rate.
3.
Adjusting the model for dividends did not significantly improve its performance.
4.
When direct dealing costs, brokerage and VAT were included they tended to help filter out the trades that were only marginally profitable and hence raised the overall profitability.
5.
The bid-ask spread was so large that it converted significant profits into significant losses.
6.
The market could not be described, as ‘potential risk-free profits do not exceed transactions costs’.
Since this study the use of the TOM has increased significantly and, given the growth in options trading, the results may no longer be completely valid.
Notes
Questions
1.
Explain and discuss the factors which may cause the Black-Scholes model to yield inaccurate results.
2.
Using the Black-Scholes model, evaluate the following calls and puts and compare your answers with the market values given below and account for any discrepancies:.
3.
Why might the use of the 90-day treasury bills be inappropriate for valuing options?
4.
Explain and critically discuss the proposition that the Black-Scholes model demonstrates how an option's value is an explicit function of the characteristics of the underlying asset.
5.
What criteria must be satisfied before options may be written on a company's shares and explain what these criteria are supposed to achieve?
6.
How might the London Traded Options Market be described as being symmetrical?
7.
Under what circumstances might a butterfly spread be used?
8.
Why would a purchased straddle be preferred to a reverse butterfly?
9.
What risks and rewards would an investor incur by writing calls on shares that he or she owns?
10.
What sources of inaccuracy would you expect to find when using the Black-Scholes model to estimate the values of traded options?
Equities
Introduction
An equity or share is a certificate of ownership and confers on the holder specific rights and privileges which are determined by the Articles of Association (for example the voting rights attached to each class of share), the Memorandum of Association and the Companies Act of 1985 (see Chapter 2).
The rights of shareholders may be summarized as follows:
1.
Alteration of the ‘objects’ clause in the Memorandum of Association which determines the business activities of the company.
2.
The election and removal of directors and auditors and the definition of their duties and remuneration (if any).
3.
The approval or otherwise of the annual accounts and auditors' reports.
4.
The authorization of the payment of the dividend (a residual and discretionary income after all the immediate liabilities of the company have been settled).
5.
The authorization of an agreed merger.
6.
The authorization of any change in share capital — rights issues, placements, scrip issues and repurchases.
7.
The right to any residual assets on the liquidation of the company.
In theory, the shareholders have legal control of the company, but in practice this is most often exercised by the directors who between them may have a small minority of the shares with the acquiescence of the institutions which are the major shareholders.
Companies already listed on the Stock Exchange have two basic methods of raising additional equity capital:
1.
A rights issue in which the existing shareholders may exercise their pre-emptive rights to subscribe to the new shares in proportion to those already held.
2.
A placing in which selected shareholders (usually investing institutions) are invited to buy up to 15 million (this had been limited to 3 million until 1986) of additional equity.
Rights issues have become increasingly unpopular over the last decade or so.
They have been criticized for being slow (a minimum of a 3-week offer is involved), cumbersome and expensive.
Recent changes in the law and the regulations imposed by the Stock Exchange have allowed companies to ignore pre-emptive rights as long as the permission of the shareholders has been obtained.
These changes have been made in response to the development of ‘vendor’ placings and ‘back-door’rights issues during the eighties.
A ‘vendor placing’ is the term given to placings which exceed the customary limit of about 15 per cent of the outstanding value of the company's existing equity.
In November 1984 the Dee Corporation raised 180 million in the form of a placing.
This was equivalent to some 45 per cent of the value of its existing equity.
The new shares were placed with institutions at a discount of 14p to the market price of 174p.
The additional capital was used to buy International Stores from BAT.
Although there have been some notable examples of this practice (such as Saatchi and Saatchi, and Ward White in 1984) it does not appear to have become commonplace.
1984 was notable for the extension to the rights queue caused by the British Telecom privatization so that the brief emergence of the ‘vendor placing’ may have been due only to exceptional circumstances.
The practice of ‘back-door’ rights issues enabled companies to evade the requirements of pre-emptive rights by getting shareholders to agree to a paper issue (an expansion of the authorized capital which, if not being sold to raise additional capital, may be used in a share swap) for the  purpose of taking over an investment trust.
The trust's assets, which consist of shareholdings in other companies, are then liquidated thus releasing the capital needed by the acquiring corporation.
The new issue market
The new issue market is not a distinct and separate organization within the Stock Exchange, rather it is merely a tag given to the collection of processes by which companies acquire both a listing on the exchange and new equity capital.
There are 3 distinct advantages to a company in using equity financing:
1.
Ordinary shares do not carry fixed returns to investors and do not have to be redeemed.
2.
As equity holders are the residual owners of the company, they constitute a loss-absorbing buffer in the event of liquidation and as such can improve the company's creditworthiness.
This is a traditional view of the mix of corporate financing and is discussed at more length later in this chapter when the theories of Miller and Modigliani are discussed.
3.
As the market for corporate debentures is rather thin in the UK, equities very often constitute a more liquid market and are thus easier to price and trade.
In addition, equities have a greater appeal to many groups of investors as they generally carry a higher expected rate of return.
It is often argued that equities are more marketable as they are a better safeguard against inflation because they will reflect the rise in the nominal value of real assets during an inflationary period.
On the other hand there are 3 disadvantages of using equity financing:
1.
The issue of equities inevitably results in a spread in ownership initially.
However, it also allows the accumulations of holdings and the transfer of ownership and control which may be unacceptable to the owner-managers of small and/or family firms.
2.
The issue of equities, although it may improve the creditworthiness of the company, will also reduce the gearing (leverage) in its financing mix and also reduce the tax-shield effect of interest payments due to debt holders, thus lowering the potential rate of return to the owners.
3.
Raising equity capital is invariably more expensive than raising debt capital.
There are 5 main methods of making a new issue:
1.
An introduction.
Strictly speaking an introduction to the Stock Exchange merely involves the acquisition of a listing and the permission for the company's existing shares to be traded on the Exchange.
Hence, every company applying to the Stock Exchange by whatever process, involves an introduction.
The Stock Exchange requires that there be at least 100 shareholders and that 25 per cent of the shares be held by the general public.
For a quotation on the USM only 10 per cent of the shares must be in the possession of the general public.
The advantages of an introduction for a company are lower costs and the benefit of having the market price of the shares before raising further capital.
This second advantage is apparent when one considers the high probability of the underpricing of new assets involved in an offer for sale.
This has sometimes been a serious issue of contention during the UK Government's privatization programme of the eighties.
2.
Placings.
The Stock Exchange permits companies to raise up to 15 million in the main market and 5 million in the USM when they come to the market through a placing (companies with existing quotations on the Exchange can also raise 15 million by means of a placing).
Although the new capital is selectively marketed by the company through its issuing house (the financial institution, usually a merchant bank, which has been employed to organize the placing) to its clients, the Stock Exchange still requires that 25 per cent of the total shares be with the general public.
3.
An offer for sale.
This involves the disposal of all or part (at least 25 per cent) of the existing  shareholdings to the public and investing institutions through the Exchange.
There is no limit on the size of capital that may be raised in an offer for sale by a company coming to the market for the fist time.
For example, the British Government raised 3.9 billion before expenses on its sale of British Telecom.
This particular issue illustrates the previous point about the probability of mispricing the issue.
BT was five-times oversubscribed and the premium on the part-paid issue price at the end of the first day's trading was 43p.
It may be argued that this issue was seriously underpriced and that the nation undersold-its asset by about 1.3 billion.
On the other hand, others have described the issue as a resounding success as all the shares were sold.
This sort of difference of opinion resurfaced in October 1987, when the sale of the Government's remaining holding in BP was adjudged a disaster because the issue was greatly undersubscribed leaving a large proportion of the shares with the underwriters who had undertaken to ‘insure’ the issue.
On average, the underwriters charge a fee equal to 2 per cent of the gross proceeds of the issue and in return guarantee to buy any shares not demanded by the investing public and institutions.
Generally, this insurance is organized by a leading merchant bank which will sub-contract a proportion of the insurance to other sub-underwriters for about half of the fee.
The remainder is shared between the principal underwriter (about 0.75 per cent) and the broker (0.25 per cent ) in the issue.
New or secondary issue underwriters have rarely had to take up undersubscribed issues as the timings of such are usually gauged to ensure the full take-up of the shares on offer.
The practice of underwriting before the reforms of October 1986 has been described as a method of compensation for the high transactions costs of fixed commissions for large institutional clients.
Since the Big Bang the disappearance of fixed commissions has removed the necessity for offering such compensation.
However, the BP secondary issue may also be described as a success for the market as the Government was able to collect the intended capital sum from the underwriters for its divestment.
Furthermore, it might be argued that this issue was overpriced and that the nation was able to sell an effectively overpriced collection of assets.
4.
An offer by subscription (prospectus issue).
This type of issue involves the issuing company itself offering the shares to the public.
The issue may or may not be underwritten and the issuing company may or may not engage the services of a broker for advice and/or to organize the insurance of the issue.
5.
An offer for sale by tender.
The tender offer involves an offer to the public to bid for the shares but with a minimum subscription price.
After the closing date, the organizers will set a ‘striking price’ which is best for the company.
However, the organizers must ensure as in all other types of issue that the ownership is spread wide enough to create a liquid market.
Hence, the tender issue will not necessarily eliminate underpricing although substantially reducing it renders it not too popular with those who like to ‘stag’ new issues.
‘Stagging’ is the process by which investors speculate on new issues.
New shares are applied for on the expectation that the issue will be underpriced and hence a profit might be made on the difference between the immediate market price and the issue or striking price.
For example, the tender issue by the Virgin Group in 1986 resulted in a striking price of 140p (with a minimum price of 100p) and at the end of the first day's trading the market price was still 140p.
On the other hand, the tender offer by Hillsdown Holdings resulted in a stagging profit as the price at the end of the first day of trading was 33p higher than the striking price of 145p (minimum 120p).
Some of the early privatization issues such as Britoil and Cable and Wireless were tender issues, but since 1983 this practice has been discontinued.
Raising additional capital and adjusting issued share capital
A company with a listing on the market (either the main or USM market) may return for more equity capital from time to time.
Additional capital is raised by either rights issues or placings.
Existing shareholders have pre-emptive rights (Companies Act 1980 S17) to buy new shares in proportion to their existing holdings.
These rights may be waived by the shareholders at a general meeting so that the new capital may be raised by means of a placing.
Rights issues require a minimum subscription period of 3 weeks to allow existing shareholders the chance to take up their rights.
A rights issue not only affects the amount of equity capital at the disposal of the company but also the price of the existing shares.
For example, in October 1988 Polly Peck made a rights issue of 1 new share for every 4 held.
The market price of the existing shares on the day of the issue was 310p and the subscription price for the new shares was 255p.
Suppose an investor held 1,000 shares in Polly Peck.
This investment was worth 3,100.
The investor has the pre-emptive right to buy 250 of the new shares at 255p each, an additional investment of 637.50. 1,000 old shares at 310p each = 3,100.00. 250 new shares at 255p each = 637.50 Total investment = 3,737.50.
The intended ex-rights price may be estimated by dividing the total investment by the total number of shares held:.
Therefore, if the investor refuses the offer to buy a further 250 shares, the price of his or her existing shares will fall by 11p each.
However, the investor may sell his or her rights to compensate for the fall in the value of the investment, 3,100 -(1,000)(2.99) =110.
The value of the right is determined by the difference  between the ex-rights price and the subscription price, 299p -255p = 44p.
If all 250 rights are sold then the investor will receive (0.44) 250=110, which compensates for the loss in value of the existing shares.
Rights issues are invariably underwritten in order to ensure that the issuing company receives the additional capital needed.
However, it is quite feasible for the issuing company to take the risk that the issue will be undersubscribed, or the company can offer the shares at ‘deep discount’ to the current market price so that there is little risk that the market price will fall below the subscription price (in which case there would be no incentive for any investor to buy the new shares).
Given the risk associated with the possibility that the market price may fall below the subscription price the timing of a rights issue is extremely important.
An example of an unfortunately managed rights issue was that of STC in March 1985.
The company's shares had reached a peak in the market in 1984 at over 350p but had fallen quite sharply after this.
Companies invariably prefer to time their rights issues to coincide with the annual results and hopefully float the issue on a tide of good news.
However, companies are not entirely free to time their issues as the Bank of England imposes a queue when it is concerned that the market may be faced with too many cash calls.
The result of this practice by the Bank of England was to force STC to make its rights issue two weeks before the declaration of its 1984 results.
In addition, the company didn't have much good news to declare.
Profits were static and the market price of its shares was already falling.
As a consequence STC explained the issue in terms of the need to maintain research and to cut its level of borrowing.
In addition the rewards from this additional investment were not forecast to occur until 1986.
The offer was 1 for 5 with a subscription price of l90p (when the market price was 234p).
This should have resulted in an ex-rights price of  and therefore a value for each right of 227p -190p=37p.
However, the market took the news rather badly and cut the price of the existing STC share by 34p on the day of announcement.
Three weeks later on 25 March 1985, the price of the old shares was 198p and the rights to buy the new shares were trading at 5p (the apparent shortfall of 3p being caused by the fact that the old shares were due a dividend while the new ones were not).
This implied an underlying ex-rights price of 195p after the old shares had gone ex-dividend.
Those investors (assume a holding of 1000 shares) who took up their rights would have seen the value of their investment fall from 1000 (2.34) = 2,340 to 1000 (1.98) = 1,980 and would have had to find a further 200 (190) = 380 to invest in the company.
Those that refused to take up their rights could have offset their losses by selling their 200 rights at 5p each; i.e. 10.
In the months that followed, the news from the company failed to improve and the market price fell below 100p in 1985.
A scrip issue is the alteration of the number of shares in issue.
With the shareholders' approval the company converts retained profits into equity by issuing new shares.
It is generally thought that highly priced shares are unpopular among investors and that the liquidity of the market for the company's equity can be improved by effectively lowering the price.
For example Hanson Plc (formerly Hanson Trust) made two scrip issues during the period 1985 88 when the market price was sustained above 300p.
Thus far we have implicitly valued the right in terms of the new shares.
However, it is feasible to value the right in terms of the old shares.
As rights are issued in the form of a right for so many old shares held we can calculate the impact of the fractional right on the old share value.
In the case of Polly Peck used previously, the company offered 1 right for every 4 old shares held.
Put another way, each old share carried with it one-quarter of a right.
Therefore taking the data for the day of issue, the market price was 310p and the subscription price was 255p.
The value of one complete right was calculated as 44p.
Therefore the fractional right attached to each old share is 44p/4 = 11 p.
A quick formula for the calculation of the value of the fractional right is as follows:
Hence in the Polly Peck example,.
There is one further way of looking at and estimating the value of a right (both complete and fractional).
This is to treat the right as a call option which confers the right to purchase the share at an exercise price equal to the subscription price.
We may use the Black and Scholes option pricing model developed in Chapter 7.
The following equations need to be estimated:, where P is the market price (310p), EX is the exercise or subscription price (255p), rf is the risk-free rate of interest (0.12 per cent), is the standard deviation of the security which in the case of Polly Peck is (O.59), t is the time to expiry as a fraction of a year (21/365=0.058), C is the estimated value of the call which in this case is the value of a complete right, and e is the natural logarithm base (2.7183).
The terms (N (d 1 ) and N (d 2 ) are cumulative probabilities of a normally distributed unit variable.
. Using Table A 1.2 (Appendix 1) we can find the values of N (d 1 ) and N (d 2 ), hence the value of the call is estimated as follows:.
Galai and Schneller have shown that the value of the fractional right is obtained by dividing the call value by ().
Therefore, the value of the fractional right in this example is .
This result is marginally bigger than the previous traditional estimate of 11p.
This is basically a reflection of the potential profitable benefit of a call.
In 1979 Marsh published a study which attempted to assess the price effects of rights issues and consequently the semi-strong efficiency of the London Stock Exchange.
This consisted of testing the validity of two competing hypotheses.
The first, which can conveniently be called the  traditional theory, is known as the ‘price pressure hypothesis’, and holds that rights issues will cause a temporary depression in the price as the issue has increased the supply of shares.
The second, which may be thought of as the ‘efficient markets’ theory, is called the ‘substitution hypothesis’.
This asserts that the demand for a company's equity may be assumed to be flat (perfectly elastic) for all practical purposes and hence increases in supply will have no discernible effect on the price.
Two similar studies for the NYSE produced somewhat contradictory results.
The first, by Scholes found no evidence for the price pressure hypothesis in 696 issues made between 1926 and 1966.
The second, by Smith found a small price fall of 1.4 per cent in the 2 months before the issue which was followed by a compensating rise in the 2 months after the issue.
This result has been interpreted as indicating a small degree of price pressure.
However, it would be fair to conclude that neither of these studies has shown the NYSE to be less than semi-strong efficient.
Marsh conducted a cross-sectional test on a sample of 997 rights issues that were between 1962 and 1975.
In addition, a time series test was carried out on a random sample of 254 of these issues.
Marsh found that on average there was a fall of 0.9 per cent for a short period after the shares went ex-rights.
On the other hand, he found that the shares more than recovered (1.8 per cent) during the following month.
Therefore, as in the Smith study, the results indicated a marginal amount of price pressure which could not be used as a basis for trading on rights issues announcements as the effect would be swamped by transactions costs.
Marsh has also used the Black and Scholes option valuation model to assess the underwriting fees charged in the UK stock market during the period 1962 to 1975.
Marsh notes that some 90 per cent of all rights issues during this period were underwritten and that apart from the principal underwriter (usually the organizing merchant bank) there were invariably 100–200 sub-underwriters.
During this period there were 671 rights issues known to have been underwritten of which only 35 resulted in a loss for the underwriters.
This loss (profit) may be calculated by subtracting the ‘loss from taking up unsubscribed shares’ from the ‘fees paid’.
The loss from taking up the unsubscribed shares is calculated as the difference between the market price on the last day of the offer and the subscription price, where n is equal to the number of shares taken up by the underwriters, P, i, m; is the market price on the last day of the offer, P, i, s; is the subscription price.
This will be partially or totally compensated by the underwriting fees F, and the return may be expressed as a percentage of the subscription price as follows,.
The average loss in the 35 cases was 4.2 per cent.
The mean underwriting fee was 1.4 per cent of the issue's nominal value.
This means that looking at the process in an ex-post fashion, the underwriters made a return of 1.11 per cent.
However, this says nothing about the under — or overpricing of their insurance services.
Marsh argued that the only way in which an objective judgement could be made was to compare actual fees charged with those predicted by an ex-ante model.
The one chosen was the option pricing model developed by Black and Scholes.
On the assumption that the fees charged for underwriting rights issues were a form of call option premium, Marsh compared the fees with the fractional values predicted by the model.
His results indicated that in 88 per cent of the 539 (this represents a subset of the sample of 671 referred to previously, the missing 132 issues arising because the dates of the underwriting contracts could not be firmly established so that they were excluded from the tests) issues studied, the underwriters earned positive excess returns.
This conclusion of  overpricing was tempered by the observation that the underwriting fee may include payment for services in addition to the traditional insurance component of underwriting.
Before looking at the idea that the overpricing of underwriting contracts as payment for other services it is worth noting that Marsh observed that ‘bear’ markets tended to lead to marginally higher excess returns to underwriters, while no large or small company effects could be discerned.
On the other hand Marsh did find that there was a statistically significant drop in the excess returns after 1968.
However, the results did not suggest any paramount reason for this shift.
Marsh observed that companies tend to retain the services of their financial advisers over extended periods and therefore the underwriting is but one of many such financial services.
Hence, changing underwriters could mean substantial costs as all the other services might have to be shifted to some new institution.
However, given the comparatively low-cost alternative to underwriting deep discount issues — the insistence of corporate financial officers on using underwriters suggests some traditional but illogical practice which is not going to change overnight.
In the case of rights issues and underwriting there seems to be a perpetual divide between academic analysts and theorists and the practitioners.
For example, Newbould argued in 1971:
Some companies incur unnecessary underwriting costs, presumably because of a lack of appreciation of the mechanics of a rights issue….
In a rights issue, of course, there is no loss to the company, investors or underwriters, unless the rights price becomes negative (for example , because of a substantial general decline in share prices).
Since the issue price can be fixed so that it is virtually impossible for the rights price to become negative, companies which pay underwriting commission on a rights issue are making an expensive ex gratia payment.
It is worth remembering that a deeply discounted rights issue is merely one which has had some of the qualities of a scrip issue added to it.
The end result will be no different whether the shareholder takes up his or her rights or sells them in the market; the end value of the holding will remain unchanged.
Hence, to issue new shares at a substantial discount to the market price and then underwrite it would appear to be a case of double indemnity in which the primary insurer is assured of a very small probability of having to make a compensation payment.
Interpreting published financial data on equities
The return on any form of investment may be defined as follows, where r is the return on security i in time t + I, P is the price of security i in periods t and t + I, and D is the income which may accrue to that security during period t+ 1.
This definition was first developed and used in Chapter 2 and it can be applied directly without alteration to equities.
As in Chapter 2 it is worth stressing that for predictive valuation purposes P, i, t; + 1 and D, i, t; + 1 are uncertain quantities.
However, the principal source of public information are the share quotes published in the press every day and these tend to concentrate on measures other than the holding period return described above.
The most informative are those published by the Financial Times,(Fig. 8.1).
If we take one of the quotes in Fig. 8.1 as illustrative we may look in more detail at the information which is published:
(1)
High price 1988; this is the highest level which the share price reached in 1988.
(2)
Low price 1988; this is the lowest price seen during 1988.
(3)
Name of the security or stock; this is the name of the issuing company and may indicate whether the security is something other than an equity.
(4)
Nominal price of the share; this is the nominal value which is used for accounting purposes in the annual accounts.
If this figure doesn't appear, as in the case of Amersham International, the nominal value is always 25p.
The foreign companies traded have the nominal values expressed in the native national currencies; for example, the shares of Dutch chemicals company Akzo have a nominal value of 20 florins.
In some cases, as in that of Imperial Chemical Industries, this nominal value is followed by one of three greek letters; α, β, γ.
These refer to the level designated by SEAQ.
The α shares are invariably the most heavily traded and the γ shares the least traded of the three (those without designations tend to be either the securities of small companies or those of infrequently traded foreign companies such as Hoescht AG).
(5)
Market price of the share at the end of the previous day's trading.
(6)
Price change on the day.
(7)
Dividend net of basic rate personal income tax; the cross in front of the dividend indicates that the interim dividend has ‘since been increased or resumed’.
At the time of this quote the basic rate of income tax was 25 per cent so that we can calculate the gross dividend payment.
The net dividend (ND) of 41p is equal to 0.75 (gross dividend, GD), therefore,.
(8)
Coverage ratio, this is the earnings per share (EPS) divided by the gross dividend, coverage =  (coverage) therefore we have,
It is worth noting that dividends are paid to shareholders net of basic rate income tax.
Therefore, should the shareholder be subject to a higher rate of tax he or she will have to make additional payments to the Inland Revenue.
(9)
Gross dividend yield (GDY %); this is the gross dividend expressed as a percentage of the market price (P).
therefore we have,.
This result is rnarginally different from the value given in the quote but may be explained by arithmetic error.
(10)
Price/earnings (P/E) ratio; this is based on the latest annual earnings and is calculated by dividing the market share price by the last declared figure for earnings per share.
In this case the value is 9.8 and calculated on the previous year's EPS.
The EPS calculated above is based on half-year figures as the net dividend figure is only an interim rather than a full annual payment.
However, using the P/E ratio we can calculate the previous annual earnings per share as follows: therefore we have,.
However, it should be noted that P/E ratios are calculated on a ‘net’ distribution basis in which EPS is calculated after taxation and without relief from advanced corporation tax.
Hence the figure of 110.97p calculated for the last published results is not strictly comparable with that (131.2p) calculated for the half-yearly figures.
The P/E ratio may be interpreted as the price investors are willing to pay for a unit of earnings.
In the example of ICI the ratio was 9.8 and so we may assume that investors were willing to pay 9.8p for 1p of earnings.
Looking at Fig.8.1 we can see a wide range of P/E ratios for the chemicals and plastics firms listed by the Financial Times; the highest is 29.0 and the lowest is 5.4.
This ratio gives investors a common yardstick to measure the attitude of the market as a whole to all companies regardless of size or industry by reducing the comparison to the simple question ‘How much is the market willing to pay for a unit of earnings?’.
There have been several attempts to build predictive models which describe the relationship  between share prices and accounting variables, prominent among which has been the price — earnings ratio.
One of the more interesting examples of this genre was that published by Whitbeck and Kisor in 1963.
They tested a set of assumptions about the attitudes of investors and hence the impact of the P/E ratio.
They advanced the proposition that investors prefer high earnings growth rates, low variability of those growth rates, and high dividend payout ratios.
There is nothing revolutionary in these assumptions.
After all, the first two merely restate the assumptions made earlier in Chapter 2 that investors prefer a higher expected return at the lowest possible risk.
However, the third assumption is more contentious.
It reflects one side of the debate concerning the importance or otherwise of dividends in the process of the market's valuation of companies, and is discussed in more detail later in this chapter.
Whitbeck and Kisor made the observations on 135 shares quoted on the NYSE.
They produced a multiple regression equation as follows: where X 1 is the forcasted earnings growth rate, X 2 is the dividend payout ratio and X 3 is the standard deviation of the historical earnings growth rate.
They tested their model by observing the difference between the theoretical and market values of a firm's P/E ratio and the share price progress in the subsequent three months.
They found that where the market value was 85 per cent or less of that predicted by the model, shares outperformed the market.
In the opposite case where the market value was greater by 15 per cent or more than the theoretical value of the P/E ratio they found that shares underperformed the market.
However, for shares whose market values were in the range 15 per cent either side of the theoretical value, the predictive power of the model was weak.
A British example of this kind of exercise was published by Weaver and Hall in 1967.
Their model set out to predict the mean dividend yield.
They proposed that it was a function of the mean payout ratio, the predicted short-term earnings and long-term dividend growth rates, the variability of the historical earnings growth rates and the historical earnings growth rate.
Many of the published regression models are quite successful in analysing past data.
However, this success does not seem to have been repeated in terms of prediction and their use as bases for mechanical trading rules.
One of the major difficulties identified by Whitbeck and Kisor was the need to continually reset the model parameters over time.
This requirement alone would preclude most individual investors from using such models.
Furthermore, it is logical that models which can yield an investment strategy capable of beating a process of random selection and ‘buy-and-hold’ would not be published until they ceased to be profitable for their creators.
However, the P/E ratio still retains considerable popularity among investors.
As suggested above, we can be fairly confident that the basic determinants of the size of the P/E ratio are the expected future earnings and their associated risk.
Traditionally, a low ratio is interpreted as indicating that investors as a whole expect rather low levels of future earnings or that those earnings are subject to a high level of risk.
Conversely, a high P/E ratio is presumed to show that the market expects high and/or non-volatile earnings from the company.
However, in a semi-strong efficient market as the International Stock Exchange in London we should not expect to find any evidence for P/E ratio being a reliable predictor of returns or volatility of returns.
It is far safer to regard the P/E ratio as an indicator of market sentiment about the future prospects of a company rather than a basis for a systematic forecasting technique of future earnings.
Equity valuation
It is time now to look at the sections of financial theory which are relevant for the valuation of securities.
Initially, the techniques will be presented in a world of certainty.
When the basic concepts have been established the assumption of certainty will be removed.
Since the privatization of BT in 1984 the problem of company valuation and the pricing of shares has received much informed and uninformed comment.
Why did Euro Tunnel price its ‘units’(each unit consists of a share and warrant in both Euro Tunnel PLC and Euro Tunnel SA) at 3.50 rather than 2 or 4 or any other price?
Why initially did the stock market react favourably to the increased dividend declared by Lloyds Bank after it had made a loss of 224 million in the financial year 1986–87?
A daily newspaper (26 February 1988) reported ‘Despite the losses Sir Jeremy has sanctioned a 10% increase in the dividend which will be paid from reserves.
That more than anything stopped the shares from sliding.
However, after an initial 5p rise they still managed to fall a touch below today's opening 270p on further consideration of the results.
‘On further consideration’ it can be seen that the fact that the dividend had to be paid out of reserves reduced the amount of assets available to the bank for investment.
Hence, not only did this decision reduce the value of the company (i.e. post-dividend compared to pre-dividend), but by reducing the capital the company could invest, it reduced the future earnings that could be expected by the shareholders.
Hence, a distribution of dividends from the company's reserves may be more likely to reduce prices than to support them.
In order to try to make sense of the potential multitude of factors that might be considered in valuing shares we need a theoretical framework which, although it may be (and is) criticized, will give the discussion and analysis a starting point.
The point of departure is the general valuation model that has been developed out of discounted cash flow (DCF) techniques.
where n is the number of periods under consideration (anywhere between 1 and infinity), C is the cash flow, t is an individual observation, and r is the required rate of return for the security under analysis.
In Eqs (8.1) and (8.2) two simplifying assumptions have been made.
The first is that the required rate of return is constant over the period under consideration.
The second is that the cash flow is constant over the whole period and that C represents both dividend payments and capital gains (losses) where necessary.
However, these assumptions may be easily dropped although the equation loses a certain amount of neatness,.
This basic model postulates that the current price (P o ) is a present value and is determined by the discounted future income that the share earns.
As this model stands it is rather cumbersome even with the simplifying assumption of a constant required rate of return.
It may be simplified by assuming that the share is held to infinity.
Hence the cash flow term must be redefined as dividends only and replaced by D. Equation (8.1) may be written as follows, multiply both sides of the equation by  subtract Eq.
(8.5) from Eq.
(8.4), as n approaches infinity  approaches zero and so Eq.
(8.6) simplifies to, rearranglng, and,.
It is worth noting here that Eq.
(8.9) is the reciprocal of the P/E ratio.
However, it is unlikely that dividends will remain static to infinity.
One way of removing this restrictive assumption is to assume a constant rate of growth (g) of dividends into the future.
Although this replacement assumption seems rather unrealistic, it does approximate what many corporate finance officers would like to achieve.
Therefore, Eq.
(8.3) will be modified as follows,.
This simplifies to,.
Multiply both sides by  subtract Eq.
(8.12) from Eq.
(8.11),.
Assuming r > g, as n approaches infinity  approaches zero,.
This simplifies as follows,.
As  is equal to D 1 , and by rearrangement,.
Despite corporate financial officers' best intentions, firms tend to go through various stages of growth.
Most recently, we have seen the rapid growth of the electronics companies tend to slow down (Fig. 8.2).
Equation (8.10) or (8.11) may be adjusted to incorporate changing growth rates as follows,.
The first term on the right-hand side is the sum of the dividend income for n periods which has grown at a compound rate of (), the ‘super-normal’ growth rate.
The second term on the right-hand side of Eq.
(8.19) is the value in period n of the dividend income to infinity which is assumed to grow at the ‘normal’ rate,(), discounted back to the present.
For example, suppose we have a company from which we expect a dividend growth of 25 per cent for the next 5 years.
From then on a ‘normal’ rate of dividend growth of 5 per cent is expected.
If this year's dividend was 10p and the shareholders' required rate of return is 10 per cent, what is the present value of the share?
Having outlined the basic techniques for evaluating securities, we may now remove the assumption of certainty.
This may be done by two methods.
The first is to calculate the risk-adjusted discount rate and apply it to the unadjusted cash flows.
In the case of securities we may use the capital asset pricing model developed in Chapter 5, where the expected return on security i,(E(ri)) is determined by multiplying the security's beta coefficient by the market risk premium and adding the result to the risk-free rate of interest.
The result may then be used to discount the unadjusted cash flows.
The second method requires the cash flow to be adjusted by ‘certainty equivalents’ and the results discounted by the risk-free rate of interest.
Algebraically we may describe the method as follows, where a t is the certainty equivalent for period t.
It may be defined as follows, where rf and r i are the risk-free rate of return and the required rate of return for the security (for example, determined by Eq.
(8.20)).
Thus if the required rate of return for a security is 19 per cent and the risk-free rate is 12 per cent then the certainty equivalent is equal to (1.12/1.19) =0.9412.
If during the next year the parameters do not change, then the certainty equivalent for year 2 will be equal to .
Therefore, if the mean expected dividend in years 1 and 2 are 10p and 12p, then they are equivalent to certain dividends of  and  respectively.
These should then be discounted by the risk-free rate of interest to produce the present values of  and  respectively.
If we use the risk-adjusted discount rate of return we will obtain the identical results,, and .
In practice, the easiest conceptually and to apply, is the risk-adjusted discount rate and consequently may be preferred to the certainty equivalent method with its intermediate stage of producing the equivalent certain cash flow.
The financial mix and the dividend decision
We can now build on the techniques presented in the last section to examine two contentious issues in investment (and corporate) finance.
The first concerns the effect of the company's employment of debt on its share price and the second is the relevance of dividend payments.
Capital structure and valuation
What might be called the traditional view of the effect of the capital structure on the price of shares is that there is an optimal debt-equity mix which will maximize the value of the company's securities.
This is based on the belief that the cost of equity does not rise sufficiently to offset the use of cheaper forms of financing; i.e. debt.
Therefore, the overall cost of capital will fall and the value of the firm will be maximized at some optimum capital structure.
This optimum is not 100 per cent debt financing as equity is regarded as a safety cushion which will absorb any losses which might be incurred during the ordinary course of trading and/or liquidation.
Hence, the smaller the amount of equity the more likely it is that debt holders may have to bear some part of any losses.
However, the traditional view argues that this factor only makes itself felt after a substantial proportion of total financing is in the form of debt.
These propositions are depicted graphically in Fig. 8.3.
The traditional view was challenged by Modigliani and Miller in 1958 They argued that the level of gearing used by the firm should not affect the cost of capital or alter the value of the firm as the risk borne by shareholders and debenture holders was dependent on how the firm used the capital not on how the firm raised the capital.
In other words, what matters is the way in which funds are invested.
Therefore, as the firm takes on more of the cheaper form of financing, debt, the cost of equity should rise so as to offset the advantage and maintain a constant cost of capital   regardless of the debt — equity ratio.
That this should happen is no accident according to Modigliani and Miller.
The means by which the cost of equity rises to offset exactly the use of cheaper debt is an arbitrage process and arises out of rational investors taking advantage of profitable opportunities if the market values companies according to factors other than their returns and the riskiness of the returns.
The assumptions on which Modigliani and Miller base their model are very important and hence they must be described before proceeding to a formal development.
The assumptions are as follows:
1.
Perfect capital markets in which information is costless and available to all investors, no transactions costs, all securities are infinitely divisible, and investors are rational wealth preferring economic agents.
2.
Homogeneous expectations of company earnings and that there is no growth (or otherwise) in those earnings into perpetuity.
3.
No corporate taxation.
This assumption will be removed at a later stage.
4.
Companies are classified by returns, and all companies with an equivalent return have the same business risk.
Our point of departure in tracing the Modigliani and Miller exposition must be the observation that the value of a firm within a given class of business risk is given by the following equation, where V is the value of the firm, E(Y) is the expected future income in perpetuity, and ri is the weighted average cost of capital of the firm which may be defined, where r e and r b are the costs of equity and debt respectively, and where w e and w b are the weight of financing from equity and debt respectively.
Assume an investor is confronted by the choice of investing in one of two companies which are identical in every respect except for the way in which they have been financed.
The first company (U) has all equity financing while the second (G) has used some debt in its financial structure.
The potential returns may be described as follows:
1.
The investor buys a proportion x of the equity in the geared company G. The investment may be described as .
The return expected from this investment may be written .
Where E(Y) is the expected income (defined as earnings before interest and taxes), B is the market value of debt used by the company in its financial structure and k b is the rate of interest born by that debt.
2.
In order to construct an equivalent investment in the ungeared firm, the investor must purchase a proportion x of the outstanding equity and partially finance this with a loan equal to xB of the geared company's debt.
The investment may be written as .
The return will be equal to , as the returns to equity () have to pay for the cost of the loan ().
By requiring the investor to buy a proportion of debt in the geared company we can write, therefore, if this is true for a proportion, we can show that by dividing both sides of Eq.
(8.25) by x, it will be true for the whole, and therefore   as , and .
If these conditions do not hold there will be a diversion in the market valuations of the equity of the two companies and profitable arbitrages would arise.
For example, consider the following numerical example:
Modigliani and Miller argue that this situation cannot persist for long as it offers arbitrage profits to the individual investor.
Suppose our investor had purchased 5 per cent of the equity of XYZ Ltd for 8,928.55, his or her expected return would be (0.14)(8,928.55) = 1,250.
This can be improved upon by selling the shares of XYZ Ltd and borrowing an amount equal to 5 per cent of the market value of XYZ Ltd's debt; i.e. (0.05)(150,000) = 7,500.
The investor now has a total of 8,928.55 +7,500= 16,428.55 to invest.
He or she may now buy 5 per cent of the equity of the ungeared firm, ABC Ltd, for 12,500 and receive an expected return of 2,000 [(0.05)(40,000)].
After paying the interest costs (10 per cent of 7,500), the investor is left with a net return of 1,250 which is the same as before.
However, with this alternative strategy, the investor can enjoy the income from an extra 3,928.55, which, if invested in ABC Ltd, will generate additional earnings of 628.57.
This would constitute an improvement of just over 50 per cent on the original return on the investment in XYZ Ltd.
Given the above potential for arbitrage profits, it was argued that if enough investors acted on this opportunity, the price of ABC Ltd would rise and that of XYZ Ltd would fall in response to the changing pattern of demand.
We can see from these arguments and from Fig.8.4 that the capital structure theory has distinct implications for the price of equity.
Although it is argued that the total value of the firm will remain    constant, it is shown that this will be so because the price of equity will fall so as to offset the impact of using debt.
Hence, the implication is that the price of equity will fall in direct proportion to the increase in the use of debt in the financial structure.
However, once taxation and bankruptcy effects are introduced the capital structure will have an effect on the overall value of the firm (Fig.8.5).
In addition, it will have an impact on the price of the firm's equity which is in excess of the contribution of debt to the financial mix.
For example, if a proportional corporation tax is introduced the above example may be reworked as follows:
1.
The investor buys a proportion x of the equity in the geared company G. The investment may be described as .
The return expected from this investment may be written .
Where T is the proportional corporate tax rate.
2.
As before the equivalent investment in the ungeared firm is given by .
The return will be equal to,.
The returns from the two investment decisions are equal; hence we may write, this reduces to, hence,.
The effects of the capital mix on share prices and equity required rates of return may be seen from the examples presented in Table 8.2.
It is noticeable that in all 3 cases presented in Table 8.2, the share price declines as the required rate of return increases.
This highlights the significance of the debate as far as equity valuation is concerned.
It is not a debate about declining share values or rising rates of return but a debate about the rates of decline and increase.
If we compare the traditional case with that of Modigliani and Miller with corporate taxes, it is clear that the latter position indicates a linear price decline while that of the traditional view suggests a more progressive decline.
However, if bankruptcy considerations are added to the case of Modigliani and Miller with taxes the results will tend to    look like the traditional view once more.
It can be argued that the imperfections of the market will become increasingly important after firms have exceeded their ‘debt capacity’ and lenders of funds no longer perceive the equity financing as an adequate cushion in the event of liquidation.
Hence, the costs of debt may rise as this ‘bankruptcy consideration’ is taken into account.
The empirical investigations of Modigliani and Miller 2 were conducted on examples of oil and electric utility companies.
They found that gearing did not significantly increase the overall cost of funds to the firm.
However, other studies, for example that by Masulis, have cast doubt on the universality of the results of Modigliani and Miller.
Masulis studied the effect of changes in corporate structure effected by debt equity swaps and vice versa in which there was little or no net cash inflows or outflows from the firm.
Masulis took a sample of 133 US cases of recapitalizations which involved a change in the amount of equity capital of 25 per cent or less (and a corresponding change in the amount of debt).
The model and tests gave the following results:
1.
Changes in share prices are positively related to changes in gearing.
2.
Changes in firm valuation were found to be consistent with the tax-based models of capital structure.
The dividend decision and security valuation
The second major debate in security valuation concerns the significance (if any) of the dividend decision.
This second debate was also started in earnest by an article written by Miller and Modigliani which argued that dividends were irrelevant for the purposes of security valuation.
They basically posed the question that, if all other financial decisions were held constant, what effect would changing the dividend payout ratio have on the value of the firm's equity?
They pointed out that given the firm's investment policy, the dividend decision is really a decision about how to finance the investment policy.
It is axiomatic that dividends have to be financed and if funds are used to pay shareholders it may be that alternative sources of capital must be tapped to provide for the investment policy.
They attempted to demonstrate that equity value is dependent on the success or failure of the firm's investment policies rather than any deliberate policy concerning dividends.
The first part of this section will present some of the available evidence about the practice of paying dividends while the second part will present a discussion of the debate regarding their relevance in valuation.
Taken together Tables 8.3 and 8.4 indicate some sort of policy for dividend payout ratios on behalf of the  commercial companies in the UK.
Although Table 8.3 shows considerable increases in the nominal amount of dividends paid these increases are accompanied by a significant decrease in the aggregate payout ratio.
This is explained when the nominal amounts paid out are adjusted for inflation,(Table 8.5).
The evidence of Table 8.5 lends itself to a policy of a constant real dividend.
However, at company level, other policies are more often mentioned:
1.
Constant nominal dividend.
2.
Constant payout ratio; i.e. a constant proportion of earnings are paid out to shareholders.
However, in practice although earnings vary, it is not always observed that dividends fall as earnings fall.
The evidence suggests that most firms have a ‘target payout ratio’.
On the other hand they are reluctant to reduce the dividend in response to a fall in distributable earnings.
Consequently, the pattern of dividend payouts for firms which follow some target may resemble a ratchet effect which is only broken when the firm's performance is bad for several consecutive periods.
In addition, increases are only made when the firm is confident that the new level can be maintained for the forseeable future   
After interviewing US corporate managers Lintner was able to describe their behaviour in terms of the following model, where D 1 is the dividend paid in period 1, T is the target payout ratio and EPS 1 is the earnings per share in period 1.
Changes in the dividend could then be described as,.
However, Lintner found that managers were reluctant to shift the new dividend up to the new target level in one jump, preferring to have something in hand so that dividend growth could be maintained if the subsequent earnings showed no growth.
Therefore, the change in the dividend was dependent not solely on the target layout ratio but also on some adjustment factor.
a,.
By substituting for the values of Do and so on, this model can be generalized as follows,.
This implies that dividends are a weighted average of past earnings in which the most recent earnings figures are the most important in determining the level of current dividend.
Fama and Babiak tested this model and found that, on average, firms in the USA have a target ratio of about 0.5 and an adjustment rate of 0.33.
They also estimated the probabilities of dividend increases and decreases under certain circumstances (Table 8.6).
The foregoing strongly suggests that dividend policy and practice contains important information for the shareholder.
However, increases in dividends do not provide completely unambiguous messages to shareholders.
Dividend increases can mean any of the following:
1.
Good investment prospects.
The management have confidence in future earnings growth and the maintenance of the target payout ratio.
2.
Sound financial management which increases the cash payout when the firm has no adequate investment opportunities; this may reflect an expectation of worsening economic performance in the near or distant future.
3.
Changes in the management team and consequent changes in investment policy which may or may not have yielded benefits at the time of the dividend increase.
The foregoing has concentrated on increases (decreases) in dividends and makes no comment on  the actual payout ratio itself.
The important result is that in an uncertain world companies like to maintain a stable payout ratio over the long run.
As the actual cash payout varies according to the firm's performance rather than changes in the long run payout ratio, the information content of dividends says nothing about the significance of the size of the payout ratio in the valuation of securities.
Modigliani and Miller begin their discussion of equity valuation by looking at the effect of dividends on the current prices of shares, ‘Do companies with generous distribution policies consistently sell at a premium over those with niggardly payouts?
Is the reverse ever true?
If so, under what conditions?
Is there an optimum payout ratio or range of ratios that maximizes the current worth of shares?’
They make the following assumptions:
1.
there is perfect knowledge; i.e. certainty;
2.
no transactions costs;
3.
no taxes;
4.
atomistic supply and demand;
5.
rational behaviour on the part of investors in which they prefer more wealth to less and are indifferent to whether an increment to their wealth takes the form of an unrealized capital gain or a cash dividend payment.
The model starts with a definition of a simple one-period return: where, p is the price, d is the dividend, r is the rate of return, and t and t + 1 are time subscripts.
This may be rearranged to produce an equation determining price in period t,.
If n is defined as the number of shares in issue in period t and m is the number of any new shares issued in period t+ 1, Eq.
(8.34) may be rewritten as follows: where  and .
We may define the total value of the firm's equity in period t + 1 as .
Therefore,.
The need for the firm to issue new shares will be determined by its income, investment plans, and dividend policy: where I t is the investment in period t and Y t is the firm's total net profit in period t.
We may now substitute Eq.
(8.37) into Eq.
(8.36): Equation (8.38) simplifies as follows:.
Hence, dividends have been eliminated from the valuation equation.
The present value of the firm is now dependent on the firm's results of its past investment policies (Y t ) and the prospects of its current investment decisions (I t ) We may now generalize this result so that the present value of the firm is independent of any future dividend decisions.
For example, using the same logic and assuming a constant required rate of return, may be defined as follows:.
Equation (8.40) may be substituted into Eq.
(8.39) for  and after some manipulation we get,.
This may be generalized as follows:.
As n approaches infinity so  will approach zero and will cease to be an important component of the valuation equation.
This leaves the current price of the share being equal to the present value of the difference between net income and investment into infinity.
Modigliani and Miller conclude that
Like many other propositions in economics, the irrelevance of dividend policy, given investment policy, is ‘obvious, once you think about it’.
It is, after all, merely one more instance of the general principle that there are no ‘financial illusions’ in a rational and perfect economic environment.
Values there are determined solely by ‘real’ considerations in this case the earning power of the firm's assets and its investment policy and not by how the fruits of earning power are ‘packaged’for distribution….
Given a firm's investment policy, the dividend payout policy it chooses will affect neither the current price of its shares nor the total return to its shareholders.
At this point it is necessary that we pay some attention to the phrase ‘rational and perfect economic environment’.
The first point to make is that dividend policy and share valuation take place under conditions of uncertainty.
Not only is the future uncertain, but information about the present is not free and is not available to everyone.
Gordon has emphasized these real world imperfections and has argued that dividend policy is important because dividends represent a more certain return than reinvested profits.
Hence, a pound paid out is worth more than a pound retained and reinvested.
However, this implicitly assumes that the investor may be able to reinvest the dividend for the same return at a lower risk than the firm (or for a higher return for the same risk) which, given the asymmetry of information, cannot be the case unless the firm itself has an inferior investment policy, in which case the investor would be advised to withdraw his or her investment from the firm completely.
Therefore, if the firm is efficient with regard to its investment policy, the investor must accept the same level of risk as the firm in order to achieve the same expected return.
Under these circumstances the dividend must lose the supposed qualities of uncertainty.
It has been and still is argued by many market practitioners that dividends do have an effect on market prices because of their information content.
Share prices do react to company announcements of dividend changes.
Earlier in this chapter, a quote from a newspaper was presented which commented on the market's favourable reaction to the announcement from the Chief Executive Officer of Lloyd's Bank that its dividend would be increased by 10 per cent.
However, further analysis of the company's results showed that a loss had been made and that the whole dividend (including the increase) was to be paid out of reserves.
This caused the price of the shares to fall back.
Although this constitutes a piece of anecdotal evidence, it serves to illustrate the point about the value of the information content of dividends.
The example poses the question ‘what was more important’?
The increase in the dividend and presumably the optimistic implication about the bank's future earning ability or the possibility that past investment policies were proving to be injudicious?
In other words did the dividend increase embody different and superior information to that published in the accounts?
Investors spend considerable amounts of effort, time and money in their investigations into the firms behind  the shares.
They analyse managements, investments and future income streams.
They make forecasts of the results of the firms' past and present investment activities.
Hence, the possibility arises that the information content of the dividend decision may contradict the information presented in other sources.
However, empirical evidence on the information content of dividends is not consistent.
Graham and Dodd and others have observed an apparent relationship between dividends and share prices.
Cragg and Malkiel provided evidence that professional analysts were no more accurate than naive earnings forecasting methods over 5-year horizons.
It has also been argued that the dividend payment represents tangible evidence of management's expectations which should be based on superior knowledge to that of investors.
Ross has taken this line of reasoning further by arguing that because managers' remuneration is linked to the value of the firm, they will make decisions which maximize that value.
Therefore, dividends should be expected to contain information.
On the other hand, those who support the efficient market theory (EMT) have made substantial cases for the irrelevance of dividends.
For example, Richards has used the methods of Cragg and Malkiel to show that over a 1-year time horizon professional analysts perform ‘reasonably well’.
The implication of this is that dividends do not carry significant new information, merely a confirmation of present conditions which are already known from other sources of information.
In addition to these results, much of the work done on the EMT has concerned the existence or otherwise of a financial illusion.
Thus, the work of Fama et al on the significance of scrip issues indicated that the issues themselves did not tell the market anything it did not already know from its analysis of the company's performance during the 30 months before the split.
Similarly, studies using their methodology of cumulative average residuals have shown that earnings announcements are correctly anticipated.
The use of the capital asset pricing model has had similarly contradictory results.
For example Bar-Yosef and Kolodny, and Litzenberger and Ramaswamy have found dividends to be significant while Black and Scholes have found them to be without significance.
The inconclusive nature of the empirical tests may suggest something about the validity of the tests themselves rather than the significance or otherwise of dividends.
The fact remains that dividends exist and have existed since shares were first sold to the investing public.
If dividends are insignificant as Modigliani and Miller have suggested, then this requires that corporate financial officers act irrationally.
However, this persistent irrationality is inconsistent given the evidence for the efficiency of stock markets.
This paradox has been considered by Dyl and Hoffmeister who used the concept of duration (see Chapter 10) to show that there might be a relationship between dividends and beta.
They conclude that firms pay dividends to influence the riskiness of their equity and that the higher the dividend payout ratio, the lower the total and systematic risk of the shares.
They also suggest that the possible existence of the relationship might explain the inconsistent results obtained from studies of the effects of dividends using the capital asset pricing model.
Dividends and taxes
When the assumption of no taxes is dropped the relevance of dividends depends on the neutrality of the taxation system.
In the situation where the tax system is more favourable to capital gains, then there is an incentive not to pay dividends.
In addition, a sharply progressive personal tax system will make dividends a relatively unattractive source of income for the marginal tax payer compared to capital gains which may be taxed at a flat rate.
The effect of a progressive personal taxation system may be exacerbated by high levels of price inflation in which the rate of increase in personal allowances lags behind the rate of change in prices and incomes.
These conclusions have been formally demonstrated in articles by Farrar, Selwyn and  Brennan.
Brennan adapted the capital asset pricing model to try to gauge the effects of dividends and taxes on the returns to shareholders: where .
If a 3 is found to be both positive and statistically significant then the model suggests that dividends are undesirable and that rational shareholders should prefer to take their returns in the form of capital gains.
However, there are problems with Brennan's original model.
By using the CAPM the model introduces the problem of unstable betas (see Chapter 6).
Secondly, the principal method of correcting this fault by concentrating on portfolio betas which are more stable, then obscures the effects on market values, risks and returns for individual shares.
However, these defects were largely solved by Litzenberger and Ramaswamy who concluded that risk-adjusted returns are higher for those securities offering higher dividend yields.
In other words, the payment of high dividends depresses the security's price which means that investors require a higher income rate of return to induce them to hold those securities paying high dividends.
Using a similar methodology, Poterba and Summers found similar results for UK firms.
Dividend clienteles
The clientele effect was first suggested by Modigliani and Miller in their original 1961 article when they pointed out:
If, for example, the frequency distribution of corporate payout ratios happened to correspond exactly with the distribution of investor preferences for payout ratios, then the existence of these preferences would clearly lead ultimately to a situation whose implications were different, in no respect, from the perfect market case.
Each corporation would tend to attract to itself a ‘clientele’ consisting of those preferring its particular payout ratio, but one clientele would be as good as another in terms of the valuation it would imply for firms.
Elton and Gruber attempted to measure clientele effects by measuring the extent to which share prices fell when they went ex-dividend.
In addition they estimated the implied income tax brackets associated with each dividend payout level.
Their starting point was to set up a model in which there were no opportunities for arbitrage by specifying an equality between those investors taking their returns solely in terms of capital gains by selling before the share went ex-dividend, and those who sold after the share went ex-dividend and thus collected their return in capital gains and dividends: where .
Equation (8.44) may be rearranged to give,.
In this form the ratio of the share price decline to the size of the dividend may be used to estimate the personal income tax of the investor given a rate of capital gains tax.
Using US data for the period April 1966 to March 1967 (4,148 observations), Elton and Gruber were able to conclude from their findings that the lower the dividend yield the higher the implied personal income tax rate and that there was a clientele effect.
This result was also found by Litzenberger and Ramaswamy in their 1982 article.
Notes
Questions
1.
Much criticism was voiced when the issuers of the British Steel share issue announced that the advisory price for the issue would be 60p.
Despite concern that this price was too low the opening market price for the newly issued shares was only 60.5p.
In what circumstances might such a course of events occur?
In what ways did the British Steel offer differ from other privatization issues?
2.
If a portfolio manager is considering investing in a company for 5 years, how much should he be prepared to pay if he finds out from his broker that the company is expected to perform as follows:.
The price in 5 years time is expected to be 75p, the beta for the company's equity is 1.2 and there are 400,000 shares extant with no expectation of any additional issues over this period.
The risk-free rate is currently 10 per cent and the expected market rate of return is 15 per cent and neither is expected to change over the 5-year investment period.
What price would the portfolio manager be prepared to pay for these shares given a holding period of 5 years?
3.
Critically discuss the proposition that the generally perceived importance of dividend payments constitutes a financial mirage.
4.
An efficient market has been described as one in which ‘the theories of Miller and Modigliani hold true’.
How far does the empirical evidence for the US and UK markets support the efficient market hypothesis?
5.
Using your own numerical examples critically discuss the proposition that the market value of a company is not dependent on its level of gearing and that the financing decision is essentially concerned with marketing the company to the investment community rather than a process of maximizing its value.
6.
Can Lintner's behavioural model and the findings of Fama and Babiak be reconciled with the dividend irrelevance model of Miller and Modigliani?
7.
(a)
If investors require an expected return of 8 per cent p.a., what prices would they expect to pay for the following:
(i)
a share which pays an annual dividend of 30p which is expected to remain the same for the foreseeable future.
(ii)
a share which pays an annual dividend of 20p but which is expected to grow by 5% p.a. for the foreseeable future.
(iii)
a share which pays an annual dividend of 10p which is expected to grow by 6% p.a. for the next 10 years and 4% p.a. thereafter.
(b)
If the expected return rises to 15 per cent what would they expect to pay for the above shares?
8.
How might market imperfections such as taxes and transactions costs affect a firm's dividend policy and the market value of the firm?
9.
How might the Black-Scholes option pricing model be used to value rights issues?
10.
Consider the following 3 groups of 3 equities each,
Group 1 shares have low systematic risks and are expected to earn a return of 10 per cent.
Group II shares have a higher systematic risk and therefore are expected to yield 12 per cent.
Lastly, Group III shares have the highest systematic risk and are expected to give a return of 14 per cent.
(a) If all 9 shares currently pay a dividend of 30p, what are the expected growth rates in each case?(b) On the basis of the results obtained in part(a) critically discuss the effects of the rate of dividend growth and systematic risk on equity prices.
Government and corporate debt
Introduction
Corporate and government debt (‘debentures' and ‘gilts’) confers no ownership on holders, only a fixed or predictable income and a fixed or predictable redemption value.
Holders have no voting rights and cannot make any contribution to the management of the corporation except in extremis when they can force liquidation if their contractual income has not been paid.
During the eighties the holders of debt from those countries which found it difficult to make interest payments found it impossible to take effective remedial action.
This lack of ultimate sanction is the principal difference (apart from degrees of risk) between corporate and government debt.
The vast majority of UK and US government debt is issued with fixed coupons (the actual cash payment made to holders) and redemption values.
Consequently, unlike equities, the income stream from debt is usually known.
However, the unit price at any time is a function of the prevailing interest rates and the risk associated with the corporation or government which issued the security.
The British Government issues two other types of debt: index-linked gilts and convertibles.
Index-linked gilts offer investors coupons and redemption values in real terms.
They are linked to the rate of inflation in the retail price index (RPI).
Therefore, the apparently low coupons offered, between 2 and 3 per cent, have to be adjusted by the rate of inflation to obtain the nominal coupon and hence the actual amount of cash paid out.
For example, if an index-linked gilt offers a 2 per cent coupon, C r , and the relevant rate of inflation, IR (this is covered in more detail below), is 5.5 per cent then the nominal coupon, C n , will be: or 8.1375 per cent ; i. e. a payment of 8.1375 per unit held.
The redemption value is also linked to the rate of inflation so that, taking the above rate of inflation as being relevant, the original 100 would have been increased to 105.5 (100)(1.055).
The rate of inflation used is the RPI and each index-linked issue has a base level for the calculation of the effects of inflation on coupons and redemption values.
This is taken as the RPI value 8 months before issue and each coupon is adjusted on the basis of the inflation which occurred during the half-year which ended 8 months before the coupon is due to be paid.
Therefore, the cash amount of the next coupon is always known.
The present structure of the gilts market
The principal objective of the Bank of England in restructuring the gilt-edged market was to minimize the cost of raising debt finance for the Government.
To this end the Bank attempted to use the reorganization of the Stock Exchange to introduce further competition into the methods by which government debt was sold.
In 1985 the Bank set about reorganizing the market for government debt.
It began by inviting applications for marketmakers in gilts who would undertake to provide continuous two-way prices under any trading conditions.
In order to reduce the supervisory role of the Bank itself, it  intended to recruit marketmakers solely from those firms and institutions who were already members of the International Stock Exchange (and therefore subject to the regulatory framework of the ISE).
The principal qualification, other than membership of the ISE, imposed by the Bank was and is ‘capital adequacy’.
In its discussion papers the Bank explicitly avoided reference to any minimum capital requirements.
Instead the Bank stated its intention to monitor and regulate the ratio of risk exposure to capital.
In this way the Bank attempted to avoid the situation of a gilt-edged marketmaker being in financial difficulties because it did not have the capital resources to cover any contingent liabilities incurred during operations in the market.
Before October 1986 the Bank of England approved 29 marketmakers for the gilts market but before the new system came into operation the Bank of America and Union Discount withdrew leaving 27 starters.
This has ensured the realization of the Bank's principal objective — that of increased competition and the minimization of the cost of funding the Government's financing requirements.
Although the number of marketmakers has not substantially changed in the 3 years since the Big Bang the membership has.
The membership has changed as the financially weaker institutions have dropped out (Lloyds Bank, Orion Royal, Hill Samuel, Pru Bache, Citicorp, Morgan Grenfell, Hoare Govett) and new ones have joined (notably the Japanese firms of Nomura and Daiwa).
Including the 2 new entrants, there were 22 marketmakers in gilts at the beginning of 1989.
There were also 5 (6 were originally appointed but in 1988 a firm called Tullets dropped out)‘inter-dealer brokers’.
These are firms which arrange deals between the marketmakers themselves and allow them to unwind positions which they might have otherwise found difficult.
They are essential for the maintenance of the market's liquidity.
The Bank also laid down the requirements for its own operations in the market:
1.
To receive and accept, at its discretion, bids from marketmakers, both during and outside market hours, for stock.
2.
To receive and undertake, at its discretion, proposals to switch stock from marketmakers.
3.
To bid for, at its discretion, stock of less than 3 months maturity and index-linked stock offered by marketmakers.
4.
To purchase, at its discretion, other stocks offered by marketmakers.
The Bank also intended to continue the tax arrangements available to gilt-edged jobbers under the old system:
1.
Marketmakers are able to claim against their tax liabilities the full amount of any trading losses made by buying stock cum dividend and then selling it ex-dividend regardless of the interval between purchase and resale.
2.
Marketmakers are able to offset against dividends received any dividends paid by them on stock they have purchased.
In tandem with the structural changes made to the membership of the gilt-edged market the Bank has revamped the payment and transfer systems.
The Central Gilts Office (CGO) provided marketmakers with computerized accounts which facilitated the transfer of stock before the change of ownership was recorded at the Bank.
It also ensured that payment was assured by the buyer's settlement bank to that of the seller on the same way as the transfer of stock.
Table 9.1 shows the average numbers of transactions per day in the gilts market during 1986.
The Bank noted that the increase in the member-to-member movements in November and December 1986 reflected additional transactions being made through the inter-dealer brokers.
Returns on equities and fixed interest stocks
By virtue of having a prior claim on assets and having a fixed and legally enforceable income and redemption, fixed interest debentures are usually assumed to offer less risk to the investor.
Hence, given that they are held to bear less risk, we should expect a lower return.
Merrett and Sykes' produced estimates of equity and fixed interest yields for UK securities between 1919 and 1966 (Table 9.2).
The evidence presented in Tables 9.3 and 9.4 lends weight to the statement that being less risky we should expect less return from fixed interest investments whichever country is being considered.
Issuing gilt-edged stock
The Bank uses two main methods of issuing gilt-edged stock:
1.
Tender offers these may involve either the issue of completely new stocks or substantial tranches of existing stocks.
An example of the former (Fig. 9.1) was advertised in the press on 31 May 1988 when 400 million of 2 per cent index-linked stock was offered to the public.
All tenders had to be lodged with the Bank by 10.00 a.m. on Thursday 2 June 1988 with a down payment of 40 per f 100 nominal bid for.
It is noteworthy that in this case the advertisement makes no reference to a minimum tender offer, the latter being the general policy of the Bank in respect of this class of stock (see Fig. 9.2).
All other gilt-edged (conventional fixed coupon stock) tender offers stipulate a minimum price for offers.
However, despite the slight difference in the way that the stocks are offered to the public, the method of allocation is the same.
A striking price is arrived at which will be in excess of the minimum offer price if the issue is oversubscribed otherwise at the minimum tender price, and the issue is allocated in proportion to the size of the bids regardless of the price bid (except those that underbid the striking price).
The only point to note in this system of allocation is that those who bid in excess of the striking price will have priority in allocation where the issue has been oversubscribed.
The Bank customarily announces the issue of new stock on a Friday and dealings usually start in the secondary market on the following Thursday.
However, it should be borne in mind that on announcement, a ‘grey’ market may start in which the issue may be traded before it is issued.
This is not uncommon and it has occurred with many of the privatization issues in the equity market.
All tender issues are underwritten by the Bank and issues that are undersubscribed are taken up by the Bank and used as ‘tap’ stock which may be sold into the secondary market at the discretion of the Bank.
The Bank's usual policy in this regard is to sell into a rising or stable market.
However, the Bank may buy in a falling market if the market is considered to be erratic and unstable.
In this event the Bank only buys stock offered to it by marketmakers at prices slightly below those ruling in the market.
Normally this activity is not noticed by the investing public, only by those market professionals intimately concerned with the gilt-edged market.
In this activity the        Bank is acting in the same way as lead managers in the Euroband markets whose duties include the stabilization of the issue's price.
Recently a very similar operation was undertaken by the Bank in respect of the sale of British Petroleum shares by the Government to the public at large.
Because the issue was hugely undersubscribed the Bank effectively underwrote the shares by entering the secondary market at a fixed price of 70p (the partly paid issue price being 120p) for a period of 6 months.
2.
Tranchettes — These are issues of small blocks of existing stocks which are placed in the Bank's own portfolio of gilts for direct sale into the secondary market (see Fig. 9.2).
In the financial year 1985–86 the gross sale of gilt-edged stock amounted to 11.9 billion of which 6.5 billion was accounted for by funding redemptions and official purchases of stock nearing maturity.
Therefore there was a net sale of 5.4 billion of new gilts to the private sector.
The remaining government funding requirement was met by sales of national savings certificates to the amount of 2.2 billion.
The market for corporate stocks in the UK
Since the end of the sixties the use of traditional debenture financing by British corporations has been rather limited (see Tables 9.6(a) and (b)).
The striking aspect of Tables 9.6(a) and (b) is the very low levels of loan capital issued in the UK by British corporations between 1973 and 1980 (inclusive).
This is in stark contrast to the fifties and sixties when loan capital formed an important part of corporate financing needs.
Conventional corporate finance leads us to believe that debt financing is usually cheaper than equity financing.
Yet the seventies saw a very significant decline in long-term debenture financing.
We may note from Table 9.6(a) that equity financing never exceeded 34 per cent of the total, indeed the primary sources of finance have been bank advances and ‘other’(Euroloans etc.) over the entire period covered by the table.
The variation in the popularity of fixed interest financing between the sixties and the seventies may be explained by changes in the tax environment and the levels of inflation experienced during the 1970s:
1.
In 1965 the Government of the day introduced corporation tax which reduced the cost of servicing debt.
This measure encouraged the use of securitized debt as a major source of cooporate finance.
This stimulus lasted until the Finance Act of 1973 which introduced a major revision of the system of corporation tax.
This was and still is called the imputation system which ensures that dividend income is only taxed once (a detailed analysis of the effects of this and the original corporation tax system is presented in Chapter 8).
2.
During the sixties the rate of inflation experienced in the UK, although higher than that of most international competitors, never rose above 10 per cent.
On the other hand, the seventies began with a doubling of the rate of inflation (from 5.6 per cent in 1969 to 11.6 per cent in 1970).
This increased to 22.1 per cent in 1974 and subsequently never fell below 10 per cent in that decade.
However, what is more important than the actual levels experienced were the levels of expectations and the perception of stability in macroeconomic management.
It is a paradox that in the contemplation of using debenture finance expectations of falling inflation are   detrimental.
Put very simply, if debentures are issued at high coupon rates which reflect current rates of inflation, then if the rate of inflation falls the company will be stuck with a high coupon burden at a time when inflation no longer boosts its earnings.
3.
From Table 9.6(a) it can be seen that bank financing has always played a major part in financing British industrial and commercial companies.
During the seventies this form of finance became comparatively more attractive as it offered variable rates of interest (which are tax deductible) and the short nature of these loans was mitigated by the banks' willingness to roll-over these loans on request.
Furthermore, by 1980 one study found that almost 60 per cent of bank  lending to the industrial and commercial sectors constituted ‘medium-term finance’.
These developments were magnified by the changes to the regulation of banks in 1971 (‘Competition and Credit Control’)-.
This gave the banks greater freedom in their lending policies to industrial and commercial companies.
Another stimulus was the steady influx of foreign financial institutions into London most of which were willing to lend on competitive terms to industrial and commercial companies.
In addition to lengthening the terms of the advances, banks began to be flexible about repayment arrangements and began to offer very attractive leasing schemes with which capital equipment could be acquired.
4.
The last, but by no means least important, of the factors inhibiting the use of securitized debt as a source of financing was the existence of foreign exchange controls and the investment premium on overseas investments.
Apart from discouraging investment abroad this also effectively reduced companies' access to international capital markets.