

Chapter 20
Ruin was inevitable.
One of the penalties of keeping immaculate accounts is that they leave no room for hope — there were no errors in Nora's books to offer the firm a surprise salvation.
Only John and Nora could see it, for only they knew of the terrible demand that would sooner or later be made on their resources — and it was going to be well over the hundred thousand that John had estimated.
His hope of getting rid of at least half of Beador's worthless debt proved far too sanguine; if they unloaded a quarter, they would count themselves fortunate.
Yet in one way they were fortunate.
Everyone could feel the abnormal strains that were now racking the monied world.
Everyone knew that a breaking point had to come; and everyone who could took extraordinary measures to protect himself.
So the measures that John and Nora now took — to disguise their ruin for as long as possible — could be passed off as acts, not of desperation, but of shrewdness.
John's role was to get together as much hard cash as possible.
Nora's was to start moving that cash around from bank to bank — and even from country to country — in quite novel and unconventional ways, so that when the time came, and there was no cash left to move around, the fact might go unnoticed for…how long?
She had no idea.
Last year an East India company in the tea trade had gone bankrupt, and the court found it had actually been insolvent for a quarter of a century — which had come as a great surprise even to the directors.
Yet in each of those insolvent years they had turned over a good half million.
On such frail straws they floated their hope for their own survival.
All that summer and autumn, John harvested for cash.
If  there was a contract that might be finished, or brought to a stage payment, by mid-September, he bent heaven and hell to achieve it, even to the extent of moving men from longer-term contracts.
For the first time in his career, John deliberately allowed some contracts to drag behind their timetable.
The supervising engineers were naturally unhappy and only his promise to catch up — and his reputation to back such a promise — prevented the companies from operating the clauses that allowed them to take over the work and reassign it.
He also tendered low for a host of tiny contracts — sidings, drains, realignments, even routine maintenance — things he would not normally bother with.
And these, too, he hastened to finish before September.
And every bill dated November or later he got discounted at once and turned into cash.
He liquidated all his material stocks and bought everything spot, paying in ninety-day bills, if possible.
As the money flowed in, first in a dribble, then in a torrent, Nora began to move it around according to the strategy they had devised.
At first she managed from their home up in Yorkshire; later, as the pace grew more hectic, she moved down to a suite at the Adelaide in London.
There was no word to describe what she was doing.
Swindle was too crude, for if the plan worked, no one would lose a penny; all that would have happened was that a few banks would inadvertently have lent them money for an undefined period.
Most of the other words — cheat, defraud, shave, pluck, mulct, and so forth— suggested something too irreversible; in any case, they were too strongly associated with criminal and aristocratic behaviour.
Nora's own word for her strategy was ‘hudsoning,’ a word fitted in every way to the matter, the manner, and the age.
And if she ever used it where it was overheard, the eavesdropper would consider the activity admirable; for George Hudson was still the Railway King.
The first bank she ‘hudsoned’ was right on her (and Hudson's) doorstep: the York City and County.
She let a draft go through for wages when Stevenson's had no funds in that particular bank to cover it.
The manager, knowing what a big and steady account he had in Stevenson's, wrote a polite, almost obsequious letter, drawing their attention to the deficiency; but he allowed the payment.
Nora composed a tart reply for John to sign, pointing out that these were difficult  times for everyone and that sound firms and sound bankers would survive them best by staying calm.
To underline the point, she kept that bank well in surplus for a good long time after.
‘Sound’ and ‘staying calm’were the constant themes of the whole ‘hudson’campaign.
Bank after bank bleated to John about a sudden dearth of cash in the Stevenson account.
Each received a variant of Nora's lofty homily on the virtues of staying calm and of reposing confidence in firms whose soundness was beyond question — plus, to be sure, the gold to back the words and to sugar the message.
Surreptitiously she sold her properties; from her lucrative firstborn at Alderley Edge to her failures at Pendle and Ary — all went under the hammer.
Money was tight that summer and they fetched only two-thirds of what she considered their true value; hoping for sixty thousand, she got a mere forty.
But she was too busy then to grieve overmuch; the bitterness was to come later.
In return for all this, Sir George handed them the deeds to Maran Hill, still unmortaged; and he assigned his heavily mortgaged lands around Stockton.
None of it was of any immediate benefit, for they could not turn him out.
Everything had to go on as normal.
The hudson strategy was not without its problems.
The ono account she did not meddle with was their permanent one with Chambers.
Sooner or later every Stevenson bill came to him for discount; and every foreign transaction went via him.
In addition, most of the banks they hudsoned would write to Chambers for reference.
Stevenson's had to be able to rely on a good word from him.
Even so, the abnormal number of requests for references that poured in from provincial and oversea banks was bound to set him wondering.
At last he was driven to ask John whether Mrs. Stevenson was quite well.
‘I left him feeling uneasy,’ John reported back to Nora, ‘as you asked me to.
But I hope he doesn't begin to panic.’
‘On the contrary,’ Nora replied.
‘I hope he does.
Begin, I mean.
The whole essence of this thing is in the timing, And Chambers is the key to it.
He's no little provincial banker — yes sir, no sir, here's three bags full sir.
The problem of Chambers demands very particular attention.
We want him to begin to panic and then, just at the right moment, we must appear as the one rock in his own private storm.’
From that day, early in the October of 1845, she began  drawing on all their outlying accounts and amassing the money with Chambers.
But from that day, too, events began to pass out of their hands.
Now they had to watch every move in the City, snap up every bit of stray gossip and try to assess its true worth, take daily, even hourly, soundings of the railway intelligence.
From that day there was no appeal from the consequences of even one false move.
For John, on his endless round of visits to cuttings and embankments, tunnels and bridges, it was sometimes hard to believe that all this buzz of well-organized industry could be brought to a halt by the movement of bits of paper in the far-off City.
He stood, hearing the picks ring on the rock and watching the spoil fly from three hundred shovels, and he would realize that perhaps, even at that very moment, a papermaker in some small East End papermill was drying the very sheet on which Chambers or someone would write the final, damning words, ‘insufficient funds.’
Then the workings would fall silent.
The navvies and the bricklayers, masons and blacksmiths, would troop off to other masters.
The bailiffs would seize the wagons, the stores, Thorpe Manor…their very furniture.
He knew it could happen for he had seen it, too often now for his own comfort, when other contractors had gone under-indeed, his own business had been founded on the bankruptcy of another contractor.
Still, the activity all around him was reassuring, for every yard was another step nearer a payment to him.
For Nora, whose daily landscape was that endless to and fro of paper, there could be no such comfort.
The office servants were cheerful, knowing they were in a thriving company at a time when others were tottering; she had to run an endless gauntlet of their cheer.
She had to endure the congratulations of Jackson on the steady increase in the firm's wealth.
And all the time she knew it in no way matched the reckoning, whose day could not much longer be postponed.
In mid-October the Bank of England raised its discount rate — a belated attempt to stem the flood of credit it had itself created.
The rise was a mere token, from 2 to 3 per cent, but people were so nervous they clutched at straws, assuring each other that now all would be well.
In case Chambers should catch this new form of laughing sickness Nora decided to pay him a visit.
Chambers was a tall, lithe, powerful man.
Something about  him, and about his movements, reminded Nora of a leopard — not the leopards in zoos, but those on Egyptian papyruses.
Semitic leopards.
He had the same flat back to his head and angularity of neck, and his walk was tense and silent.
At thirty-eight he was certainly a very handsome man, but there was nothing in that to endear him to her.
His eyes, dark and set deep beneath a firm, unfurrowed brow, were sleek and watchful; one's first impression that they twinkled with a friendly mirth soon vanished.
His lips, too, seemed to smile; but they were so mobile, even when he was silent — especially when he was silent — as to cancel out the cheer and leave instead the impression of a man unwilling to reveal how he might appear if he allowed himself to relax.
His office had changed greatly since John and Nora had first seen it.
Six years ago, Chambers had been in a very small way of trade, on the outer fringe of the dozens of banks that belonged to the London Clearing House.
He had risen, however, with Stevenson's.
As a Jew, he would never penetrate the very inner circles of the City-but, also as a Jew, he knew more European bankers and understood their ways better than any other London bank of his size.
This and his link with Stevenson's had served him well over the last few years, and he had become something of an expert in railway funding, especially in European railways.
Millions in British capital had gone into overseas lines, and Chambers had managed a greatly disproportionate share of it.
So the delicate gilded furniture and the rococo mirrors had gone from his office; and in their place were desks and chairs that renaissance princes might have sat on in perfect safety, even if they had weighed three hundredweight.
His inkwell was a silver replica of Kitson's new long-boiler locomotive Hector, the gift of George Hudson and the York & north Midland.
The quills stood in its funnel and the lid of the ‘boiler’ hinged up to reveal the ink well.
‘Isn't that pretty,’ he said.
‘I'm so pleased with it.
And how kind of Hudson.’
‘Hudson is a one-man disaster,’ she said evenly.
‘It will take a generation for this country's railways to recover from what he has done in this one year.’
This opinion was so absolutely contrary to the general view of the man that Chambers merely laughed, as anyone might laugh at eccentricity.
‘You've done well enough,’ he said.
‘Stevenson's, I mean.’
She looked puzzled.
‘What d'you mean?’
Her sharp tone startled him.
‘Your account, Mrs. Stevenson.
That's what I mean.
Your funds.
Never better.’
He spoke as if to placate her.
Now it was she who looked astonished.
‘You have no idea what it is all about?’ she asked.
He shook his head.
‘You really don't know why we've done it?’
‘I assumed…’ he faltered.
‘That it was an attack of prosperity, plain and simple?’
He laughed.
‘Nothing to do with you is ‘plain and simple,’ ma'am.’
She did not laugh.
‘Then I must tell you, Mr. Chambers.
In 1836 Sir Charles Knightley, one of the richest men in England, had to ride twenty miles to break open his daughter's money box and borrow a few sovereigns before he could…’
‘Yes, yes!’
Chambers was impatient.
It was a well-known story among City men and was often told as an example of what used to happen in the bad old days of ten years ago — and what, by implication, could never happen now.
‘Then I tell you, Mr. Chambers, I tell you most particularly, the money crisis of 1836 is going to seem like a high feast when people look back on 1845 — and ‘46, and ‘47…and more for aught I know.’
He pretended to believe her.
He pretended to take her analysis seriously.
But he turned the conversation to the actual sum they had amassed.
It was far too much for their daily operations, he thought.
Why didn't they put it into something solid and endurable?
Property, for instance?
No doubt he thought the suggestion would please her.
She persisted in saying that the wondrous new banking system was about to collapse and that only those with gold in the hand were going to survive.
She could see him growing quite testy beneath that polished urbanity of his.
But she kept her best argument to last — until he was driven to assure her that ‘we people in the City have all these matters perfectly under control now, you know.’
‘Then consider these facts, Mr. Chambers,’ she warned.
‘There are now over twelve hundred would-be companies looking for capital.
And the total they seek is now around five hundred and sixty million pounds — of which they must  deposit ten percent by the thirtieth of this month.
Fifty-nine million pounds!’ she stressed.
‘Where on earth will they find it?’
Even to name the sum brought a sinking feeling to her stomach.
She knew only too well where they'd find some of it.
‘How can you be certain of these figures?’
Chambers asked.
‘You'd have to comb through a year's issues of about thirty different railway magazines to be —’
‘Or keep a running total in your mind,’ she said.
‘All year.’
He laughed in agreement, thinking she was speaking in irony; then he realized she was not.
‘You have done that?’ he asked.
She stood up, smiling acidly, and bade him good day.
Early in November the Bank of England moved again, another half per cent.
But confidence had gone.
Government securities, which had started the year at 67 premium, were now down to 19.
The trust fund Chambers administered for her and the children was now worth less than half the thousands that had gone into it.
‘I doubled the value of what you gave me,’ Nora told John.
‘He halved what you gave him.’
He looked at her with hunted eyes.
‘You are pitiless,’ he said.
She threw her arms around him and buried her head on his huge chest, loving the solidity there.
‘I'm sorry’ she repeated, several times.
‘I'm not really pitiless.
You've no idea how many times I've willed myself not to say that — and won.’
He laughed.
‘Tighter!’ she said, wriggling deeper into his embrace.
He obeyed.
‘We're bound to be on edge,’ he said, speaking into her hair.
‘I live through each day in a silent terror.’
Her hair tickled his nose as she nodded.
‘We must try not to be short with each other.’
She remained silent, content to hold him and be held.
‘Aren't you terrified?’
‘Not yet,’ she had to admit.
‘There's still one more action we have to take.
We have to move all that money away from Chambers, back to all those little provincial banks.
And then we have to start the biggest hudsoning of all.
That's when I'll be terrified — when there's nothing more we can do but wait.’
‘When?
When should we begin, d'you think?’
She broke free then, biting her lip.
‘Y don't know,’ she admitted.
‘That's what worries me.
I don't want to start haunting Chambers’ doorstep, yet I want to be absolutely sure that the moment we pick is the right one.’
In the event, Chambers saved them the trouble of deciding.
He came to them.
It was their habit to take lunch several times a week at Dolly's Chop House, by St. Paul's Churchyard, one of the few places in the financial district that would allow a woman in.
On this particular day, the seventeenth of November, they had barely started their lunch when Chambers, who rarely ate there, came in, saw them, and made straight for their end of the table.
‘Have you seen this?’ he asked, putting a copy of The Times before them.
He grinned.
They had, of course.
The article on the Railway Bubble by Spackman was the talk of the City that day.
‘Join us,’ John said, pointing to the empty seat next to Nora
Chambers accepted with as little formality as he had shown on coming in.
‘It's terrible,’ he said, quite cheerfully.
The main feature of Spackman's article was a set of tables showing railways completed, in course of construction, and projected.
There were 47 lines completed, 118 in construction, and 1,263 seeking capital — seeking, to be precise, £566,019,006.
‘Can we,’ thundered the leading article, ‘add one-tenth of this vast remainder?
We cannot, without the most ruinous, universal, and desperate confusion.’
‘It's as bad as can be,’ Chambers said.
He rubbed his hands and ordered half a dozen mutton chops.
‘When I tell you,’ Nora chided, ‘you don't believe me.
It seems you prefer your news three weeks cold.’
He smiled and lowered his head, good-naturedly accepting her rebuke.
‘You're cheerful company anyway,’ John said.
‘Have you acquired some shares in Disaster?’
‘Any man who is banker to the great John Stevenson has a right to be happy at this hour,’ he said.
Nora felt the pressure of John's foot on hers.
She could sense his delight.
But something in the way Chambers kept glancing sidelong at her kept her on her guard.
‘You're going to need all that confidence in the next few months, Mr. Chambers,’ she warned.
‘They will be extraordinary times and we will take extraordinary measures to deal with them.’
His hands waved permissive circles before him, like a blessing upon the chops.
‘Dear lady, you have carte blanche!
You especially.’
He turned to John as if introducing Nora.
‘Do you know what treasure is here?’
Her wariness turned to deepest mistrust.
He had never spoken like this.
She told herself to clear all thought of their bankruptcy from her mind, to think like the rich he still believed them to be.
That was the thought in Chambers' mind: These people are rich.
Now where did it lead him?
‘I owe you an apology,’ Chambers was saying to her.
Yes — to her!
‘I think it was last March when you first pointed out that a madness in railway dealings was growing.’
Nora nodded, still watching every move.
‘March, eh?
And it was not until June that The Times began to ruffle its feathers and not until today that we get this.’
He had the paper out again and he tapped Spackman's tables with his spoon.
‘Well, when it's five hundred million, it's obvious to any fool, even’— he grinned wryly —‘to a City banker.
But you saw the danger when the figure was one-tenth of that.
And I'll tell you what I find even more impressive: The figures you gave me accord exactly with Spackman's.
And you told me you've kept a running total in your head all the year.
Is that really so?’
She nodded, watching him all the while with an unblinking gaze.
He still found it difficult to believe.
‘But why?’
How do you tell a child why two and two make four?
‘It never occurred to me not to,’ she said.
‘I do it as a matter of course.
All the time.’
Chambers merely stared.
Nora, not knowing whether he  had taken it in or not, tried another approach.
‘This man’— she took John's arm —‘could shut his eyes and walk yard by yard in his mind-down any line he's built.
He could tell you the geology underfoot — every hedge every feature, every boundary.
He could date each milepost.
Am I right?’
‘Near enough,’ John admitted diffidently.
‘Give or take.’
Nora returned to Chambers.
‘Well, if you wander like that behind here’— she ran a finger over her brow —‘you'd find it ordered just like that with figures.
I can't explain it better than that.’
Chambers breathed in and out; at last his eyes left Nora's and he turned to John.
‘Have you any notion,’ he said ponderously, ‘of the value of a mind that works like that?’
‘I hope so,’ John said uncomfortably.
‘I doubt it.
It's incalculable.
You realize that there are probably only half a dozen big firms in this country who could actually laugh at a money panic now.
Five of them are in that happy position by chance; one, just one, is there by deliberate design, carefully phased and executed over months.
And why?’
He pointed toward Nora.
‘Because it never occurred to one person not to keep that running total.’
‘Oh, come, Mr. Chambers,’ she said, embarrassed.
He turned full face to her.
‘I don't believe even you know what I'm really talking about.’
She became deliberately vapid and girlish.
‘Indeed?
Do tell me.’
She wanted him to be mocked into silence or at least into changing the subject.
The conversation was not taking the line she wanted.
‘I have never been more serious,’ he said.
‘Y freely confess I have often dismissed your opinions as mere intuition.
But it was I who was blind.
Believe me, I have thought a lot about this since your last visit.
I think that you, without fully realizing it, have a way of ordering or arranging that internal landscape of figures that amounts almost to — clairvoyance.’
Nora burst into dismissive laughter; she was sure now that Chambers was up to something very subtle.
‘I don't mean anything mystical, at all,’ he went on stolidly.
‘If you stand in a real landscape and pick out with your eyes a path ahead, then walk the path and find it was a good route to have chosen, why, that is nothing mystical.
I think you do that, too, in this mathematical landscape.
I'll go further: I think it doesn't even occur to you not to do it!’
Nora stared at him, hoping her confusion did not show.
It was true!
Every word he spoke was true; but she fought with all her will against the impulse to agree to his face.
What was his game?
John had no such inhibitions.
‘Eay!’ he said.
‘I'd never thought of it that openly.
But there's aught in what Chambers says, love.’
It was as if Chambers bad been waiting for this admission.
‘And how often do you use it?’ he asked, turning to John.
‘This extraordinary faculty?
One of the biggest assets any business could have?
Yet when did you last use this talent?’
Now she was certain he was out to do mischief.
Never once in all the years they had known each other had Chambers gone further than a grudging admission that she had a certain flair for bookkeeping.
Yet now he was praising her to the skies.
It did not fit — not even in these extraordinary times, when the unexpected performed twice daily.
She could not guess why or how, but she knew that in some way he was out to drive a wedge between herself and John.
She decided then that the conversation had gone Chambers' way long enough.
She saw, too, that they would never get a better moment to start the final, grand hudson.
Chambers had freely walked into the trap, now she would spring it.
Taking his last rhetorical question to John —‘When did you last use this talent?’— she answered: ‘This very morning, Mr. Chambers.
We are not so silent at home as this panegyric of yours has forced us to be here.’
He grinned an apology and listened.
‘My ‘faculty,’ such as it is, inclines me to advise that we withdraw all our funds from the centre and spread them in their due proportion among the banks nearest to each contract.’
The silence that followed became almost unendurable.
This was the keystone-moment in the strategy they had followed all that summer and autumn-if it failed, the entire structure would fall.
Chambers swallowed a morsel of chop he had forgotten to chew.
It made his eyes water.
‘Leave nothing here?’ he said.
‘Nothing with me?’
‘Five years of goodwill,’ Nora reminded him, supremely gracious.
‘I don't pretend,’ John broke in, ‘to understand all of  Mrs. Stevenson's reasoning — not all the time.
But, by Jupiter, I understand her here!
If there is to be a money famine.’
‘And if there isn't?’
Chambers was clutching at straws.
‘We'll know that by the new year,’ John said.
‘And come back to you, filled with gold and gratitude,’ she promised.
Chambers shrugged.
‘We'd still want you to discount our bills over that time,’ John warned, as if it were a mere afterthought.
Chambers shot him a look of astonishment, then turned to include Nora
Her face and eyes still smiled but there was a new sharpness in her voice as she said: ‘Who else could we ask so much of?
Who else could we trust?
Who else would trust us?’
Her hand presented him to himself.
‘Unless what you were saying earlier was just so much…’
She left the idea in the air.
‘We shall see,’ he said miserably.
Inwardly she exulted, for she knew they had won.
So far at least.
Chapter 21
Chambers had seen the money — had seen how rich they were.
Now several dozen provincial and oversea banks saw it, too.
And, such is trust, they went on seeing it after it had gone, for by now they were used to the constant and bewildering ebb and flow of Stevenson money.
Each banker took it to be part of some Brand strategy of which he was privileged to see, and be entrusted with, but a small portion.
They did not notice that there was now more ebb than flow.
And they did not know that the portion which ebbed, never to flow again, made its way to an account in Hertford town, where Sir George Beador also banked.
As fast as it came in, it went out to clear his debt.
There was a time, at the end of summer, a hopeful time, when it looked as if a lot of would-be railway companies would simply vanish, like the mushrooms they were.
Their directors, despairing of raising any money from the cooks and porters and pet dogs who made up the bulk of their subscribers, quietly ceased to badger.
But then the lawyers got wind of it — the vultures of the money system.
They knew that in every list of a hundred subscribers there were one or two with real money, and on them they descended in their raucous, black-gowned hordes.
A list worth (in theory) fifty thousand could be bought for five hundred.
Then for the mere trifling expense of printing a few worthless shares in a company that had no hope of building a line, the owner of the list could issue writs and summonses enforcing payment on the hapless subscribers.
Quiet country parsons, who had applied for twenty shares in the hope of being allotted one, now had to buy all twenty, at fifty pounds apiece, or go to debtor's jail — all for a railway that the judge, barrister, company, and jailer knew would never exist.
Many thousands of decent people of all classes were made bankrupt in that way.
All the resources of the great firm of Stevenson's now were squandered to keep John and Nora from joining them.
The system was a scandal.
Everyone knew it was a scandal.
Everyone said it was a scandal.
The members of Parliament said it was a scandal; they were still debating it long after the last vulture took his last victim.
Then it was easy to decide to do nothing.
Most of the members were lawyers themselves.
‘They're as much use as the bishop who could fart Lilliburlero through a keyhole,’ John said in disgust.
On the last working day in November, Stevenson's ran out of money.
The firm still had tens of thousands lodged in provincial banks, but every penny was needed to pay out wages between then and the next large foreseeable piece of income.
If they dipped into that, they were knowingly making themselves insolvent.
They had dreaded reaching this moment.
Yet now it had come, now there was no possible turning back, and no alternative path to take, they found it oddly liberating.
So that when John suggested they should spend Sunday ‘watching  the fun’ down at the Railway Office, it did not seem at all out of key.
In any case, as Nora said, it's exactly what they would be doing if they were still in funds; and now, more than ever, they had to keep up their pretence.
‘We'll go up on the roof,’ John said.
‘I'll put an awning up there in case it rains, and we can have a coke brazier to roast some chestnuts and heat the chocolate.
Sarah can come, too.
It'll be a pleasant outing for us all.’
It was an easy promise to make, since Stevenson's had the contract to extend the New Treasury Building, which housed the chaotic Railway Office, which, in turn, was a division of the Board of Trade.
The last day of November 1845 was set by the Board of Trade as the day on which all new railway plans had to be lodged if they were to stand any hope of a parliamentary hearing.
At the time of the announcement it had occurred to no one that the thirtieth was a Sunday; then, rather than admit the error, the Board had to announce further that it would be open for the reception of plans until noon, sabbath or no sabbath.
This was to be the ‘fun’ that John had promised.
The last fortnight in November was more hectic in railway business than all the other weeks of that mad year put together.
Go into the remotest tavern and you would find it filled with tired and perspiring committee men almost buried in survey and legal papers.
Go to a printer with some ordinary business and he would refuse you, for he was working double tides — and quadruple rates — on railway maps and prospectuses.
As the end of the month drew near, the roads and rails leading into London provided scenes that lingered for years in local memory.
Coaches and four and post chaises went thundering by in a lather of horses, their occupants cheering and whooping as each milestone was passed.
Dozens of ‘specials’ were chartered on the railways.
One, on the Great Western, broke down at Maidenhead, coaxed beyond its limit.
The party behind, in another special, paid their engineer well enough to drive into the rear coach and smash it — they being rivals with the stranded party to serve the same area with a  new railway.
Some railways refused to carry parties whose projects clashed with their own.
One group of speculators thus thwarted overcome the ban by staging an elaborate funeral, complete with coffin (in which lay all the requisite plans and papers) and mourners.
The deceased's name was given as Stafford Lawry I.A. (an anagram of Stafford Railway); the I.A., they say, stood for in aeternum — the whole thus implying ‘Stafford Railway forever!’
On any day there was a great advantage in arriving at the Board of Trade early, for people were called up in the order in which they handed in their cards.
Often the clerks would accept no more cards after midday, and even then those whose cards were taken in close to that hour were not called up until near midnight.
The agents complained fiercely at having to stand twelve hours on Whitehall's pavements in pouring November rain, clutching maps and papers, waiting to be called; but there was no other way to get through the work.
One special, coming up very early on the Great Western, with a clear line all the way, made over eighty miles an hour — which even the engineer said was impossible.
When the final Sunday dawned, John, Nora, and Sarah went to the early service at St. Martin's Church in Trafalgar Square and walked down Whitehall to the site, arriving just after eleven.
It was a clear day, cloudless and cold, with the overnight rain still glistening on the cobbles.
The wintry sun, pale yellow and barely warm, hung above the new towers at Westminster, still with their fuzzy outline of scaffolding and looking more like giant columnar trees than a work of man.
At the corner of the Privy Garden some gas engineers were returning a repaired main to service, flaring the gas to make sure no air had entered it during the work.
The brilliance of the flame had collected a large crowd of urchins, dancing in the warmth; behind them the cabmen stamped their feet and held forth their hands to the glow.
Each passing minute brought one, two, or even more cabs and post chaises clattering down the street to great cheers and cries of ‘In time!
In time!’ from the crowd.
And even if the drivers had never visited London, they would have no excuse for mistaking the building; the throng around it-was already twenty or thirty deep, spilling far over the pavement and into the street.
John took his party in by a back door, using the yard between the Foreign Office and the new building.
‘There'll be murder here before the day is out,’ the doorman said cheerfully as he let them in.
He looked so extraordinarily like Tom Cornelius that Nora glanced at once at Sarah to see how she responded.
But she appeared not to notice the likeness at all.
From the roof they had a splendid view, not only of the proceedings below but also over the houses in King Street and Parliament Street, which forked at the end of Whitehall and led into Parliament Square.
They could see the Abbey and the new Parliament, where every finial and crocket on every pointed spire showed sharply in the brilliant noonday sun.
And beyond was the Thames, curving away at Battersea and Vauxhall-a thin miasma rose from its putrid, oily surface, and the smell of drainage — the smell into which all London smells sooner or later merged — hung over all.
The strongest smell on the roof, though, was of the coke that sang as it burned in the brazier.
A coach and four came hell-for-leather up King Street and almost collided with a chaise coming down Whitehall.
Men poured from both and raced through the cheering crowd, up the steps, to hammer at the door.
When it was not immediately opened, one of them began to shout ‘Too late!
I said it!’ and set about his colleagues with his fists.
Only the doorman's assurance that they were within time reconciled them.
In the final quarter of an hour more than forty parties drew up in this same agitation; and the closer they were to the final minute, the wilder their excitement to give in their cards.
‘I don't know about murder,’ Sarah said, remembering the doorkeeper's words.
‘There'll surely be heart failure.’
‘How many of those gentlemen will be handing out works to us next year?’
John wondered aloud.
He looked down at their faces — those he could discern in that sea of tall hats and paper, half-lost among the scaffolding: common faces, glowing with common avarice, indulging the common pleasure of gloating at the latecomers' despair.
‘Here's some gentlemen who won't,’ Nora said, pointing at a cab coming down Whitehall like a runaway.
But by a kindly error of the doorman's watch they were just in time.
The four gentlemen actually danced a ring-a-rosy when they regained the pavement.
They scattered for  safety as a coach pulled up; it had begun its final tumultuous dash from Trafalgar Square just as they had hammered at the door.
Now the coach party hammered there, too; three of them carried a titanic roll of paper, like a stage battering ram.
When the doorkeeper said ‘Too late!’ a universal cheer went up, from all except the coach party.
Now the fun would begin.
The leader of the latecomers began a furious argument through the crack in the door, which was now held on its night chain.
Odd words carried up clearly to the roof.
‘Great Missenden time, sir!
Great Missenden time!’ the man bellowed at the doorkeeper and pointed to his watch.
It was too good for the Cockney punsters in the crowd to ignore.
‘Great Missin 'em time!’ one of them shouted.
And there was a ripple of laughter that grew to a delighted roar as the words Great Missin 'em time passed from mouth to mouth.
Then for an hour, of course, every bemused latecomer — and there were dozens — was greeted with the same ironical cries and laughter.
Many of the latecomers, especially as the afternoon wore on, were furious to find the doors locked, not having heard of the noon closure and so thinking they had all day.
Whenever the doorkeeper opened up to let in an applicant who had left his card in time a great throng would press forward, hurling their plans through the door like assegais.
But always some clerk would gather them up and shower them back from an upper window.
It was not long before someone threw a lump of broken paving through a window; a dozen sets of plans followed it in short order.
John laughed grimly.
‘Observe,’ he said, ‘how the foremost nation in all the world determines the future shape and course of its railroad system!
What a model of logic and order!’
‘Oh, yes, dear,’ Nora said.
‘Now tell us how marvellously the French arrange these things.’
He pointed down.
‘You can't defend that.’
‘Why ever not?’
‘Suppose among those late plans — which no one will even look at now — suppose there are schemes so much superior to those already submitted that they would save hundreds of thousands in running costs each year?’
‘I don't care if they are all like that,’ Nora said.
‘I  wouldn't trust them to people who've had a year to get ready and still manage to come two hours late.
In fact, I'd reject every plan handed in today — on the grounds that we don't want railways operated by skin-of-the-teeth men.’
John shook his head and yawned.
‘Folly,’ he said.
‘If they break any more windows, I think you'd better go.
Does anyone want the last hot chestnut?’
Sarah was still watching the latecomers.
She was the only one to show any sadness on their behalf.
‘What happens to them now?’ she asked.
‘Most of them will be ruined,’ Nora said.
‘And their sub scribers will lose all their deposits.
That's the folly.’
For brief moments that day she could almost believe she was talking about third parties.
Chapter 22
By the middle of December they had exhausted all their cash — whether it was needed for wages or not.
True, with a firm the size of Stevenson's, working on up to fifty contracts for a dozen or so companies, there could never be so dead a reckoning that the final moment could be named with certainty.
All Nora could say was that funds in all the banks were exhausted and their known outgoings over the next four weeks exceeded their best estimate of income three-fold.
From that moment on they were trading on nothing more substantial than every banker's memory of their ‘soundness.’
Even Sarah's money had gone.
They kept it intact to the last but both of them knew, without any discussion, that to keep themselves afloat they'd jump on any passing raft.
On the credit side (if that was the word for it), they had discharged the last of the luckless Beador's debts.
‘He wept,’ John reported back to Nora ‘He could hardly sign the final draft.’
‘He'll do more than weep before we see this out,’ Nora promised.
How she wished they could turn him out at once.
The moment it was free of debt they dissolved the partnership and replaced it by the limited-liability company she had suggested in the first place.
For the whole of the following week they waited daily for the soft, insistent question or the outraged cry that would begin to crack their flimsy structure.
None came.
‘Too soon, yet,’ Nora warned.
She thought it would be best then if John found some sudden reason for going to France — or to a small line they were doing in Belgium.
‘They can't arrest me,’ she said.
‘You're the one that's in danger.
And I've no power of attorney — so any banker can take that as a good and valid reason for waiting until you return.’
Something about this suggestion made him acutely uncomfortable.
‘It won't do,’ he said.
‘If we were in funds, I'd never leave so soon to Christmas unless there was a disaster somewhere.
No!’ he rallied.
‘We're safe enough this side Christmas.
I'll leave for France on Boxing Day.’
She felt he had some other reason for refusing but ho would not admit to it.
Anyway, he was right.
They were almost certainly safe now until after the holiday.
By the third week in December, when Chambers bad honoured the fourth weekly wages draft not covered by funds, they both admitted, with some mutual bravado, that they had now grown quite used to skating without ice.
Nora said she could sometimes forget their predicament for an hour on end.
They decided to go north to Thorpe Old Manor and spend Christmas as if they had as few cares as they now had pence.
Chapter 23
Christmas that year was dry and cold.
There was a slight hollow in the field beyond the old fortifications to the east of Thorpe Manor where water sometimes collected.
This year it froze right through and they all spent the afternoon of Christmas Eve sliding on it.
The strip of ice was not broad enough to skate on but you could run over the crackling, frosty grass and leap onto it and slide the best part of thirty yards.
John, with his weight, could get up momentum (and courage) enough to go hurtling and somersaulting off the end; but everyone else came to a halt before the end, despite desperate jerks, which added no more than inches to the length of their slide.
Sarah would not take a flying run, but with John and Nora running and holding her at each side, just catching the fringes of the grass, she had her stately share, too.
Mrs. Jordan came down in midafternoon with a basket full of hot spiced rolls and honey, all wrapped in white linen; behind her came Mrs. Jarrett with cups and two cans of steaming chocolate.
And of course John and the two oldest children wouldn't let them go without taking their turn at the slide.
Todd and Woolley, two of the girls, came out to watch, and John beckoned them down.
‘And the others!’ he called.
Nora and Mrs. Jarrett protested but he would have none of it: Everyone must come.
And one by one, as they arrived, he organized competitions and prizes: for girls with names beginning with C, and for all cooks, or all housekeepers, and all stablehands under 16 years, and so on— prizes that each was bound to win, being unique to the class.
The lad's prize was a silver shilling, the maids got a shilling and a kiss, and Mrs. Jarrett — well, for one terrified minute she thought she was due a kiss, too, but instead she had a stately one-round waltz on the meadow with the master, while everyone else laughed 206  or cheered or sang their own idea of a waltz tune.
Cox, the cold automaton, got a waltz and, as it ended, stole a kiss, and then ran off giggling up the hill, back to the nursery.
At last, while the shadow of the ramparts reached quickly over the grass, they gathered up the debris of their afternoon and skipped or ran or walked or grumbled up the slopes to home.
‘What a pleasant way to give out Christmas boxes,’ Sarah said.
Sarah had previously suggested that they should try the effect of Queen Caroline's ‘Christmas trees’— young fir trees set in tubs and put upon the table or in a window seat and then decked with penny candles.
They spent the evening trying them in different places and ended with one in the hall and one in the window seat in the winter parlour.
John twisted soft iron wire around some thick dowelling, whittled to a taper, to make candleholders.
The trees looked very pretty when they finished.
Then they went upstairs and filled the children's stockings with apples and nuts, and sugar pigs with string tails made by Mrs. Jordan.
For Winifred there were some hair ribbons too, and a book of tales by Maria Edgeworth; for Young John, a halfdozen new brass buttons and a coloured alphabet book.
For Caspar there were crayons wrapped in a roll of drawing paper.
At six next morning they heard the treasure being discovered.
At a quarter past six Young John came in, bearing a candle and his alphabet book.
He poked his father's eyelids open.
‘Happy Christmas,’ John said to him in a voice like a death rattle.
Nora, without apparently waking or stirring, said, ‘Who lit your candle?’
‘Winny.’
‘That's naughty.
Happy Christmas.
And don't call her Winny.’
‘I can read,’ Young John said.
He put down the candle and began to turn the pages of the book.
‘I can read that.
And that.
And that…’
At the fifteenth, John, his eyes still shut, said, ‘What's that one then.’
‘That's the letter orange.
And that's the letter pudding.
And that's the letter queen.
And that's the letter…colours.’
John opened an eye quickly.
‘Rainbow.’
‘Yes, rainbow colours.’
Winifred, not to be excluded, began a processional reading from the door:
But his father caught hold of him by the arm.
‘I win whip you now,’ said he.
So Robert was whipped,.
in he cried so loud with the pain that the whole neighbourhood could hear him.
She read with bright-eyed relish.
‘There,’ said his father; ‘now go without supper.
See how liars are served!’
She closed the book and clutched it to her.
‘Aren't they glorious tales, mummy!’
The bed shook with John's silent laughter.
‘Happy Christmas, popsie,’ Nora said wearily.
‘And that's the second letter horse.
A different horse.
A stripey horse.
And that's what I can read.’
When the last mince pie had gone and the last slice of plum pudding had been washed down with the last drop of Madeira, the children were sent up to recapture the sleep of which Father Christmas' bounty had robbed them.
The postman came just as the grownups were moving into the parlour.
He rode back up the drive one shilling heavier and two letters lighter.
‘For you —’ John handed it to Nora.
‘From Arabella Thornton.’
‘I thought so,’ Nora said.
‘She never forgets Christmas.’
And she explained to Sarah how they and the Thorntons had been married in the same month in 1839 and had all four spent that Christmas together.
‘The GS&W;, Dublin, wants us to begin next week,’ John said, folding his letter.
‘Flynn can start without me.
I'll go over in the spring.’
Nora read rapidly through Arabella's, throwing out her own summaries: ‘They have a new cook…very good…
The road dug up again, drains very bad…
Bristol has plans for roads and great civic works which we should interest ourselves in…
Scandal at Bedminster parish — but we read all that in the papers…
Terrible water shortage all year, a real scandal, and new waterworks urgently needed…
Walter offered a tempting salary in the South Wales Union Railway but doesn't think it can ever become profitable…
Children all well — oh! and she's to have another next June…hopes  for another girl as three boys are quite enough for the moment.
They must be — five and a half, and four, and just turned three.’
‘Quite enough for the moment!’
Sarah echoed.
‘Hello!’
John, rooting around near the tree on the window seat, picked up a small package.
‘For me!’
‘I thought that was a good place for them.
Let Sarah have hers first.’
‘Oh!’
Sarah said, as if she had never suspected it.
Their present to her was a tortoiseshell brush and comb and mirror, each with her initials engraved on a silver cartouche let into the shell.
She was enchanted with the set and thanked them half a dozen times.
Then she shyly produced, from behind the sofa, something like a tray wrapped in paper.
When they opened it, they found an embroidered firescreen in a mahogany frame with the feet left loose and unglued.
‘If they'd been on, it would have spoiled the mystery,’ Sarah explained.
Nora looked closely at the pattern.
‘You really do the most beautiful needlework, Sarah.
But I say — isn't this the embroidery Rodie was doing?’
Sarah was delighted she had recognized it.
‘The same picture.
I saw her doing it and took a copy.’
‘But it's perfect!’
‘I don't suppose it is.
But I thought you could look at it here, by your fire, and think of Rodie at La Gracieuse, with hers.
You see.’
That pleased them even more.
Nora's present from John was a lovely, dainty little diamond brooch.
Its beauty awed her so that her thanks were quiet and almost reverent.
‘I'll wear it now,’ she said.
‘No one can object, surely.’
‘I should think not,’ Sarah agreed.
‘It's the very opposite of showy.
It's exquisite.
Now yours, John.’
‘Do you know what it is?’ he asked, taking out a pocket knife.
‘Don't cut it!’
Nora called.
‘Look, it pulls undone.
Your extravagance!’
He laughed.
‘Here's me, who condemns miles of rope, each year, most of it probably sound, and now I'm saving string!’
‘Open it!’
Sarah almost screamed.
It was a hunting watch — one of the new ones with a metal cover over the glass.
‘What a splendid idea,’ he said.
‘Why didn't anyone think of that before!’
‘Push that little thing that sticks out,’ Nora said.
The watch chimed three for the hour and then three for three-quarters.
‘That means it's between quarter to and four o'clock,’ she explained.
‘It'll do it again, as often as you want.’
He pressed and it chimed again.
He was about to put it in his pocket when Nora said, ‘Open the back.’
There he found the greatest novelty of all: a twenty-eight-day dial that showed the phases of the moon — at least, it had been the moon when Nora bought the watch but she had got a miniaturist to overpaint it with an enamel portrait of herself.
‘I shall take it out and kiss it hourly,’ John said.
‘And every time I condemn some rope.
And if folk ask me why, I shall just say, ‘Oh, that's my wife — she's a lunar-tick!’’
He and Sarah fell about laughing, especially when Nora said she thought it clever rather than funny.
Later, when they were in their bedroom, preparing for Evensong, John pulled out a long legal envelope from his travelling writing case and said: ‘Here is my real present to you.
I didn't think it appropriate in front of Sarah.’
She took it cautiously.
‘It won't bite,’ he said.
The enfacement read Power of Attorney: Stevenson to Nora Stevenson, 3 December 1845.
‘Won't bite!’ she said.
‘It could send me to jail.
I see now why you were so evasive when I said I hadn't power of attorney.’
She looked at the document again.
How happy it would have made her at any other time.
‘Here's a pig's pizzle,’ she said, using a favourite phrase of his.
‘What ever possessed you?
‘It was prepared in much happier times,’ he explained.
‘You know how lawyers can drag things out into the years.
I wanted to give you power to deal with…’
He could not go on.
She realized with shock that he was trying to fight back tears.
‘John!’ she said gently.
‘It doesn't matter now.’
‘…to deal with…your property.’
He choked on the words.
He fell to his knees in front of her and threw his arms about her waist.
‘Oh Nora, love!
What have I done to you!’
She held his head tight but it was an automatic response; she was too astonished to do anything else.
Suddenly she realized she had loved these last few months.
Not all of it, of course.
Seeing her properties go, and then signing away all their money — that had been terrible.
But everything else had been alive and splendid in a way it had not been for years.
She and John had been together again, as they had in their very first year.
The excitement had all come back.
Even this new threat of jail was part of it.
And precisely what distressed her about John's outburst was that it once more put that distance between them; it made them opposites sinner and sinned against, penitent and confessor, worm and angel.
She pulled his shirt away at the back of his neck and dropped the document down inside.
‘Never mind what you've done, love.
You're not getting me in jail with you — who'd arrange the escape?
No — you take this to France tomorrow.
Lose it for a while.’
She held him until his dignity returned and then she broke free.
To get the paper out he had to stand again.
‘You're better when you're tall,’ she told him.
He grinned.
‘You won't let me do an easy penance, then,’ he said.
‘Such rubbish!’
He put the document in his writing case, buried among other assorted papers.
‘Funny thing,’ he told her.
‘It was Chambers’ idea, really — giving you power of attorney.’
‘But he's always hated me having properties, independently.’
‘I said: funny thing.’
Chapter 24
Nora endured one day at Thorpe after John had left; then she decided that to be without him but surrounded by the children, the house, the land — by all they stood to lose and all that would make the loss hurt most — would be intolerable.
She would go hunting.
Better still, she would go to Maran Hill, where, squired by Sir George Beador, she would hunt with the Puckeridge under their master, Lord Wyatt.
Now they had less than nothing to lose she felt an ancient pugnacity stirring within her.
She had not felt it since her days of poverty, when she had faced the world alone; it was something different from the polished ruthlessness that money had brought; it was brighter-eyed, more truculent.
At the last moment she decided to take Sarah along, too.
It was a decision that almost completed their ruin.
An avenue of limes, dead straight and exactly half a statute mile in length, ran from the gates to the big house at Maran Hill.
On either side there was open parkland grazed by a herd of red deer — or, now that it was December and the males were apart, two herds.
Gideon's wood and Red wood, two large game coverts, blocked the view to the north of the park; they almost joined with Home wood, a coppice to the immediate north of the house.
But on the south side, looking down and across one of the loveliest valleys in the county, all the views were open.
There was no covert there larger than an acre or two and they had been placed as much for their scenic effect as for their game-preserving role.
None of their trees had been coppiced, so that knolls of tall beeches and huge, spreading oaks delayed  the eye as it swept over rolling pastures and ploughed fields.
The winter sun reached through the bare branches of the limes, making bars of startling light and shade that flickered in the carriage like a pyrotechnic display.
Sarah, who had leaned out of the window to see the house, sat down again, smiling and blinking at the water drawn into her eyes by the cold and the wind.
‘What a beautiful house!’ she said.
‘How would you like to live in such a place?’
Nora asked.
‘Oh, I'd prefer a town house.
There's the same amount of work and you have more interest for your time off.’
Nora laughed.
‘Silly Milly!
I meant as mistress, not as maidservant.’
‘Oh.’
Sarah looked out at the park, assessing it now with different eyes.
Nora watched her fondly.
‘You'll never get used to it, will you.
To being independent.’
‘Not to that degree.’
She pointed at the park to stress the word.
‘You could rent a place like this, on a maintaining lease, for less than two hundred pounds a year.’
‘Nora!
It's unthinkable.’
Every now and then Nora took such opportunities to remind Sarah of her fortune; she tried not to think of it as a kind of hudsoning.
Shallowness had saved Beador — that very shallowness which had enabled him to engage in such monstrous debts when he had nothing to meet them but his partner's money.
His character was as bankrupt as his purse; he had nothing with which to meet his debt of obligation to John and Nora.
And, as in business he knew no way of earning by his own labour, so in his relationship with them he knew no means of restoring himself by his own effort.
True, at the start he had been filled with remorse.
A broken man, pale and much given to outbursts of weeping, a man trembling on the threshold of self-murder.
But it was the remorse of youth — intense, yet so shallow its depth is plumbed at a glance.
By the time of Nora's visit he was his old, uncaring self again.
It made Nora (who, at 26, was actually his junior by a year) feel vastly older.
For it was she who told herself that nothing was to be gained at this moment by recrimination, that Sir George's  land and influence at Stockton were still big assets (though nowhere near worth the price at which they had been bought), and that a moping Sir George — a sackcloth-ashes flagellant — could be all it needed to bring the whole structure of confidence tumbling down.
Coldly she watched him pour out his careless charm, telling herself to be thankful he could sustain no deeper soul.
Inwardly she longed for some sparkling revenge.
‘Pretty woman, your friend,’ Sir George said, as they rode out into the cold.
‘It is her nature,’ Nora agreed.
‘Looks as if she might harbour quite a temper there.’
‘I wouldn't say that.
She certainly has a mind of her own.’
‘Hm.’
He said no more until after the hunt.
There had been a sharp frost overnight and the ground was frozen hard.
A poor day for scent.
They drew three coverts blank, found at a fourth, but lost the line in less than a mile.
‘They'd need one nostril up the fox's arse today,’ Nora heard a farmer say to the whipper-in, not knowing she was the other side of the hedge.
She was disappointed.
Beador had lent her a magnificent five-year-old mealy bay gelding, called Fontana.
She was certain that if only they could get away, he'd go superbly over this country.
Lord Wyatt, the Master, seemed to take every check and every lost line as a personal affront.
He was a choleric, self-important little man.
The cold wind and his own anger turned parts of his face as scarlet as the hunting ‘pink’ he wore.
At one point he grew so angry he failed to blow any kind of a note on his horn; he dashed it to the ground in a fury of petulance.
Nora took care to stay on the fringe of the field.
She did not think he noticed her.
When the hounds checked for the fourth time and could no. find again no matter how the huntsman held them round, Nora and Sir George withdrew.
‘I'm sorry,’ he said.
‘It's more what you'd expect of Durham country than Hertfordshire.’
‘I'm sorry not to have made better use of Fontana here,’ she answered.
He brightened.
‘Care for a bit of a swish?’ he asked.
She smiled then, for an idea had just occurred to her.
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘Take me through Wyatt's place at Panshanger.’
Beador tried to dissuade her but she insisted.
He led her at a good trot through the country lanes, by Bramfield and Tattle Hill, through Thieves Lane to Hertingfordbury.
There they turned west, into the grounds of Panshanger, which stretched up the Maran valley for about three miles.
It was park and pheasant covert and partridge manor all the way.
‘Ready?’ he called.
‘Hold tight.’
She increased her grip.
‘Now!’
The horses had been waiting for it.
They went at once from walk to gallop.
Nora felt the blood begin to race.
Beador knew the ground well for he led the way unhesitatingly through a maze of rides, some broad and straight, some narrow and zigzag.
A brilliant sun shone through the trees.
The frosted leaves crackled underhoof.
And from somewhere came drifting the lazy smell of woodsmoke.
All the fears and stresses of these last weeks deserted her on that gallop.
Here and there the way opened into glades, in one of which the woodmen had left the trunk of a once mighty beech.
To her astonishment Nora saw Beador's horse fly at it as if to clear it in one bound — which was impossible, surely.
Then she began to feel anxious, for she could sense that Fontana was getting set to make the same impossible leap.
In fact, she was on the point of reining in when she saw that Beador had come to rest on the top of the trunk; he stood there, poised like a trick rider in a circus.
Very well, she thought, suddenly daring.
On you go! and she touched Fontana forward.
She leaned over the crupper, ready for the jump.
At the last minute her courage failed.
The height, which had before seemed merely daunting, now looked terrifying.
No horse could do it, not even this great-muscled giant.
But they were both committed and to go forward.
For a moment she  thought it shared her doubts; there was a hint of a fumble as it doubled its hind legs under for the leap.
‘Haaaa!’ she yelled.
And she frightened it into the supreme effort that carried it up, soaring and stretching, reaching beyond any achievement it knew of, until, by a hairsbreadth, it gained the crest of the fallen trunk.
It did not need the tug of her rein to stop, every ounce of its ability had gone into that leap.
There was no momentum left to be checked.
Their coming to rest seemed both magic and effortless.
‘Heigh!’ she gave a cry of relief and delight and turned to Sir George.
He was as pale as the bleached wood on which they were both now perched.
‘Magnificent!’
He merely breathed the word, shaking his head in disbelief.
‘But mad!’
‘Why!’
She laughed.
‘You did it.’
‘Would you look behind us.’
She obeyed.
‘Oh!’ she said.
A ridge, perhaps the roots of an ancient wall, crossed the glade at an angle-to the trunk, running under it.
Sir George had made his impressive leap from the top of it; she had made hers from fully three feet lower.
‘That was stupid,’ she added, beginning to tremble at the thought of what she had done.
‘But what a hunter!’
She patted Fontana's mane.
‘No one 's going to believe me,’ he said, looking around.
‘Did anyone see?’
Automatically she looked around, too.
And there, over the tops of the trees that grew on falling ground to their north, there on the other side of the valley was one of the liveliest country houses she had ever seen.
As big as a cathedral it stood, in red Midland brick and warm Oxford limestone, with the noon sun full upon it.
The woodland, marching up the hill, vanished before it but reached an arm around to the west, fringing the road, and then ran behind it to the north, forming a long backdrop to the palm house and the terraces.
Only the clock tower on the stables showed from behind the trees.
With the sun shimmering on the glass of the palm house and the frost turning every shadow pale blue, the whole place looked like a gem, set perfectly upon the hillside.
‘Pretty place, really,’ Sir George said.
For her it was a citadel.
‘Hardly buzzing with activity,’ she said.
Very few chimneys were smoking.
‘Only Wyatt himself is here at the moment.
He can't stand his wife and children.
They're at the family's main estate over Maidenhead way.
To them this is just a huntin' lodge.
There's only a handful of servants here on board wages.’
‘Let's go closer then,’ she said.
They galloped down the rest of the long gentle ride to the river, across a wooden bridge, and then up the grassy slopes to the terraces below the house.
It was even lovelier at close quarters.
Winter sweet, viburnum, and witch hazel were all in flower; the air was so still that they could hear the distant gurgle of the river from down in the valley.
The smoke rose straight from the chimneys.
‘Home!’ she said suddenly.
The display of the Wyatts' wealth, so casually used (‘just a huntin' lodge’) was more than she could bear.
Beador seemed relieved to be going.
They went around the house by the gravel drive to the east.
The gravel was a mixture of hard flintstone and sand.
The two-mile ridge on which both Panshanger and Maran Hill stood was composed entirely of the same mixture, locally known as ‘hoggin.’
It makes an iron-hard road.
Today, bound by the frost, it was as good as tarmacadam.
They soon left the estate, crossed the highway, and entered the park around Maran Hill.
‘Now there's a happy couple,’ Sir George said, pointing to the gate lodge.
‘The Bagots.’
The Bagots were nowhere to be seen.
‘Yes,’ Sir George sighed.
‘I don't think there's a more contented little family anywhere.
They adore each other, and the children.
They never fight.
You never hear the children quarrel.
They're all the picture of health.
The house and garden's like a new pin.
Yet I doubt they have meat more than once a week — and I doubt he thinks about money from one year's end to the other.’
Nora kept an amused silence.
She remembered the laughter and the happy times they had enjoyed in her father's cottage, where ‘meat once a week’ would have been luxury indeed.
No doubt the Duke of Bridgewater's agent had thought them happy when he collected their rent each week.
But she knew  what a constant and life-deforming worry the money had been.
‘Yes,’ Sir George said, ‘You could base a book of sermons on the Bagots.’
‘It would probably sell very well, too,’ Nora said, unable to resist it.
‘We'll have one last gallop down to Lambs Dell and then up to home, what?’ he said, his pastoral vision of the Bagots already forgotten.
‘I think I could ride to Wales today,’ she answered.
But they soon found galloping impossible.
Fallen branches littered the rides and new growths of whippy little sapling twigs poked down at head-and-shoulder height to a horseman.
They left the woods and went around by the neighbouring fields —‘blind’ country where the ditches and drains were all concealed in coarse, overgrown grass.
They dared not canter there.
‘Refresh my memory, now,’ Nora said.
‘Which are the farms that belong to Maran Hill?’
They had ridden to the far end of the long gravel ridge.
The whole upper valley of the river Maran stretched away from them in a succession of rich pasture, coppice, and deer park.
There were a dozen fine estates between them and the distant skyline.
‘Since we now own it,’ Nora prompted, ‘we ought to know its extent.’
Sir George kept silent.
He pointed vaguely here and there, scowling, and then let his arm drop.
‘I can't follow that,’ Nora said.
He pretended to be busy adjusting his horse's bridle.
‘Show me again,’ she asked.
He spoke to the bridle.
‘There aren't any bloody farms.’
Quickly she thought back to the day that the deeds for Maran Hill had arrived.
Quite a pile of them.
They hadn't checked them all at the time, and then they had forgotten.
They hadn't checked the farms!
‘I suppose Lord Wyatt won them, too!’ she said, thinking it could not possibly be so.
But it was.
Four farms, nearly eight hundred acres — Wyatt had taken them in settlement of various wagers.
‘I won things off him, too,’ Sir George said defensively.
‘For instance?’
‘I won three of them back once.’
She stifled her fury.
There was no point in being angry with him — he was nothing, nothing but a fool.
‘Show them to me anyway,’ she said.
Sullenly he pointed them out.
They were good farms with plenty of water meadow along the river banks, all of it drowned in protection against the frosts.
Their loss — again to Lord Wyatt — was, at this point, worse than all that had gone before.
‘Wyatt is going to have to give them back,’ she said.
‘I don't know how, but I'm going to make him.’
‘You can't.
He won them honourably.’
‘Honour!’
Her scorn stung him at last.
‘You could hardly be expected to understand.
There's no honour in the gutters you came from.
But a wager is a matter of honour among gentlemen.’
She was so angry she dared not thrust herself to speak above a whisper.
‘You say that to me!
When we've honoured your debts?
Honoured!’
She-found her voice.
‘And you sneer at me about honour, sir?
You?
Lecture me?’
He could not look at her.
‘I swear to you that your honourable gambling partner is going to restore those farms to this estate.
Our estate.
And you will do nothing to hinder me.’
Still he was silent.
‘Do you hear?’
‘I hear you.’
‘And you give me your word you will do nothing to hinder me?’
‘I give you my word.’
He reined about and spurred his horse into a gallop.
‘I hope I may trust your honour even that far!’ she shouted after him.
But she had no idea how to make her threat come about.
Chapter 25
Next day the frost had gone.
A fitful northeast wind blew a dampness over the country, threatening rain that never quite fell.
‘There'll be scent enough today,’ she said as they set off again for the meet.
This time one of the grooms came, too.
Nora was once more on Fontana.
It was a huge field, more than eighty riders, all as certain as Nora that the scent would burn today.
Their excited babble and their laughter carried far — the cacophony that ruined many a good hunt.
Nora's spirits sank.
They drew a long covert upwind between Queen Hoo Hall and Bramfield.
Nora, seeing its western end thinly attended, went there at first.
But as they drew deeper into the coppice, moving farther east all the while, she began to fear they would leave her entirely behind.
Slowly, for she could still hear them less than half a mile away, she walked forward into the thick of it.
If Beador's rides had been bad, these were deplorable.
Elderberries, whitehorns, sycamores, and other volunteer saplings of every sort barred the way.
Soon she was quite alone, and wondering whether or not to go back and make her way around by the fields.
Then she heard a commotion in a thicket some way in front and to her left.
She urged Fontana carefully ahead.
Three loose hounds were in there; one, she was sure when she got a good look, was a bitch, Wrathful, who had impressed her that memorable day last February.
A rider, still out of sight around a bend, came toward her, crashing heavily through the regrowth As soon as he came to the turn, where the path was open to the sky, she saw it was the Master, Lord Watson Wyatt himself.
‘The buggers have found something,’ he said.
Nora was too astonished to reply.
He peered toward her.
‘Who in hell's name are you?’ he asked amiably, still unable to make her out in the thick shade of an ivy-infested oak.
‘Mrs. John Stevenson.
I hunted with you in February.’
She was damned if she'd call him Master, speaking like that.
‘One of Beador's.’
He was not the least embarrassed.
‘Yes.’
He looked away at the dense thicket where the three hounds were working.
‘Rioting after a badger,’ he said, drawing in breath to bellow a discord.
‘It's my belief there's an earth in there.
Wrathful wouldn't riot.’
‘Eh?’
He paused, uncertain now.
‘Unstopped, too.’
‘Devil!’ he said and dismounted so as to  approach the thicket more closely.
‘I was sure I knew every earth here.
I'm me own huntsman today.’
Wrathful had worked round the downhill side of the thicket until she lost the scent; now she had come back and was working around the uphill side.
Nora guessed that if there was a fox in there and if it broke, it would seek first to go downhill.
She pulled Fontana around and trotted quickly back the way she had come.
When she arrived at the edge of the covert, she made her way cautiously along its downhill fringes.
There was a rider standing ten yards out in the fallow.
‘You'll head him if he breaks here,’ she warned.
He looked at her scornfully.
‘They won't find in that!’ he said.
Then he looked her up and down appraisingly.
But just at that moment came Wrathful's opening challenge, quickly taken up by the other two hounds.
The rider spurred for the edge of the covert, immediately in front of Nora, arriving there only just before the fox broke.
There was a great deal of crashing behind.
The scornful rider gave the fox no chance to get well away.
As soon as it entered the fallow he began an excited scream of view halloa, halloa! and flapped his arms.
‘No!’
Nora shouted, unheard.
She could have shot him.
The fox turned at once and went back into the covert, about ten yards from the point where he broke.
All the activity around his earth, and the fact that there were a mere three hounds, had combined to make him think the open  country might be safer today; now they'd given him proof that it wasn't.
He'd go to earth and stay there till dark.
She almost went home then.
But it was such perfect weather that if they could not get a fox away, even the most incompetent hunt in England couldn't fail to make something of it.
She went back to the overgrown ride where she had left Lord Wyatt.
He was just remounting as she reined in.
He had obviously decided to be pleasant to her.
‘Gone back to earth,’ he said.
‘Sorry I swore, by the way.
I was sure you were my cousin.’
He grinned.
‘I suppose that makes it worse.’
‘If true,’ she said.
‘There's a young fool down there in pink, shrieking like a banshee and windmilling away.
That's what headed Charley back to earth.’
He nodded sourly.
‘That's my cousin, Meredith Wyatt.’
They trotted in file up the ride, still having to pull this way and that around saplings and brambles.
In a little while they came upon the rest of the pack at the upwind end of the covert.
Most of them, to judge by the paw marks, had gone straight up the ride, not working the covert on either side at all.
Of course they had drawn blank.
‘See that small bit of sticks there,’ the Master asked Nora ‘In the hollow, two fields away?’
‘Yes.’
‘I'm going to draw that next.
From the upwind side — I don't want to surprise the fox and have the hounds chop him.
As I'm short of a huntsman, might I ask you, Mrs. Stevenson, very kindly to go downwind and watch him away?’
He had the difficult task of taking the field around and beyond the covert and getting them to stand well back before he could attend to his hounds.
The gossiping and the cigar smoke carried strongly downwind to Nora, who had chosen a place to the south of the covert, where she could stand unseen in a gateway, her silhouette lost against a spreading oak at his back.
How often as a girl had she and her father and brothers deserted their looms and raced out to watch the hunt!
Many a time she had seen the hounds draw such a covert and heard them open and challenge as the fox broke.
And then the music as they followed in full cry!
And, afterward, the  sadness as the pack and the field vanished over the hill, leaving their world silent and dreary once more.
That was the excitement of today: She could follow that music wherever it led.
Lord Wyatt gave one crack of his whip as a signal to his pack to begin drawing the covert.
The fox needed nothing more to start him from his kennel.
He slipped from the edge nearest Nora as soon as the hounds entered at the farther side.
Only she could see him, a gash of red streaking over the pasture.
She let him pass her, fifty yards to the east; the temptation to shout was wrong but she waited until he was at the hedge.
Then ‘View halloa! halloa!’ she screamed, making sure that the pack had started to chase before she spurred Fontana toward the point in the hedge where Charley had threaded through.
But then the fox's behaviour went somehow wrong.
He ran a great circle almost passing through the covert where they'd started him.
‘A ringer!’ people shouted.
Then he ran a short foil along part of his original track and broke abruptly northward, almost dead straight.
Through Perrywood he led them, and Watkin's Hall, between Datchworth and Broom Hall, over the Stevenage road, through the park at Frogmore Hall and on up the valley of the Beane.
All the while a dark suspicion was growing in Nora's mind: a ringer that broke and ran dead straight for so many miles.
It was not right.
It was not Charley Fox, not in such country as this.
On top of that there was the slovenly, almost token, way they had drawn the first covert.
And when they had accidentally found, the Master had sworn, and his cousin Meredith had deliberately headed the fox back to earth.
Everything about this chase was wrong.
At Frogmore Hall she turned back.
Beador was nowhere to be seen, but she did not care.
She needed no squire for the kind of hunting she now had to do.
A furlong short of the small covert where the fox had started she slipped from Fontana's back.
Quietly she went forward to the edge of the trees.
There was a scuffle, and then a woman's giggle, among the undergrowth toward the centre of the small coppice.
Nora tied Fontana to a thorn and walked briskly toward the sound.
The man and the girl were guiltily rearranging their clothing when she reached them.
Their movement dislodged a stone beer jar that rolled into a small depression and began glug-glugging its contents into the soil.
The man leaned quickly forward, on hands and knees, to right it.
Nora put her foot on the jar.
‘Your name?’ she demanded.
He looked at the beer, gurgling away.
He tried to tug it but had no leverage.
She stood more firmly on the jar.
The girl was hiding her face, pushing her hands up into her hair.
‘Bryant,’ he said.
‘Charles Bryant.’
‘And you?’
The girl turned completely away from her.
The movement exposed the very thing she had come expecting to find: a large jute bag.
The couple had been lying on it.
The girl's move revealed something else — a wedding ring upon her finger.
It was that, not so much her face, she had been trying to conceal.
‘You!’
Nora repeated.
‘Cory,’ the girl mumbled.
Swiftly Nora took her foot off the jar and, while Bryant was busy retrieving what was left of his beer, she darted forward and whisked the bag from under the girl.
‘Now,’ she said, ‘I want the truth of this matter.
Or Lord Wyatt and Mr. Cory shall be told.’
The bag reeked of fox.
Moments later she was cantering triumphantly back toward High Wood, near the head of the Beane Valley.
For High Wood was the true home of their ringer fox — he had no more business in the small covert where they had found him than the man in the moon.
That fox was a bagman!
And she had the bag concealed beneath a fold of her riding habit.
Honour! she thought exultantly.
Lord Wyatt — a man of honour!
To introduce a bagman was one of the worst crimes in hunting's social calendar.
Rather be caught cheating at cards or forging a friend's signature.
Rather go into seven years' voluntary exile!
She rejoined the field on the slope below High Wood.
The bagman-fox, now on home ground, had delayed them by running up a long culvert.
They had smoked him out and now he had run for home in High Wood.
Once again Nora was among the leaders.
Sir George was still nowhere to be seen.
Cousin Meredith Wyatt was there, though — and looking at her rather impertinently, she thought.
Lord Wyatt did not want the fox to slip out unseen, so he first made sure every side of the wood was watched.
He turned to the remnant of his field.
‘First ten or dozen,’ he said.
‘go around and hold up the northern half of this wood.
We'll force him down to Dane End or Watton.’
Those he had asked, Nora among them, set off at once to take up conspicuous stations around the northern fringes of the wood.
Nora took the lead, determined to go right around so that she would be nearest to the line if Charley broke in the directions the Master had hoped.
She heard the numbers falling off and the cries of ‘Try over-r-r-rl’ and ‘Edawick!’as they took up station, one by one.
Then she became aware that the horseman behind was following her very closely indeed.
If she fell at a fence he could not avoid trampling her.
She snatched a quick glance backward and saw that it was Meredith Wyatt, grinning like a death's-head.
‘Hold back!’ she shouted at him.
From inside the wood she heard the cries of ‘Leu-try, leutry there!’ and ‘Try over, yoi try!’
They were working across very quickly; unless she got around soon the fox might break unseen.
Over the next fence she went, with young Wyatt right at her heels.
He was laughing!
‘Stop!’ she called, -not stopping herself.
‘You stop here!’
But on he thundered, not a horse's length behind.
When she took the last fence it brought her right around the wood, opposite the point where the Master had asked them to fan out.
She could hear he was somewhere dose now, in the wood nearby.
Again Meredith Wyatt was almost on to her over the fence.
She turned hard upon him, doubly enraged — at his folly and at his interference with the joy of the hunt.
No doubt he thought himself a national marvel.
‘Damn you to hell!’ she said, trembling with her anger.
‘Go back!’
‘Where?’ he asked, all innocence, walking his horse slowly toward her.
‘To your riding nursery.
If I fell, you'd trample me to a powder.’
‘Grind.’
He spoke the word like a correction; he was  alongside her now, still grinning.
‘If you fell, I'd grind you all right.’
She lashed out suddenly with her crop, intending to hit him in the face.
But some last-minute impulse lowered her aim so that the blow caught him, hard but not painfully, on his chest.
He was startled, though he did not flinch.
‘Quite a governess,’ he said, lingering on the word as if it were especially endowed.
‘Do you relish…whipping?’
She looked angrily past him, into the wood; the cry for the Master was already in her throat.
But there was the Master, not thirty yards away.
He urged his horse into a walk, toward them, all the more ominous for its slowness.
Meredith Wyatt followed her gaze.
The smile vanished.
He pulled his horse back, doubling and trebling the distance between it and Fontana.
He might as well not have bothered.
‘Meredith!’ the Master called.
‘Leave the field at once!’
Meredith looked quickly around; there was no one else in view.
‘No, Watson.
You can go and shit cinders.’
The Master turned away in contempt and put his horn to his lips.
‘What are you doing?’
Meredith asked quickly.
‘Going to lift the hounds.
Going to abandon this chase, Going to call the field together.
Going to expel you publicly.’
‘You wouldn't dare!’
Meredith spoke as if he had some power over his cousin.
The other held the horn an inch from his lips.
‘You try, Meredith,’ he said.
‘Let me touch one note and you'll see what I dare.’
Meredith did not wait.
He turned his horse at once and ambled off without a word.
‘You'll not hunt with the Puckeridge again until Mrs. Stevenson has accepted a written apology from you,’ the Master called after him.
Meredith looked back and blew a rasp at them.
‘He'll write that letter.
Promise you.
Matter of honour,’ Lord Wyatt said.
‘Honour of the family.’
Then he saw what Nora was doing.
She was prying open the weave of the bag so that she could work the handle of her riding crop into it.
‘What the bloody hell is that?’
She laughed — straight into his white face, so white that the  red patches on it seemed like a clown's makeup.
Bankruptcy was a thousand miles away.
She turned and spurred Fontana forward, leaning down and dragging the bag over the ground.
‘Hark forrard to!’ she called to the hounds, still searching in the wood.
Obediently the whippers-in urged them toward her with ‘lope forrard!’ and ‘try forrard!’
‘No!’
Lord Wyatt called.
But it was too late.
Already several hounds had found the line of her drag.
They challenged and gave tongue in delight — only to stop in bewilderment as they reached the point where she had lifted the bag and hidden it again.
She spurred close to Lord Wyatt and spoke in a voice full of soft malice: ‘They know what the bloody hell it is!
And so do I!’
She spoiled several more chases for him that day by surreptitiously dragging her fox-reeking bag wherever their quarry held them to a check.
There came a time when she thought that if she did it once more, he would burst of an apoplexy.
‘You bitch!’ he spluttered when he was sure they were alone.
‘I know you have little cause to like me.
But to take your revenge in this petty…vindictive…’
‘This?’
Nora said.
‘This isn't even a beginning!’
She quit the field then.
It was early afternoon and she wanted to be sure of getting to Panshanger before Wyatt returned.
She approached by the same route she and Beador had taken the previous day.
Halfway along one of the rides a gamekeeper stepped into her path.
She reined in.
‘I am a guest of Sir George Beador,’ she said.
‘I think we have leave to…’
‘Ah, ma'am,’ he allowed.
‘I i'nt stoppin' you.
But I'd beg you not to go in the rides south o’ here, ‘tween here and Cole Green.’
‘If his lordship wishes.’
’‘Tis the pheasant, see?
I'm very short-handed here.
His lordship…’
‘Quite understood!’
Nora smiled.
‘I'll go around by the highway.
Have no fear.’
If she had not met the man at that particular moment, she would not have gone out to the highway and she would not have met Flynn.
And everything would have taken a different turn.
Flynn was the nearest John had to a right-hand man.
He was actually no more than a deputy, but John always used him as a sounding board for his new ideas and always considered his advice very carefully.
Flynn got all the really difficult contracts, or the ones John was unsure of being able to visit regularly; Flynn was the one man John would trust to manage an entire contract on his own.
For his pains Flynn drew the biggest bonus of all the deputies.
He would be a rich man soon enough.
‘Mr. Flynn!’
Nora called when she saw him on the road just ahead of her.
He turned, saw her, and smiled.
‘Well now!
And well met, ma'am,’ he said.
‘I was after looking for ye, so I was.’
‘Nothing wrong, I hope?
Have you news of Mr. Stevenson?’
His face fell.
‘There's quare things happening in the office, ma'am.
And I wish we had news of Mr. Stevenson.
Here's me who should already be starting the Great Southern and Western in Dublin, and the chief away.
And I daren't go.’
She felt the blood draining from her.
‘What…‘queer things’?’ she asked.
‘I think you should come yourself.
Mr. Jackson urgently desires you to.’
‘But what is wrong?’
‘God, I'm sure I don't know.
‘Tis all a muddle with letters from the banks and Mr. Jackson threatening murder and Mr. Chambers with his hair dropping out…’
She had to make light of it, of course.
But things were falling apart much earlier than expected.
The firm's next substantial income would not be until February — a month away.
If what Flynn said was even half true, they could not possibly spin it out until then.
Breathing in to stop her guts from sinking any deeper, she said, ‘Really!
Mr. Stevenson is not gone a week and you all go to pieces!
And now I have to interrupt the first bit of pleasure I've been able to take in I don't know how long and put you all to right.
I'm disappointed — especially in you, Mr. Flynn.’
His face fell.
‘Very well,’ she said.
‘You shall stay the night and tomorrow you will carry a letter to Mr. Chambers that will make all well.’
Still he looked glum.
‘Perhaps you need some pleasure, too?’ she said.
‘Have you a mind for a jape?’
It pricked his curiosity but he shook his head, saying, ‘Ah — I have to be away to Dublin.’
‘Believe me,’ she told him, ‘you may do more good to the firm if you stay here.
You know we are in partnership with Sir George Beador?
In company with, anyway.’
He nodded.
‘Well, this is his land.’
She pointed to the left of the highway.
‘And his neighbour on this side’— she pointed to the right —‘Lord Wyatt, has some threat out against him.
I wish to show Lord Wyatt that he may not with impunity threaten any partner of ours.
Otherwise, if Sir George is forced to withdraw from our company, a lot of work and even more money will have gone to waste.’
‘I'm at your entire service, ma'am,’ he said, eager now to know what she had in mind.
It was an idea she had thought of in a vague way yesterday, when she had seen the extent of the gravel ridge that ran beneath the two estates.
‘Well then, Mr. Flynn, I would say this is excellent hoggin we're riding upon?’
‘I was after thinking the same meself, before you came.’
He was puzzled at the apparent change of topic.
‘The best.’
‘Pretty good.’
‘No, Mr. FIynn.
The best.
The best in England.
And we're going to quarry it!
Every last cubic yard on Sir George's side of the road.
And we're going to do it in the most slovenly way possible, with a nibble here and a nibble there, leaving great
gashes up and down the hillside, as near as you can get to my
Lord Wyatt.’
Flynn broke into a broad smile.
She grinned back; both were enjoying the picture.
‘And
we'll mire and pothole the highway…’
‘And fell trees accidentally upon it!’ he broke in.
‘Yes!
Yes — force the traffic around on to his land.
Good!’
‘Ye don't want Stevenson men,’ Flynn told her.
‘It'd spoil
them.
Ye want any catch-hand rabble.
I can scour them from
the hedgerows and workhouses.’
‘Wherever you can, Mr. Flynn.
They're to have a liberal  allowance of liquor.
And we'll waive all our usual requirements on the bivouac and sanitary needs.
And fires.’
By now Flynn was roaring with laughter.
‘Mr. Stevenson'll turn grey!’ he said.
‘So he will!’
‘Mr. Stevenson will love it.
I promise,’ she answered.
‘One more thing — you could pass the word that the pheasant manors on Lord Wyatt's land are well stocked.
And there's few gamekeepers to bother with.
The southern part is the best.
I'm told.’
Flynn went ahead of her to Maran Hill.
Slightly mystified, he took the fox bag with him.
Nora turned back to wait for Lord Wyatt, on the road between the Panshanger gate lodge and the stables.
It was almost dark when he came, there were two grooms riding with him.
He was barely inside his own grounds before Nora urged Fontana out from behind the cedar.
A furlong separated them but he knew her at once.
He rode on toward her with no change of pace, getting quite close before he spoke.
‘I've said all I wanted to say to you.’
‘I am not yet in that happy position,’ she answered.
‘Please send your grooms back to the gate.’
‘Damned if I will!’ he said.
But he stopped.
‘Very well.
It is no concern of mine if they overhear us.’
She pretended to search in the folds of her habit, where she had previously concealed the fox bag.
The look he shot her was pure hate.
‘Go back,’ he told the two grooms.
When they had gone he turned again to her.
‘What do you want?’
Had she not met Flynn, she would merely have asked for the farms to be restored to Maran Hill; but the news from London made her too bold.
‘Do you know what those worthless shares cost us?’ she asked.
He shrugged.
‘Two hundred thou’, I presume.’
‘A hundred and fifty.’
‘You did well!’
She was surprised to hear a note of admiration behind the mask of impatient indifference.
‘You lured Beador into it, knowing he was in partnership with us.
You knew he could not pay and that we would have to.’
‘You did not have to go into partnership with the fool.’
He grinned complacently.
‘I'll take the shares back, if you like.’
‘You'll buy them.’
‘Five shillings.’
‘No.
A hundred thousand pounds.
And the four farms — they are to be restored to Maran Hill.’
He breathed in, ready to laugh, but something in her face stopped him.
‘It is quite dear,’ he said, ‘that you are insane.’
He obviously intended this remark to conclude their conversation for he half-turned to call his grooms.
‘I'll hunt you!’ she said.
She could think of nothing else to say.
It sounded fine, though.
‘I'll hunt you from here to Yorkshire!’
Afterwards she thought that, of course she must already have formulated the plan somewhere at the back of her mind; but at the time it burst upon her with all the excitement of a vision.
‘Insane!’ he repeated.
But she saw that he was intrigued with the words — with the insane idea of ‘lt.
‘by no means,’ she said, with a confidence she did not feel.
‘The Oakley, the Pytchley, Fitzwilliam, Cottesmore, Belvoir, Blankney, Lord Galway's, Badsworth, and my own York and Ainsty!’
She listed without hesitation every hunt between here and Yorkshire.
It left him shaken, for the outlines of her plan were taking shape in his mind — exactly as they were in hers.
‘And I'll take the fox bag, your fox bag, and its story with me.
Every hunt in England shall know of…’
‘They won't let you in,’ he sneered.
‘You are riff-raff to them.
And to me.’
‘Bet me!’ she challenged.
‘The same stake you lured Beador into making — a hundred thousand pounds.’
He licked his lips but refused the challenge.
She smiled.
Her heart, in delayed response, began to pound.
‘Whether take the challenge or not, my lord, it's there.
You are gambling.
I'm going now.
And from this moment on you are gambling that I shall fail.’
She turned Fontana's head.
‘No, ma'am.
That's a certainty.’
His voice was very level.
She did not, at first, take his meaning so she replied, ‘The  price of making it a certainty is a hundred thou’ and the four lost farms.’
Then she saw how he was staring at her habit, and looking at the two grooms.
When he called them and turned smiling to her she realized why he had said it was a certainty.
‘They'll find nothing.’
she said, and she pulled her habit this way and that, exposing every fold.
‘The bag is safe, many miles from here.’
A flaw in her plan then struck her, just as she was about to go.
She turned to him again.
‘I'll give you a sporting chance,’ she said.
‘I'll hunt my way to Yorkshire without saying a word.
If by then you haven't paid, I'll hunt my way back, chattering like eskimos’ teeth.’
Her first enthusiasm began to wane on the short ride back to Maran Hill.
True, it would suit her very well just now to be darting hither and thither between Hertford and York.
The journey and the sport would usefully consume at least three weeks, during all of which she would be beyond the regular or predictable reach of the mails.
And it was such a natural thing for her to do if she truly hadn't a care that it would lull any suspicion.
Yet there was the one supreme difficulty; Lord Wyatt had put his finger on it: The hunts wouldn't let her in.
To them she was just riff-raff.
Unless…it was a small hope…unless the idea of hunting from London to York just happened to catch their imagination.
Acts that were wild or eccentric — or even plain lunatic — would always intrigue the English upper class.
The hope was slim, but it was the only one she had.
She got Beador to write an amused and amusing letter to Mr. Hollingworth Magniac, Master of the Oakley, telling him of Mrs. Stevenson's mad notion and begging his hunt's assistance.
Beador's own response was reassuring — he thought it a ‘ripping good idea’ and gladly added Fontana to the travelling stable of two hunters she had brought down from Yorkshire.
Since Stevenson's now owned Sir George right down to the buttons on his shirt, she thought that most generous.
He was in very good humour.
Later she found out why.
After dinner she wrote a brisk, chatty letter to Chambers, telling him of her notion and in every way (she hoped) putting him at his ease.
It was exactly the sort of letter she  would have written if they'd had two hundred thousand in the bank instead of less than nothing.
Flynn, she found, had already gone recruiting in Hertford.
John certainly picked his men well.
She was about to retire when Sarah knocked at her door.
She came in bubbling with excitement; all evening she had brimmed with some secret mirth.
Nora had not seen her like that since the day she and Sam had arrived at Coutances.
‘You'll never guess,’ she said.
‘Sir George has asked me to marry him!’
Nora was thunderstruck.
‘Think!’
Sarah babbled.
‘Lady Beador!
Me a Lady!
Prom scullery maid to Lady!’
It was her money, of course.
Somehow Beador had got a sniff of it.
He must have a nose for money better than any hound for any fox.
But if Sarah took her money out now…l
‘Aren't you pleased, Nora dear?’
Nora made herself smile.
‘If it's really what you want.
If it will really make you happy.
But why Sir George?’
Sarah giggled.
‘Because he asked, I suppose.
No one else has.’
‘And that's all it needs?
The ability to put you, me, and the verb to marry in their proper grammatical relationship?’
‘Of course not!’
Sarah blushed.
‘You're a bit sharp, anyway.
I thought you liked him.
He admires you enormously.’
Nora waited.
At length she asked, ‘Am I to be content with that snippet of intelligence: ‘Sir George likes me’?’
Sarah blushed again: ‘What more?’
‘Do you love him?
You goose!’
‘I like him.’
‘What in particular?
His frank and open way with money, for instance?’
Sarah actually laughed.
‘He's told me all about that.
I think it's so generous of you to let him stay on here.’
Nora's heart missed a beat — and the next beat was a huge thump that shook her whole body — and the bed.
‘All?’ she asked guardedly.
‘Well, it was only ten thousand pounds.
Or…oh, I know one shouldn't say only ten thousand pounds.
But he has learned his lesson.
And when we've repaid you and bought back Maran Hill, we shall live ever so quietly.
He's promised  that.
We shall have to live quietly, because all my money will be gone.’
To Nora it was the final blow.
After she and John had done so much to guard against the enemy without, the fatal wound was to come from the friend within.
It was not fair.
Of all the things they could have foreseen and prevented how could they possibly have foreseen this?
Yet now it had happened it looked so inevitable — so predictable, even, given the different natures of Sarah and Sir George.
And why oh why had she asked Sarah to come?
It had been the merest afterthought.
Anything could have intervened — any distraction.
Winifred with a dead bird, Mrs. Jordan wanting her daily orders, even a fit of coughing — if any of these had happened at the right moment, she would never have invited Sarah on this visit.
‘What did he say when you accepted his proposal?’
Nora asked.
She might as well put a date to disaster.
‘Oh, I've not told him yet.
I'll tell him tomorrow.
Or the day after.
Soon anyway.’
It gave Nora the only hope she had.
‘Sarah,’ she said.
‘I think the very least you can do is not to rush into it.’
Sarah drew breath, already shaking her head, smiling radiantly.
‘Please listen,’ Nora went on.
‘The least you can do is talk to John.
After all he is a sort of unofficial guardian to you — a trustee of your fortune.
And he was a very good friend to Tom.
He would be most…’
She stopped as soon as she saw the effect of her words.
By chance (chance again!) she had chosen the one thing that would reach, spinning down through all that froth of excited sentiment, right down to the very core of Sarah's being: the memory of Tom.
She did not let the moment slip.
‘You didn't say you loved Sir George,’ she said.
Sarah did not look up.
‘I will never love any other man.’
Now all the fighting exuberance had gone.
‘I know that.
I'm not such a fool as to look for love again.’
‘What then?
Liking?
Is Sir George really the most likeable?’
Sarah looked trapped.
‘I thought you would understand.’
‘Understand what?’
‘I need someone.
I can't go on being alone.’
She turned bright pink.
‘You must know what I mean.’
Now Nora, too, was embarrassed.
‘I think it's essential you should talk to John,’ she said.
‘I can't tell him that!’
‘I don't think you'll need to.’
‘Don't you tell him!’
She was even more alarmed.
‘Of course I won't.
But there's no man with more understanding — and you'll find no truer friend.’
‘I know.’
She sighed.
‘You are quite right, of course.
Poor George, he will be so disappointed!
How can I face him?’
‘You won't have to for long,’ Nora assured her, and she went on to explain her idea of hunting all the way home.
‘Sir George called it a ‘ripping idea,’ and he must know I need a chaperone so he can hardly object if I take you, since it was I who brought you!’
Chapter 26
When they left the following day, the eastern end of the park had already begun to fill with tattered bivouacs and shelters of thorn and tarpaulin.
Around and among them lounged villainous men with pocked faces and broken teeth.
There was a handful of verminous women, too, and even a few sickly children.
Rubbish already littered the park and highway.
Mangy cats, and dogs with lice, nosed and fought among it.
Half the people there were drunk; the rest were well on the way.
Fires were lighted everywhere against the cold, and bands of ruffians were bursting out of the Panshanger woods carrying ripped-off branches and uprooted saplings.
As their carriage went by, Nora smiling, Sarah aghast, Flynn came riding over.
He gave a huge wink.
‘Sure we'll just let them wet their whistles a bit longer, then we'll start winning this gravel.’
‘Then we'll start winning,’ Nora said, like a correction.
‘You can control them?’
‘Like the tap on a beer keg.’
Flynn laughed.
‘I'll write and tell you when to stop.
Remember — you take your orders from no one but me.’
Flynn gave a jaunty military salute and withdrew.
Even Sarah was smiling.
‘I've never seen you like this, Nora.
What is it?’ she asked.
‘I'm going to do what I haven't done in five years: please myself.
I think if the world was to end in three weeks, I'd do no different.’
She meant it too.
Her words were no more bravado.
She was going to live every minute of the next three weeks like a hedonist.
No thought of the future, whether it was to be spent in jail or exile or even in restored fortune — no thought of it was to mar those living moments as they were given to her.
It was infectious, of course.
Sarah caught it first, being nearest, and she soon forgot to mope for her disconsolate Sir George (who had seen them off with very ill grace).
And Mr. Hollingworth Magniac, Master of the Oakley, caught it the moment he read Nora's letter of introduction.
And Nora hunted like a mad Irishman — and in the hunting field none are madder.
If a gate was open, she'd jump the fence beside it.
If a winding lane led to where she wanted to go, she'd cross two furlongs of field to cut the corner.
She fell off all four sides of all three horses.
She fell into mires.
She was wiped off and left hanging by branches.
She half-drowned in ditches.
She was dragged backwards and sideways through hedges.
Yet when it came to a hulloa and a gallop and a death, she was on terms to the end.
She leaped the most fearsome raspers of hedges, where even cavalry ensigns — even Irish cavalry ensigns — turned aside.
It was the sort of exhibition she usually despised, but she knew that nothing less would serve her purpose.
The Oakley gave her the brush of the only fox they broke up that day.
The Pytchley, under Mr. George Payne, gave her two brushes — and three rousing cheers, for she enjoyed the first day's hunting with them so much she stayed for a second.
And then word began to spread of this dashing, spirited young Yorkshirewoman who was hunting her way home.
Lord Fitzwilliam gave an impromptu ball for her at Milton Park and she danced until dawn.
Ninety minutes later they were all back in the saddle and drawing their first covert as if the season had just begun.
Sir Richard Sutton said it was the biggest meet the Cottesmore had seen that year.
Everyone wanted to see her, shake her hand, watch her fly — or fall.
Invitations arrived from hunts that were off her direct route home — the Quorn, Earl Ferrers, the Meynell…even from the Bedale, well to the north of her destination.
She took in as many as she could.
Only Lord Middleton's, which hunted all around Thorpe and which had turned her down, remained silent — the one hunt, above all others, that she longed to join.
From Lord Galway's hunt the Master, Mr. Richard Lumley, came with an escort of riders to flank her carriage up the Great North Road to Retford.
Four days she hunted with them.
Lord Hawke, Master of the Badsworth (her final hunt before her own York and Ainsty), held a presentation dinner with silver-edged invitations and programmes; the presentation was an illuminated map showing her erratic journey through the hunting countries of eastern England.
Each of the hunt masters had signed their portion of the map, and each hunt had sent a brush — even those that had broken up no fox while she was in their country.
She could hardly thank them for the tears in her eyes.
But best of all was the letter awaiting her at York from Lord Wyatt.
‘You have won your wager,’ he wrote.
‘I do not grudge you your victory.
To the contrary: I salute you.
As evidence I return the deeds of Framwell, which Beador mortgaged to me.
They are now free of any charge upon them.
The deeds to the farms will follow in some six weeks.’
Framwell was Beador's estate near Stockton.
Wrapped in the folds of the letter was a draft, to her, for a hundred thousand pounds.
She was ungrateful enough to regret that the excitement was over — and that she must learn again to be the sort of woman who would find that sort of regret childish and irresponsible.
Chapter 27
When the train drew into York station, bringing John back from his exile, it was not Nora but Sarah who waited to greet him on the platform.
He gave her a brotherly kiss and said, ‘What's up then?’
Sarah smiled.
‘I did not understand it either until we arrived here.
I felt I would be excessively de trop.
But, of course, Nora cannot waste a visit to York, and as Mr. Hudson is in the city…’
‘Ah!
Say no more!
And we are to wait for her?’
They climbed into the carriage, which was standing outside the Railway Office.
An urchin was holding the horses.
‘We sent Willet to collect some dress lengths and other things,’ Sarah explained.
‘I hope he hurries.
It'll soon be dark.’
They sat facing each other in the gloom of the carriage while the cold January twilight deepened around them.
John stifled a yawn and apologized.
‘You must have had a hard month of it,’ she said.
‘It's the irregularity, not the hardness.’
‘But it must be a great comfort to know that Nora is looking after her end of things.
It's a perfect arrangement.’
John agreed.
‘Even now.
When she knows you are in York, after nearly four weeks away.
Even so— she is busy at your interests.’
He chuckled and tapped the window lightly, three knocks.
‘What's in thy mind, lass?’
She leaned forward into the fading light and looked at him intently.
‘I shall never understand people, John.’
‘Well, which of us ever does?
Given a long life, we may come to understand one or two well enough.
And learn a trick or ten for coping with t'others — or keeping out their way.
What's the particular puzzle?’
She shook her head and retired again into the dark.
‘Do you think I should accept Sir George Beador's proposal?’
‘You needn't worry about Beador,’ he said.
‘We're not throwing him out.
He can stay on as a sort of pensioner up at Framwell.’
‘I feel so sorry for him, though.’
‘That's no substitute for love.
In your letter you made it quite clear it would be no love match.’
‘Love!’ she said, almost with mockery.
‘I came to it so strangely with Tom.
Now I think it an accident — intended for some other.’
When she added no more he asked: ‘What do you mean?
Came to it so strangely?’
He could not see her face now.
She became a voice speaking out from the shadows.
‘My mother and father were like two cordial strangers sharing an abode for convenience.
I believe he overcame his aversion for — for anything — stronger long enough to beget me.
And after that — never again.
I wonder now how my mother felt about that.
Though she seemed content enough always.
And then when he died and she followed him so soon, you see, I was at once cut off from all example of domestic life between the sexes.
All I had ever known was that very dull — at least, now I call it dull, then it seemed secure and eternal — but life at the vicarage was dull.’
‘And you went straight from that to the Church Commissioners’ girls' orphanage?
That was even less preparation.’
‘Well…’ she said doubtfully.
He waited.
‘I did not ten you all,’ she said.
Her voice was trembling; he could hear the fear in her pushing it from her control.
‘Nor do you need to,’ he said.
‘I do.
I do.’
She was past stopping.
But as she spoke, the fear seemed to lift from her.
The effort had been to start.
‘May I tell you something, John?
I never thought I would tell anyone.
I never told Tom.
But since he is dead the thought of it keeps coming back.’
‘If you are sure of never regretting it.’
‘I'm sure of that.
With you it will be safe.’
‘I don't mean that.
I mean it might be better to talk with a complete outsider.’
Her exasperation cut him short.
‘Or a woman — Nora?
Have you told her?’
She thought hard before she answered.
‘It's a man's view I need.
That's what I don't know.’
‘Very well.
I hope I'm the right person.’
She breathed in, steeling herself again.
‘You and Nora sometimes mention a Reverend Doctor Prendergast, now bishop in Manchester I think.’
John sat upright suddenly, startled out of his role of passive sympathizer.
‘Go on.’
She hesitated again.
‘You will remember that although I was born a vicar's daughter, I have seen quite a different level of life since then.
You will not be shocked if I speak of — things a vicar's daughter —’
‘That is not the fear,’ he warned again.
‘The fear is that, however I respond, you will regret speaking of it at all.
What of Prendergast?’
‘When I first heard you mention him to Nora, last autumn’— she laughed —‘I was so startled!
I thought — now you will be ashamed of me — I thought, I suspected…
’ She faltered.
‘You suspected that from the little you told me that morning at Coutances I had made investigations and found out something.’
She was astounded.
‘How do you know that!
I'm ashamed to have suspected you.’
‘But why?
It would be very human.
Tell me about Prendergast.
Is it the same man?’
‘It must be.
He knew my father, I think.
Or so he claimed.
He came to the orphanage just after I went in there, and they let him take me out to tea.
Of course, they would.’
There was quite a silence before she continued.
‘He offered to take me away from there.
I thought he meant to adopt me, because that's what it sounded like.’
She giggled nervously.
‘I was only sixteen then.’
‘Oh, dear,’ John said.
‘You really want to go on?’
‘If you'd rather not…’
‘I can imagine the rest, knowing Prendergast.’
She laughed then, harshly.
‘Oh, you can not!
I mean he told me.
He made it very clear.
He told me exactly.
Every detail, every step, every…move.
Everything.
And he spoke so — ooh!
So drily.
Like a — geometry book.
No — a dancing master.
I don't know what he was like.’
‘How terrible for you.’
‘But it wasn't.
Because, you see, I had no idea what he was talking about.
I thought he was — strange, of course.
But you know how children accept almost anything that grownups tell them.
And especially a dignified old clergyman like that.
It seemed no more silly than — deportment classes or — physical exercises.’
A flesh-curdling thought began to seize John.
‘And — did you…?’
He could not voice it.
She laughed.
‘I would have.
Truly, I was so ignorant, I would have.
But he told me to think upon it and he would come back for an answer.’
She sighed the relief he felt.
‘He never came.
I never saw him again.
Do you know,’ she said in a brisker tone, ‘I believe he never intended to come back.
I think his pleasure was merely to talk about it in that calm way to a completely ignorant young girl.
I even think I was not the first.
Nor the last.’
He thought that was very perceptive of her.
‘Poor old gentleman,’ he said.
‘Yes.
That's all I feel about him now.
But when I ran away from the orphanage, I was so nearly trapped again.
In London that was.
And in a place that would have made Prendergast's — arrangement — seem almost pure.’
He stifled the urge to tell her again that he could imagine it — though, of course, he could.
She was too intent upon confession.
‘The first man they — let into the room — well, I have often wondered about him.
I cannot remember him at all, whether he was young or old or fat or thin or short or tall or anything.
I must have been partly stupefied by something they gave me.
I remember the madam, though — a hard, pretty woman, still quite young.
I'll tell you who she was like — Madame Corneille.
Just like her.’
‘I picture her exactly!’
‘Anyway, this man.
I imagine he had dreamed of doing what he came to do for years before he tightened up his courage.’
‘You knew by this time?
You understood?’
‘Half I had seen things in that place and heard the girls talking.
But this man, when the moment arrived, I think it must all have evaporated for him.
And he saw himself left with a ridiculous, dead feeling, and — a half-drugged, frightened, tearful, disgusted young girl.
That's what I imagine.
D'you know what he did to me?
He combed my hair!
For almost an hour that's all he did.
Until I could talk sensibly.
Then he asked me if I wanted to go from that place.
And I thought he meant with him.
I thought it was Prendergast again — the same offer.
But, anyway, I said yes, because I thought I could escape from him easier than from madam.
So he made me pretend I was in a dead faint.
I had to chew soap to froth and so on.
Then he ran out in a panic and said he was a doctor and thought I was dying.
And she was so terrified she let him take me to — he said — the women's hospital.
Or perhaps she thought she could always pretend to be a relative and come and claim me from the hospital.
Anyway, the miracle worked.’
‘It was a miracle.’
‘It's like a moral ballad, isn't it!
The man took me straight to the Tabard.
I don't know what tale he told Tom — certainly not the true one.
But there I stayed.
First as scullery maid, then — when he found I was a vicar's daughter — Tom put me upstairs.
Why can't I remember that man's face!’
‘Did he never come to the Tabard again?’
‘He may have.
And I wouldn't have recognized him, you see.
For a long time I thought of him as ‘my saviour’ and even — though it was blasphemy — as my Saviour.
You know?’
‘That wouldn't be blasphemy.
To rescue girls in that situation would be His work.’
Struck by a thought he looked over the street, where the gaslights were being lighted.
He moved to the seat by the window on that side.
‘Look there,’ he said, pointing to where the ‘gay’girls of Station Road shivered, stamped their feet, and walked morosely up and down beneath the flaring gas.
She moved across and looked out too.
He felt the sudden warmth of her nearness in the dark and withdrew.
‘How many of them lacked only the good fortune that saved you?’
She shuddered and returned to her former seat.
‘I often think it.’
‘Still.
A tavern in Southwark is, many would say, only one step up from the place you were spirited from.’
‘But a very important step, John.
A girl couldn't close her eyes and ears to it, but she could keep herself pure.
And then I fell in love with Tom years before he even looked at me.
And that made it easy.
Oh, but wasn't he a marvellous man!’
‘He was.
He was lucky, too, in you.
You were both lucky.
I ought to light the carriage lamp.’
‘Leave it a bit.
Nora's a long time.’
He wondered why she had told him all this.
‘A long way from George Beador,’ he said.
She sighed.
In the light that shone feebly from over the street he saw her hands grip and rub one another.
‘Does it still happen to you, John, that you look back at yourself as you were six months ago and you think what an ignorant, innocent goose you were!
How little of life you knew then and how wise you are now!’
And he had to confess that it was years since he had had such notions.
‘It's like that all the time with me.
All those years at the Tabard when I was so prudish.
And then when I went t
France with Tom last year I was still like that at first, until…
He was so patient and gentle.
And so I learned it is not always shameful and wicked.
Does that sound brazen?’
‘Of course not.’
He sat tensely, guarding himself for one false word or gesture that might dry her up.
‘Remember, we were not married.
Yet even in the depths of my soul, even when I faced God in church and took His Body and Blood at communion, I could feel no shame.’
He almost told her that he had once lived a year with a girl he had married navvy-style, over the anvil, and had got her with child before she ran away from him.
But caution checked him before he began to speak.
‘You still aren't shocked?’ she asked.
‘Not at all.
That kind of shock is really a sort of timidity.’
‘I remember how it was to lie with Tom.
And I still feel no shame.
Those uxorial memories are very strong.
Are they equally strong in everyone?
We can never gauge that, can we?’
‘Do you really think marrying Beador would help?’
‘I would have no other reason for marrying him.’
‘But do you really want to marry him?’
A man was walking past the girls across the street, looking at and talking to them in turn; then he went off with one of them.
Sarah drew an enormous breath, let it out, and said: ‘If you really ask me, I want it to be as easy for me as for that man over there.
I will never fall in love again.
So what am I  to do with — those feelings?
You call them uxorial, but we both know what they are.
Now I'm sure you are shocked.’
He knew exactly what she was offering him then; and he was fairly certain that she knew, too.
The moment was exciting and he wanted to prolong it — to think of himself as capable of taking up such an offer — though he knew that in the end he would have to decline it.
The conventional response: If only there was some way I could help…rose to his throat and was half uttered before he realized its implication.
He changed it to: ‘If only there was some way I could…illustrate it for you.
What you say is not unnatural, not shocking, not even uncommon.
The same longings overtake me when I am away from Nora for weeks.
So how could I be shocked or surprised?
And a few nights ago, in London, I did what that man over there just did.’
‘Oh, John!
I didn't mean you to —’
‘Wait!
Listen to the whole story.
I actually went with this girl to a little hotel.
But just before we got there I realized how — tawdry it was going to be.
Unlovely and tawdry.’
He laughed.
‘My one thought then was how not to hurt her feelings.’
The lamplighter came back and put on the lamps along their side as John spoke.
‘How like you,’ she said.
‘What did you do?’
‘I had some filberts in my pocket.
I bit the shell of one and gave the kernel to her, and then bit another and pretended it had broken one of my teeth and I was in too much pain.’
The incident had actually happened two years ago but to say so would have diluted the force of the tale.
‘Suppose you suddenly had that feeling — tawdry — while you were walking up the aisle with George Beador.
Or, even worse, afterward!
Toothache would offer no escape.’
She nodded glumly.
It was cold comfort, all right.
To change the mood he returned to the seat opposite her and daringly, reached a hand across and squeezed her knee.
And daringly he grinned, a wicked grin as he said: ‘Find a discreet lover.
You'd not be the first young widow to do such a thing,’
‘John!’
She kicked him in mock outrage.
And that was the moment Nora chose to open the carriage door.
Chapter 28
Nora had been prepared for almost any response from John, except the one she got — or thought she had got.
She knew it would wound his dignity that he had been forced to skulk abroad while she had saved the firm — never mind that she had done so in the most unbusinesslike and outrageous manner.
She had prepared so many ways of telling him how accidental it had been, how only the thought that he was safe in France had made her bold enough.
She even thought up ways in which — had he been at home — he might have managed the rescue more easily and with far greater certainty.
Even more, she had been quite ready to apologize for the public exhibition she had made of herself, and to ask his forgiveness.
So to catch him taking advantage of Sarah's desperation like that shocked her far too deeply to allow her to tax him with it directly.
It was not that she lacked sympathy for Sarah; she had made that plain in her letter to John.
She knew, from John's frequent and long absences, what it was to yearn to lie entangled with a man again.
She knew how unendurable the lack of that fulfilment, and the lack of any prospect of it, must seem to poor Sarah.
But the last thing she had expected was that John would take advantage of it, especially after so long an absence from her, and even more especially after the crisis they had endured and survived together these months past.
She did not blame Sarah in the least.
Had she not heard Sarah's cry of outrage the moment before she opened the carriage door and caught John in that position?
She had passed it off at the time, saying, ‘That's right, Sarah!
Keep him in his place!’
Which was not the welcome she had prepared and longed to give.
And even when they reached home and she and John were at last alone together, she could not forgo the homecoming  she had dreamed of for so many weeks.
So she continued to make light of what had happened in York.
‘Couldn't wait, eh?’ she asked, grinning as she began to undo his shirt buttons.
His bewilderment looked very genuine.
‘Our Sarah's proving a bit of a hot lot,’ she went on, thinking that to blame Sarah might ease his guilt.
‘A bit of a Fulham virgin, eh?’
‘She will be, unless she finds…well, someone.’
Nora eased his shirt off and began on her own dress and stays.
He watched her, frank in his longing.
‘For God's sake,’ he said.
‘Who are we talking about!’
She grinned.
Her eyes gleamed in the candlelight.
‘Mistress Sarah,’ she whispered.
She kissed him.
Only their lips were yet in contact.
His hands were to the buttons of her dress.
Lifting his lips a thousandth of an inch from hers, he said, ‘Forgotten her.’
He felt the blood hammering at the pit of her neck, and among the tendons at the back of his skull.
‘No sleep tonight,’ he said at the corner of his lips.
She undid his trousers and let them fall.
‘You dare try!’ she said.
A month of unslaked lust bound them, racing their hearts and shivering the breath.
Sarah was truly forgotten.
When Nora's dress fell to her knees he pulled her swiftly to him, trying to lift her off the ground.
But she turned a little to one side.
‘Don't be hasty now.
Savour it.’
And she turned for him to unlace her corset.
And she went on turning, pressed to him, after she stepped from its loosened clutch.
Her slim, nude body, warm in the candlelight, warm by the fire, turning and turning, now this way, now that, against him…the curve of her back…the firmness of her hips…her soft breasts…the grace of her neck and the beauty of her, and of her face, and the dark, desperate eyes, begging now, and entranced — these were the images of her he had only half captured in his years of days away from this house.
‘Nora!’
It was hardly his own voice.
He fell to his knees and buried his face upon her belly, his tongue into her navel.
‘Oh, love!’
Her voice shivered down through the magic air around them; her fingernails were a cap of spikes upon his head.
His tongue and lips and breathing rose up her body to her breasts, her neck, her shoulders, her ears, her stifling hair.
And his grip tightened as he rose, bearing her aloft, and then, with infinite gentleness, lowering her, lowering, lowering, upon him.
As the cry of her throat tore the air, and the warmth of her dosed around him, not death itself could have held him back.
Then she fell upon him, leaning out and abandoning herself to his grip, throwing both legs up until she was rammed to the hilt of him, and feeling that marvellous pulse as he squandered his month of continence into her, spending on and on.
When the crackle of the flames, the creak of the floorboard, and the weight of their bodies returned, he lowered her to the carpet before the fire and sat himself beside her, leaning so that his face was only inches above hers.
His eyes smiled; hers responded.
‘I can face anything if you're with me,’ he said.
She closed her eyes then.
‘Nothing could take you from me, or put aught between us.’
Neither of them had said anything like that to the other for years.
Or needed to.
He still had said nothing directly about her rescue of their fortune.
He had written, of course— quite warmly.
But he had said nothing, and his silence was beginning to hurt her.
In the small hours he awoke, feeling ravenous; he slipped quietly from the bed,— trying not to awaken her, and tiptoed from the room.
He's hungry, she thought.
It could hardly be…well, anything else.
He often felt hungry when they had made such magnificent love.
He often stole down to the kitchen when he felt like that.
Of course he's hungry.
But for the first time in their life together she rose, slipped on a dressing gown, and went down to join him.
The kitchen clock whirred and struck three — that is, its hammer flailed the air three times, having been bent by Mrs. Jordan, the cook, so that it would fail to strike the chimes.
The sound of chimes, she said, made the air stifling.
John was not there, but the light of her candle showed the signs of his visit; the cut pie, the crumbs on the table, the pickle barrel and the sticky wooden ladle beside it.
On her way up the west stair, which led, it so happened, past Sarah's rooms, she saw a light in the business room across the courtyard in the east wing.
She took no pains to be silent as she turned back and went that way.
She did not want to catch them unawares again.
He was alone — or as alone as the owner of a large enterprise can be when he has a case full of unanswered letters, of contracts awaiting perusal or signature, of complaints, of surveys, of claims, of excuses and explanations, of alarms and false alarms.
He grinned apologetically when he saw her.
‘Eay love, did I waken thee?
I tried being quiet.’
Ashamed now of her suspicions, she could only smile shyly.
He was eating the last of the pie with gusto.
He pointed at the pile of documents spread before him.
‘I think we've accidentally hit on one of the cardinal principles of business,’ he said.
‘Look!’
He passed her a letter.
‘Tucker to me; Exeter, 28 December: Come at once, the world's falling apart.
In eight pages.’
He gave her another letter.
‘Tucker again; Exeter, 4 January: Come if you can but it's not so bad as it seemed.’
Another.
‘Tucker; 9 January: Ignore all previous letters.
All is well.’
He laughed.
‘What's this cardinal principle?’ she asked.
‘In difficult times the chief's job is to vanish.
There's half a dozen similar cases there.’
He waved his hand over the correspondence.
‘Half a dozen cries for help that would have had me losing sleep and tearing out my hair.
All solved.’
His tone was self-dismissive, but to her he seemed, obliquely, to be minimizing all that she had done.
‘Perhaps I should have joined you,’ she said.
He winked.
‘It's only because you stayed — and did what you did — that I can make light of it.’
He reached out and took her hand.
Suddenly she felt herself close to tears.
‘I can't go on and on telling you,’ he said.
‘But you know it.
I owe everything to you now.’
The tears came then.
She could not stop them.
But she did not want to withdraw behind them; feeling every inch a fool she kept her eyes on his, as well as she could, and smiled.
‘Thou great softie!’ he said, delighted; and he wiped her cheeks with the kerchief on which he had cleaned his fingers  after eating the pie.
She could smell the pork fat and pastry on her skin.
‘Anyway,’ he said, ‘the future's not holding back.
Look at this.’
And he passed her the list he had been looking at when she entered.
It was in his own hand and read:
‘These will put up the value of my land,’ she said.
And then it struck her: She had no land!
The moment embarrassed them both to silence.
‘Or the bit of land where I was born,’ she added lamely.
He did not look directly at her.
‘You realize there's the best part of four million pounds in those contracts — most of it still to be paid to us.’
‘We'll certainly need it,’ she said.
There was an odd, plaintive note in his voice.
‘Perhaps we'd have been all right anyway,’ he added.
Again there was that note — defensive and hesitant.
‘Of course, darling!’
She took his hand in both of hers.
‘Of course we would have!
All I did was…’ she thought hurriedly ‘…
I merely made it possible for you to come back to me the sooner.’
Let him believe it if it helped.
He must know it was not true.
He must know it was not how much they earned that was important — not when they were insolvent — it was when  they earned it that counted.
Still, if it helped to restore his own estimation of himself, let him think otherwise.
With a contented smile he fished deep among his papers, using his free hand.
‘You can have this now,’ he said.
‘It really won't bite.’
It was her power of attorney.
She could not stifle a slight truculence as she took it.
‘And what may I practise on?’ she asked.
Now he looked at her steadily.
‘I'd like to treat the money you won from Wyatt as a loan to the firm,’ he said.
‘As all this money comes in’— he pointed to his list of contracts due for completion —‘you could progressively withdraw that money and…er, ‘practise’ with it.’
She had actually thought of asking for no less than John now proposed; so why did it feel like a slap in the face?
John was going to make his comforting fiction — that she had not really saved the firm, merely secured it a little earlier than the normal contracts would have saved it anyway — he was going to make it true, by (in effect) doctoring the books.
In six months her winnings, which had saved the firm, would have degenerated into a mere loan.
That is what the books would show: ‘Per loan to Mrs. J. Stevenson — £100,000.’
In red ink.
She realized that she had some confusions of her own that needed sorting out.
Now that the single overriding goal had been removed from their lives, what did each of them really want?
How close were they really, in matters other than their mutual love?
Worst of all, would their money once more drive them into a tolerant and easy separation?
He broke into these thoughts with a forgotten piece of news.
‘It's your brother Daniel,’ he began.
‘I know,’ she told him.
‘Sam wrote to me.
He's to be pardoned.’
‘He's been pardoned.
I've heard he's already back in England.’
He could not read her face.
‘What'll you do, love?’ he prompted.
‘If Daniel knocked on that door now, dying with the cold, I'd not so much as cross the room.’
The intensity of her hate made him quail.
‘By God!’ he said.
‘I hope I may never make an enemy of thee!’
That morning at breakfast — a rather late breakfast — a messenger came with a letter from Lord Wyatt.
He was staying a few miles away, with the Earl of Carlisle at Castle Howard, and he would be hunting that day with the Lord Middleton's.
Perhaps, he suggested, she could arrange to go out riding and for her path to cross his?
He would have a further communication for her then.
‘He's going to humiliate you,’ John warned.
‘Why else does he want you and the hunt to cross paths?
That hunt in particular.’
She agreed it was possible but was too intrigued by the note of challenge in the invitation to stay at home.
‘They're hunting Burythorpe way today,’ she said — Nora, who claimed to take not the slightest interest in anything the Lord Middleton's did!
‘We could at least ride that way and see what's what.’
‘As long as we're back in time for Livings’ visit,’John said.
Livings was their architect for the iron foundry at Stockton, which John now had ideas of enlarging.
That afternoon they both went riding out along the ridge of the wold toward Burythorpe.
John was on Hermes; Nora was trying out a new three-year-old she had just bought — a dun-coloured filly with white stockings, a little undersized but very sturdy and, the dealer said, ‘a double-tit of great stamina.’
She had been ridiculously cheap because of a few slight zebra markings.
Some early rain had completely cleared and the higher parts of the road had even started to dry by the time they set off.
They rode almost due north, making for Birdsall Brow and facing into a gusty northwesterly breeze.
Patches of sun and shade of varying density swept toward them over the fields and hedges.
The treetops thrashed violently in a wind that seemed to spend its force before it touched the ground.
‘That'll shake out the cobwebs,’ Nora said, drawing in great lungsful of the breeze, until she shivered.
‘Let's canter,’ he said.
And for more than a mile they threaded their way around the standing pools that reached from the verges out into the  drying roadway.
Hermes cantered slowly but Tessa, Nora's filly, was close to a gallop.
Yet when they returned to the trot, Hermes was the more winded of the two.
‘You've not hunted him much,’ John said.
‘You could at least let the lad take him down and back, even if you don't use him.’
‘Aye,’ she said.
‘I think I will.’
At the edge of the brow they turned eastward along the bridle path to Burdale.
Almost at once they heard the music of the hunt — the pack and the leaders, running crosswind a furlong or so downhill from the path.
Both their horses became restive at once.
‘We'd better pull aside,’ John said.
‘We can wait for them here on the highway.’
Nora squared her shoulders.
‘I don't see why.
We've as much right to ride as they have.’
And she rode on down the path into the teeth of the arrogant crowd who had blackballed John's and her application for membership.
She pretended a greater surprise than she felt that the leader of those upon the bridle path was Lord Wyatt.
He was smiling but with such grimness that she began to regret her rash decision to come.
If he were going to humiliate her, he could not have picked a better opportunity.
The whole ‘quality’ of the East Riding was behind him.
‘Mrs. Stevenson!’ he called, with a surprise to match her own.
He halted, forcing the rest of the field to bunch up behind him, a captive audience to all they said.
‘How very well met!’
‘Lord Wyatt!
How good of you to say so.
May I present Mr. Stevenson.’
The two men nodded warily at each other.
‘Yes,’ Wyatt went on.
‘I rode out today of a purpose to meet you.
England's foremost huntswoman, what!’
He was oblivious of the sounds of well-bred impatience arising from behind.
‘But they tell me you don't hunt with them.’
‘That's very true,’ Nora said.
‘Ain't it odd!
I may hunt with my lords Fitzwilliam and Forester and Hawke, but here in the East Riding they still have standards to maintain.’
She heard John draw a sharp breath beside her but she spoke with a bright-eyed defiance, not to Lord Wyatt but at the crowd behind him, noting with pleasure their discomfiture and annoyance.
Both reactions intensified when Lord Wyatt  looked around, surveying what was to him a motley collection of petty gentry, squires, and baronets.
‘Extraordinary!’ he said and turned back to her.
Then he produced a letter from his tunic.
‘We have our standards, too, what!
From my cousin Meredith.
Handsome enough, I hope.’
She took it, smiling, and thanked him.
‘Jove!’ he said.
‘What a ride you had, eh?
What ever put such an idea into your head?’
‘I had a sort of wager,’ she said simply, amused at the alarm that now crept into his face.
‘A private wager with myself, you understand — that it would turn hostility’ into friendship.’
Her look included the rest of the field.
Wyatt laughed then.
‘Ye didn't lose,’ he said to her.
‘Ye didn't fail.
I for one will swear to that!’
He spurred onward a good few yards before he turned and shouted back over his shoulder: ‘You're always welcome with the Puckeridge at least!’
Like royalty on a saluting base they watched the rest of the field troop past; not an eye met theirs.
‘Now wasn't that kindness itself,’ Nora said.
John at last breathed out his relief.
‘You do take chances,’ he said.
‘Oh no, love.
As long as we are sitting on God knows how many million cubic yards of best gravel at Maran Hill, I think we shall have a very kindly and attentive neighbour in Lord Wyatt.’
Chapter 29
Bernard Livings, architect, with an academy diploma to back
the claim, was an ambitious, easygoing, round-faced, sharp-nosed, curly-haired, straight-bearded young thirty-eight-year-old.
He was a devout Methodist, a devoted husband and  father, and — though John would not believe it — an ardent womanizer.
‘You don't understand the word,’ John would say.
‘Thornton's a womanizer.
This man Livings is altogether different.’
‘It's you that doesn't understand,’ she told him.
‘Thornton's no womanizer.
His interest begins eight inches north of the knee; go twenty inches higher and he's already starting to yawn.
Faces and names mean naught there.
He'll take it any place, any time, free, bought, or bribed.
But Livings wants everything — except the details between calling the banns and cutting the wedding cake; he'll forgo them.’
John could not really grasp the distinction.
Later, in the business room, with the site maps spread out before them, John explained his new ideas.
They would use more land, beyond the first twenty acres, on both sides of the little Billingham Beck.
On one side — the side of the twenty acres — they would build the mill, with its attendant wharfs and railways.
On the other side they would lay out a little town, using the river as a division.
It was to have a small park, with a stand where a German band could play, a church and dissenting chapels, a hospital and dispensary, a school, an evening institute and library, a gasworks, waterworks, and a sewage outfall works.
Also almshouses.
The gasworks and waterworks would, of course, serve the mill as well .
There would be no public houses, but markets and shops would all be in the plan.
As he spoke he deliberately failed to notice Nora's increasing bewilderment and anxiety, until he thought she would burst.
Then he turned to her.
‘We'll not build it all at once, but we'll allow space for it.
We'll plan it, d'ye see.
We'll not be building any more than we intended for this year — well, a house or two more, maybe, but nothing beyond.
But we'll be building it in such a way as lets us add without making a pig's breakfast of it.
If’— he remembered the architect —‘Livings here says it may be done.’
Livings, who had come to Thorpe expecting a host of small, annoying revisions, could not believe his luck.
But, being a thorough architect, his first instinct was to find an objection to his client's scheme.
‘It's a splendid idea, sir,’ he said.
‘Truly magnificent.
The town presents no insuperable difficulty.
But’— sigh —‘your manufactory.
Now that will be a problem.
How big might it finally be?’
‘Let's say it will cover all twenty acres.
It occurred to me that you might plan it as one great central shed with bays let off it on each side.
D'ye see?
Like a spider.
The original works can be one of those bays.
A spider's leg.
What d'you think?’
He nodded, and his eyes said it was feasible; but his voice said: ‘It isn't necessarily that easy.
The proportions…’ he began vaguely, and then thought of a better line.
‘The bays would impede each other 's light.’
‘We want twenty foot between them, for two rail roads.
And the overshadowing would matter less if the roof were made of glass.’
‘Glass!’
Nora and Livings exclaimed together.
‘Yes.’
He was amused.
‘We make a simple flat triangular truss of iron, like a railway station roof, and we glaze it direct.
I was looking at Euston the other day and thinking how much lighter it would be if they had glass instead of that wood and flashing.
But’— he gripped Livings' arm —‘these are just crude ideas for you to work on.
It's to be your design.
I want that firmly understood.’
He smiled.
‘If you still want to, of course.’
The client's coup de grace.
‘Indeed.
Indeed!’
Livings said.
‘I welcome the challenge, sir.
But in the space of a single weekend — I fear —’
‘No, no, no, no,’ John assured him.
‘This weekend I want you to design three grades of house — for a labourer, for a mechanic, and for an overseer.
I want each unit costed before we even start to plan the town.’
Nora was relieved at this return of monetary caution; it supplied the motif she had missed in all the previous talk.
‘What's this new town to be called?’
Nora asked.
‘We had a competition for a name in the London office last week.
Chambers suggested-Learlington, as an anagram of Nora Telling.
One of the clerks thought of Middleton, since it's midway between Middlesborough and Stockton.
But I won the prize.’
‘What was your suggestion?’
‘Stevenstown.
People will find that much easier to remember.’
Livings took a bare two hours' sleep that night.
By the following morning he had rough-planned all three houses and produced elegant little water colours to show their appearance.
‘Theme and variations,’ he said proudly.
It was certainly most elegant.
For the labourers he had produced, on a twenty-seven by twenty-four-foot ground plan, a unit containing a lobby, living room, scullery, indoor w.c., and one large and two small bedrooms.
These units were grouped in blocks of four, two down and two up, with a central entranceway.
And each four-unit block stood on a quarter-acre plot, allowing each family a seventy-five-by-thirty-foot vegetable patch.
The mechanics had basically the same but with an extra hundred-square-foot room at the back.
The overseers had exactly twice the labourers' allowance, having both the upstairs unit and the one downstairs.
Their gardens, too, were twice as big as the labourers'.
‘You see,’ Livings said, ‘they all have part of what is basically the same building.
Labourers get a quarter-building; overseers have a half-building; mechanics get a quarter-building with an extra room.
It's easy to convert any one to any other.
For instance, if that's an overseer's house and you extend the town and want to turn it into two labourers’ houses, all you do is add a w.c. upstairs, change the stair entry, and remove the coloured-tile decoration from the balcony and cornice.’
They were very impressed.
John could see some trivial improvements but deferred any mention of them.
‘Any idea of cost?’ he asked.
‘About five hundred and sixty pounds per building.
That includes builder's profit of fifty.
For each labourer's unit it comes to one hundred and fifty with the land.
John rolled his eyes as he did a rough calculation.
‘Two shillings a week rent.
It sounds marvellous.’
‘Wait wait wait,’ Nora called.
‘Sewerage?
Water?
Repairs?
Insurance?
Share of civic provisions?
Roads?’
John drew breath to speak, but she continued: ‘It's no answer to say the company will bear part of the cost.
We've got to know the size of the millstone before we hang it around someone's neck.’
‘It's a good point.
I'm convinced.’
‘It's your visiting manufacturer you have to convince.
If  you can tell him the whole town pays for itself, that's far more impressive than —’
‘I agree.
I've said it.
Just work it out.’
Livings' head went left, right, left, right.
Ten minutes later Nora said-’ With two thousand dwellings, the weekly rent would be four shillings for a labourer, four and tenpence for a mechanic, and eight shillings for an overseer.’
‘Still very cheap,’ Livings said.
‘What are you allowing on the civic side’
Nora looked back at her figures.
‘Roads, park, dispensary, institute, and so on— a hundred and twenty thousand pounds; repairs and upkeep, recurring, four thousand…’ and so on through all the elements that make for the running of a town, ending with the caution that it was ‘all very round-figurey.’
‘It sounds of the right order,’ John said.
‘I can't believe the rents are so low.’
Nora checked a sample of them again.
‘Well, they are,’ she confirmed.
She was feeling quite excited now.
On her properties she usually thought only of leasehold for the most superior housing, as at Alderley Edge, where the houses had between one and five acres each.
She wondered that she had never done the calculations for renting humbler and more close-packed estates.
Of course, there was the cost of building and repairing, the cost of collecting rents, bad debts, quick turnover of tenancies, property empty.
No, it was not for her.
Not yet, anyway.
‘How much more would it be,’ John asked, ‘if you added a modest profit to us on those outlays?’
Nora smiled sweetly.
‘It never occurred to me not to do that in the first place,’ she said.
‘Three per cent.
Already in.’
Later he teased her for her character-reading ability.
‘That man's no lecher,’ he said of Livings.
‘You've found the cure,’ she said.
‘Fame and a fat fee.’
Chapter 30
Flynn's great progress with the GS&W; line astonished even John, who already had the highest opinion of the man.
It was not merely that he had the work done quickly but he had done it thinkingly.
For instance, there was a shortage of surveyors in Ireland at that time; the perennial shortage of all skilled artisans and middle-class professionals had been made worse by the demand for public works to relieve the distress following the potato disease.
Trevelyan at the Treasury insisted that every scheme should be properly surveyed and costed, and be personally authorized by him in London, before work began.
So surveyors were in great demand all over the country.
Flynn had overcome this shortage by holding a night school for his gangers, where he taught the simple precepts of laying down a line on the ground from a survey map.
Then each ganger was taught how to range the first curve he would be working on.
If it was a simple curve, he was taught the ‘ranging by offsets’ technique, which needed no theodolite.
If it was a complex curve, starting lazy and getting tight, say, Flynn made up a set of templates, each consisting of a plank and three nails to mark the tangent and the offset sighting lines.
These planks he marked A, B, C, etc., and all the man had to do was to sight along them in the proper order and he could not help getting the line right.
This, in turn, freed his one surveyor to do the really difficult parts — where sight lines were obstructed, for instance— and the parts where errors would be very costly, such as embankments and cuttings.
It is true that there were one or two errors; but they were all on level ground and cost little to rectify.
And it is certainly true that the surveying profession was outraged at the ‘Flynn system,’ as it was soon called.
For years afterward, whenever a line was accidentally misaligned (as happened, for instance, at Sough Tunnel on the Blackburn & bolton in 1847), it was always said to have been ‘laid out on the Flynn principle.’
But the joke was most unfair, for the Flynn system enabled Stevenson's to lay out the line and start preparing the rail bed from a number of focal points along its path without waiting for survey engineers.
By April, track laying had got beyond Lucan, over eight miles from Dublin.
John was confident enough then to leave Flynn to it and to go off himself to look at the proposed routes of the Waterford & limerick and the Waterford & kilkenny lines, both of which had been authorized by Parliament last year but neither of which had yet gone to tender.
He was making these trips at the suggestion of Lucas, the engineer to the GS&W;, who said that if the distress got much worse, the government could hardly resist appeals to include authorized railways in the list of acceptable public works.
Lucas ‘lent’ John a guide whose name sounded very like MacMinimum — whose baptismal name, More, made this unusual surname even less likely.
John listened hard at each introduction and heard, variously, MacMahanon, MacManamon, MacMarneymum, and — once-MacMillan; he gave up and settled once again for MacMinimum, to which the man invariably answered without so much as the lifting of an eyebrow.
MacMinimum's relationship to the GS&W; remained obscure.
‘Do you work for the company?’
John asked, when they were set out on their journey.
‘I do work for them,’ was the reply.
‘That is, I do some work.
But also for others.’
‘For the Waterford & limerick , for instance?’
‘Oh, of course.’
He spoke as if he were giving elocution lessons in the Irish accent.
‘And the Waterford & kilkenny ?’
‘Beyond doubt.’
Several minutes later he added: ‘But I would not like to give you the impression I have worked for either of them yet.’
‘Do you have an interest in them?’
John asked, meaning, of course, a financial interest.
‘Oh, I'm deeply interested in them, and always have been,’ he drawled.
And again, long moments later, he added the  qualification: ‘Though I want to tell you one thing — I know very little about them.’
John began to wonder whether More MacMinimum was not, after all, a most apt name for this man; perhaps, indeed, he was the figment of his own name.
Half an hour in his company left John feeling that nothing of that sort was impossible.
Most countries that have both mountains and seaboard usually have their highest points somewhere near the middle; they are built on the principle of the pitched roof.
But Ireland is like four pitched roofs built around a central depression.
As a result, more than three-quarters of its considerable rainfall does not easily run off to the sea.
In Ireland, even in high summer they say, never bet on mirages; as you approach ever closer to those distant shimmering patches, they go on shimmering until they force you to detour around them — or get wet.
This accident of geography has created a vast central bog.
It extends up and over all but the highest mountains, between whose feet all main roads and railroads must thread their way.
There was thus little difficult for the GS&W; in choosing its line from Dublin to Cork.
It had to go south of the Slieve Bloom mountains, on the southern rim of the central depression, just as it had to go north of the Ballyhoura mountains, seventy miles farther to the southwest.
John had ridden this route the previous year, before he had tendered for the contract.
He felt a superstitious, almost fatalistic reluctance to look too closely now, in case he discovered some horror he had overlooked on that earlier journey, for toe tender was accepted and the price could not be varied.
So he was pleased enough that MacMinimum was a hard rider and got them to Tipperary in only two days.
John noticed that as they left the rich pastures of Leinster and rode into Munster the degree of destitution worsened considerably.
Even in Queen's County, in the Great Heath of Maryborough, still technically in Leinster, they saw appalling signs of starvation — though it moved John far more than it seemed to move MacMinimum.
‘Sure aren't they like that every year,’ he said.
That evening, at the Royal in Tipperary, John asked MacMinimum if that was really so — was the distress always as bad as they had seen it today?
He replied that he knew damn all about it but would swear it was.
They were dining at a common table, and a man sitting opposite to them begged to differ.
Ormond, he said his name was, Captain Cashel Ormond.
Not only was the distress worse, it had been aggravated by interference from Westminster.
Would they wait now while he took another slice off the joint?
While he was away at the buffet, MacMinimum said quietly to John: ‘For God's sake, say not a word on railways.
The quare fella here is Master of the Tipperary and they hunt all along the valley of the Suir — the way the line is to go.
Sure he'd kill ye.’
John began to understand why Lucas had sent MacMinimum along with him.
Ormond returned.
First he tried, not very energetically, to find out what John's business was.
When he failed, he reverted quickly to the subject of the distress.
‘You were blaming the government?’
John prompted.
‘Indeed, sir.
They have no notion of what monster they have formed.
If they had said no help would be forthcoming and no stock of food had been set aside and no extraordinary public works would be undertaken, they might have provided all three by stealth and so avoided a great nuisance.
But by God, when governments meddle with labour, trade, and sup ply, it's time to look to your shutters and locks.’
‘Isn't that the truth of it, sir,’ MacMinimum said.
‘It is.
It is,’ Ormond confirmed.
‘Look at it here.
Not a man gone to the English harvest, because the Board of Works had promised work in Ireland.’
‘Not promised,’ John corrected.
‘You explain that to the countryside here!
Wasn't there three thousand men in Tipperary last Saturday in a riot for work, outside this very building.
And the Relief Committee and the Board of Works inspector upstairs — four of them go out on the balcony, and there was a silence would have lifted off your hat.
And every man out there, three thousand I say, goes down on his knees!
In the street!
The Board of Works sits at God's right hand.’
He grinned and beckoned John conspiratorially close.
‘Now you know, sir, and I know, that  the Board of Works comprises four clerks working in a back corridor of Dublin Castle, trying desperately to reduce a mountain of ten thousand schemes to order.
And we know that when they're finished, though God knows when that will be, the schemes that survive must all be sent on to Whitehall where Trevelyan, and Trevelyan alone, will pronounce upon them.
And another thing we know is that when word finally arrives back to Clonahoe or Ballyeen that they can build their road as a relief work, there'll be no one there fit to supervise it.’
‘Not the poor law guardians?’
John asked.
‘Surely they are the ideal people?’
‘Of course they are, but that bas nothing to do with it.
The law provides that they may administer indoor relief; they may not touch outdoor relief!
So we shall see hundreds of gangs of idle men, smoking and drinking, and half-building roads that no one needs anyway.’
‘Why don-t they undertake drainage?’
John asked, remembering the appalling wetness of much of the land they hat splashed across that day.
‘God knows you could do with it!’
‘Sure that's the truth!’
MacMinimum said.
‘That, too, is forbidden,’ Ormond explained.
‘But why, for God's sake!’
‘Because some individuals might benefit more than others and the rule for public works is that all must benefit indifferently, or none may benefit at all.
And meanwhile, next year's potatoes will not be planted because the men who should be doing it are on the public works instead — and they are on the public works because that is the only place they can get money to buy the meal they need to replace the potato that failed.’
‘And of course,’ John said, thinking be could see the end of this train of thought, ‘the price of meal is bound to rise beyond their reach.’
But Ormond shook his head.
‘Would to God that were true!
Even though it would go hard with the poor for this year.
But Trevelyan has brought in over a hundred thousand pounds’ worth of Indian corn from America, all of it held in the Commissariat depots.
Vile yellow stuff it is, hard as flintstone.
The people call it Peel's brimstone.
And the sole purpose of this corn is not to relieve starvation, but to release  onto the market whenever the price rises.
Their aim is to keep down the price of meal!’
John shrugged in resignation and disgust.
The lunacy of it!
He had seen enough of the country to know that, outside the main towns, there was no mercantile system of any kind.
He and MacMinimum had ridden through parish after parish, in one of the more prosperous parts of the country, without seeing a single shop of any description.
If the government wanted to encourage a new trade in supplying meal to the populace, the last way to do it was to remove all profit from the enterprise.
‘Trevelyan has a thousand eyes, they say,’ Ormond added.
‘Well, I'll tell ye — nine hundred and ninety-nine of them are glued to the Holy Writ of Economic Theory; the remaining one, which ought to be fixed on Ireland, is blind.’
‘And deaf,’ MacMinimum said.
They talked on for the best part of an hour, ending in agreement that there was no solution to this problem, short of the mass emigration of millions.
The potato had been Ireland's ruin.
It had encouraged the growth of a vast population who had sprawled over the land, preventing its improvement; and because they needed no money in order to survive — for their sole equipment was a spade — they acted as a monstrous brake on the monied system, a millstone around the necks of those who sought to improve land and trade.
If they could be cleared, there was some hope for the country; while they remained, there was none.
It was a long while before John got to sleep that night.
Something Flynn had once said to him kept repeating itself in his mind.
‘Don't you think that if after seven hundred years of London government, you can't do better than this, you ought to leave Ireland to govern itself, and get out with the best grace you may?’
Flynn, of course, meant that the English government was uncaring and malignant — out to break Ireland and keep her as an inexhaustible well of cheap labour and a fertile nursery for the British army.
But John's talk with Ormond had shown him that the danger was far more insidious: The corruption of a kindly, well-intentioned, paternal government could do more harm than the worst of tyrannies.
Men who might have gone to England and earned good wages at the harvest now stayed at home and waited for relief work at one-third of those rates.
Traders who might have  started a line in meal for the populace would not even think of it, knowing that the government was always ready to step in and depress the price.
And landlords and people of substance, who might normally offer charitable relief of their own, would certainly guard their purses as long as the government declared itself to be the great provider.
The result of such ‘government’ would be a nation in which all enterprise was stifled, all charity smothered, all industry stagnant, and all self-reliance stultified.
It would be the ultimate in the corruption of a people by paternal kindliness — a corruption that had already taken great hold in the country.
Its eradication would inevitably be painful and the miseries of the people would be intense; but they would even so be light compared with the miseries of eternal enslavement at the wheel of poverty and relief works.
Perhaps the famine — like the plagues of Egypt of old — was sent by God as a warning to England and Ireland to turn from this course while time still offered.
He was glad to hear that their priests were telling the people that the potato murrain was a visitation of the Almighty; he only hoped they went on to draw the full lesson.
These convictions of his were to be tested hard in the days that followed.
The first of those tests came the following afternoon, when they were riding along that stretch of the route, around Carrick-on-Suir, where the rail was to run near the northern bank of the river for the best part of ten miles.
It was a bright, breezy day, with plenty of blue sky, now filled with shoals of pale, dove-grey cloud, now empty of all but the merest  wisps of white.
On every side of them, as they rode down the winding valley of the Suir from Clonmel to Carrick, stretched great rolling hills, rising to the distant mountains — Slievenaman to the north, Comeragh to the south.
The green of the spring grass and of the new leaves upon the trees was so intense that even riding through it for hours could not dim John's sense of wonder.
In fact, the beauty all around was so breathtaking that, for the first time in his life, he actually caught himself thinking what a shame it would be to put a railway line here, to bring dirt and clamour to this Eden.
And it was at that moment, half a mile before Carrick-on-Suir, that they heard an actual clamour — of angry voices, hundreds of angry voices.
John, who had many times heard the distant rioting of armies of drunken, brawling navvies on a payday randy, recognized it at once.
‘The route goes north of the town,’ MacMinimum said with relief.
‘We'd best stay clear.’
‘You may,’ John answered.
‘I want to see this.’
And he spurred his hack forward at a canter down the hill and into the town.
The noise guided him straight to the wharfs, down on the river side, for this part of the Suir is also an inland navigation up to Clonmel.
The centre of the turmoil was a string of ten barges so laden with grain that only inches of freeboard remained.
At first John imagined that this was relief food on its way to a Commissariat depot, for it was guarded by a large body of troops, about eighty infantry and fifty cavalry as well as two field guns and their crews — half on one bank, half on the other.
But the cry that went up from the angry crowd, kept at bay by the military, was ‘Ireland starves, England profits!’
Clearly this was a normal commercial shipment of grain for export.
John had come to the tow path as the stragglers of the crowd were passing.
As soon as he saw their mood he made no attempt to join or follow; and the people, seeing he had not the cut of a government man, passed him by.
All were in old, tattered clothes, some in outright rags; many were barefoot and hatless.
Starvation gave a gaunt menace to their sullen anger — and they were angry, he could not doubt it.
He had seen angry mobs in England.
It is rare that a large crowd — and there must, he calculated, have been at least two thousand there — is entirely united in any mood.
If they are happy, there will always be at least two men fighting, and children crying; if they are annoyed, there will always be at least two swapping jokes, and youngsters will be skipping at the fringe.
But here there was none of that.
They were angry to the point of erupting into riot.
It would need only a charge of the cavalry, or a shot fired over their heads, to set them off.
As the stragglers passed he noticed a man sitting on a tree root, nursing a bloodstained foot.
He was ragged and starved, one of the mob.
‘Are you hurt?’
John asked.
‘Ah — I trod on glass beyond.’
John got down to look.
’‘T will stop soon enough,’ the man said.
It was badly cut and needed stitching.
‘I'll take you to a doctor,’ he said.
‘I have no money.’
‘Would he refuse your
‘He'd send me to the dispensary at the workhouse.’
‘I'll take you there, then.’
‘It's not open until tomorrow, d'ye understand.
It's the same doctor.
I thank you now, but it'll be well.’
The man took a lot of convincing that it would not be well unless it was stitched; and when John said that he would pay, there was a further argument.
In the end the man agreed to take a loan of two shillings, and John's card, and he promised to send repayment when he was next in funds.
John got him to sit facing backward in the saddle, resting the foot on the horse's rump.
The man's fastidiousness over money marked him as one not belonging to the mendicant class, and on the way to the doctor's John asked him about himself.
He was a small farmer, with three acres and a stone house, plastered walls within.
His name was Conroy.
His rent was thirty-six pounds a year, which was very hard on him.
Some of the landlords had reduced or cancelled the rents this year; but his, a near-bankrupt squireen in a mouldering mansion with half its roof gone, could afford no abatement.
Conroy had had to sell his entire grain harvest of last summer, and the family's pig, to raise the money.
‘It's on the navigation there this very minute,’ he said.
If he had eaten the grain instead, he and his family would not now be starving, but they would be homeless and the remains of the grain would have been seized for the debt.
They would be beginning to starve; and once they had dropped to the level of homeless, destitute paupers they would never again rise.
He had had no choice but to ignore the whimpering of his hungry children and take the grain to market.
‘I can bear it all,’ he said, ‘but the keening of the little girls is hard…hard.’
For John it was hard at that moment to remember the calm imperatives of economic law.
It was even harder the following day when he and MacMinimum rode north out of Waterford along the proposed route of the other railway, the Waterford & kilkenny .
It was only 31 1/4 miles, with a branch of 6 1/4 to Kells, so they expected to finish within the day.
They covered barely a third of that distance.
As he wrote to Nora:
We had gone through Mullinavat and came to a village whose name I do not know — if it ever had one.
If it did, it will surely live forever in the annals of infamy; but for the mapmaker it has ceased to exist.
When we came to it, the militia had been there already for about an hour.
They had come in support of the constabulary, who had come in support of the agents of the landlord, a certain Mrs. Pedelty.
The village, comprising forty-nine houses, solidly built and dry, with plastered walls, was upon her land and she wished it cleared.
The tenants were not in arrears with their rent and they had, entirely by their own industry, cleared and reclaimed more than two hundred and fifty acres of bog.
When the landlord's agents and the militia arrived, the tenants offered the whole of next year's rent in advance if only Mrs. Pedelty would leave them at peace; it had taken half an hour to get word to her of this offer and to bring back her refusal Then they asked for compensation for the land they had cleared and she sent back to say if they persisted in the claim she would sue for dilapidation and waste.
The sergeant of the constabulary said that any change in land or buildings by a tenant, even an obvious improvement, was, in the eyes of the law, a ‘waste’ and entitled the landlord to compensation.
The villagers then, seeing they had no defence anywhere, rushed indoors and put up what pathetic barriers they could.
It was at this moment when MacMinimum and I arrived.
He was for going on at once, but I would stay; so he said he would return to Mullinavat and wait for me in a bar there.
The officer in charge of the militia refused to let his men take part in the eviction, saying they were there merely to prevent disorder.
Neither he nor his men had stomach for such business.
The implication that the constabulary  were fomenting disorder angered the sergeant, but he commanded his men to assist the bailiff and agents in evicting the tenants.
The scenes that followed were so piteous that even now, two days after, I tremble to recall them; and the screams of the women and frightened children are with me day and night.
They were dragged, shrieking and weeping from their homes and hurled like so much old clothing into the middle of the road.
They were not even allowed to take such belongings as they had — pots and stools and the like.
I saw one young boy, of thirteen I would say, have his leg broken by one agent — a brute of a man who grinned when the lad cried out.
I actually heard the bone break though I was ten paces away.
I went to the sergeant and told him this, but he ordered me to be on my way.
I then said I was a friend of Sir Randolph Routh and that if the agent was not immediately taken in charge for assault, I should send in the strongest adverse report on his conduct of this entire vile business.
The agent then walked away with a constable, ostensibly in arrest, but whether they spent the day over the brow of the hill twiddling their thumbs I cannot say.
At least I have the man's name and have written to the Inspectorate of Constabulary at Dublin Castle and to the Sheriff of Kilkenny County.
As soon as they had a family got out, they rushed indoors with poles and burst out the slates near the ridge tree of the roof.
Then a man would go up on a ladder outside and put a hook on a chain around the ridge tree.
The other end was already harnessed to a team of horses, so it was easy work pulling off the entire roof in one smack.
Forty-nine houses they wasted in this way.
On some, the roofs were so flimsy they could pull them off with rakes alone.
You may imagine the anguish of the people as this was going on.
The men and women were on their knees, begging the agents and constables not to persist with the evictions.
And then the wailing that went up and the curses that fell as the roof came off.
I confess without shame I was unmanned — choked with dust and tears both.
I spoke to many of the soldiers, they were of the 72nd Highland, and they answered to a man that they  detested the business.
I saw several give money to the people.
I gave them all I had, too, which amounted to 51. 2s. 4d.
Shortly after two, when all the roofs were off, they stopped for a bite and a drink.
Then the people were allowed back in to salvage what they could of their possessions.
Which was precious little (yet precious to them, for all that).
I saw one woman standing at the door of her ruined home, crying and bewildered, with dried blood on her forehead.
She had in her hand a broken china plate, and I asked-her what it was.
‘It's my life away,’ she said.
Yet such is the fortitude of these people (remember they were not destitute paupers but were, by Irish standards, in a fair prosperous way) that before evening they had built shelters of furze and stone out along the wayside.
And such is the ruthlessness of authority here, that they were hunted out even from these rude shelters and scattered far and wide over the country.
Three constables went along with torches, firing the furze.
There was one crippled young girl did not get out in time and had her hair and neck and face badly burned.
There is no poor law infirmary nearer than Waterford, so I took her there, and that was the last I saw of that dreadful day.
When MacMinimum and I rode through the next day, they were pulling the walls down and even uprooting the foundations.
A little way on we came to another village, where some of the evicted had been taken in and given shelter.
The constabulary was hard at work driving them out again and giving out cautions that whoever took in any of the evicted would himself be turned out.
So Mrs. Pedelty (who collects 11,0001. in rent and has not subscribed one farthing in relief) has regained several hundred valuable acres, while the British Treasury has acquired two hundred and fifty more mouths that can be fed only through relief.
And Ireland has another cause to detest us — and rightly, I say.
The tolerance and friendly hospitality that greets me everywhere baffles my comprehension.
When I told Flynn of this, he said, ‘Oh, that's been going on for centuries, did you not know?’
And when I  showed him a list of names I had collected (why, I do not know, I had some notion of an appeal or inquiry), he read: ‘Lynch, Connally, Egan, Kelly…etc.’ and then he looked at me and added, ‘I was looking at the lists of those who died in the recent great victories of general Gough at Aliwal and Sobraon in India.
I'd swear half of it was Lynches, Connallys, Egans, Kellys…etc.
‘Roll of honour,’ it said, ‘of those who died for their country.’’
My dearest, I tell myself — what you will certainly say — that it is a landowner's inalienable right to do what he wishes with his own land I know all this — yet it does not stifle the cries of terrified children and the weeping of their parents.
It does not efface the picture I have of that young cripple I carried ten miles before me on my horse, she mad with pain, blistered from her shoulders to her temple; and the cloying smell of her burns is there now in my nostrils.
T am too wounded still to say what –s right.
I know that all I saw was wrong.
Three days later this letter was followed by another, scribbled in great haste:
After sending my last I felt compelled to turn about and go back to Waterford for news of the little burned girl, whose name is Mary Coen.
Since I had taken her from her people, I felt in some degree responsible for seeing them together again.
I have searched high and low and cannot find them I have sent others out, two dozen, also seeking, and they cannot find them either.
The constabulary have also (they claim) made inquiry, to no avail.
What shall I do?
What must I do?
I am minded to bring the child, Mary back to England with me.
We may surely find her a place.
even though she is crippled.
She could no doubt be taught to sew or clean things.
She hardly needs the use of a leg for that.
Her family were decent folk.
I cannot leave her in this bastille.
I wish you were here.
Could you come and see to the arrangements?
I will await you here.
If rage had been a fuel, Nora would have been in Waterford within the hour.
As it was, she steamed from Liverpool that night and was with John the following evening.
Her way to Liverpool ran through the Pennines via Summit Tunnel on the Manchester & leeds — Stevenson's first contract.
As the train drew near she looked out for Rough Stones, the house up on the hillside where they had made their first home; but it was night, and all she saw was a glimmer that could as well have been a shepherd's lantern.
And then the train swept into the tunnel.
She was glad not to have seen the place.
It had held too many of her hopes, too much optimism, to suit her present anger and despair.
She was furious at his neglect of the rest of the business — she told herself.
He was behaving in a secretive, high-handed way — the way that had led to their disastrous partnership with Beador.
This had all the signs of that same flawed judgement.
That was another good reason to be angry.
And he was going soft.
He was losing his grip on reality.
He was even assuming that she was a willing accomplice in all of this…this madness.
He did not even consider that she might hold the contrary viewpoint.
Yd hadn't she been the one who pulled them out of the mess, his mess, last time?
And she still hadn't got much in the way of new property to recompense her loss — yet here he was behaving in this lofty, inconsiderate way, as if she didn't count at all.
Well, she would show him!
She did not pause to marvel that she had so many reasons for anger — as if the anger grew first, and grew tall, before any reason came along to prop it up.
The ready smile of welcome left John's face the moment he saw her.
‘Eay, ye look badly,’ he said.
‘I'm fit,’ she answered curtly.
‘Fit for what has to be done here.’
It had never once crossed his mind that she would take exception to what he had done.
Even now, when her anger was plain, he could not at once adjust to the notion.
‘You're not…vexed, are you?’ he asked incredulously.
‘Sure not.’
She let him see what effort it cost to stay calm.
‘I am vexed, John.
And so would ten thousand others be if they knew of this…what can we call it?
Escapade?
Escape, anyway.
Escape from your duty.’
‘Duty?’
The word stung him.
‘Plain duty.
Duty to a dozen railway companies.
Duty to every man who works for us.
To every man as trusts you and has tied his fortune to yours.
I don't know what sort of weighing scale you've found to make one child heavier than all that.’
He smiled at her when she said the word ‘child’ and held out his hand.
‘Come and see her,’ he said.
‘I'll do no such thing.’
She saw the hotel porter preparing to carry her bags from the post chaise.
‘Leave it all there,’ she said sharply.
Her meaning was not lost on John, but still he held forth his hand.
‘Come on, love.
At least see the child.’
She was adamant.
‘I've come here to restore your judgement,’ she said.
‘Not to be swayed out of mine.
I'll not see her.’
‘You must,’ he said and began walking away down the street.
He did not look behind him until he reached the corner.
When he saw she still held her ground he had to turn and come back.
‘Afraid you might, after all, see my side of it?’ he taunted.
She had to go with him then.
On the way he explained that he'd paid to have the girl moved out of the workhouse into the direct care of a nurse in the parish.
‘But they'll not let her beyond the parish-union boundary except by way of proper apprenticeship,’ he added.
Daylight was quickly fading as they walked up the street to the nurse's house.
The nurse, a sprightly, middle-aged woman, full of nervous good humour, was set for half an hour's good jawing before she would think of showing them the girl, but John cut her short.
The girl lay stiffly, half sitting on top of her bed, a gaunt little scarecrow in patched and threadbare workhouse reach-me-downs.
The room was low, and precious little of the falling day crept in at the one small, grimy window.
‘Hello then, Mary,’ John said.
‘Here is Mrs. Stevenson come to help us.’
The girl's head was swaddled in dressing made from torn sheeting.
She kept as still as possible; every slight movement made her whimper.
Nora thought she might be dying.
The nurse left them alone with her, one on each side of the little bed.
Nora had not needed to see the child in order to understand what had moved John to behave as he did.
But to her mind it still did not excuse his neglect of everything else.
She looked around the room.
‘Well,’ she said.
‘It's clean.
It's dry.
It's not cold.
Where is the difficulty?’
He stiffened angrily and was about to speak when she cut him short.
‘See thou — I came through Summit Tunnel last night.
It put me in mind of the man I met there, and Ill tell you for free, you're nothing like him.
There was a man who'd just lived through an explosion underground, who turned round and sawed off Pengilly's injured leg smack smooth, who passed the night forging a banker's letter of credit, and who spent next day drawing wool over the eyes of the Manchester & leeds directors.
That was a man who knew where the main chance was and how to take it.
He'd never have spent a week milksopping around this godforsaken backwater on account of— one little bag of bones.’
She smiled at Mary, who smiled wanly back.
John pressed his knuckles into his eyesockets, trying to contain his anger in front of the child.
‘You cannot have read my letters,’ he began.
‘What?’ she asked.
‘About the evictions?
They weren't the first.
Nor will they be the last, I daresay.
Why you had to go and involve yourself —’
‘But I was involved.
I was involved because I was there.
I was involved because they were people, not animals, that were treated so.’
He gestured at Mary.
‘Well, where do we stop, John?
Why don't we shoulder all the burdens of this wretched country?
Eh?
And what about England?
Things every bit as bad happen there, too.
Any day of the week.’
‘At least you agreed it's bad.’
‘Of course I do.
I find Mrs. Pedelty despicable.
I hope all doors are barred against her.
I hope she's denounced from the pulpit.’
‘And?
That's all?’
‘Is it not enough?’
‘Certainly not.
At the very least the law on evictions must be changed.’
Nora could not believe it.
She began to shiver and she felt her heart hammering in anger.
‘You must be mad!’ she said.
‘You did not see what I saw.’
‘I could see a hundred evictions and still keep a level head on that subject.
It's a hard fact of life, but a landlord must be free to do as he likes with his own land.
If the law were to curtail that right in any way, the value of land would fall.
If that happened, then people of enterprise would stop putting their money into land.
And agricultural progress would halt.
Or even decline.
Think of the destitution and misery that would cause.
Not in one village but in thousands.
You can't cure one evil by bringing in another a thousand times more pernicious.’
What an absurd discussion, she thought, to be having in front of this child!
He laughed mirthlessly, despairing of her understanding, ‘You can't expect those who are evicted to see it like that.’
‘I do,’ she said stoutly.
‘I've been evicted too, you know.
When our dad died, we were turned out by the Bridgewater agent.
I screamed murder at him but I never questioned his right, though I had the rent in my hand.’
‘It's different here in Ireland.
You can have no idea —’
‘I believe they must have different water, or different air or something.
It seems to rot the backbone out of good men.’
If they had been on the same side of the bed, he would have struck her.
As it was, he clenched his fist and glared at her across the gulf that divided them.
A whimper from the girl distracted them.
Both looked down at her.
Large tears brimmed in her eyes as she stared dumbly from one to the other.
When she blinked, the tears overflowed and ran back along her cheekbones to her ears, where the swaddling absorbed them.
She raised her hands feebly outward; the left to John, the right to Nora.
She had nothing else to offer them.
Ashamed, each took one shivering hand.
The girl shut her eyes and gripped back for dear life.
Neither of them felt able to speak.
‘I hope you're satisfied,’ Nora said, breaking the silence at last.
Before John could answer, she sat down at the child's side, took out a lace handkerchief, and, with her free hand, dabbed at the run of the tears.
‘It isn't you, Mary,’ she said.
‘It's not you, popsie.
You're going to be all right.
You'll be safe here, and we'll go on looking for your mammy and daddy.
Have no fear.’
She spoke in this way until the girl's hand went limp and she seemed to have fallen into a doze.
Nora looked up to see John doing his best to hide a smile  of triumph.
‘I mean we'll pay someone to do it for us,’ she snapped at him.
‘Which is what should have been done a week since.’
‘Shhh!’ he whispered, grinning.
Outside in the street, where she could raise her voice again, she almost shouted at him, telling him he was to stop behaving as if he had been right and she wrong — as if he believed she now shared his views and endorsed his ridiculous maunderings.
When he refused, and persisted in his lofty, tolerant, self-satisfaction, she understood that only some drastic gesture would persuade him of her seriousness.
So when he went to take his bath, she hired a fresh chaise, had her luggage transferred to it, and left at once for Dublin.
She was tired enough then to feel a certain caustic amusement that John's infidelity to the firm touched her so much more on the raw than his infidelity to her.
Chapter 31
Nora's abrupt departure had, at first, the desired effect upon John.
That very night he saw a lawyer, the priest, the chairman of the poor law guardians, and the nurse, putting in hand all the arrangement necessary to secure Mary's immediate future.
Early the following day he, too, set out for Dublin.
The more he thought about it, though, the less pleased he felt.
He told himself he had fully intended to make all those arrangements in any case.
Nora's virtual command, reinforced by her petulant departure, had no bearing — except that she had taken all the pleasure out of it for him.
She had turned an act of his own free will into an act of meek obedience to her.
The hurtful things she had said came crowding back in his memory.
They became less and less forgivable as time cooled the heat of the moments in which they had been spoken.
She was getting too damned arrogant.
Flying across England and Ireland like that to deliver him an angry homily on his duty to his firm!
Well, he'd have a flea or two to put in her ear next time they met.
Ever since he'd given her that power of attorney she'd been getting above herself.
He ought never to have listened to Chambers' advice on that.
Yet it was comforting, too, when he was alone — especially at night — to say her name to himself and to think of all the good things about her.
There were still plenty of them, too.
Business had piled up while he had been ‘milksopping’ around in Waterford.
He arrived back in Dublin to find no trace of Nora — and several urgent letters, each making demands on his time.
Before he left he wrote to Routh suggesting that if some of the money now wasted utterly in relief works were instead put into interest-free loans to the Irish railways, a great deal of employment would follow, not only on the lines but in the trade they would stimulate.
His anger at the ineptitude of the present government action led him to suggest that ‘when the loans were repaid and the revenues from new commerce were collected, the Treasury might even be able to soothe Parliament with the claim that it had, after all, turned famine into a going concern.’
Once the letter was sent he regretted the remark — and he got a frosty reply from Sir Randolph.
The lack of judgement that led him to write to Routh in such a vein was Nora's fault.
He had not realized how deeply she had disturbed him.
The most urgent of his letters was from Jack Whitaker, his deputy on the Chester & holyhead line through North Wales.
Whitaker had been with him from the very start, a solid, dependable man who knew his own limitations.
Chiefly he lacked the flair, or the confidence, for tackling out-of-the-way problems, especially among the men.
His trouble this time was that masons, carpenters, and other mechanics were leaving the job almost as soon as they started, because of the outrageous rents being demanded by the people with houses bordering the line, especially in Rhyll, where they wanted ten shillings a week just for a room.
John could easily believe it; be remembered how, when he was walking the route of that particular line, he had once asked for a glass of water at a cottage and been charged eightpence for it.
Another letter was from Robert Stephenson, son of the great George, who was the engineer to the Chester & holyhead he was eager to advance the Conway tubular bridge, and could John meet him at Conway in the coming week?
The worst of the lodgings in Rhyll consisted of one dirty room with decaying plaster and a leaking roof, over a coal merchant's in the narrow part of the town.
Here a carpenter and his wife were lodged.
‘And it's ten shillings a week?’ he asked the man.
‘Ten and sixpence,’ the carpenter said.
‘He wanted twelve shillings.
I said we'd sooner sleep under the hedges.
But I shall leave at the end of this week, Lord John.
I can't pay a third of the wage in lodgings.’
All the while the coal merchant looked on, smiling.
‘Why do you charge so much?’
John asked him.
‘You know the room is not worth two shillings, much less ten.’
‘It's worth what it will fetch, see,’ the man said, unruffled.
‘Who says only two shillings?
You.
I say twelve, and I let it for less because I'm soft-hearted.
Rooms is scarce in Rhyll, see.
Demand and supply.
I do both, see.’
One way and another John had had his fill of the theory of price lately, and the last person he wanted to take lessons in economics from was an avaricious north Welsh merchant.
‘I'll teach you about ‘demand and supply,’ sir,’he said angrily.
‘You shall learn of the law of avarice — a gluttonous trader makes a glutted market.
In ten days no man of mine will seek a single lodging in Rhyll.
No, nor anywhere else in this neighbourhood.’
He had no idea how he was going to fulfil this promise-he knew only that he was determined to teach these greedy people a lesson.
‘What now, guvnor?’
Jack Whitaker asked when they were on their way back to the workings.
‘That's a good question, Jack.
Are you friendly with any farmers locally?’
He had an idea of renting barns, putting up partitions, and making some form of acceptable shelter, at least as a temporary expedient.
But on his way to one of the farmers that Jack had forlornly recommended, John hit upon the real answer: a large timber plantation of about twenty acres — ash, sycamore, larch, balsam poplar, noble fir, silver pine — all in just the right condition for his purpose.
‘Jack!’ he said excitedly.
‘Where's our nearest timber yard, our own yard, where we could handle trees like yon?’
Whitaker looked at them.
They were not so big as to require steam lifting machinery and powered saws.
‘We could handle those here,’ he said.
‘The timber yard's at Mostyn, five miles back.’
So John bought all twenty  acres of timber as it stood.
Ho took three gangs off the line and within a week not a tree was left standing.
A fourth gang had meanwhile laid a narrow bogey line downhill from the woods to the workings and soon a steady flow of timber, all cut to lengths, was arriving at the lower end.
There it was quickly turned into log cabins and dormitories — all erected on company ground along the fringes of the cuttings.
John had never seen men work so willingly or cheerfully.
All had suffered the greed of the local landlords to some extent and the thought of taking this revenge had really fired their spirits.
On payday, at the end of the week, most of them refused their wages and John had to be called to the site to intervene.
‘We think as you're out o’ pocket enough, what wi' buyin' the timber, an' it's to our advantage,’a carpenter explained — the man who had been cheated by the coal merchant.
All the counterarguments flitted through his mind — the law of price and the business of supply and demand again — and he saw how impossibly incongruous they would sound in these circumstances.
They wanted to sacrifice the wage so that they could feel they had personally taken part in the humiliation of the local landlords.
‘Well, I thank you,’ he said.
‘I thank all of you.
But you must know that my main interest is in getting men to stay on this line.
And if it meant the purchase of a hundred acres of timber, I'd count it cash well spent — especially to get men who can work as I've seen you lads work this week!’
Ironical groans began at that.
‘If you put that same elbow grease into finishing this line…
’ He was drowned in laughter and mocking cheers.
‘But seriously now, lads,’ he went on, ‘I'll not be out o’pocket in th' end.
I've worked out that a rent of tenpence a week on each log cabin, or sixpence for each bunk in a dormitory, will just pay me back by the end of this  contract.
Timber and wages.
So you must take the wage.
If ye don't, it'll bugger up all the books.’
He had known it would not satisfy them, and he waited for the rumbles to grow before he said: ‘Very well.
You want more?
You want the chance to spit in the eye of these landlords?’
‘Aye!’ a great raucous cheer went up, joyful at the implied promise.
‘I'll tell you what, then.
Most of them are petty tradesmen.
The worst was a coal merchant.
There's a way we could hit a lot of them, especially that one.
There's enough spare kindling and wood up there, trimmed off the trees, to keep Rhyll warm for a year.’
‘Burn the bloody place!’ called an excited navvy.
‘Nay!’
John said with relish.
‘Cleverer nor that!
If on my time you prepare that waste wood into bundles such as any man could store at home, and if in your own time you will carry those bundles around the town and distribute them free, to rich and poor alike — but not to any man who was landlord to any among us — we may together teach them —’ The rest of his words were drowned in a universal roar of delight.
‘So that's why you wouldn't let them burn the trimmings,’ Whitaker said.
‘I wondered.’
‘Aye.
I had that in mind all week, but I couldn't see how I could afford it.’
Robert Stephenson, when John met him after the week's delay, was amused at the story of the Triumph of Rhyll.
‘You're a lucky man, Stevenson,’ he said.
‘Your men will work with a spirit all summer now.
They always do after something like that.
And now’— he made a gesture that cleared the air around them of all such trivia —‘I want to show you a machine that's going to put some spirit into my work this summer.
If I told you I want to install the first tube of the bridge next March or thereabouts, what'd you say?’
‘I'd say good luck.
And we'll be ready for you.’
Stephenson chuckled.
‘You're good for my digestion,’ he said.
‘I'll tell that to Fairburn when he gets back.’
The machine was a device for punching rivet holes in flat sheets of wrought iron.
The ingenuity of it was that it operated  exactly like a Jacquard loom, which is a loom for weaving tapestries without human control no matter how intricate or varied the design.
It is very easy to devise a machine that will punch one rivet hole every six inches, but imagine a column of newsprint in which every letter o was a hole through the paper, and then imagine that the paper was magnified to a width of two feet and pasted onto a sheet of wrought iron, half an inch thick.
It is easy to imagine, then, the labour and skill that would go into making such random — yet precisely required — holes in the metal and punching them out by hand.
The machine Robert Stephenson was so proud of could punch such a sheer in less than four minutes, never forgetting a hole, never punching a superfluous one.
They watched it chew its faultless way through several plates.
John marvelled at the way it seemed to be thinking for itself.
They left, then, to be able to talk without having to shout over the noise.
The tide was ebbing, and they went down on the steeply shelving bed of the Conway.
They walked over the firm mud, among the seaweed, cuttlefish bones, and the jetsam of the sea below and of the mountains above.
A pack of stray dogs on the far bank tore at the sodden carcase of a dead sheep.
‘Will that machine pay for itself?’
John asked.
Stephenson looked at him cannily.
‘It might, just,’ he said.
‘Why?’
‘I could make you an offer for it when this is over.
It's ideal for boiler plate.’
‘Ah.
When this is over, it will go down the line to Menai.
I want this bridge to be in every way a dress rehearsal for that.
I'd be obliged, Stevenson.
if you'd see to it that as many people as possible, and certainly all your chief people who take part in making this Conway bridge, will be at Menai afterwards.
The lessons we learn here will be invaluable.’
‘I will indeed, sir.’
John said.
‘As to that machine paying for itself, let me tell you that one side of one tube alone has thirty-nine thousand rivets to be inserted.
Seventy-eight thousand holes.
If you count the holes for nuts and bolts, too, there's not far short of seven hundred thousand in the entire structure.
I think it'll pay for itself all right!’
They were approaching the open riverside yard where the  giant square tubes were being assembled, on pontoons that floated with each spring tide.
The base of one tube, four hundred and twelve feet long, was already complete, and the side panels of wrought iron were being added.
It looked huge — far greater than the empty space between the foundations of the towers suggested.
When all the plates were riveted together, the structure would form a square tube fourteen feet wide and about twenty-five feet high overall — big enough for a train to pass through.
Several much smaller tubes, also square, would run at the top and bottom to strengthen it.
The whole would, in effect, form a gigantic hollow girder supported only at its ends.
Two such girders — one for the up line, one for the down — were to be made here at the riverside and floated on the tide, to be fitted into niches in the masonry piers.
Then they would be lifted by hydraulic machinery from above, while masons filled the niches with stone beneath each as it was raised.
‘Does it not tie your stomach in knots to look at it?’
John asked.
‘To think of that vast length of tube supported only at its ends and a whole train running through it.’
‘Think of Menai, then,’ Stephenson said lightly.
‘The same tubes, but forty-eight feet longer — and a hundred feet up, not twenty.
However, none of the models we built failed, so I don't see why these should.’
They watched several rivets being hammered home.
Then Stephenson went forward and tried to force thin metal gauges between.
he plates.
None would penetrate, which seemed to satisfy him.
He returned to John, and they strolled back toward the castle and the site of the railway bridge.
The old road suspension bridge, built by Thomas Telford twenty-four years earlier, spanned the river just downstream of the rail line; its fake medieval towers looked incongruously new against the castle behind it.
‘The city fathers are still determined to have battlements and arrow slits on the rail bridge,’ Stephenson said.
‘I am composing a poem, which begins: ‘Sir Walter Scott, Ought to be shot…’ and I want to work in something about hits and arrow slits, but I'm not ingenious enough.’
John laughed.
‘Why not, on the opening day, conceal in the tube of the bridge a little band of knights in armour on horseback and longbowmen and varlets with pikes and that  sort of thing.
Imagine it!
The engine steams slowly in at one end.
Everyone's eyes turn to the other so await its reappearance.
And — what? what? what I say!— it seemingly flushes out a long-lost medieval army!’
Stephenson roared and howled with laughter, slapping his thigh and stamping in the mud.
‘How I wish I dared!
Oh, would it not be a superb revenge!
Stevenson, you're a cure for dull aches, you really are.’
Day followed day and no letter, no word-of-mouth message, came from John.
Nora's anger, so hot in Ireland, turned cold and hard.
She was damned if she was going to make the first conciliatory move; it would blunt the point of all she had done in Waterford.
But news was meanwhile piling up, news that she would ordinarily have passed immediately to him.
Eventually the accumulation of it forced her to break the silence.
‘If your taste for the dull business of railroad contracting has reawakened,’ she began.
Then she tore up the sheet.
Just facts, she told herself, and began again:
’(i) We have an invitation from Spain to tender for the line Locke has surveyed between Barcelona and Mataro.
(ii) Also several from Italy and Austria, less well advanced.
(iii) I assume you know of the English tenders that are invited — including Scotch.
(iv) I now know Rodet's true manufacturing costs.
(v) We must let them know when we shall visit La Gracieuse this summer.
Tentatively I have told them June.
(vi) Do you need any further information touching any of the foregoing?
(vii) When do you return to Thorpe again?
(viii) Maran Hill is now ours for life.
Sir George will move back to Co.
Durham in May.
We shall take up residence in autumn, not later, for I am to have another child close to Christmas, I believe.
Dutifully, Nora.’
She read it through, added the word ‘yours,’ and sent it to him.
She liked the way she had not openly offered reconciliation yet had managed to imply that forgiveness would not be unreasonably withheld.
It did not please John at all.
Yet he realized it was the best he was likely to get from Nora and that, on balance, he  would do well to think of it as ‘Nora's apology,’ accept it as such, and hope that these aberrations in her behaviour would die away.
Chapter 32
This year Sam was at La Gracieuse before them.
He had, in fact, come over three days earlier and gone straight to Paris.
There he spent two days alone before coming back to Normandy, arriving an hour before the Stevensons and Sarah.
He stood at Rodie's side while she made the courtyard ring with her eerie yodelling welcome.
Nora closed her eyes on tears of joy.
‘That noise!’ she said.
‘All the way over I've been trying to remember it.
Dear Rodie!’
And then there were long minutes of crying and embracing and mangled French-English before they even moved indoors.
In the midst of it, Nora's ‘Hello, Sam love,’ and his ‘Nora luv!’and their warm (but English-warm) embrace seemed like an ice chip.
Only an English eye could have discerned the warmth in the handshake and the ‘Mrs. Cornelius’—‘Mr. Telling’ that Sam and Sarah exchanged.
Rodie was disappointed.
‘Oh,’ she said severely, ‘you must kiss the hand, Monsieur Sam.
But you shall tonight, you see.’
She turned to Sarah.
‘You are going in a bowl.’
‘Really?’
Sarah was bewildered.
Sam's smile showed ho knew what was meant.
‘Oh, yes!
All.’
She threw wide her arms.
‘All of we are going in a bowl.
But it's for the youngs — the youth.’
She narrowed her compass to just Sarah and Sam.
‘The quadrille,’ she said into the face of Sarah's bewilderment.
‘Kiss the hand.’
‘A ball!’
Sarah said.
‘Un bal, hein?’
‘Oui.
What I say.
Tres grand!’
‘Not,’ Nora said to Sarah when Rodie was out of earshot, ‘a wedgefoot bowl, you see.’
The ball was a very grand affair at the chteau of Monsieur Tallien, the man whose name had led John to tell the Rodets that Nora's maiden name was Telling.
Someone said they had two thousand candles lighted that evening, and two servants working full time to replenish them.
Everything else was on the same scale — an orchestra of sixty players to dance to, eight large buffets with four tiers on each so laden with food that hardly an inch of rosewood or mahogany showed, a winter garden where gentlemen could smoke their cigars, and a long terrace where perspiring dancers could escape the candle fumes and wander in the warm, starlit twilight.
But all the wealth and all the lands of the Talliens could not provide the one element that Nora sought: the fragrance of the oaks — the smell of Normandy in spring; for spring was gone for another year.
She danced several dances with John, who then excused himself and went off to talk business with Rodet.
She stood watching him, wishing fiercely that she could go too.
Then something, a movement to her right, caused her to turn that way.
It was only a couple coming in from the terrace, and she was about to look away again when she caught sight of a tall, stooping man standing outside and peering lugubriously at her through the glass.
He smiled and came in from the terrace.
She smiled back and looked away; she was sure they had not been introduced.
‘May I present myself, Mrs. Stevenson, since I am unable to find Madame Rodet to do me the honour?’
He was foreign but not French.
Dutch or German perhaps.
He spoke in English to her.
‘You know Madame Rodet?’
‘A very dear friend.
I am Julius Wolff.
Of Hamburg.’
The name awakened her interest.
‘There is a firm of bankers in Hamburg —’ she began.
‘Gebruder Wolff,’ the man said.
‘The same.’
Nora gave him her hand at that.
‘But, then, we are hardly strangers.’
He kissed it and murmured, ‘Gnadige Frau.’
As he leaned  forward she noticed that his lower eyelids, which were loose and wrinkled, fell free of his eyeballs, like loose pockets.
He had the face of a starved pug with little pearly beads of fat just under the skin; a whole cluster of them, like a family of yellow ticks, were stuck between his left upper eyelid and his nose.
Yet his smile was inviting and friendly, promising more.
She thought him to be about sixty.
‘The family name is Wolff-Dietrich,’ he added.
‘It's the old name for the leader of the werewolf pack.’
He grinned to show that he was joking; the effect was ghastly.
‘You act as Chambers’ agent in Hamburg,’she said.
‘And the whole of Holstein.’
‘Ah.
We have bought and sold a lot of paper through you.’
He chuckled.
‘Much.
And more in the future, I hope.’
She smiled.
‘Against — pesetas, perhaps?’
‘If the arbitrated rate is good, we will buy and sell against cowrie shells from the Spice Islands.’
He laughed.
‘You give nothing away, Madame.’
He pulled out a handkerchief and dabbed water from his eyes; the loose lower eyelids kept filling like cisterns.
They danced two dances together — or, rather, one and a half, for in the middle of the second, a waltz, he complained of feeling hot and giddy and she took him to sit out at the side.
She asked a footman to get him a brandy, for he was trembling.
He smiled at her and apologized.
‘I did not eat,’ he said.
‘Stupid.’.
The brandy steadied him but now he began to sweat.
‘Come outside,’ she said, ‘where it is cool.
I will support you, see.’
But he was firm as a rock — so firm that she began to suspect that the whole episode was a ruse.
‘You like France, Mrs. Stevenson?’ he asked.
‘What I know of it, Herr Wolff-Dietrich.
Only Normandy.
But I have such a good friend here in Madame Rodet.’
‘I, too, share that good fortune.
Please —‘Wolff’ is enough.
In fact, I think we meet there tomorrow.’
‘I look forward to that — and so, I know, will Mr. Stevenson when I tell him.’
Wolff seemed on the point of saying something; he hesitated, looked at her, then looked away and breathed out.
They leaned against the heavy stone balustrade of the terrace, looking down over the gardens, dark and mysterious.
The stone harboured the heat of the day's sun.
She wondered if Wolff and his brother were good bankers; Stevenson's had used them only as agents for buying and selling foreign exchange.
Would it be etiquette to talk of his business?
Continentals were sometimes very funny about that.
‘Do you enjoy banking, Herr Wolff?’ she risked asking.
It was as if the question touched a start lever within him.
‘It is at once the most absorbing and frustrating of professions,’ he said.
‘To see inside so many great affairs, sometimes even to help plan them, yet always in the end to be the — you say, third person?’
‘Third party.
Chambers says it's the trade of sultan's eunuch.’
Her frankness, which was deliberate, took him aback.
For a moment he did not know what to say, then he composed himself to pretend she had said something else, and then he laughed.
She decided that a man of sixty years' experience who, when surprised, let so much of his thoughts show in his face was probably not a very good banker.
‘It's good,’ he said.
‘He is amusing, Chambers.’
‘There is a funny side to him,’ Nora agreed.
She looked away again, for her gaze seemed to discomfit Wolff, and said: ‘I imagine there was never a more interesting time to be a banker than the present.’
‘In London,’ Wolff agreed.
‘But on the Continent we meddle with mere currency; we argue of currency unions and common coinage.
We are techniciens.
But in London you are artists.’
‘Why do you say that?’
‘Because of what happened last October and November.
The manner in which the extraordinary demand was met.’
He looked at her.
‘Did you not find that — exciting?’
She decided to say nothing; instead she smiled, making him smile, too.
‘On the Continent, it would have been — chaos.’
He said Kaos, the German word; it sounded much more doom-laden than mere ‘chaos’— which, to her mind, was a fitting description of the everyday state of the London money market.
He became even more lugubrious.
‘But we can procure Kaos without extraordinary demand.
You are so comfortable  and secure in your little island.
But here on the Continent things are terrible.’
‘Really, Herr Wolff!’
She laughed.
‘What a thing to tell me at the start of a visit here!’
‘Truth,’ he said, with a Germanic intensity that carried no apology.
‘Do you realize — of course you don't — how close revolution is, here, in France too, also in Germany, also Italy — everywhere?’
She began to feel a little bored with Wolff.
Only the suspicion that he had something important to say and could not work around to saying it kept her out there with him.
His recovery from ‘giddiness’ was so complete that it could not have been real.
‘If you are so certain,’ she prompted, ‘why do you not close your business and come to London?’
‘Oh!’
It was a dismissive sound.
He shrugged and waved his hands aimlessly, as if ten dozen contrary reasons presented themselves.
‘Do you know how little a banker can move?
Only his fixed capital — his own money.
But his loan capital — his good name — how can he move these?
Yet they are his real trade.’
‘You have survived revolutions before,’ Nora said, preparing to return to the ball.
He did not move.
‘This one is — will be — completely different.
In England you are so clever.
Peel repeals the Corn Law, and what happens?
The country workers, rural workers, are at once in harness with the aristocracy and proprietors of land, for expensive corn.
But the town workers, they of course arc in harness with the factory masters and proprietors of industry, and they want cheap corn.’
He brought down his hand, like a guillotine blade, on the baluster rail.
‘Boomz!
The worker class is divided.’
It was an interesting insight, one she bad not heard before; she made no further effort to disengage.
‘Here they are not?’
‘Here we have no rural worker class; only peasants.
So the town worker class has no — no interest together with the bourgeoisie, they say.
It is a hard fight.
It is revolution like no other before.
It is not ancient against modern, or country against town, it is the modern against modern, the bourgeoisie against — we call it das Proletariat.’
‘We use the French — proletaires.
What are their demands?’
‘They wish the state.
They wish to be masters, to direct  capital, to appropriate profit.
They wish to become the proprietors the sole proprietors!’
Nora began to laugh.
‘You mean communists and socialists!
But how can you take them seriously?
It is so easy to demolish all their arguments and pretensions.
Their leaders are idealists, their followers are greedy; and, as always happens, the greedy will swallow the idealists.
And then they will choke.’
‘Of course we take them seriously!’ he said.
The note of anger carried to the groups and couples passing by, provoking amusement and raised eyebrows.
But he persisted, unnoticing.
‘It's easy for England.
You have been so clever.
You divide the proletaires, you give them slow improvement — enough to stop revolution.
So you avoid danger — and you think it is no danger on the Continent, too.
But it is.
And it's dangerous for you, as well.
A hot fire can jump the water!
It can jump the English Channel, even the German Ocean.’
‘Perhaps we do not see these things as clearly as we should, Herr Wolff,’ she said to soothe him.
‘But you, too, are misled if you think we have solved the problem in the ways you say.
Perhaps we do not face immediate revolution, but our danger, seen over years, is worse.
We are facing a new kind of leader of our workers.
He is not communist.
Perhaps he is socialist out of convenience, but certainly not out of conviction.
He thinks’— she tapped her forehead —‘like you and me.
He thinks of supply and demand and price and market.
And so he thinks of his labour as a commodity, like tea or iron.
He says if a Baltic trader can corner the market in Russian tallow and then dictate his price, why cannot the labourer make a corner in his own commodity?
How do we answer that, Herr Wolff?
It is our own ideal thrown back at us.’
He nodded.
‘Here, too, in France and Germany, is such an element I tell you how we answer it: with guns and soldiers.
And then’— he made his fist explode with a flurry of fingers —‘revolution!’
‘But that is not your answer, Herr Wolff?’ she asked, certain now that she was close to his purpose in drawing her out here.
‘No,’ he agreed.
‘We — my brother and myself — because we are bankers, and very cautious, old-fashioned bankers — and also not young — we can have only a little answer.
We  wish to put some money abroad, in England.
Not much, of course, because everything that goes away makes smaller our — fundament, do you say?
Our fundament for lending.’
‘Basis.
I can see that.’
‘Ach so!
Basis.
It's the same.’
‘Why do you not speak to Chambers?’
‘I did.
We did.’
He looked calmly, almost — as far as she could tell in the light that poured from the house onto the terrace — amusedly at her.
‘And?
What did he say?’
Wolff lowered his voice.
‘He says that of all people who would know how to use best this money, it's you.’
The slight smile on her face did not vanish, but inside she was furious.
It was all a joke.
This whole charade of Wolff's was the elaborate opening round of some little scheme of theirs to humiliate her.
A little Jewish bankers' joke on the gentile lady.
Chambers!
He was so sure of himself they had even agreed to bring his name into it from the beginning.
Her first instinct was to sweep majestically from the terrace, as any affronted heroine would feel impelled to do.
But Nora was no longer a woman of first instincts.
Instead she said, quite neutrally, as if reserving the choice of being pleased or angry: ‘He had no right to say such a thing.’
Wolff looked pained.
‘He did not discuss your business.
But he admires you so.’
He gripped her gloved arm fastidiously in his gloved fingers and said, confidentially, ‘He told me not to mention his name.
He says you unreasonably mistrust him.
But I do not like secrets.’
It was too amusing — that they would imagine she could be taken along so easily.
She decided to play them out at the game they had chosen.
‘I think, Herr Wolff, that you are a victim of Mr. Chambers’ humour.
You know him well?’
‘Nathan?’ he asked.
(He pronounced it Nahtan, which Nora did not at once recognize.)
‘From a child, I used to give him — what do you say?’
He gestured the holding of a child on his shoulders.
‘A flying angel,’ Nora said.
‘Oh?
It's good.
A flying angel.
I give him many.’
He chuckled at the memory.
‘And now he is playing a little game with you.’
‘Oh no!’
Wolff was at once serious.
‘I assure you, no.’
‘Very well, Herr Wolff.
How may I help you?’
‘We wish, my brother and I, we wish you to take some of our money and to invest it for us in — in such places where you invest your own.’
He studied her face closely for the effect of this extraordinary proposal.
She could tell from his reaction that he found nothing there.
‘In whose name?’ she added.
‘Understand, I think this is preposterous — a joke of Chambers’ in poor taste.
But — let us play, let us amuse ourselves.
In whose name?’
‘You will see it is serious.’
He pulled out a bill drawn on Chambers in London.
It was marked a vista, which made it payable at sight.
It was drawn in her favour.
And it was for ten thousand pounds sterling.
An expensive joke.
The first doubt that this proposal might, after all, be genuine occurred to her.
She pulled her shawl around her and said: ‘It has gone far enough.
And I wish to dance.’
She walked away from him.
‘Please!’ he called after her.
His anguish sounded genuine.
‘I have done it so badly.
Nathan has said not to say his name.
And I — fool — think I know better.
Please, just listen.’
She stopped then.
She had been walking slowly back to the terrace doors with him jogging at her elbow.
‘Very well, Herr Wolff.
I will listen.
And I will try to believe.’
He thrust the bill into her hand.
‘You take.
You invest it — anywhere you believe good.
You are free, totally free.
And you keep ten per cent of its profit.
And the other ninety per cent you reinvest on the same conditions as before.’
‘Fifteen per cent,’ she said at once .
There was one way to scotch this silly idea.
But moments later she wished she had said twenty, for, although he looked unhappy and muttered about having to consult his brother, it was clear he was going to agree.
Quickly she added: ‘And there will be management fees.
Were you thinking of a trust?’
‘No,’ he said unhappily.
‘We cannot so certainly revoke a trust.
We give power of attorney.’
She nodded.
‘So there will also be a fine for cancellation of the power of attorney.
The management fee will be one-half per cent on the investment each year that the profit or yield is not realized on that investment.
The cancellation fee will be ten per cent if in the first five years, five per cent between five and ten years, two per cent thereafter.’
That will surely kill it, she thought; at least I come out butter side up.
She wished she could see Chambers' face when Wolff-Dietrich, the werewolf king, carried the tale back.
But Wolff was looking at her with frank and breathless admiration.
‘Du liebe Zeit!’ he said.
‘You must be certain of your power.
It's outrageous!
Highway robbery!’
She smiled with relief, thinking he was at last calling off his proposal.
‘Good!
I'm glad that's agreed.’
She forgot to return the bill, though.
‘Oh, no!
No, no!’ he chided playfully, snatching the bill from her.
‘I still must talk to my brother.
I tell you tomorrow.
Adieu, Gnadigste!’
He kissed her hand and was gone.
Only then did the amazing truth dawn.
He had not been cancelling his offer!
He really intended it.
All this ‘I must consult my brother’ was nonsense.
He was going to say yes tomorrow.
Could she think any other fees she might impose?
No sooner had she asked herself the question than she realized the folly of it — and of the fees she had already demanded.
She had simply, and thoughtlessly, intended to kill what she had in any case thought of as an insincere proposal.
Now, clearly, it had all along been sincere.
And how close she had come to stultifying it!
She trembled at the memory.
In the small hours of the next morning, when they were back at La Gracieuse, after dancing her feet raw with Sam, with Rodet, and with half of Normandy, she told John what had happened and how it had come about.
He parodied a huge chagrin.
‘You say you trembled!’
He laughed despairingly.
‘You drift into these situations all your life.
And how you come out unscathed — let alone with gold in your palm — I'll never understand.
You're like the drunken smoker in the gunpowder works.’
‘What do you mean?’
She laughed.
‘The day I met you, that very first day, you were running away.
Running for your life.
Why?’
She smirked.
‘Because you found your gaffer had his fingers in his employers’ till — and you told him you wanted a quarter of whatever he was getting.’
She bit her lip and grinned.
‘And when you intercepted those letters of Chambers’, and you tried to blackmail him —’
‘I did blackmail him.’
‘Very well.
But, in fact, as I pointed out the minute you told me what the letters said, there wasn't one line there to connect them with Chambers.
Your ‘blackmail’ was pure bluff.’
She squirmed with delight.
‘And with Wyatt.
There was more bluff than real threat in what you did.’
‘He didn't think so.
And it's my opinion we both ought to be glad for that.’
It was a rebuke and John knew it.
She often did that sort of thing these days — repulsing him just when she seemed to be warming again.
For the first time in this long climb back to their fortune he began to feel a sort of panic.
He and Nora were growing apart, and he could not understand why.
In so many little ways she was shutting him out, building a complete life of her own.
He wondered whether she was even aware of it.
There seemed to be a permanent but suppressed hostility there, cooling everything that had once been so warm.
What did she want?
He reached a hand across the bed and caressed her.
‘Come on,’ he said.
‘You've got me going now.’
She kissed him, affectionately enough, but refused the offer.
‘I have a lot to do tomorrow.’
She threw away the explanation, as if she knew he didn't really need it.
‘I must have a talk with Ferrand before I see Wolff again.’
He chuckled, pretending to a lightness he did not feel.
‘That's my lass!
The priorities are right.’
She laughed good-naturedly, too.
Chapter 33
Ferrand was very pleased with himself.
He had, of course, kept Nora posted on his acquisitions over the year, so she knew he already had more than half the land they were after.
But only yesterday he had pulled off the best purchase yet — not the biggest, but a vital strip of land running along the foreshore.
He was rubbing a red crayon over this latest addition to his map when Nora arrived.
‘Voila!’ he said proudly, dusting his hand and standing back.
‘Four more hectares.’
‘Well done,’ she said.
‘That strip of seafront was beginning to worry me.’
‘It has emptied our account, but I got it for twelve hundred and fifty francs.
It was worth five — ten times that to us’
Nora made that about five pounds an acre for the ten acres.
‘Very good.
Its value to us was incalculable.
I'll fill our account again.
Another — what?
Hundred and thirty thousand francs?’
‘Excellent.’
Ferrand smiled and took out a bottle of brandy.
She accepted a thimbleful reluctantly; today had to be clear-head day.
‘What would my esteemed partner say must be on that land before it can become a resort!’ she asked.
‘Ah!’
He flexed his hands like a conjuror and dived into a lower drawer in his desk.
‘See!’
He spread an artist's folio before her, untied the ribbons with delicate fingers, and invited her to lay it open.
It contained perhaps half a dozen large water-colour sketches of a seaside resort; because of the context she knew it had to be Deauville — his imagined Deauville.
Only the distant headland was recognizable.
The rest was obliterated by buildings and private and public gardens.
Her heart quickened to see it; she had imagined the resort often, of course, but without actually picturing it.
Her mind did not run to pictures, only to labels — salt-water spa, theatre, library, gaming club, racecourse, houses, and so on.
And here, beautifully realized, were the images to match all those labels.
‘It is perfect, Monsieur Ferrand.
What a shame it must one day become reality — it will never match these views for charm and elegance.
Who is your artist?’
‘Myself.’
She looked back at the painting with redoubled surprise.
‘But you have a great talent.’
And, with Gallic frankness, he agreed.
‘I was to have been an architect.’
‘If this becomes reality, you may yet live to become one.’
He shook his head and shrugged.
‘If it becomes reality, I shall be too busy.’
‘You must, in that case, have some idea of the cost.’
He shrugged again.
‘Thirteen million francs.
Say, half a million pounds.’
Nora pursed her lips, breathed slowly in, and nodded.
‘People will not lay that out all at once.’
She tapped the drawings.
‘So what is the first stage?
We must make it very select.’
She watched his reaction carefully.
‘It must be where a few people, of the very highest quality, come to stay.’
She could see he had not thought of it this way.
‘Or what do you say?’
‘I say we assemble first the land.
Then we seek capital, in Paris, in London…and bonjour Deauville!
You are beautiful!’
Nora laughed.
‘I agree.
Entirely.
Yet I think you underestimate the difficulties of raising such capital.
If you say Deauville now, people will say ‘where?’ and pull their beards and make long faces.
But if we could say, ‘You know — where lord so-and-so and the marquess of such-and-such and the dowager duchess of elsewhere have their places.’
’ She could see he was assimilating the idea.
She let it soak while she searched again among the water colours.
She quickly found the view she was looking for; in the foreground was a perfect French seafront villa — elegant, sumptuously decorated, a bit overripe, yet full of charm and suggesting an informal but entirely proper gaiety.
‘Can you sketch several like this?’ she asked.
‘All different yet all with this character, which is perfect.’
He could not resist such a challenge.
‘Very easily,’ he said.
‘You see!
You will be Deauville's first architect after all.’
And she went on to explain to him how they would now have to hasten what had previously been a very leisure long-term affair, at least in her mind.
The longer they had in order to establish this bit of coast as an aristocratic retreat, the easier it would be to turn it into a fashionable resort when time and money offered.
She was determined now to do as much of it out of their own resources as possible.
And, in the short term, she wanted to put the Wolffs' money to immediate use.
‘I think,’ she went on, ‘now that we have more than half  the land — and most of the best part — you must come out into the open.
It cannot remain a secret much longer, in any case.’
He nodded glumly.
‘The price will go up.’
‘I have always been prepared for that.
When I do this sort of thing in England, I tell my agent to go out and say, ‘I have been instructed to buy all this land by a woman who i9 completely mad.
Believe it or not, she is prepared to pay…’— and then he mentions what is no more than the market value of the land, but he makes it sound like a king's ransom —‘…per acre.
She is very old and a bit soft in the head, you know; my advice is to take this offer before she dies!’
And most of them do.
For the stubborn ones we go no more than ten per cent over the value and say the offer stands one month only.
Very, very few resist it.
Of course, in France you may be more clever.’
He conceded that possibility.
‘But Ill try,’ he said.
She refused a further brandy and hastened back to La Gracieuse.
The britzka overhauled Sam and Sarah halfway up the hill from Trouville; Nora made the coachman pull in and let Sarah climb up; he and Sam walked beside the horses to the top.
‘I'm neglecting you this year, Sam.
I'm sorry,’ she called to him.
But Sarah said that Nora's loss was her gain.
‘I've had ever such an interesting walk down on the beach with Mr. Telling.
And such beautiful shells as we have collected!
We could make a grotto if we had a sack to carry them in.’
She was fishing in her reticule as she spoke, and from it she produced a handkerchief tied in a loose bundle.
It fell open, spilling out a mass of shells on her lap.
She turned them this way and that, selecting four perfect specimens, which she put on the seat between herself and Nora.
‘Name them!’
Sam said, climbing in.
‘I'll wager you've forgotten.’
Sarah smiled a challenge back at him.
‘Patella nimbosa,’ she said of a plain limpet shell.
Then, of another limpet with  a starburst pattern of ribs and a spiny edge: ‘Patella granatina.
Right?’
Sam nodded.
Then came a scallop.
‘Ostraea jacoboea.’
The last was a spotted cowrielike shell.
‘Cypraea tigris!’
She got her tongue triumphantly around the syllables.
‘Well done, Mrs. Cornelius.
You are a star learner.’
‘Mr. Telling knows so much about shellfish.
And about how the tides are caused,’ Sarah said.
Sam laughed, a little shamefacedly.
‘I do about those shellfish, for I picked up their cousins last year and learned all about them from Rees's Cyclopedia in Mr. Nelson's library.’
‘Where could we make a grotto, Nora?’
Sarah asked.
‘Ask Rodie.’
‘Ah.’
Sarah and Sam exchanged glances.
‘What?’
Nora asked.
‘There's something else we want to ask Rodie,’ Sarah said.
‘Yes.
I want to come and see the Auberge Clement with you and Mrs. Cornelius.’
‘But we had arranged not to go until next week.
After you go back.’
‘I know.
Would Madame Rodet be upset if you changed?’
‘I should think she would.
She's arranged so much this time.’
They said no more then, for the coach had pulled up at the main door.
That afternoon Rodie had arranged grand outdoor tea in honour of the English guests.
It was almost exclusively a Protestant gathering — sober, energetic, hard-working, careful people who spoke endlessly of business, land, and alliances.
Nora enjoyed the undercurrents and tensions she felt in the light-seeming chatter all around.
Even when they bent to sip tea, their sharp eyes, like those of wary creatures at a water hole, flickered this way and that above the teacup rims.
Nora had smiled at and nodded to Wolff several times but the affair was almost over before they found occasion to be casually alone together.
They wandered into an elegant little classical temple, with a statue of Hygeia — somewhat marred with birdlime — in the middle.
Before he could speak of their  business she pulled out of her pocketbook some sheets of notepaper on which, just after lunch, she had dashed down what, if accepted, would become the heads of agreement between them.
In essence it was simpler than what she had suggested the previous night; but the details were far more involved.
Basically, it provided that they would be investing in her rather than letting her buy this or that security for them.
Whatever capital they put into her hands was secured by a mortgage debenture on her property at large.
Their income from that capital was a proportionate share of her total net income (and here there was a long schedule of allowable deductions)…and so it went on, carefully balancing her interests and theirs.
Wolff was very impressed by it, even at a quick read-through.
‘In some ways it's even better,’ he said.
‘Not necessarily.
You might make more profit with your proposal, but the security is less.’
‘Of course,’ he said.
‘I like the security.
And income, for sure.
But this has a good balance.
We write to you from Hamburg.’
‘Herr Wolff,’ she said as he started to leave her, ‘I hope you and your brother understand that, though I am grateful for your trust, I do not admire your judgement.
The risk you are taking is madness.’
‘Risk?’
It worried him.
‘Well — what do you really know of me?’
‘Nathan has told us much already.
Also Rodet.’
‘Rodet!
What does he know?’
Now Wolff looked at her with sardonic amusement.
‘He knows how you have discovered his manufacturing costs.’
Nora stared at him, stony-faced.
Her stomach sank.
She thought of trying to brazen it out, but realized how futile that would be.
‘He told you?’ she asked.
Wolff nodded.
‘We work it out together, yes.’
‘But how dreadful!
I am a guest here.
I would never have come if — Is he very angry?’
‘He says he is amused.’
Wolff shrugged.
‘But we say, if the oats are stolen, one must thrash the hay instead.
Rodet says Stevenson's is an intelligent firm.
You will not starve him.
You will look after him.
I think so, too.’
Of course, Rodet was using Wolff as a messenger.
‘It's your idea, yes, Gnadige Frau?’
Nora, unable to keep an entirely straight face, nodded.
‘We take no risk I think, my brother and I.’ He kissed her hand and left.
She walked back to the house, thinking over Rodet's strange reaction.
She could not imagine any English capitalist taking kindly to the idea that someone out there in the jungle was ‘looking after’ him.
Yet that was the situation Rodet was accepting; and Wolff had not sneered at him for it.
How different these Continental capitalists were.
They all liked the cosy life.
Could one call it decadent or effete?
Or were they really older and wiser?
It was, in any case, a difference to bear in mind if Stevenson's worked more extensively in Europe, as now appeared quite likely.
When she returned to the house, she found Sam skipping on the terrace like a child.
‘We can go Friday,’ he said gleefully.
‘Friday first thing.’
‘But I thought on Saturday, Rodie had arranged for —’
‘She doesn't mind.
In fact, between you and me, I think she's relieved.
I think she's fallen out with this friend of hers we were going to visit.’
And it was true that Rodie was very abstracted throughout dinner.
Nora later asked her if anything was the matter.
‘I am fearful,’ she said, not smiling, ‘of the future.’
‘Your future?
The business — is anything wrong?
Could we help?’
At last Rodie smiled.
She patted Nora's arm.
‘It's so generous.
No, thank you.
Our future, thank Providence — and thank Rodet — is secure.
But for Prance —’ She pulled a glum face.
‘And the poor people.’
She shook her head sadly.
‘You've been talking to Wolff!’
Nora said.
She nodded.
‘But also Rodet.
He says Wolff is right.
He says we must find some way of coming closer with the poor.
I think I must begin some charity.
Do you?
In England?’
Nora shook her head.
‘I have so little time.
We give to certain proper charities, of course— the Invalid Asylum, which is for respectable females, and the Female Refuge, which is for penitent fallen women, and the Yorkshire Boys’ School in London, and the Railway Servants' Orphanage.
And, of course, the Society for the Suppression of Mendicity.
That's a wonderful thing do you have one here?’
And she took out one of the society's cards.
She kept several always  about her.
‘You see, if a beggar comes up to you in the street, you give him, or her, this card.
They can then go to the society's offices, at the address on the card, see?
And the society investigates them, and if they are deserving, either refers them to some appropriate charity or grants them relief or refers them back to us with a note of recommendation.’
Nora did not say it but she and John gave between three and four thousand pounds a year to these various causes.
Rodie was delighted with her description of the way the Mendicity Society worked.
‘That's good,’ she said.
‘I can do that here, in Rouen.’
‘It's a lot of work, Rodie.
Why not something simpler?
Supply coals and soup and good used clothing.
You could do that here in Trouville.’
She nodded, glum again.
‘It will be necessary.
The harvest is very bad, they say.
The worst in memory.’
‘They always say things like that in June.
Wait till August.’
Chapter 34
The following day they had no get plans until after lunch.
Nora got up looking forward not only to John's return that evening but to a quiet morning lazing on the sands beneath a big parasol, with Sarah and Sam.
But Sam said he had a surprise to show her; and Sarah, obviously put up to it by him, claimed she would prefer to sit in the shade on the terrace and do a water colour of the garden at La Gracieuse.
So, excited, and wondering what surprise her brother could conceivably have arranged, she set off with Sam in the britzka for Trouville.
The mystery deepened when, instead of going seaward at the foot of the hill, they turned up the right bank of the Touques as if making for Deauville.
Had Sam discovered something there?
Did he know of her schemes?
But they stopped before the bridge and Sam told the groom he could go home again and meet them back in the centre of the town in two hours.
Nora repeated the instructions in French, just to make sure.
Then she turned back to Sam, expecting him to lead her off somewhere at once.
But he waited-until the carriage was out of sight and then took her in its wake, halfway back into the centre.
‘We must be careful,’ he said.
‘Why?
What of?’
‘Not ‘of’— for.
You'll see.’
He would say nothing more a– he led her this way and that through the streets, doubling back often, like a fox laying a foil.
When he was certain they were not being followed he darted down a narrow, stinking court and knocked at a door.
Almost at once it was opened, not wide, as he obviously expected, but just to a slit — enough to pass out a note.
As soon as he had the paper in his hand the door slammed again.
Absolute silence reigned.
No child, nor even a cat, was at play in the court.
No eyes beheld them for any of its windows; no one beat a carpet or scraped a cauldron or swilled out their slops.
It was an unbearable, unnatural silence.
Sam read the note, shielding it from her.
He smiled.
‘'The artful dodger,’ he said.
‘Come on.’
And she was so relieved to be out of that place that she ran after and even overtook him.
Still offering no explanation, he led her down to the riverbank and then the rest of the way back to the centre.
‘Where are you taking me now?’ she asked.
‘To the beach.’
He smiled.
‘Isn't that where you wanted to go today?’
The beach was less than a furlong from the centre.
As soon as they arrived she saw, about half a mile away, a tall figure in a cloak, with a wide-brimmed black hat.
A poet, she imagined, or a painter.
He was the only figure on the beach, apart from two children and a nurse nearby.
‘It must be him,’ Sam said, and began a fast, exhausting walk along the sand.
But soon he had to slacken, for Nora made no attempt to match his pace.
Her heart sank at the thoughts aroused by the sight of the romantic poet-painter, and Sam's puppy eagerness to reach him.
What had Sam done?
Was this some indigent artist he had picked up with in Paris?
She could just imagine him saying ‘Oh, but I can help.
I have a sister who's very rich.
Come up to Trouville and meet her.
She's bound to be interested.
And she's bound to want to help.’
It would be just like Sam.
How could she say, politely, that she had better calls on her time and money than to devote either to mendicant little talents?
She couldn't.
Sam would be so hurt and humiliated.
She'd have to give this…person…something or it would spoil Sam's holiday — which was like saying it would spoil his entire year.
For Sam's sake, she would have to be pleasant to — to —
Daniel!
The day suddenly dislocated its joints; the sky went brilliant and black in turn; she lost all sense of movement though she still moved forward.
The person she would have to be nice to, for Sam's sake, was their  brother Daniel.
Bearded.
Dressed like a Frenchman.
He even managed to stand and walk in a new way.
But the flashing grin and the warm Leeds dialect of ‘Eay, Nora luv!’ were pure Daniel.
She had forgotten how fetching he could be.
She had forgotten the compulsion of his confident smile, the total assurance he carried everywhere he went.
For a weak moment she almost relented.
She let that impulse fetch a smile to her drained face.
She let it lift her arms toward him.
And she let it force out the delighted cry ‘Daniel!’ and make her hug him and kiss him — even while the darkness and the ice returned within.
How dare he! she thought.
How dare he imagine he could charm his way back into her life, after the way he had deserted her and left her destitute with Sam and the two children to rear.
‘Thou looks well, Nora,’ he said.
‘Thou ‘ast fleshed out.’
‘Aye,’ she said.
‘You're far from starved yourself, I see.
Revolution must pay a good dividend.’
He parodied shock, and a hint of accusation.
‘Sam tells us thou bears a grudge.’
‘Aye,’ she said flatly.
He sighed.
‘I don't blame thee bein' radgy.’
‘Radgy!’ she cried.
‘More than bloody radgy, I tell thee!
Thou got my eckle up the day thou left, and it's been sky ‘igh over eight year.’
Spittle flew from her lips; she was trembling; her breath shivered.
It took Daniel completely aback; and Nora herself was more than a little surprised at her own sudden vehemence.
‘Nay — don't barge now!’
Sam called in dismay.
‘Thou left me speyed down wi’ the family.
I were dickeyup in a week.’
Anger, and the chance to shout it to the wind in the elemental language of their common childhood, fired her.
Long years of poverty had filled those words with a special resonance; to use them now brought out again the risk-all abandon of those times, before responsibility had taught her caution.
She became once more a woman of first instincts.
‘Aye.
I grant thee that.’
Daniel wilted before her.
‘And then our Wilfrid an’ little Dorrie dead.
And Sam and me heart-sluffed.
And where was our great lad o' wax?
Slammockin' in jail, beyond our ken or ken of us.’
‘Nay, luv, fair jannocks!’
Daniel protested.
‘It weren't my orderin'.’
‘Eay — don't fratch!’
Sam pleaded.
‘Nay, Sam,’ Nora told him.
‘We sh'll have this now or it's never.
Our Daniel were born a shuffletoppin' an’ 'e'll die a shuffletoppin'.’
Daniel stood at bay, steeling himself not to be afraid of her.
‘What I were born and what I've since become, the likes o? thee'll never fathom, see thou.’
Now that the shock of her assault was passing he grew bolder.
He turned full face to her.
But Sam, taking advantage of the momentary silence, leaped between them and grabbed a hand of each.
‘Praya!’ he shouted.
‘Please!’
There was nothing — there never had been, never could be anything — that anyone could say to warm Nora to Daniel once again.
Nor did she think he could ever feel anything but shame for the way he treated them; if he was now ready to pretend otherwise, it would only be that he saw some advantage in it.
So, not wanting to hurt Sam any more for this ill-thought-out gesture of his, she broke his grip on her wrist and, turning on her heel, walked off in the direction of Trouville.
‘Aye,’ Daniel called after her.
‘Turn thy back on thy own folk — as thou ‘ast turned thy back on thy own class these many years.
Traitor!’
She looked around at him, contemptuous beyond anger.
‘From thee,’ she called, ‘I sh'll own that name wi’pride!
And I'll tell thee for naught, Daniel — never look to me for  succour.
Do that, an' I sh'll flay thee.
An' that's Wilfrid an' Dorrie speakin' an' all.’
Daniel drew in breath to reply but Sam's ‘Nay Dan, leave loose wi’ thee!’quieted him.
Nora left them and walked back to La Gracieuse on her own.
Sam returned an hour later.
She was waiting for him and ran across the entrance court to meet him.
He looked most disconsolate.
She put an arm around him.
‘Eay, thou great soft cuddy!’ she said.
‘Why do a thing like that!’
To her dismay Sam burst into tears.
‘I love the pair of ye,’ he sobbed.
‘That much!’
She stood beside him, lost, and bereft of comfort for him.
‘You've heart and stomach,’ she said.
‘But no brain nor sense.
That man and me can never meet, not on any terms.’
Sam ran off across the yard; he did not appear for lunch.
When Rodie heard of what happened, she went up to Sam's room and comforted him enough to bring him downstairs and sit with them on the terrace.
Yet in a curious way it was John who did more to restore Sam than any of them.
He returned late that afternoon, eager with the good news that they had been awarded the Rouen-Dieppe contract.
But when he heard what had happened that morning his face darkened and he turned angrily on Sam.
‘You've no more sense than Old Man Fuzzack’ he said.
‘Did you not know your Daniel is wanted by the French government?
There's fifty thousand francs on his capture, alive.
Did you know that?’
Nora turned sick to her stomach on hearing this news, and she, too, rounded on Sam.
Yet she could see the shutters falling across his eyes, and he became a stoic, much-put-upon servant taking a rating from his master and mistress.
Contrition turned from a feeling into a technique.
‘I'm sorry,’ he said, ‘to both of you.
I just thought that, being family, like…’
She saw Sarah nod agreement out of the corner of her eye.
‘Thought!
You didn't think at all,’ John said.
‘You didn't think of your host, Monsieur Rodet, who depends in part on government work.
How many new contracts would he get if it came out that guests of his had held clandestine meetings with wanted men?
You didn't think of us.
We too rely on, if not the direct patronage, at least the goodwill of people in government and high places.
You talk of family and you  mean one ruthless and callous renegade.
We've family enough without that.
There's a family of seventeen thousand relies on your sister and me.’
As Sam repeated his apology, Nora stood up to leave, offering no polite word of explanation.
John followed her.
‘I'm surprised at you —’ he began.
‘I'd no idea he was wanted,’ she said.
‘I spent less than a minute with him.’
She was putting on her shawl and bonnet.
‘I flared up at him right off And I told him rd flay him if he ever sought me out again.’
‘Where are you going?’
‘To the prefect,’ she said calmly.
‘I know where Daniel's lodged.
At least I hope I can find it again.’
Even John was a little taken aback by that.
‘Your own brother,’ he said.
‘You're as bad as Mistress Sarah,’ she answered.
‘I've got interests in these parts to look after too, see?
The last person I'd let interfere with them would be Daniel.
Don't tell Sam.’
She returned just before dinner with a new silk cravat for Sam.
‘Just to show that, though we're vexed with you, we've not lost our fondness,’ she said.
He took it as the closing of the incident.
‘Ill not involve you and the Rodets with him again,’ he promised.
And so an uneasy, smiling peace was patched up — enough to last to the weekend, and with all the year to mend in.
‘Well?’
John asked.
Taken?’
‘No such luck,’ she answered.
‘He'd gone already.’
‘And the house?’
She grinned.
‘An ordinary maison de tolerance, class C, mainly for sailors.
A lot of them leave and collect messages there, so there was nothing to blame the owner for.
The prefect was more concerned that we and everyone should keep quiet about Daniel having been here; the last thing he wants is word to get out that a wanted renegade came and went on his demesne without hindrance.
I gave solemn word I'd turn Daniel over if ever it was in my power again, So I think we're saved, and all damage repaired.
My God, I hope so!’