

Amicus 25 Years Ago
Volume 21, Number 4 — December 1968
There was a record crop of 27 marriages reported.
Of those still in active service, there were:
Miss Morag Sinclair (Pensions) to Mr Arthur Laird on 31 August 1968.
Miss Jessie Neill (Actuarial) to Mr Jim Mitchell (Actuarial) on 14 September 1968.
Miss Liz Philp (Pensions) to Mr Denis Hinchcliffe on 4 October 1968.
Miss Marilyn Bryon to Mr Frank Caddell (Brighton) on 5 October 1968.
Miss Pat McMorran to Mr Andy Kilpatrick (Pensions) on 19 October 1968.
Miss Shirley Scutts to Mr David Morrill (Brighton) on 20 October 1968.
There was also the engagement of Miss Jenny Russell to Graeme Knox (Actuarial) on 18 October 1968.
Graeme Knox wrote a report on the address given by Jim Campbell, the Society's Assistant Investment Manager, to the Glasgow Actuarial Students’ Society in October 1968.
Mr Campbell commented ‘The most important recent development in ordinary shares was the reverse yield gap which at present stands at the alarming value of 4 ¼%.; The main reason was again inflation.
This year's 6%, I hope, is a once and for all beast, but I am still worried’.
He also remembered sadly buying 2 ½%; treasury stock at 100 in 1946.
He also told the audience that, while he was willing to purchase near gilts such as UK local authorities, New Zealand and Australian stocks on a yield differential of 5 shillings per cent, he considered that Africa was now too difficult.
He felt that property often required a unit too large for all but the largest institutional investor.
It is good to know that Scottish Amicable has long since grown sufficiently to be able to invest in large properties.
There was a report on Bill Proudfoot's departure from Australia in August 1968, having been the Manager since 1961.
The last month almost spent on a series of farewell visits to the branches and his many business friends in Melbourne and Sydney.
The government has just introduced new regulations about the tread on car tyres.
At that time it was considered that over 60% of cars in the United Kingdom had at least one defective tyre.
It is the practice in this article mainly to concentrate on the coverage of members of staff who are still in service.
However, we think an exception should be made with regard to the Face-to-Face article with a Pensions Secretary, namely Mr Ian W Ferrier, who we are delighted to say is still a pensioner.
When the article was produced, he already had had more than 40 years service with the Scottish Amicable.
Your correspondent has re-read his report on the 1968 Glasgow Actuarial Students’ supper and considers the article probably conveyed as much on his changing view of the world as it did on the supper itself.
It is amazing how qualifying as an actuary quickly changes one's attitude!
‘Perhaps it is a sign of the approach of middle age in your reporter by the supper did not seem to be as good this year.
It is very sad to report that the entire actuarial staff of the Society was in bed before midnight and that everyone appeared with rosy complexion and clear eyes the following morning…
The sing-song lumbered along for a little while but it appears that the ‘Ball of Kirriemuir’ has been removed from the Examination Syllabus.
Graeme Knox (ably abetted by John Christie and Eric Henry) tried to revive flagging spirits with slick revue type humour.
However, the audience this year was below its normal pitch of receptiveness and Nobby and company might have found it easier to perform at the old Glasgow Empire…‘.
A considerable sporting achievement was reported by Peter Wild where Scottish Amicable's Norwich branch won the 7-aside soccer tournament held by the CII.
Norwich office boasted a total staff of 5, 3 regular soccer playing males and 2 girls.
The boyfriends of the girls made up the numbers.
It was discovered that all the other 9 offices has selected all male teams.
Fine wins were achieved against the Sun Alliance, Road Transport and General, Provincial and Eagle Star.
The semi-final was won deservedly against the Norwich Union, with the team playing well within themselves.
Eventually they met the Royal in the final.
The girls kept well in the wings as play became more rugged.
Eventually Scottish Amicable scored and held on to their lead.
‘All Advertising is Good Advertising’
After seeing the RA Salas label in the last issue, I thought it worth showing my contribution to further illustrate our free subliminal advertising campaign.
Although not in our corporate style of typeface I wonder how many holidaymakers felt uncontrollable urges to contact one of our sales outlets on their return from Majorca.
Perhaps there are lots of subtle references to things Amicable in the outside world.
Please send me your examples and I will print the best ones.
Amicable focus
J. Rothschild Assurance Administration Centre
On 1 January 1992 a new Life Assurance Company was born — J. Rothschild Assurance and we faced the challenge to deliver for this new company ‘the award-winning professionalism of Life Office Administration’ as quoted in the press.
Scottish Amicable's partnership with J. Rothschild Assurance goes much deeper than purely processing the business for the Company.
We are one of the major shareholders in the Company, we are one of three investment fund managers and we provide substantial systems development and computing facilities.
In this article we aim to give you a snapshot of the Administration Centre, the people who make the unit tick, how we organise ourselves and what we are learning from the experience.
Doing the best for our customers
Scottish Amicable has a clear purpose —‘to do the best for all our customers’ and in the context of JRA our newest customer the dedicated administration unit is committed to doing the best for J. Rothschild Assurance.
Doing the ‘best’ means exactly that.
It is unacceptable to provide an average service.
We must provide the same superior level of service which Scottish Amicable customers have come to expect.
J. Rothschild Assurance is equally committed to providing a superior level of service to their clients as Scottish Amicable is for their customers.
People
The financial services industry, in common with many other industries, has been experiencing the problems, of rationalisation, restructuring and shrinkage.
We are fortunate to have been able to offer opportunities to Scottish Amicable staff as a result of setting up the dedicated administration unit.
On 1 January 1992 three multifunctional teams of 10 people were set up to handle all aspects of Life and Pensions contracts.
They would handle business allocated on a regional basis from 14 office locations throughout the UK.
This includes receipt of application through underwriting to acceptance, policy issue, premium collection and updating of head office records.
Having set up the functioning New Business teams and created the essential facilities for servicing in the first few months, much further development was still needed to create procedures to service business once on the books.
A small development team was formed to progress this over 1992 with much assistance from Systems and the relevant Scottish Amicable departments.
The Administration Centre has been expanding over this first year.
This is in line with the development of the business of the new Company.
At the time of writing there are four teams handling new business and a further team of 12 people involved in servicing the now established client bank.
This latter area is poised to develop towards a structure that will best serve the needs of the client bank of the Partnership.
The management team leading the administration unit contribute a valuable variety of administration skills to assist Ann Martin, Director of Administration to deliver quality service to JRA.
Their faces will be familiar to many of you from their previous roles in Scottish Amicable.
The learning experience
Our partnership with J. Rothschild Assurance as well as allowing us to extend our competitive advantage of service provision in a major way also provides an opportunity for us to extend our knowledge.
Everyone in the Administration Centre has been through a very steep learning curve.
The learning process has involved a number of facets:
New products -
A full range of new products to be handled from day one.
New concepts -
Underwriting critical illness and permanent health insurance being sold in volumes by experienced sales people.
Volume peaks -
Target deadlines that are sharply focused by the JRA Partners (representatives) create high activity at month end, year end, convention-counting and share-counting times.
Language -
Everyday business language where the same words mean very different things for our main contacts — the Partners — presented a challenge for each of us to overcome.
One very important example of this is the word ISSUED.
We have in the past used this to indicate ‘yes that acceptance…was issued today’.
The word ISSUED for the Partners from their background means the case is paid and commission allocated.
This has caused some exciting moments for us!
Culture -
The above specific items are probably enough of a change you may think.
By far the biggest change and most valuable learning experience is our proximity and working relationship with, for us, a new and different culture.
J. Rothschild Partnership envelops 400 individual sales professionals with many years of experience in the industry and a large number of extremely high achievers.
Daily contact with the Partners, whilst a very demanding experience, is equally rewarding.
Our involvement in progressing their business is compulsive.
The power of their positive thinking is infectious and pervades our daily working life.
One year old -
Our business partners in whom we have invested are now one year old.
They have in the first year written 30,000 plans with a total of £900 million sums assured recording £100 million in premium income.
I am sure you would all wish to congratulate J. Rothschild Assurance on a hugely successful start.
It is good to see their business grow alongside our own to our mutual benefit.
Next year -
We are bracing ourselves in the Administration Centre for what promises to be an even better year two targetting very substantial growth over year one.
Myrtle
Sited in a corner of the courtyard garden is a sandstone plaque depicting Myrtle — our former corporate emblem.
Her history goes back 140 years.
In 1884 the Scottish Amicable Life Assurance Society applied for a Royal Charter or Separate Act of Parliament to enable it to hold property and enjoy the privileges of a corporate body.
This Royal Charter was granted in 1849.
At this time the Common (or official) Seal showed Glasgow Cathedral in the background and a robed female figure holding a cornucopia in the foreground with the motto ‘amicus certus in re incerta’-a quotation from the poet Ennius — was adopted.
For many years, the lady has been affectionately known as Myrtle.
She was retired in favour of our current logo in 1976.
A sandstone plaque depicting the Scottish Amicable crest was made for Scottish Amicable when Head Office moved to 78 St Vincent Street in 1852.
It is thought to have been positioned either over, or at the side of, the main entrance.
When Scottish Amicable moved to 35 St Vincent Place in 1859, the plaque was removed.
It was incorporated by the architect, Alexander Skirving, into a private dwelling house he was building in Langside Avenue.
This house was demolished in 1963 and the plaque returned to Scottish Amicable.
It was painted and embedded in a wall at the rear of Craigforth House, just outside Training Room 1.
In recent years, the paintwork had become very scruffy.
We asked our architect to consider the practicality of cleaning the stonework and re-locating the plaque.
Today, Myrtle, duly cleaned and repaired, resides in the recently finished main courtyard at Craigforth, having survived 140 years.
Amicus 25 years ago
Volume 20 No 4 December 1967
There was a report of the Glasgow Actuarial students’ supper held in Daniel Brown's restaurant.
There were 52 members present and the President, Alistair Shaw, was in the chair.
Roy Nicolson wrote a report of considerable length and highlighted the entertainments, ably compered by Eric Henry.
He introduced Graeme Knox and Jim Mitchell to perform for the Company.
They led the community singing, danced like fairies and sang in sweet harmony.
Two of the Actuarial typists were then smuggled in to the delight of the all male audience and sang ‘Three Little Girls’ along with‘Nobby’Knox, who was distinguishable only by the fact that he was the one not wearing a mini-skirt.
After some entertainment by Scottish Mutual students the programme was completed by Messrs Mitchell and Knox with the description of the wedding of an American President's daughter.
A policyholder who called at Croydon branch recalled an occasion years earlier when he was summoned to appear before the Board of Directors at London Office because he notified the Society of his intention to take up an appointment in Singapore.
He duly appeared before three or four venerable gentlemen who lectured him on how to behave in the Far East.
The code of ethics ranged from strong drink to women of doubtful morals.
They explained to him that there was no provision in the premium rate charged for his endowment assurance to allow for residence in such a hazardous part of the world.
The sum assured was £500.
Autre temps, autre moeurs.
Among items of domestic news was the engagement of Miss P McMorran (Actuarial) to Mr A Kilpatrick (Investment) on 7 October 67 and of Miss A Muir (Admin, Craigforth) to Mr L Ewbank on 21 October 67.
Among the marriages was that of Miss A G Barclay to Mr M D Paterson (London Pensions) on 3 October 67 and of Miss J Stirling (DPI, Craigforth) to Mr R Botfield (DPI, Craigforth) on 21 October 67.
Among the births was that of a daughter to Mr & Mrs M G Le Roi (Liverpool) on 9 September 67.
The golf season was triumph for Robert McLaren (Craigforth) who in the final of the Pearce Cup beat Charles Brown, the conqueror of Willie Thomson (Craigforth) in the semi-final.
Robert also won the Foursome Competition, partnered by the late Alex McDonald.
A long-service cleaner in St Vincent Place was given an ex gratia payment when her employment was terminated.
In her letter of acknowledgement and thanks the lady wrote, ‘I would have written sooner but I had a strained muscle in my leg’.
One Hundred Aphorisms
Many readers of Amicus enjoy Clifford Hammond's ‘aphorisms’— short, pithy expressions of a principle or precept.
Some are witty, some serious, and some a mixture of each.
Clifford retired in 1975 as branch administrative officer at Southampton Branch, and his hobbies in retirement have included the composition of poems and aphorisms.
Two small collections of his poems have been published, and last year he was responsible for the production of the ‘Envoi Book of Quotes on Poetry’.
Clifford has now brought a collection of his aphorisms together in a little book entitled ‘One Hundred Aphorisms’.
Dedicated to his wife, Anne, to mark their Golden Wedding Anniversary, the book is published by Envoi Poets Publications, Pen Ffordd, Newport, Dyfed, Wales SA42 0QT, and is edited by Anne Lewis-Smith.
If any reader of Amicus would like a copy of the new book it can be obtained either from the publishers or from Clifford at 38 Hocombe Drive, Chandlers Ford, Hants, SO5 1QE.
The price is £2.50 plus 50 pence for postage and packing.
1-2-3-Bungee
Bungee Jumping was something I had never given much thought to, never mind considered actually doing myself.
I mean, who in their right mind would want to jump from a great height with elastic tied round their ankles?
That was until the morning of Saturday 12 September, when my brother Sandy announced that he was going to do a Bungee Jump from a 160 foot crane in Thornhill that afternoon.
After all the expected taunts from me that he would not have the nerve and my mum telling him he was crazy, we decided to go along and watch.
When we arrived in Thornhill there was quite a crowd already gathered.
After watching a few people jumping and getting caught up in the excitement and atmosphere, I decided I would love to have a shot, much to the family's amazement and Sandy's amusement.
I went into the van where the people were booking in and asked if there was any chance of me having a go.
The woman told me that they normally like you to book a few days in advance so that you have some time to think it over in case you wanted to change your mind.
I assured her that I would definitely not change my mind and that I was sure that I wanted to do it.
The price very nearly put me off though, £37.00 for one jump, but I thought it would be worth it as the price included one year's membership and insurance so the price of the next jump would drop to £25.00.
After filling in various forms for insurance, I was weighed and my weight written down on my hand along with the colour of the Bungee Cord I was to use — the colour varies according to weight.
I was then given a number and told to wait outside until my number was called.
Standing outside I was getting more and more nervous.
With only four or five people to go before me, I was getting myself geared up to do it.
It was then that the organisers announced that there would be a half-hour break for lunch.
I could not believe it; I had another 30 minutes to think of all the things that could go wrong.
We went into the pub next door to wait.
I drank a cola with very shaky hands.
The half-hour eventually crawled round, then it was time for me to go and get ready.
There was a row of five chairs where people sat to wait for their turn.
I was chatting nervously to everybody around me.
I overheard the man next to me saying that he would have to use a chest harness as he had broken his ankles twice.
I interrupted him to ask him exactly how he had broken his ankles — if it was doing a Bungee Jump there was no way I was going to do it.
It was OK though, he did it skydiving — what a relief!
There was a man from Central FM there.
He interviewed me, asking my name, where I worked etc — I got a plug in for Scottish Amicable of course.
He asked how I felt and what I was most afraid of, I answered ‘hitting the ground’-at least I was honest.
Suddenly, one of the organisers called my number, I had to take off my socks and shoes as you had to do the jump in bare feet and I had to go over to get weighed again on different scales to make sure I was using the correct cord (they were very safety conscious about every aspect of the jump).
I was then fitted with the cord.
This was strapped so tightly around my ankles I think it stopped the circulation in my feet.
They put a safety rope around my waist just in case.
They checked the harness and cord about five times, very reassuring, then stamped my hand with ‘checked’.
I had to jump to the cage attached to the crane as my feet were now tied together, the man in the cage checked everything once more and then we were off.
The cage was lifted up by the crane and stopped when we were 160 feet above the ground.
I jumped to the edge of the cage, the man told me ‘don't look down or you'll spoil it for yourself’.
Of course, what do you always do when somebody says that — look down.
When you are on the ground looking up, 160 feet looks very high, when you are 160 feet looking down it looks twice the height.
The man said ‘I will say 1-2-3-Bungee and you just dive off’.
I had about five seconds to think ‘what on earth am I doing?’
The man called out ‘1-2-3-Bungee’, I did not hesitate, I launched myself head first off the platform.
You cannot feel the elastic around your ankles when you are falling, just the rushing of the wind past your face, then suddenly the elastic goes tight and you go shooting up towards the platform again.
I can honestly say it was the greatest thrill I have ever experienced.
You then bounce up and down until you stop.
It was a great feeling.
The crane then lowered me down towards the two men underneath me who shouted for me to put my arms out so that they could grab me.
They grabbed my arms and swung me over to a mat lying at the side then undid the strap around my ankles.
As I got up, the man from the radio came over and asked me what it was like as he was getting forced into doing it later on.
I could hardly speak, I told him it was fantastic, he asked if I would do it again.
My answer?
Definitely!
I was actually on a ‘high’ for the rest of the day.
I could not believe I had actually done it.
I had to go back into the van to collect my Certificate (proof).
While I was waiting I glanced at the stamp that was on my hand.
It read ‘Air Mail’-what a sense of humour these guys have!
My overall opinion?
It was definitely worth it.
I would do it again in a minute.
For anybody looking for the ultimate adrenaline experience, I would have to recommend Bungee Jumping.
For all those interested, the telephone number of the UK Bungee Club for bookings and to find out locations is 0506 884188.
Bill Jamieson Despatch HO Glasgow
On 7 August friends and colleagues of Bill Jamieson met in the conference room Glasgow to wish him well on his retirement.
They were surprised to learn that he was retiring after working for fifty-one years!
This is because Bill left school at fourteen years of age in the ‘bad old days’ and has had a pretty varied career.
He spent some time in the Navy, worked in light engineering and is a watchmaker to trade.
He is no stranger to the changing work scene having been made redundant twice, finally joining Scottish Amicable ten years ago in 1982.
Bill was given a cheque with best wishes for a long and happy retirement, from all his friends in Scottish Amicable.
In a short speech of thanks, Bill told us that he was ‘heading on down’ to a DIY megastore with it to purchase drills, saws and other paraphernalia necessary for home improvements which is his first project in retirement.
He also hopes to take up swimming.
If there is time and he has any energy left, Bill will also do some gardening.
We wish him luck and a very happy retirement.
An Appreciation
Mrs Margaret W Blaikie (nee Berry)
It is with regret that we report the death on 30 July 1992 of Margaret Blaikie, better known to her Salas colleagues as Miss Margaret Berry.
Margaret retired on 30 June 1972 after 24 years’ service and in May 1975 married Bill Blaikie.
They enjoyed a full and happy life together until his death in June l990.
Margaret came to Scottish Amicable in February 1948 after being with Cadbury's Scottish depot for the first part of her career.
Margaret's career with Salas started in 1948 when she left a senior secretarial job with Cadbury's Scottish office to take responsibility for all typing staff at head office.
This work involved her in both recruitment and welfare.
She was greatly valued for her knowledge, help and guidance, given unstintingly over the years.
Margaret loved her work and never gave less than her best.
In 1952 she was appointed secretary to the general manager working first for Trevor Haynes then Bill Proudfoot.
After retirement she took up many interests including cookery to a very high standard.
Her garden was a source of great pleasure and she was very proud of her wonderful displays of Pelargonuims — she did not like you to call them geraniums!
Her marriage to Bill was the beginning of a very happy part of her life and his death in 1990 left her bereft.
Her own health by that time was not of the best and she latterly resided in Dalnair House, Croftamie, where she was well cared for.
We extend our sympathy to the remaining members of her family.
Amicable focus
Eastern regional sales centre is one of seven centres set up in July this year following Scottish Amicable's decision to separate the Independent Financial Advisor (IFA) and Appointed Representative (AR) distribution channels.
This decision was mainly due to the success achieved by AR's in producing 13% of the company's total new business income in 1991 — the company only began appointing ARs in 1989.
This percentage excludes business produced by the Alliance and Leicester building society, Scottish Amicable's principal tied ‘partner’.
We cover the South East of England, from the south coast of Kent to Skegness, just north of the Wash.
This is a large area, though no means the largest.
This distinction goes to Northern regional sales centre which covers all of Scotland, Northern Ireland and Northumbria.
David Savery is regional sales manager of the sales centre.
His main responsibilities — amongst many others — are the recruitment and sales support of ARs.
He is also responsible for the recruitment, motivation and support of the business development consultants (BDCs), the Appointed Representative Divisions’ equivalent of inspectors.
Kim Parsons, office administration manager, is David's ‘right hand woman’.
Kim runs the centre from day to day, recruiting, training and developing the administrative staff.
She also ensures that the sales centre and its ARs comply with the Financial Services Act (FSA).
Scottish Amicable is responsible for its ARs and answerable to LAUTRO, our regulatory body under the FSA, for their actions.
Compliance monitoring is an important aspect of new business processing.
‘Fact finds’ accompanying each proposal must be fully completed, carrying full details of the AR's recommendations to their client and the justification for recommendations made.
David Newman, team leader, helps Kim to carry out the administrative aspects of the sales centre.
He also provides administrative support to one of the centre's BDCs.
The centre assistants, Gill Langley, Carmel Devine, Anne Pearce, and Amanda Osborne, are a crucial part of the administrative support.
Each has responsibility to an individual BDC.
It is on this team that the bulk of the administrative workload falls.
They are also the first point of customer contact at the Sales Centre.
The Centre is split into five sales areas.
Each is covered by a BDC.
The BDCs are Steven Fidgeon, Jane Gould, Paul Beadnell, and Bruce Clark David Booker.
Due to the geographical size of Eastern region all but Steven are ‘on detachment’, working from their homes.
The main responsibilities of the BDCs are the recruitment, development and support of the ARs.
They also follow up leads generated by local branches of the Alliance and Leicester who are restricted in terms of the range of Scottish Amicable products they can sell.
Working from home brings communication challenges.
BDCs are provided with business telephone lines, pagers and fax machines.
Before the Scottish Amicable's strategic review BDCs worked from a branch.
This has meant adapting to change by working from home.
The consensus is that working from a base in the area being covered has advantages that outweigh the inconvenience of being unable to just pop in to the sales centre.
These are early formative days for the new AR Division.
It is difficult to fully assess the effect that the revised regime will have on the recruitment of new ARs and the development of existing accounts.
However the formation of ‘AR only’ sales centres is a very positive signal to both existing and potential ARs.
The development greatly improves our own internal focus and accountability for both distribution channels.
Those with several years’ experience of the AR ‘side’will confirm that dealing with ARs is no soft option.
ARs depend heavily on us, not only for their income but for product and technical training, administrative backup, mortgage advice, special guidance in areas such as corporate pensions, compliance with the FSA, sales ideas, day to day motivation, marketing support, general morale boosting and even the occasional lunch!
We do have the opportunity to get more involved with AR agencies because they actually ‘belong’ to the Scottish Amicable family.
This is the fun aspect of the AR operation, when we see sales initiatives that we have suggested and instigated actually resulting in improved levels of business.
The sales centre, like most branches, has a fully equipped training room.
This is used regularly by Steven Fidgeon, our resident BDC, for his AR workshops.
This gives him an opportunity of bringing his appointed representatives together to discuss sales opportunities, the marketplace, and provides an ideal opportunity for an exchange of ideas.
The sales centre is also visited by potential company representatives who come in for compliance and product testing.
It is rewarding to get positive feedback and comments from these people who find the sales centre a pleasant place to visit.
Appointed Representative Division provides a new environment to meet the needs of our ARs — which are quite different to those of IFAs.
The sales centre has been on a very steep learning curve as to the needs of individual appointed representatives.
The centre enjoys excellent advice, guidance and back-up from the staff in Glasgow, allowing the business development consultants to prospect, recruit, analyse, guide, train and motivate the current and future appointed representatives within Eastern region.
We also receive excellent support from John Labarte, marketing manager (pensions), Alison Rubenstein, marketing controller, Maxine Bell, regional product trainer and Melanie Bradley, technology trainer.
We are pleased to be a part of the new AR Division within Scottish Amicable and look forward to seeing the Division increase its percentage share of the company's overall — and increasing — new business production.
Person to Person — Alison Rubenstein
Alison Rubenstein discovered at an early age that if you want to get on in the world and have a good career, hard work is not enough — qualifications can also be a great help.
This was brought home to her when the only holiday jobs she could get as a teenager were helping on market stalls and working as a chambermaid in a hotel.
Despite being part of a happy close-knit Jewish family, Alison couldn't wait to go out in the world to do her own thing.
So at 18, she seized her chance to leave her Ilford, Essex home, waving a fond farewell to her parents and sister, and accepted a place at Hull University to study for a degree in Operational Research and Management.
On graduating, the world of Insurance beckoned.
Determined to do well, she studied in every available spare minute to gain her Chartered Institute of Insurers qualification.
It wasn't all slog during those years.
While at university, Alison had the chance to go to America during the first summer vacation with BUNAC — British Universities North America Club.
For two months Alison was a counsellor looking after American children at a camp in Pennsylvania, after which she was free to travel around for a month.
It was at the Camp that Alison met husband Jeff — who actually lived a few miles away back home!
Alison says that camp was great fun.
She got to see a grizzly bear, skunks and chipmunks.
For a laugh one night she and the other helpers got the children up at 4 am and told them there had been an eclipse of the sun.
As the helpers screamed with laughter, the kids, half asleep and baffled, were not amused!
Alison and Jeff enjoy travelling, especially around the States — Florida last year and the West Coast this year.
A brilliant memento of last year's holiday is a framed ‘Toons’ photograph on show in their home at Bushey Heath, Herts.
This depicts them both in a cartoon car with Roger Rabbit.
Alison is a ‘people person’ and has served on the consultative committee.
She also has a great sense of humour.
Nevertheless she is a perfectionist and an organiser and her life revolves around lists.
Her leisure interests include step aerobics, badminton and the theatre, both musicals and comedy.
Most recent excursions to the West End were to see Les Miserables and Miss Saigon, both of which Jeff and Alison have seen twice.
Alison also likes 60s music (too young to remember it the first time around) and buying things for her home.
Her current job is marketing controller for South East sales region, but when she left University she at first had no idea what she wanted to do.
‘I got hold of a book on careers,’ she recalls ‘Initially I opened it at ‘marketing’and got really enthusiastic.
Then on the opposite page I saw ‘insurance’ and thought that looks interesting, so I made some enquiries.
I didn't think that after a few years I would end up doing both!’
She was offered a job at Guardian Royal Exchange in Watford.
As a ‘professional new entrant’ she rotated around the different departments to get a flavour of all aspects of the business, from motor trade to marine cargo insurance.
However, she felt frustrated working indoors all the time.
The exception to this for Alison was Life business.
So in 1986 after 18 months she became a trainee inspector, and got her wish to go outside and meet the brokers.
With her new role Alison qualified for a company car.
As she had passed her driving test only a couple of months before, she was very cautious when the shiny new vehicle arrived, delivered on Christmas Eve.
When she parked at the office she couldn't find reverse.
She recalls abandoning the vehicle diagonally skewed across the space and trying discreetly to phone a colleague to ask how to back out — much to the amusement of all in the office.
‘But luckily I'm a quick learner’, she says.
Alison's career with Scottish Amicable started in 1986 on Big Bang day.
She was employed as an Inspector working in City Branch.
One milestone during this period was completing her ACII exams.
She later achieved her Financial Planning Certificate — the incentive for this was that she needed a new tumble drier, so the bonus for completing the qualification was perfectly timed!
In 1990 Alison became a business development consultant, based at Elstree.
She describes her early days in this job as chaotic.
She had to use a lot of initiative and think on her feet.
Gradually the systems were all set up and now work very smoothly.
This meant that Alison was more than ready for her next challenge as one of four marketing controllers appointed after the branch strategy review — in at the deep end again.
That was how she ended back at square one, Ilford — her temporary location since April's bomb blast at City regional office.
Here she can look out over old haunts from her tenth storey office.
In contrast to the old familiar setting, Alison says this is an exciting new venture for her: ‘It is being in at the start of something that makes it so interesting.
It means an opportunity to be proactive, to mould the way things go in the future.’
Alison sees Scottish Amicable as ‘wholesalers’, selling via IFAs and ARs.
She therefore acts as a link person between head office Marketing and Sales division feeding vital local market information from the agents back to head office, and vice versa.
At head office information is collated and overviewed alongside other data.
This means that appropriate action can be taken to improve Scottish Amicable's marketing strategy.
A great deal of Alison's time recently has been spent on the launch of the Income Protection and Critical Protection contracts.
When I asked Alison what qualities you need to be a marketing controller she said, ‘you need to be able to establish immediate empathy with the people you are talking to as you may only have a short time to get the feedback you need.
You have to be adaptable to change and react quickly to circumstances, especially during launch periods.’
‘You've also got to be able to express yourself well in writing — there are a lot of reports to compile.’
As a natural talker, Alison finds herself having to listen more.
When gathering marketing information it is important to encourage accurate and quality feedback.
Looking back to the time when she couldn't find reverse on her company car, Alison contrasted this with her new job responsibilities: ‘Now I'm driving over 2,500 miles a month, much of it spent on the M25.
But at least I have plenty of time to think while I'm driving — I use the time to plan ahead.’
Situation vacancy — consultative committee representative
Grade: G4-G7, G8-G10
Location: Various
A number of positions have arisen throughout the company for consultative committee representatives.
This job involves taking a constant stream of compliments and criticism from staff members within your area and relaying them to the relevant parties.
Applicants should have a friendly, outgoing nature as the role involves interaction with people from many areas within the company.
No previous experience is required although an interest in bus routes and cold soup would prove useful.
The successful applicant would report direct to management but would be accountable to all staff members within their area, regardless of grade.
Training will be given and wherever possible the new representative will be thrown in at the deep end.
The company currently employ a number of life-guards however, and these can be found in Staff Services department.
Contracts would normally run for three years and applicants would be required to start as soon as possible.
Flexible working may apply to this job and would involve the successful applicant working on average one and half hours per week.
To put it into perspective, that's approximately double the workload of the average Member of Parliament.
Home working is a possibility in some areas and the successful applicant may be eligible for a company car.
Those applicants who wish to follow a career in this field can find rapid promotion, often within one or two years, to the role of secretary (the one with the pen) or chairperson (the one with the bad back).
The job has been evaluated at grades G4 to G7 and G8 to G10 on the company's current scales.
Applications are invited from members of staff on any of these grades with at least six months experience within the company who do not currently have a representative within their area.
But seriously, vacancies will arise from time to time in all areas within the company.
If you are interested, keep your eyes peeled for nomination lists to that effect.
If you want to broaden your horizons, do some good for your colleagues, learn lots of new skills relating to meetings, negotiating, etc, this is probably the job for you.
JOHN SINGLETON, SYSTEMS
Vienna diary
Home Purchaser Sales Award
Trips to Vienna were arranged this year to reward sales successes.
Two trips were organised due to three pregnancies coinciding with the first dates.
This article contains the essence of both trips.
Diary Day 1 (10 April 1992)
Scottish Amicable intended to do everything in style.
We were met by chauffeur driven limousine, transferring to Heathrow by Super-Shuttle from Manchester Airport.
One or two of us were destined to have problems.
Some of the luggage was mislaid and after claims were placed at the lost luggage desk, it eventually turned up which meant a dash across the city out our ‘5-star accommodation’, the Vienna Marriott Hotel.
On arrival, we were greeted by a ‘Kaffen-und-Kucken’ reception which had to be cut short.
We were due on a Viennese trolley car — or tram — and had only 15 minutes to shower and get ready.
Hilary (our agent) and also Elizabeth (our courier) made a splendid job of serving up the wine and snacks whilst we toured the city, listening to an accordionist who spent most of his time falling in love with the ladies.
We arrived at ‘Grinzing’ for a typical ‘Heuriger’dinner with 1/3 pint glasses of wine that needed to be constantly refilled.
This was definitely headache material over breakfast the next day.
Not many of the gentlemen present were romantic enough to buy their ladies a rose.
After much ‘mickey-taking’, I informed every lady that I only bought one in order to get some change for Sue to go to the toilet (25p a time — whatever happened to the expression ‘spending a penny’).
Coach home; too late for a swim.
Just time for a few hours sleep before the early morning call in the biggest beds you have ever seen.
Diary Day 2 (11 April 1992)
I hope David and I are not ill.
The fried bread surrounding the bacon in the hot plate was simply to create effect and mop up the excess fat.
It had probably been there for some time!
Urgh!
Stopping in the City is certainly for the rich.
Some purchased — most didn't.
Then on to the Cafe Central for lunch.
We could do with a swim at the hotel pool and maybe a sleep, but there was no time as our schedule was tight.
In the afternoon, we visited the famous Schonbrunn Palace — the former summer residence of the Habsburgs.
That evening, after a pre-theatre platter in the room, we were taken by horse-drawn carriage to the Volksopera for the Robert Stolz Gala performance.
This was not the biggest success of the trip, although we did enjoy putting on our evening gear, not to mention more champagne at the interval.
After the Opera, we made a short trip to the famous Sacher Hotel, where a private room was organised for supper.
I did promise not to mention David Nieman's accident that day; but needless to say a pigeon did not have much respect for a dinner suit.
Steve Holden and Wendy relaxed in what was a quieter atmosphere after being assaulted by an irate opera buff in the row behind for talking during the performance.
The ‘Sacher Torte’ cake was available for purchase at something like £3 a mouthful.
The ride home took us through the Red Light district (not that I noticed).
The rest of the party wanted to go round the block and have another look.
Oh well, there is always Channel 9.
Diary Day 3 (12 April 199)
Up early again, although there was time for a swim and sauna today.
The Spanish Riding School was very impressive, however, no photographs were allowed.
Not many took much notice.
The coach then took us into the Wachau Valley for lunch at another 5-star hotel and then after a short walk through the medieval village and Durnstein Castle, we went on to the ‘UND’ Monastery at Krems for a wine tasting.
Over 140 wines to help yourself to.
Hic!— nobody paid — you were supposed to spit them out!
One of the girls had two glasses before she realised that it was the water refreshments and not wine at all.
Our guide and ‘trendiest monk in the world’ soon departed leaving us to it.
However, we were advised well by Simon Ellis who was an amateur ‘plonker’ or is it wine buff?
Sunday night was the Gala Dinner and champagne cocktail party in the Sachsen Coburg Salon at the Marriott Hotel.
Frank Kelly thanked us for our efforts and I somehow was volunteered again to make the reply.
Some ended the evening with a visit to a local disco.
Diary Day 4 (13 April 1992)
After a long breakfast, we went into the Town to buy last minute chocolates for our families before visiting the Ferris wheel for a champagne meal overlooking the entire city.
A fitting end to what was a memorable trip.
Thanks to Scottish Amicable and here's to the next competition.
Great Scottish Run
This year's Great Scottish Run in Glasgow on Sunday 23 August featured in the ‘Jim'll Fix It’ TV programme the following Saturday evening.
A group of runners from Alistair Shaw's running club, Giffnock North, took part in a wheelchair push of three disabled people from a home in Glasgow round the 13.1 mile course.
Because of his interest in the disabled, Jimmy Saville was introduced to the wheelchair athletes after the race and the closing shots of his TV programme feature the runners and their disabled friends.
Liz McColgan covered the course in 1 hour 10 minutes — the wheelchair lot took 2 hours 25 minutes but they were not last!
The one disappointment for the group was in finding that all the bananas had gone by the time they got in.
The runners in the group, when not occupied in pushing chairs, collected money in buckets on the way round and £330 was collected for the home the disabled athletes come from.
The photograph, taken in the People's Palace in Glasgow, shows Jimmy Saville chatting up one of the disabled athletes with Alistair in the background — counting the money?
The Journey to Backnong
The story starts one cold night in January when I was asked to attend a staff meeting for members of the Chelmsford Local Duke of Edinburgh award leadership team.
We run a group of about 200 people aged between 14 and 25.
Our aim is to encourage as many as possible to attain various levels within the award scheme.
You can start at bronze for a period as short as three months through silver and up to gold which can take 18 months to complete.
In each award you must complete four sections.
These include a Service to the Community, Care of the Elderly, Conservation or Theoretical courses ranging from stamp collecting to art appreciation.
You must also show improvement in a physical activity either in a team or as an individual.
The final section is the expedition, the main reason why people do the award scheme.
This was the basis of our meeting.
David Archer — or boss as he's known locally — is the local area co-ordinator for the scheme.
He called the meeting to discuss an expedition at silver level.
Such an event normally takes us to Dartmoor or Exmoor, has run on the same basis for the last few years and is planned to the last minute — so why the meeting?
He wanted to be different and run it in Germany!
The leadership team fluctuates at around eight in number.
This was whittled down to three for this event, including me.
With my wife's reluctant agreement (she did not fancy being left on her own with our two year old son for over a week), we started to plan our journey.
We decided to take a group of young people from this area over to Backnong in Germany, Chelmsford's twin town.
Over the next few months we planned when to go, who to take, who to contact and why.
The purpose of the expedition had to be clarified as all ventures of this sort must qualify under the Scheme's rules.
What were the insurance implications of talking a group overseas, what did we need to eat, was the water clean?
The list was endless.
We allocated various jobs and set about finding out the answers; monthly progress meetings were arranged.
The departure date was fixed for 4 August, an ideal time to travel because of school holidays and our diaries.
The final job that needed doing was for the trip to be advertised and participants sought.
The final number came down to seven, three girls and four boys.
They had to plan a route that would take them over 50 kilometres in a three day period.
This is the part of expedition planning that the participants hate.
Experienced planners could do this job in three or four hours — we had to arrange four meetings each lasting three and a half hours and they still only just got it done.
At last we were set and 5.00am on Tuesday 4 August arrived.
We met at the youth centre in Chelmsford, checked that everybody had passports, E111's (health forms for the European Community) and luggage and set off for Ramsgate.
The journey was about 600 miles, south east across France, Belgium, Luxembourg and into Germany.
Bocknang is situated south in the old western half of Germany.
The ferry left Ramsgate for Dunkirk at 9.00am British time and docked two and a half hours later at 12.30pm continental time.
The leadership team had now dropped down from three to two as one of the leaders could not make the trip due to work commitments so the driving was split equally between co-leader Dave Lowe and myself.
We drove all day and at 10.00pm reached our destination — a small village called Waldsee — just before the camp site closed for the night.
We pitched tents in the dark and clambered into our sleeping bags not knowing what to expect the next day.
After such a long day I thought of my wife and son with ‘What have I done?’ running through my head as I dropped off to sleep.
I awoke in the morning completely refreshed after ten hours of uninterrupted sleep.
When I opened the door to my tent the sight that greeted me was unbelievable.
We were camped fairly well up a valley that was completely enclosed by a magnificent pine forest.
After a long hot journey we had not paid much attention to our surroundings and it seemed unbelievable to be in Germany at last.
We organised our camp, as it was a bit chaotic when we arrived, then made our way by mini-bus to Backnong.
The philosophy of town twinning, I thought, was that two towns of similar nature with joint interests got together and interacted.
The only two things that Chelmsford and Backnong have in common are our industry base (we have Macronis in Chelmsford, Backnong has a similar electronic industry based in the town) and the fact that they, as we do, have a river running through their town centre.
This is where the twinning stops.
Backnong is an incredible place.
The town is clean, with no rubbish on the streets.
All of the shops have either hanging baskets or flower tubs outside their doors.
On most street corners there are cigarette machines (the Germans don't seem to be as health conscious as we are).
Chelmsford in comparison is dully, dowdy, sprawling and unfriendly.
People would stop in the street asking how we were and where we had come from all in perfect English.
I wondered how many people in Chelmsford could hold the same conversation in German.
I know I could not.
We spent most of that first day walking around the town looking at the historical buildings some of which had been there since the mid-sixteenth century.
We found a railway bridge that had been named the Chelmsford Bridge painted in drab brown colour.
We felt this summed up Chelmsford completely.
The most historical thing in Chelmsford is probably the multi-storey car park constructed about 1973.
We were all most impressed with our German hosts and the pride that they obviously had in the town.
Our second day in Germany was spent on a horse and cart trip.
We had organised this before we left England and so it was a test of our planning skills.
The trip was due to start at 10.00am.
When at 10.45am we had resigned ourselves to a day of swimming and sunbathing a farmer pulled up and asked, in German, if we were waiting for him.
Rural Germans don't wear watches and have little sense of time.
We all got into the covered cart and made our way off into the countryside.
Our driver, Hans, spoke to David Lowe, who spoke good German and gave us a running commentary on where we were going.
We stopped at lunch time and had a traditional meal with our driver who then took us back on our way.
We eventually got back to our campsite at around 5.00pm.
We were cooking for ourselves so we settled in for the evening and made ourselves comfortable.
The ‘younger people’ as they were known started to ready themselves for the expedition which started the next day.
When we woke on the Friday it was very hot.
The participants had decided to walk 20km on each of the first two days and finish by walking 10km on the last day.
As they started to walk on that first day the temperature increased dramatically and continued to do so.
Because of the problems we could have had due to heat stroke I elected to walk with the group carry 50 litres of water.
This was needed as the heat was draining the walkers very quickly.
We eventually finished the first day's walking.
It had taken twice as long as planned due to the heat and it was decided that a 6.00am start was required on the second day.
Meanwhile Dave had gone to pick up the boss from Stuttgart Airport as he was joining us for the weekend.
On the third day the group had a bonus.
After their 10km walk they were invited to Backnong for a special lunch that had been laid on by the Canal Dignitaries of the town.
We had food provided for us that we did not have to cook.
Meanwhile the temperature was still increasing and now stood at 106°f.
We spent the afternoon being entertained, eating, drinking and representing Chelmsford.
This was a climax to the expedition for the participants.
They were made to feel very important by the dignitaries from this picturesque town in southern Germany.
We drove to Stuttgart to drop the boss at the airport then spent the rest of the day looking around the ‘hot pot’ of the region, as the locals call it.
This is due to the fact that Stuttgart is situated in a natural hollow that encompasses the whole of the city.
On our return we realised it was our last evening at the campsite in Waldsee.
We cooked dinner, packed up things we did not need over the next two days and had a group meeting to discuss the itinerary for our journey home.
On the Monday morning everyone within our group had lost the buzz from the last five days.
We packed up the campsite, paid our bill and left.
We travelled in a north easterly towards the German/Luxembourg border with Queen's Greatest Hits playing full blast (it seemed to be the anthem of the trip) which restored spirits.
We stopped in Backnong for the last time to do our souvenir shopping then at lunch time started to make our way to Trier, the most westerly town in Germany.
We arrived at about 4.30pm and made camp at a very good site.
We cooked our dinner and departed to the bar on the site for a last night celebration.
I pulled the short straw and could not drink as I had the job of getting everyone up in the morning and doing the first two hours driving.
Everybody (and I must say at this point all participants were over the age of 16, the legal age of drinking in Germany) got very mellow and slept well.
We left Trier at 9.00am the next day.
I seemed to be a lot happier than the rest of my fellow travellers who seemed to be very sleepy.
As we made our way across Luxembourg and into Belgium I livened the group up by putting on our Queen music.
This had the desired effect.
We picked out all of the best songs from the tapes and sang our way across the rest of Europe.
We eventually arrived in Dunkirk at 2.00pm with a three hour wait until our ferry sailed.
We killed time by looking at classic cars that had been driven by classic car ‘lovers’ as they called themselves all the way from southern Italy.
The time flew past and we got onto the ferry at 4.00pm and sailed at 5.00pm.
We ate on the boat and landed at Ramsgate at 6.30pm British time.
Altogether on the trip we clocked up over 1800 miles.
In all of that time on the continent we did not encounter one set of road works, one traffic jam or one police car.
When we got through Ramsgate town centre and onto the motorway we hit roadworks and a long traffic jam, the weather became very overcast and it started to rain.
As we drove back to Chelmsford we all wished we were back in the sunshine of southern Germany.
As a postscript we all thoroughly enjoyed the trip.
The Germans were very friendly — we all went with preconceived ideas of what the people and place were going to be like.
It was completely different.
As we drove back we started to plan for the return to Backnong in 1993.
We are expecting the locals from Backnong back to Chelmsford in the middle of November.
I wonder what they'll think of us?
Bridge
To the non Bridge player, discussions or articles about Bridge appear to make little sense.
Underneath all the apparent complexity, however, the game is really amazingly simple.
Indeed, when an article focuses on a problem in the play, anyone who has an understanding of any other trick taking card game should be able fully to comprehend the problem, and indeed to appreciate the beauty of the solution.
Take the following two hands as examples.
In both cases, declarer is playing in a contract of 3 No Trump.
For the uninitiated this means that the hand described as South below is playing to take at least 9 tricks with no suit as Trumps.
He can take tricks either in his own hand or in his partner's hand, which is spread on the table as the dummy.
Before the dummy is placed on the table, declarer's left hand opponent leads to the first trick.
In both these hands, the problem is remarkably similar.
At first sight, nine tricks are comparatively easy, but on closer inspection it becomes clear that it is impossible to get at all of them.
The first example is as follows:
The lead to the first trick was the 2 of Hearts.
Whatever right hand opponent now plays to this first trick, you clearly have at least three tricks in Hearts, together with the Ace of Diamonds.
Unfortunately, there is no way, without help from the oppositions, to get into your partner's hand to make the remaining Diamond tricks.
How then are you going to plan to make this contract?
There is no automatic way to make nine tricks in a hand like this, but you have the comfort of knowing that it will not be easy for the defence either.
At trick two you cash the Ace of Diamonds and thereafter the defence cannot dare to lead Diamonds and must always lead another suit at you any time they are on lead.
What should you do at trick three?
Clearly, the best suits in which to make tricks are Spades and Hearts.
The defence, however, does not know that.
You have certain losers in Clubs and a good plan in hands like these is to play out the suit in which you have certain losers and wait to see what the opposition do.
At trick three the best play is to lead the 3 of Clubs from hand towards the 7 in dummy.
When I did this at the table, the player in the West seat went ‘into the tank’, a bridge expression for a deep trance.
Eventually he played the 4 and after I played the 7 from dummy, the trick was won by the King in the East seat.
East now returned the 4 of Hearts which I won with the Ace.
At the next trick, I continued my strategy of playing Clubs and led out the 9.
This was won by the Jack in the West seat and another Heart was returned.
This now ensured four tricks in the Heart suit.
I now led out a further Club taken by the Ace in the West seat.
West returned his last Club.
Having cashed the last Heart trick, I had now made six tricks, four in Hearts, one in Diamonds and one in Clubs.
I required to make three of the last four tricks in the situation shown below, knowing that both opponents also held only Spades and Diamonds at this stage:
Up to this point, West had shown up with 4 Clubs and 3 Hearts and on the last Club had discarded a Spade.
East had shown up with 3 Clubs and 3 Hearts and had discarded 2 Diamonds.
At this point, there is only one possible way to make the remaining three tricks.
One of the opponents must hold precisely 2 Spades containing the Jack.
I played out the King of Spades and the opponent in the East seat was fixed.
He held at that stage the Ace and Jack of Spades and 2 cards in Diamonds.
Whatever he did, I had the remaining tricks apart from the Ace of Spades.
The second problem has a similar theme:
In this case, however, a clue has been given to declarer in the earlier bidding.
The opponent in the West seat had made a call of a weak 2 Hearts, which suggested that he had a 6 card Heart suit and not many high cards in his hand.
He lead out the Jack of Hearts.
Again, it is not clear where nine tricks are going to come from.
Having won the first trick with Ace of Hearts, the best approach seems to be to play on Spades.
Accordingly, for the second trick, the King of Spades is played from dummy and then the Queen of Spades to the third trick.
On this third trick, East plays the Ace while West throws away a small Heart.
East returns the King of Clubs.
It is now time to take stock of this hand.
We have one Heart trick, two Diamond tricks, one Club trick, and two clear Spade tricks, making a total of six — well short of the required total of nine.
As West has 6 Hearts, he is likely to be short in all the other suits, and with East returning the King of Clubs, there is a suggestion that he has a fairly long suit.
The right action at this stage is to play a small Club from both hands on the King of Clubs.
To the third Club trick you throw away your 7 of Hearts from hand and take the trick with the Ace of Clubs in dummy.
West plays Clubs on all of these tricks.
It is time to take stock again.
West started with precisely 6 Hearts, precisely 1 Spade and 3 or 4 Clubs.
In order to make this contract you now have to hope that he had precisely 3 Clubs, leaving him with precisely 3 Diamonds and that these Diamonds include the Queen.
At the next trick you cash your winning Jack of Spades and then play the Ace of Diamonds followed by the King of Diamonds followed by another Diamond.
Your prayers are answered.
West wins this third Diamond trick with the Queen and all he has left in his hand are 3 Hearts, and whatever card he plays he must give you the last three tricks in that suit.
Can you see how West could have defended the hand better other than leading a Club at the first trick?
Look at the effect of playing the Queen of Diamonds under the King of Diamonds, thus throwing away a clear winner.
You now make all four Diamond tricks on dummy, but you only have one trick in Clubs, one in Hearts and two in Spades to go with them, making a mere eight tricks in total.
You are then obliged to play a Spade from the dummy and East will win it with his 10 and cash his winning Club for the setting trick.
Surely, even to the uninitiated, there is an elegance in the play of these two hands?
Peter sounds off
I first became interested in car hi-fi about five years ago.
I was strolling through the local city centre, when I heard a thumping bass sound coming from just around the corner.
I had to investigate!
I saw a couple of cars from the local car hi-fi centre and people distributing leaflets on car hi-fis that were currently available on the market.
Enjoying what I had heard so much, I started asking questions, only to realise that the equipment in these cars alone was worth about £3500, and installation costs were on top of that!
Later that week I bought a Kenwood cassette player, four good speakers and a graphic equaliser.
This equipment I kept for about three years, although I never forgot the quality of the original sounds I'd heard, so I decided to invest in what I thought was some serious equipment.
I exchanged my cassette player for a compact disc player, replaced my speakers with component speakers (ie tweeter, midrange, mid bass and sub bass) and added two amplifiers.
At this time I didn't have a clue about fitting this type of equipment and had to pay somebody to do it for me.
I was over the moon — although this only lasted for about a year as I paid a visit with some friends to see the 1991 ‘Sound Off Championships’ at Wembley.
It was unbelievable, there were some 200 vehicles from all over the UK fitted with top hi-fi systems.
The competitors were in various categories for judging and were to be judged by professionals specially flown in from the States.
We eventually left seven hours later with our ears ringing.
This was to be the turning point for me in terms of Car hi-fi.
Over the next two months I stripped out my stereo and taught myself to re-fit it from scratch following various manuals and the original wiring installation.
I must mention that this is my own car and not the company car, in case our car fleet manager is getting worried!
Since August last year I have found myself spending a fortune as I desperately wanted to compete in the ‘Sound Off Championships’ 1992.
As a music lover I found myself in search of the ultimate sound — and I don't mean loud boomy bass.
By June 1992 my car was ready for the ‘Sound Off Championships’ to be held on 5 and 6 September at Wembley in London.
In total we spent 200 hours installing the equipment and ironically none of it was from my original system.
I found myself specialising in equipment like Alpine, Rockford Fosgate, JBL, Phoenix Gold, gold plated connectors, and even gold plated battery terminals!
Then something drastic happened.
No may car wasn't stolen, it was worse.
A friend of mine who is a car trader rang me and told me that he had found the car I was looking for.
I currently had a Cavalier SRi and was looking for a GSi.
I just had to have it, so that weekend we stripped out my car and prepared to start again from scratch.
Most of the equipment is stored in the boot and the problem I now faced was that my new car had a smaller, different shaped boot.
I expect you think my brother and I are complete idiots and I think that you are probably right!
The whole design of the system was for it to look factory fit.
All twelve speakers were fitted behind existing factory speaker locations or behind the existing upholstery of the car.
Two hundred and fifty hours later, after fitting an alarm and the full system over numerous late nights, early mornings and long weekends we drove the finished product out of the garage at 3.00am on Saturday 5 September, yes four hours before we had to register at Wembley.
The system sounded great and we were very pleased with the installation.
This was to be my first ever entry and I was prepared to enter the amateur class as this was where the prize money started.
There are three classes; novice, amateur and professional.
The professional is for car hi-fi dealers to compete in and is a competition in its own right.
All three classes have two sub categories for two different power classes under and over 500 watts.
I had entered the under 500 watts amateur class.
It was a great feeling to be a competitor, just to get the pleasure of so many people looking at our installation or listening to the quality of sound.
Over the two day event I understand nearly 20,000 people attended the show and at times my car was four or five deep, people of various different ages just trying to get a glimpse or take pictures.
This was a truly superb feeling and we received some good compliments, that made it all worthwhile.
All cars were judged over the two days at given times for sound quality including staging, stereo image, clarity, frequency separation and absence of noise.
Some of the sound tests were done by a computer and luckily I had access to a computer from my dealer in Bath that enabled me to set the sound up perfectly.
Installation judging included cosmetic integration, wiring cosmetics, speaker installation integrity, ergonomics, attention to details and general creativity.
At about 5.30pm on Sunday everybody shut off their music and headed for the main stage to hear the results.
This was a very tense time and to my complete amazement I took 2nd place in the amateur class.
I received £300 prize money and a three foot tall trophy.
I also won a separate competition arranged by one of the major manufacturers attending the event — another £350.
After the excitement I couldn't sleep for about three nights.
I have since been offered a write-up in one of the car hi-fi magazines about the work on my car and others we have worked on.
With the help of a friend and my brother, to date we have fitted about seven full systems, some of them for brokers that I call on.
We still consider that we are one of the top amateur installers in the country as we were only beaten by a chap that had his system professional installed, yes Mr Mega Bucks.
Unfortunately the current rules permit this competitor to compete in the amateur class instead of the professional class.
I have since heard that many people thought this to be unfair and an additional class has been effected for next year called the professional amateur class.
This is good news for all because with a few modifications hopefully on the same car I may be in with a chance for first prize next year where the prize money increases plus a trip to the States to see their ‘Sound Off Championships’.
But who knows out of the 20,000 people who visited the event this year, there may be similar people to my brother and me who enjoy music to the full and who could be in the top three next year!
Cookery
Penne Arrabiatta
Serves 4
This is an Italian dish of pasta quills tossed in a hot and spicy tomato sauce which only takes about 20 minutes to make.
4 tbsp oil
1 large onion, peeled and finely chopped
4 cloves of garlic, alternatively use garlic powder
1 red chilli pepper, de-seeded and chopped (or more to taste)
2 tsp paprika
14oz tin chopped tomatoes
2 tbsp of tomato puree
1lb fresh tomatoes, skinned and chopped
Salt and freshly ground pepper
12oz penne pasta (or more if required)
For the sauce, heat the oil in a pan and cook onion and garlic over gentle heat until softened but not browned.
Add chilli and paprika and cook for a further minute.
Stir in canned tomatoes.
Bring to the boil and then simmer for 10 minutes or until slightly reduced.
Stir in tomato puree and fresh tomatoes and cook for a further 5 minutes, or until sauce is mushy and thickened.
Season with salt and pepper.
Meanwhile cook pasta in plenty of salted boiling water until tender.
Drain, pour over tomato sauce and toss through.
Sprinkle with parmesan cheese.
Tip: If you want to make this dish hotter add a teaspoon of chilli sauce.
Dundee branch ‘strikes’ back
No, Dundee branch has not been re-opened but you can't keep a good team down.
On 19 October staff of the former Dundee branch competed as two teams in the Dundee Insurance Institute 10-pin bowling tournament.
Sixteen other teams from insurance companies, brokers and loss adjusters in the Tayside area at the GX Superbowl in Dundee also took part.
Strikes and spares aplenty were required and both Scottish Amicable teams set out to prove once again that consistency counts.
Following their previous success (see Amicus September 1992) there was keen but amicable rivalry between our teams in particular, with Graeme Cowie following Don Stewart's opening double strike with three in a row.
There was no stopping Scottish Amicable team A comprising Jim Hill (now Aberdeen branch), Graeme Cowie (now Edinburgh branch) and Lorna Caird (redundant) who took first place with the highest total team score.
Lorna was a late substitute for Ewan Cameron (now Northern regional sales centre) who had to go to Skye on business.
Some people just can't get their priorities right!
The Scottish Amicable team B comprising Stuart McGhee (now Edinburgh branch), Don Stewart (now CH/New business) and Malcolm Watt (redundant) took second place with Graeme Cowie having the highest individual score.
However, the organisers decided not to award him the individual trophy since he already had a team trophy and instead awarded the individual trophy to the person with the lowest score.
Naturally this was not one of the Scottish Amicable team members.
Such a very fine performance goes to show that some skills are not redundant.
The teams were well supported by Jane Soutar (retired) and Leah Gardiner (now Glasgow branch).
After the presentation of trophies the Scottish Amicable teams and supporters retired to a local hostelry for a victory and re-union celebration.
A bit of a skirmish
Skirmish is the ‘game’ that pits friend against friend, brother against sister and husband against wife — a great way to let off steam.
One cold, overcast Sunday in May, a group of staff from CPS/Service department, along with their friends and families, went along to shoot each other— not with bullets but with paint pellets.
This is the chance for would be ‘Rambos’ or ‘Arnold Schwarzennegers’to run about the woods armed with paint ball markers and get to shoot people.
Once we were issued with our camouflage gear, face protection and goggles the game marshals grouped us together and explained the rules of the game along with the safety rules.
These were repeated at various intervals during the day.
We were split into two separate teams and taken into the play area.
The first scenario was the fort.
One team responsible for defence, the other had the hard task of storming the fort.
Each game lasted approximately 30 minutes, although it seemed much less.
Once one team had defended the fort, the sides were changed and the first team then led the attack.
The next scenario was the bridge.
After the first game the majority of the players had become accustomed to the range and accuracy of the paintball markers so the second game was much more exciting.
The idea of the bridge was to get an ammo box from one side of the bridge to the other.
This sounds easy but it's not when faced with 10 mean faces all wanting to ‘splat’ you.
This game ended in a stalemate with both teams entrenched on either side of the bridge.
After a few more games we stopped for lunch and went over the morning's action.
The afternoon continued with more games and the day was finished off with a ‘Hamburger Hill’ scenario, just like the film.
This was the most popular game of the day with both teams striving to beat each other.
At the end of the day, two exhausted teams piled into cars for the drive back home from the skirmish site in Edinburgh.
A great day out was had by everyone and it sure beats a Sunday at home.
Consultative Committee
It was good to read Leslie Patterson's article in September's Amicus to find that her committee meetings are no different from our meetings, with frivolous items (such as peeled grapes!) to important items which affect us all, like the office's smoking policy and PEARL.
The make-up of the Glasgow head office committee is slightly different from the committees at Craigforth, branches and regional sales centres.
Whereas members of these committees represent a particular department, branch or regional sales centre, staff in Glasgow are represented by Irene, Carolyn and myself, one from each floor.
This is to ensure a fair split of staff to each representative due to the small number of staff in some departments.
David is the officials’ representative, representing all the grades 8 to 10 in Glasgow, as well as the regional auditors and the regional marketing controllers.
Because of this existence of the separate Saim Staff Committee we are again slightly different to other committees.
We have two joint liaison managers, Martin Wilson from Saim and Iain Stark, head of Human Resources.
So, as you can see for such a small number of people, we cover a large area, also some very diverse subjects.
We are involved in many discussions and complaints about the new smoking arrangements that will come into force next year.
The Committee have been able to smooth out a lot of anxieties on this item, although it is impossible to make everyone happy on such a diverse subject.
On a more light-hearted matter there have been several amusing items discussed, including a subject that will probably have been a topic of conversation at a few lunch tables — uniforms.
Several fanciful (male) members of staff at the Glasgow office ventured upon the suggestion of a Scot-Am latex catsuit (no doubt keen Michelle Pfeiffer fans) and also Scot-Am suspenders.
Of course the female members of staff found these suggestions inappropriate office attire.
Also, as you all know, the festive season is fast approaching and in Glasgow the Committee will be helping to sell raffle tickets to raise funds for a good cause, every year we hold a raffle on the day of the Christmas lunch and we are hoping that this year we will raise a substantial amount.
So the Glasgow Committee would just like to sign off by saying we hope you all have a very Merry Christmas and a not too sober New Year.
Chess
Excitement swept back into the chess world in September this year with the return after a 20 year self imposed exile by the American former world champion Bobby Fischer.
A highly publicised press conference launched his return match with the man he defeated for the world title in 1972, Boris Spassky.
This typified the controversy that raged as he fought his way to the top in the late sixties.
Over the board, flashes of Fischer genius in a match of fluctuating quality and fortunes helped the American Claimant to the world champion crown to a stunning victory.
After playing no competitive chess for 20 years, Fischer's comeback in beating Spassky — still an active player and rated in the top 100 players in the world — by 10 games to 5 with 15 draws is a remarkable achievement that would (if it was rated) earn him a place in the world's top ten players.
The result leaves a mixture of emotions in its wake.
Most powerful for me is the tragic loss that the chess world — both living and generations to come — has suffered through Fischer's self imposed 20 years exile.
One can only speculate what magical chess we would have seen in matches with Karpov and Kasparov.
One can also of course speculate on the future!
There are strong indications — not least from Fischer in an aside to the Belgrade audience at the end of the match — that his comeback will continue.
Personally, I would like to have seen him play Karpov but that seems destined to remain the match that never was.
The most fancied contender seems to be the teenage Hungarian girl Judit Polgar the youngest ever qualifier as a grandmaster, one month younger than Fischer.
We must all hope the negotiations succeed and that perhaps we may even see Bobby Fischer on the regular tournament circuit.
Here is one of the best games from the match.
Marketing Matters
Launching the Capital Guarantee Bond.
For many people the launch of the Capital Guarantee Bond on 30 October may have seemed a fairly simple process.
However the background activity that goes on before any product launch can be quite considerable, lasting several months and involving many departments and even more people.
The starting point is the research into the market.
The single premium life assurance market was, over the past two years, dominated by the with profit bond.
However, these plans were falling out of favour and a clear opportunity existed to replace it with a product that offers a capital guarantee.
The Capital Guarantee Bond is ideal in that respect and fits well with our corporate strategy of launching contracts which consume little capital.
Once it was decided to launch the Bond the Product Development team set to work in determining the financial aspects of the plan — how it would actually work, etc.
This is an involved process involving many hours of profit testing.
Both Systems division and New Business are involved at an early stage to ensure that we have adequate procedures in force to process the anticipated business efficiently.
Training department need to ensure the competency of our company representatives before the Bond goes on sale.
This is carried out via a self-learn training module followed by a validation test.
My own department, Marketing, was involved in the initial investigation into this product.
This included the design of our marketing plan.
We are also responsible for the launch of the Bond to our salesforce and to the wider world, which I deal with in this article.
This part of the project started in the late summer of 1992.
One of the earliest decisions to be made was how to actually launch it.
We had successful launches of Home Purchaser in 1992 and Critical & Income Protection in 1992 and decided to repeat that format.
A project control document was drawn up which recorded all of the items that had to be produced, by whom and to what time scale.
Normally we have three or four months between the decision to launch a new product and the actual launch date.
With the Capital Guarantee Bond there was only two months — this brought its own challenges.
While the Capital Guarantee Bond may be a fairly simple product it more or less requires us to go through the same process as all other new products.
In terms of literature, however, it wasn't quite so voluminous as, say, Home Purchaser — but the very nature of the Bond meant that all of the product details couldn't be confirmed until just before the launch.
This added to the challenge of getting the literature ready on time
The launch to our own salesforce took place on a regional basis during early October.
This gave our people time to familiarise themselves with the new plan before our Appointed Representatives (ARs) and Independent Financial Advisers (IFAs) received details.
ARs and IFAs were mailed with details of the Bond in mid-October.
This was the first opportunity we had to try out the new personalisation facility with the agents’ mailing.
Using this process we can personalise the letter to every adviser whose details have been recorded on our agency records.
This means our mailings to advisers are far more likely to reach the person they are intended for.
Close to the launch date itself we like to obtain as much publicity as possible in both the industry trade press and in national newspapers.
Press releases with follow up phone calls to key journalists coupled with advertising in the trade weekly newspapers brings our message to a wide range of customers — from financial advisers to the general public.
A few of our competitors have decided to launch similar plans to our own at roughly the same time so this causes considerable interest in these products particularly among family finance journalists.
We decided that for the Capital Guarantee Bond we would advertise in the national press.
This was designed to increase consumer awareness of our plan — this makes the adviser's recommendation easier.
These ads contain a coupon with which the public can request more details.
We also undertook a direct mailing campaign to roughly 40,000 of our own ‘orphan’ policyholders (defined as policyholders with no agent) and to a rented list of approximately 40,000 people who are interested in single premium investment products.
Once the product is launched it is down to our salesforce to make sure that their advisers are aware of our plan and its advantages to the adviser's clients.
At the time of writing we are in the middle of the offer period.
(The Bond is only available until 14 December.)
Our branches and regional sales centres are reporting quite significant interest in activity in the Bond.
The launch of any new product, in whatever industry, can be a long and complicated process.
With a number of teams in different departments working in harmony anything can be achieved.
American Pie
I admit to having been a bit sceptical beforehand about this year's family holiday to Florida but it turned out to be a huge success, not least on account of the terrific food and service we encountered everywhere.
I have never felt so much that I was in a foreign country with seemingly infinite resources available for any purpose you care to name, from stretch automobiles to space travel.
The provision of food and drink was just another example of this phenomenon.
‘All you can eat’ buffets were exactly that, accompanied by limitless supplies of soft drinks.
Like everything else in the States the helpings are larger than life and you very soon learn to resist the temptation to start the meal with an appetiser.
However the Americans are so helpful and flexible that if a starter does particularly take your fancy you are perfectly welcome to make a meal of that and nothing else.
their sandwiches are composed with countless varieties of breads and fillings making meals in themselves and it is not unusual to see one dessert shared among several people.
The best news of all is that you pay remarkably little for all this bounty.
There is probably no particular style of food that is uniquely American.
Instead, restaurants can be found representing almost every recognisable country and ethnic community for Mexican to Amish.
Alternatively many restaurants offer a cosmopolitan selection of dishes and so you can find on the one menu everything from the French Eggs Benedict to native Cajun Chicken and of course the ubiquitous Apple Pie.
Margheritas at Mulligans.
For any of you making the trip to Florida next year and finding yourselves on the Gulf Coast anywhere near St Pete's beach, a visit to MULLIGAN'S SUNSET GRILL must be included.
Open air eating is not favoured in this part of Florida — maybe it's the heat, maybe just the custom but Mulligans is an exception.
You can eat inside with air conditioning if you wish but most people prefer the veranda overlooking the Key.
There you can enjoy the view of — surprisingly enough — the magnificent Florida sunset and be tempted by one of the house cocktails such as a fresh Peach Daiquiri or a Margherita.
We went back again and again to sample the Cajun (blackened) Chicken Louisiana style in a delicious spicy sauce full of giant prawns, Nachos with Chilli Beef, sizzling Fajitas with the traditional accompaniments of sour cream, guacamole and salsa, Louisiana Gumbo — a thick soup/stew of tomatoes, fresh corn and those prawns again and, best of all, Chargrilled Snow Crab, a real delicacy somewhere between lobster and crab served in enormous quantities with delicious lemon butter and Creole rice.
Sunday brunch is one of the great American inventions and here it means Eggs Benedict washed down with a ‘Mimosa’— champagne and fresh Florida orange juice.
Stateside in Strathclyde.
Back down to Earth, and having been grumbling for months about high prices and offhand service I decided last week to try TGI FRIDAY's AMERICAN BISTRO just newly opened in Gordon Street, Glasgow.
(There are also branches I am told in London and Birmingham).
Leaving the view aside, could it possibly match the States in quality, value for money and service?
The menu was certainly comprehensive offering every kind of burger you could wish for an pages and pages of Mexican and Cajun dishes.
Starters included Corn chowder, potato skins with dips, Nachos and other familiar Stateside items.
We ordered the Steak Fajitas which proved to be excellent.
The beef was tender, the sauce delicious and it came with all the expected accompaniments.
The Cajun Chicken too was very good indeed although the portion would have disappointed an American.
The burgers chosen by the children too were first class.
We loved the atmosphere — it had a real buzz about it and there seemed to be plenty of smiling faces around.
Altogether it was a great evening but reliving our holiday experiences did not come cheap.
With drinks, albeit limitless Coke for the kids, our meal cost about £65.
We felt that nonetheless it was good value for money by British if not American standards.
What was certainly authentic was the service — a kind of disarming effrontery which was entirely successful, even with a Glasgow accent — enjoy!
Amicable Focus
Amicus
The readership questionnaire recently carried out raised a lot of comments (of which more in the next issue).
These have all been noted and will be built into the planning for future Amicus editions.
However you may be interested to know what goes into producing each issue.
Hopefully this will give an insight into how we try to please most of the people most of the time, and maybe encourage more staff to put pen to paper and get into print.
This article is divided between the editorial side (Sheila) and the production side (Gordon).
Who's involved
The magazine is a team effort consisting of a core of people at Craigforth who ensure that the magazine is produced.
Besides that there is a network of regular contributors from head offices and branches, also occasional contributions from members of staff or pensioners.
A small focus group of Human Resources staff meet occasionally to discuss new ideas, production issues, budget etc.
Besides the editor, the editorial team consists of Angela Harrold (admin assistant), Raj Jamieson (proofreading), Lynne Marshall, Yvonne Ferry and Gillian Cook (typing).
This team is responsible for all text and graphic material as received from contributors or written in-house.
At the production end is Gordon Somerville's team consisting of Marshell Waugh (design), Andy Buchanan (photography), Andy Strachan (cartoons/illustrations), Brian Price and Donald Lawrence (printing).
Editorial
Amicus is read by staff and pensioners, therefore the age range of the readership is wide.
It is my responsibility to try to include something for everyone.
The purpose of the magazine is to provide a communication channel for staff throughout the company.
In 1948, when Amicus began, Robert Jeffery, Managing Director, said:
‘with the return of our men from the Services and the increase in the staff, necessitated by the great expansion of our new business, it may not now be so easy to keep in such intimate touch with each other.
As loyalty and friendship among the officials and staff is an old established tradition of the Society, this magazine is being published as a help towards the maintenance of that tradition.’
Amicus is intended to provide lateral communication.
This relies, of course, on there being material to laterally communicate!
The core of regular contributors are essential here, providing regular columns and continuity from issue to issue.
Some provide material on disk, which is a great help as it saves having to retype or scan the text.
As editor, about one fifth of my work time is spent, on average, on Amicus.
This ‘peaks and troughs’, with the week after the deadline for contributions being the most intensive time.
I try to keep my diary clear and concentrate on collating and editing all the material that has been arriving in my in-tray over the previous weeks.
This is greatly helped by the technology.
The spellchecker is helpful, and moving text around is easy on the PC.
There are always some contributors who are late with their material, and they have to be chased by phone — sometimes a number of times!
Angela helps me with this task in between proofreading first drafts, checking names and collating and typing the Amicus News, Intimations and Exam Successes sections.
Photographs and diagrams have to be obtained or taken, labelled, sorted, chosen and captioned.
Other areas that I am personally responsible for are Person to Person, an ‘in depth’ interview with a member of staff at their home, Amicable Angus/Agnes (getting someone to come up with an idea) and Amicable Focus.
I prepare copy (text material) for Graphics, and send the files on disk along with photos, maps, drawings etc to Marshell.
Once the first draft is complete, a proof copy is sent up for checking.
I look at layout and consistency, Raj does a detailed proofreading.
Amendments are then made.
A well travelled diary
Jim Hill, chief inspector at Dundee had no idea just how far afield one of his Salas desk diaries would travel when he passed one of his (very limited) yearly supply to Independent Financial Adviser C E Heath.
Some time after gratefully accepting this sought-after limited edition Salas freebie — or broker sweetener — a colleague at the office asked the consultant whether he had a spare diary available.
It is not recorded whether the Salas diary was his most recent acquisition or whether it appealed most to the colleague but the following story is quite remarkable.
A request for a diary had come from friends of the broker whose daughter was due home from Arra in Zaire because of political troubles.
She was a teacher at a girls’ school.
This school was in the missionary order Sisters of St Mary of Namur.
She has now returned to Zaire and the diary is used as an official document during the school year.
At the end of the year the diary is to be presented to the Zaire government as an official record of the school's activities.
Jim is not aware of any proposals from Zaire as a result of this act of missionary work.
However C E Heath, Dundee have kept him well supplied with new business in 1992!
Most of it is ‘Convent'-ional and so far ‘Nun’ of it has gone off the books!
Amicable winners
After reading of Helen Wright's good fortune in September Amicus Ivan McNeill wrote to tell me of his luck in winning a three day family trip to Euro Disney in a free draw organised at his local Esso petrol station in Ballymena, County Antrim.
Ivan is a regular winner in the photographic competition.
By chance he is also the winner of the caption competition we carried in the June issue!
Please let me know if there are any other Amicable winners out there.
Photographs welcome.
Appreciation
It was with great sadness that we learned of the death, at 94, of Ralph Gerstenberg, on 27 September 1993.
Our oldest pensioner, Ralph was formerly Branch Manager in Aberdeen.
Retiring in 1961, there is no-one on the current staff who worked closely with Ralph but to give a flavour of his long life two articles are recreated below.
One is his retiral piece from the spring 1961 Amicus, the other an article which appeared in the Aberdeen Press & Journal.
JRA's Jim's Just Champion
In February this year, Jim Mailer from the JRA Administration Centre won the Scottish men's singles badminton championships at Meadowbank in Edinburgh.
Jim was also unbeaten in Scotland in all other events and as a result ended up as the official No 1 in Scotland.
Since then he has competed all over Europe.
In March Jim was the beaten finalist at the Amor Open in Holland after defeating the Russian and Dutch No 1's, ranked 12th and 14th in the world.
In May Jim rounded off his season by representing Scotland in the World Championships.
Co-incidentally these were held at the Birmingham Indoor Arena, the set of the TV programme ‘The Gladiators’.
His ambitions for the current season, which runs from October 93 to August 94, is to represent Scotland at the All England Open (in the Wembley Arena), the Thomas and Uber Cup (World team competition), the European Championships and finally the Commonwealth Games in Victoria, Canada, next August.
Amicus Bridge Article — December 1993
How would you play the following hand in a contract of 4 Hearts by South on the lead of the King of Diamonds:—
If the trumps are split 3/2, there should be no problem.
Two rounds of trumps can be drawn with the Ace and King, and then 3 rounds of Spades played trumping the last losing Spade in dummy.
Declarer can then concede a Club and a Diamond to make the contract.
What, however, if the trumps are split 4/1?
When this hand was played in a recent tournament, at one of the tables the bidding was very revealing.
West made a conventional bid showing a hand with at least 5 Spades and at least 5 Diamonds.
Declarer was alert enough to put this information to good use.
Declarer won the Diamond lead and played only one top trump.
She now proceeded to play Clubs and East correctly held off his Ace until the third round.
He returned a Diamond won by his partner who now played the 10 of Spades.
This trick went Jack, Queen, Ace and declarer now played 2 more rounds of Spades trumping in dummy.
The position was now as follows:—
A winning Club was now led from dummy and East was trapped.
If he discarded, then the losing Diamond would disappear.
If he trumped with the Queen, once again the losing Diamond would go.
If he trumped with the 6 or 10, he would be over-trumped and his second trump trick would vanish.
The full hand was as shown below:—
Note what happens if declarer plays 2 rounds of trumps before proceeding.
If she then plays 3 rounds of Spades trumping in dummy and proceeds to knock out the Ace of Clubs, East can simply hold off to the third round and then lead a Diamond.
Declarer has no entry back to dummy and is forced to concede 2 Heart tricks.
On the other hand, if Clubs are played before Spades, East wins the third round and can play a high trump, removing the last trump from dummy.
Declarer has no play for the contract.
Retirement
Barbara Todd
Barbara Todd, executive secretary to a long line of senior managers, retired on 3 July 1992.
With 43 years’ service Barbara was our longest serving member of staff at the time.
Barbara joined us as a junior shorthand typist in 1949.
After several years doing the rounds of St Vincent Place she was spotted as someone with an aptitude for the executive floor.
Her accuracy, excellent memory and attention to detail were key attributes throughout her career.
Barbara not only acted as secretary to a succession of senior managers including Harold Worland and Raymond Anderson, she also carried out the secretarial work for the Board for many years.
Successive Secretaries acknowledge the outstanding support she provided in that role.
On her final day Barbara's many friends gathered at 150 St Vincent Street to hear me — her last ‘Secretary’-extol her many virtues.
I handed over a plethora of retirement gifts from her colleagues and wished her a long and happy retirement.
Barbara's delightful thank you speech was typically unassuming and manifestly sincere.
She will be expanding her world travel experience and in between times has many interests in and around Glasgow.
We miss her presence at head office — both as a character and a colleague on whom we could rely 100 per cent.
Caledonian Cup — Another win for Scotland's Bowlers
Team Scotland's Ten Pin bowlers were again rampant during their victory in a four team international last October.
The matches took place in Ballymena, Northern Ireland and Catherine McKenzie from Craigforth Administration (who was featured in the summer Amicus) played a full part.
Convincingly winning the dozen strong mixed team also secured the lions share of individual medals.
Catherine, pictured here holding the trophy with great pride won gold and silver in the team events and a silver as second top lady in the individual masters competition.
Anything for a Potential Customer
The following letter was received at our office just after the start of our latest advertising campaign.
‘Dear Sirs
This is rather an unusual request.
I am a very proud Grandma of three boys — triplets — born last September.
As you can imagine now they are beginning to stand and moving rapidly they are very hard work and amusing.
The sight of your poster in your office at King's Lynn caused my son and daughter-in-law some amusement as they call Clark ‘Captain Chaos’.
Could you possibly spare a poster to go in their play-room, it would be highly appropriate.
It would be greatly appreciated if you could post it directly to Master Clark Field.’
Needless to say one was issued by return.
Chess
For more than 20 years John Glendinning has been chess correspondent for the Scotsman newspaper.
At the beginning of this year, Scotland's first grandmaster Paul Motwani agreed to share the paper's weekly column by writing alternate columns.
The notes to the game below are extracted from one of Paul Motwani's first columns.
English Grandmaster Nigel Short will challenge Garry Kasparov from Russia for the World Chess Championship in the autumn.
He is the first western born challenger for the title since Bobby Fischer took the championship in 1972 and the first British player this century to be this close to the world title.
In a well-publicised match in February, Short defeated Dutch Grandmaster Jan Timman in a contest that lived up to the expectations for hard fought games.
Scottish Grandmaster Paul Motwani explained why he thought Short had come through.
‘He won for three main reasons.
Firstly, he was tremendously courageous and didn't shy away from opportunities to create balanced but complex positions.
Secondly, his pre-match preparation was excellent with his faith in the Queen's Gambit Declined rewarded by a solid score with black.
And thirdly his speed of play was fast and natural, whereas Timman found himself in time trouble on numerous occasions.’
Twenty-seven year old Nigel Short can now aspire to becoming Britain's first chess millionaire.
In addition to his share of the £136,000 prize fund for his match with Timman, he has already picked up a share (with Timman) of around £500,000 from sponsorship by the manufacturers of the Mephisto Chess Computer.
His match with Garry Kasparov is also expected to be a lucrative affair.
The World Championship match will not be the first time the two players have contested a world title.
In 1980, they both played in the World Junior Championship with gold going to Garry Kasparov and silver to Nigel Short.
In the decade or so since, they have progressed to the top of their field but with Kasparov always in front and generally recognised now as the world's best player.
Nevertheless, Short was similarly written off before his semi-final match against former world champion Anatoly Karpov but his combative approach produced a stunning victory.
Two other factors may operate in Short 's favour.
The upsurge of young talent at present must make 1993 Short's only realistic chance to take the title and his personal dislike for the current world champion, which Short makes no attempt to hide, may add an extra edge.
Chess in Britain and many other parts of the western world experienced a tremendous boom in the 1970s in the wake of Bobby Fischer's spectacular and controversial success.
It was in the wake of that boom that Short was attracted to chess.
Whilst we can expect a little less controversy, it seems certain that the additional publicity next autumn from an English challenger for the world title is bound to generate a similar upturn and the 1990s may become a golden era for British chess in more ways than one.
Chilling history
Craigforth ice-house
Today, almost everyone has a refrigerator and we tend to take for granted chilled food and beverages and the storage of perishable foods.
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries it was only the most affluent who were able to benefit from refrigeration during the summer.
Only those who could afford an ice-house had this luxury available to them.
An ice-house is a building with thick stone walls (those of the Craigforth ice-house are more than two feet thick).
During the winter months, servants would gather slabs of ice from ponds and rivers and deposit them in large quantities in the ice-house.
Insulated by thick walls, ceiling and door the ice would last throughout the summer heat.
In the nineteenth century such ice-houses tended to become redundant when ice was imported to this country from Norway and North America throughout the year.
The entrance to the Craigforth ice-house is half-way down the steps to the right as you leave the lower end of the tunnel from Craigforth House.
Behind the door is the storage room in which the chilling took place.
This represents only a small proportion of the structure.
The greater part is given over to the well in which the ice was deposited.
The accompanying sketch gives an indication of the size of the front elevation of the ice-house.
The top part of the well section cannot be seen from the entrance viewpoint as it lies behind the retaining wall and is covered by earth and vegetation.
However, it is possible to see the outside of the well section by continuing down the stairs and turning right behind the dining room.
The stone walls of the bottom part of the wall section are clearly visible but most of the structure is ivy-clad.
Some years ago a man-hole was built behind the retaining wall.
Pieces of the globular bodies of eighteenth century wine bottles were unearthed.
This may be evidence of some long past wine chilling exercise.
I still have some of the more interesting pieces at home — bases with pontil scars and necks with ridges to accommodate tie strings.
Seasons Greetings
As we reach the end of 1993, and before we start on the challenges which the new year will bring, I want to express my thanks and appreciation to you, as members of our Company for your contribution to our business over the last year.
Amicus has another new editor and I would like to welcome Derek Robertson and thank Sheila Macdonald for her part in changing the face of our staff magazine.
Let me also wish everyone, staff, pensioners and friends a very Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year.
Gardening
Garden ponds
An important part of garden design is the use of water as a feature.
Installing a pond may be expensive and time consuming but, thereafter, little maintenance is required.
In return for the initial outlay the gardener will obtain a place to grow aquatic plants and a mini nature reserve for insects, birds, newts etc.
Further time and effort may produce a fountain giving extra interest and a pleasing sound.
In common with many projects, preparation is very important.
Siting the pond
You must decide where the pond is to be situated.
Points to consider are the proximity of deciduous trees (clearing leaves is essential), access restrictions for small children (avoid accidents at all costs) and light and shade (water sparkles in sunlight).
Lining
Secondly the type of waterproof lining must be selected.
It is possible to use concrete but, if there is any settlement in the ground and cracks appear, they are very difficult to repair.
A better option is a plastic liner.
Be sure to line the hole with a couple of inches of sand to avoid stones puncturing the liner.
They are strong and reasonably easy to work with but don't always produce natural looking ponds.
Depth and contours
The depth and contours of the pond are crucial.
For example more wildlife can get into, and back out of, the water if the edges are shallow.
A flat shelf 8 — 12 inches below the surface is ideal for plants that like to be partially submerged.
Some part of the pond should be at least two feet deep to allow oxygenating plants, essential if fish are to be kept in the pond, to flourish.
A well-known aquatic plant is the water lily (nymphaea).
Its varieties are natives of Europe, Asia, South Africa and Australia.
Many species require tropical treatment in a hothouse but several hardy species may be used in pools in the UK.
They should be planted in fibrous loam and in a basket so that the depth may be increased as the plant develops.
Seeds may be collected but be quick as they only float for a short time.
Alternatively, you can propogate by carefully splitting established plants.
Many other aquatic plants can be obtained from good garden centres.
Tip
Prevent the garden pool from freezing over by placing a rubber ball on top.
The gentle movement of the ball stops the ice forming.
Happy gardening!
Next stop Euro Disney?
During the first week of the launch into the Critical Illness and PHI Market, Manchester Branch decided to run a series of seminars.
Due to the numbers of guests involved and the limited size of the branch accommodation the venues were to be away from the branch.
Hotels are the usual choice of venue and were used in some cases.
However for the city centre we decided upon an imaginative location — Granada Television Studios.
Some years ago Granada organised an enterprising backstage tour and theme park area within their grounds.
This is now one of the major entertainment attractions in the north west of England.
Before our presentation we were joined by our regional marketing officials.
Both Martin (jolly hockey sticks) Hunter and John (large centre parting) Richard were brought in due to the absence of Neil Wise, our area sales manager who was away on holiday.
Late on the evening prior to the presentation we all met at the Studios.
This was the last opportunity for a dress rehearsal in the New York Preview theatre.
We also managed a quick listen to the Wurlitzer that was to provide the background music for the champagne breakfast in the reception area.
A night-cap was called for before we retired for the evening — where better than the Rovers Return?
A quick walk down Coronation Street was followed by a few pints of Newton and Ridley Ale before we departed.
It must be said that Scottish Amicable's own version of ‘JR’ along with his side kick ‘I always watch Coronation Street while eating my tea’Hunter are totally enthralled with the marketing potential of the whole concept!
The big day arrives, the sun shines, the interest of the agents in our new protection contracts is enough to ensure a full house — or is it the choice of our unusual venue?
The guests are greeted by the New York cop who patrols the New York street scene.
This is the first piece of fantasy that greets you when you enter the gates of the Studios.
He returns at the end of breakfast to ‘move along’ all present to the Theatre for our presentation.
The magic takes control of our guests, rapturous applause is received at the end — but we soon take the smile off our IFAs’ faces.
The pistol packing cop returns to escort us all to the Pathe News Theatre.
Here we are entertained by black and white clips of early ‘B’ movies.
Screaming, we are then chased out to the next Movie Theatre.
This is because at the end of the newsreel a roof opens above the screen at the far end of the auditorium and King Kong's arm appears holding that screaming woman in his great hairy mit!
Next we are ushered into the Space Age Movie Master's Theatre.
Strapped into gyrating seats with all the correct audio and visual accompaniment we have a space age race.
The film that accompanies this sensation can best be described as a cross between a scrap yard and a journey round your internal body system following a good night on the drink!
We all land safely with no real casualties other than the odd jaundiced expression.
Minutes later we stand, blinking, in the blazing sunshine.
At the end of the formal presentation not all had joined us for the stomach churners, preferring to get to the office and start selling those new protection contracts.
Now more of our guests decide it is time to get to work.
We are left with the fun loving (overgrown kids) and the ‘I am not going to miss out on the fun’ brigade.
At this point the Manchester sales managers, along with Martin Hunter, have to depart as we are committed to doing some real work for the IFAs of the area in the more traditional brokers’ offices.
Now John (Bailey-Lichfield) Richard decides that this is the opportunity to demonstrate his business acumen.
Our revered Pensions Guru of the region entertains, photographs, talks pensions and purchases yet another round of drinks in the Rovers Return.
During this session our entertainment is also extended by a backstage tour of the Studios which is enjoyed thoroughly by all.
There is a rumour that John Richard was screen tested for a bit part in Coronation Street during his visit — which bit was tested no-one is saying!
The day at Granada was particularly well received.
The launch week was a great success and thanks are due to all who participated.
Special thanks to David Atkinson for supplying presentation materials and to John Richard for the photographs.
On the first day of the launch Manchester branch received the first Home Purchaser with a Bolt-on Critical Illness application from a Bolton Agent, on his own life.
To close can we credit our regional manager, Tom Makeham, for his pun ‘Will Manchester Bury the opposition’(Editor — must you?).
Life with Holmes
Puppy Love
You can imagine the eager anticipation I felt when following the death of our much loved 16 year old dog, I saw an advertisement quoting ‘Basset Hounds For Sale’ and the contact, which could have been anywhere in the UK, was only a few miles away.
Naturally we had to go and see them.
After toying with the idea of having two (we were advised against it — in hindsight a blessing) we chose a tri-coloured one.
As experienced dog owners we thought we knew what to expect at first— a little mess, some chewing, a bit of a handful.
Nothing could have prepared us for Holmes (named after Sherlock Holmes as his ears resembled the detectives hat).
Puppy Problems
By the time we collected him two weeks later he had grown considerably.
We were warned to keep him out of the bedrooms, and for days we resisted the howls and barks and pneumatic drill impersonations.
After constant sleepless nights brought us to the brink of a nervous breakdown; we gave in.
Since then Holmes has slept wherever his fancy takes him!
We should have known after this start that life with Holmes would never be dull.
Like any dog he has pinched the Sunday Roast when hubbies back was turned but our Holmes has done lots more besides.
My washing has to be hung out horizontally rather than vertically because given the chance he can bring down a row of wet towels in six seconds flat.
This rag doll treatment of our things is great fun for him.
Wicker waste paper baskets and bathroom sponges are guaranteed to be disintegrated at an alarming rate if left in the open.
With five biting the dust already the family have had to undergo training to ensure the new ones are kept in a safe place.
The stealing of clothing is less understandable especially as the smellier the socks the more appetising to Holmes.
Basically, we cannot afford to leave anything lying around, not even for an instant, or it will be history.
With things electrical he has equal affinity or disdain.
One night he trotted across the hearth and proceeded to do on the video recorder what trained dogs do outside — usually on trees!
On another occasion the TV inexplicably began changing channels.
Was it possessed, did my TV have an ET.
No, the sound of crunching from the hallway confirmed that Holmes was having a remote control snack.
Some snack at £40!
Even ‘walkies’ are restricted.
Holmes will not come back when he is called (he doesn't even turn round when you shout) and he cannot be allowed of the lead.
The compromise of an extendible lead gives him some freedom to wander but it does give rise to ‘incidents’.
Walking along the canal bank one day we came across a wee lady siting on the banking drawing.
Holmes, enthusiastic and friendly as ever, bounded up to her with the allotted amount of lead a fraction longer than I anticipated.
Yes, you guessed it he knocked the we soul off balance and she toppled over, notepad and all.
I offered my profuse apologies but all she could say was ‘Can ye no take care o’ yer dug!’
Puppy Training
The next stage had to be training.
I eventually had to place a book order after scouring the shelves of shops and libraries.
The written word did not however really help me train Holmes.
The best help came from all the fellow humans we met on holiday.
A typical conversation would be ‘Oh a Basset Hound, how lovely — we used to have one.
Does he steal?
Is he wilful?
Does he do as we wants?’
All my answers had to be in the affirmative with the exception of the last one because, to be precise, Holmes does exactly as he wants.
Formal training was the next step, although the writing was on the wall when one class had a notice displaying ‘No Basset Hounds’!
I did find a place that would take us but for Holmes there were too many interesting species of humans and dogs, for him to get involved in being trained.
People say all dogs can be trained but I believe Bassets are the exception.
Holmes does however more than compensate because he is the most affectionate and cuddly dog I have ever known.
Holmes At Home
Holmes is happy having the freedom of the house when we are out.
He passes his day snoozing, playing with his toys and relaxing in his favourite spot.
We have managed to keep the lounge to ourselves, after all you have to have one hair-free place for visitors.
To conclude, we have come to accept Holmes as he is.
Apart from terrifying him into submission, there is no surefast remedy to make him comply with your wishes.
Although the mischief in his personality occasionally overrides good sense, he has ‘wormed’ his way into our affections and is a much loved member of our family.
More Of Melanie
In the summer edition of the Amicus, I reviewed jazz singer Melanie O'Reilly in concert.
Melanie and her trio are hitting the road again.
You can catch them 8 December at the Old Athenaeum, Glasgow (041-227-5511), 9 December at the Music Hall, Aberdeen (0224-641-122) and 10 December at the Queens Hall, Edinburgh (031-668-2019).
Tickets are available at each venue.
She has plans in the pipeline to record a CD with her trio and possibly record an album with her dectect.
A treat in store for all jazz fans!!
Fish at the Funny Farm
Down on the Funny Farm, they don't have padded cells or straight jackets…but they do have soundproofed rooms.
The converted farmstead in Haddington, near Edinburgh, is one of Scotland's top recording studios.
The man behind the project is popstar Fish who shot to fame in the early 1980s as lead singer of the group Marillion.
Fish explained his decision to run his own recording studio; ‘I got tired of giving a lot of money away to other studios and being away from my family and Scotland.
Also, Scotland and especially the east coast, was limited on the amount of really class, high quality recording studios that were available.
It's still the general feeling by several of Scotland's well known bands that the only place to record is London and if they record in Scotland it's a bit parochial.’
The Funny Farm team say their facilities compare with any recording studio in London.
There are five different studio rooms as well as a residential complex.
The remote location provides a relaxed
atmosphere compared to the hustle and bustle normally associated with London-based studios.
Although the Funny Farm has been operating for just over a year it has had many bands through its doors already including The Proclaimers, The Silencers, Botany 5, Kith ‘n Kin, Avalon, Fini Tribe, Jools Holland and Nazareth.
Fish told me; ‘The studios were completed last July and the recording of ‘Internal Exile’, my second solo album, began in the same month.
We had so many breakdowns and strange things were going on that one of the guys went to see a medium in Germany.
The medium said it was definitely spirits and something to do with Italians and recommended that some Italian sage should be burnt in the studio.
We did this and things started going right.
We brought another medium into the studio as we were a bit worried with all the goings on.
He said the vibe was perfect, a wonderful place to work in as it's so free.
I asked him what the problem was and he told us that when people are together and a lot of energy is being created through tension, it can manifest itself in equipment failures.’
It is thought that the Italian connection relates to the old farm being used to hold Italian prisoners of war captive during the Second World War.
The Funny Farm makes a special effort to help up and coming bands.
‘Our attitude is any demo band is seen as a potential album band and we always treat people like that.
What we try and do here is show young musicians how a major studio works.
We obviously can't afford to spend all our time to put demo bands in, but we do offer special rates for demo bands that they can afford.’
Fish has this advice for up and coming bands.
‘Any up and coming band that really wants to do it will do it.
Don't become disenchanted when you fail, keep on striving forward, keep your ego under control and never believe the things people write about you in the press!’
Sound advice from a man who has lived in the eyes of the media for the past 10 years.
The media spotlight shone on him most harshly when he left Marillion.
‘I left at the right time as I felt the band had run out of ideas and it was becoming motivated by the wrong things.
A lot of things were said when we broke up and perhaps we regret saying them.
I hold nothing against them and I wish them all the best.
I don't like what they do, they don't like what I do.
Fair enough.
That's why we broke up!’
Fish is quite happy being a solo artist and his new album, ‘Songs from the mirror’, is due for release in January.
The album consists of cover versions recorded this summer at the Funny Farm.
On being asked about his new album, Fish explained why he decided to record an album of cover versions.
‘The mirror was where the rockstar was born.
When I was young, we had an old Victorian wardrobe with a mirror on it that I used to sing to.
I didn't have a hairbrush but a long pole that was used to open up the attic hatch.
I thought it looked more like a microphone!
When the studios were built, I wanted to record some of the songs I knew when I was young and I wanted to record them the way I wanted to hear them.
That's how ‘Songs from the mirror’ came about.’
So now you know the story about the title of his new album.
But do you know the story about his name?
It's simply because he likes water!
My thanks to David Bogie, studio manager and Fish for their time and patience — and for allowing me to visit the Funny Farm.
Old Elgin Band
The Old Elgin Band, from St Thomas Ontario, visited Craigforth on 17 August 1993.
Many members are veterans of the Elgin Regiment of the Royal Armoured Corps of Canada.
Their Colonel in Chief is our President, Lord Elgin, and he accompanied the band on a whirlwind two week tour of Northumberland and Scotland.
Before lunching in the Staff Dining Room the 41 member band lined up on the lawn to provide a short concert for staff.
Their unique sound, based on one valve trumpets, is a relic of an earlier military era.
The band presented the Company with a plaque commemorating their visit, together with a framed print displaying the regimental battle honours.
The band left us after lunch to play on the esplanade of Stirling Castle.
We enjoyed having these fine Canadian ambassadors with us at Craigforth.
Running Runrig
Surrounded by the engineering workshops and servicing companies of Aberdeen Harbour lies the entrance to the nerve centre of a major Scottish band.
You could be mistaken for thinking that on the other side of the plain red door is another harbour based company.
But you'd be very wrong!
Two floors up, behind her desk, sits manager Marlene Ross — the powerhouse who has been managing top Gaelic rockers, Runrig, for 12 years.
‘There is never a typical day as such,’ says Marlene.
‘During an office day we're answering the phones, planning ahead, keeping the bookwork up to date and trying to keep everybody happy!’
The ex-nurse speaks with a colourful North-East accent and she generates a warm, friendly feeling; but underneath is a strong and determined woman who puts HER band first and will stand no nonsense.
In 1981, Runrig, a struggling group with a new style of music — Gaelic rock — turned Marlene's life about.
The band were initially looking for a lighting rig and a PA system to do a gig in Aberdeen and obtained them from the music shop she worked in.
Having had experience of managing local bands and promoting one or two of Runrig's gigs, they asked her to manage them.
Marlene went on: ‘But when we tour it is very different.
We often get to bed very, very late at night because we've met with the host record company of whatever country we are in.
Frequent early rises are not unusual because you're busy organising everybody.
That includes chatting to the band throughout the day, to make sure that they are at interviews, TV sessions and record signing sessions.
Also, I need to be available for the crew and all the personnel on the road to see that everything is going fine from their point of view.
It's your job to ensure that all difficulties are minimised and that everyone is as happy as can be.’
Life on the road can be very hectic.
‘There are 30 people on the road with the band and it is a very strange situation to be travelling with so many people constantly.
You've got to pick the crews and personnel who will get on reasonably well together because it is very much living in one another 's pockets.’
‘You don't have the luxury of doing a working day and having your social life separate.
We are together all the time for weeks and months on end.
But we usually go out for about three weeks at a time then have a break of about one week to allow everybody to go home to their families, because we think that is absolutely vital!’
Obviously this is a caring manager reflecting the attitude of the band.
They haven't forgotten where they came from and also who put them where they are today.
‘We try to play as many venues as possible close to major cities so that fans don't have to travel too far.
This is quite unusual in the music business because most large bands may play one big date in Scotland and people are expected to travel possibly 150 miles.
We don't do that.
We go to the people…rather than them coming to look for us!’
What is the worst thing that can happen when organising a tour?
‘There are many things which can go wrong, the obvious ones being if no-one was interested in buying tickets for the gigs, or if equipment couldn't reach the destination or if the band missed their flights and gigs had to be cancelled.
Thankfully none of these things have happened so far!’
If I mention ‘Midsummer at Loch Lomond’, what would this conjure up?
Good weather?
Couples taking a romantic stroll on the loch-side?
For Marlene, her team and 40,000 Runrig fans, these four words bring back memories of a fantastic outdoor concert on the water's edge.
‘Playing a gig at Loch Lomond was an obvious choice,’ enthuses Marlene.
‘Loch Lomond’ is Runrig's anthem and there is a special thing between the fans and Runrig.
It was the right thing to do because it captured everyone's imagination.
I don't think in the history of Scottish rock music has there ever been a day that has been celebrated so well.
It brought a few tears to my eyes.
We felt the Scottish people had taken us to their hearts and it is something we'd like to repeat.’
But planning the event took months of hard work.
‘The stage was rigged the week before the gig but any outdoor festival can take that length of time!
There are horror stories about things that went wrong!!
Knowing that half of Scotland had left their cars sitting in the middle of roads to make sure that they could get to the gig is not so much my horror story as the police's, she chuckled.
‘The Loch Lomond gig is definitely one of the best moments of my career.
Another is seeing the band play Murrayfield with U2.
It was a hard job to secure that gig for them because in those days — and probably still even now — we are not the trendy band everybody wants to use.’
Being with the band for 12 years you might think that Marlene would get fed up with their music.
‘I never tire of their music,’ she insists.
‘I'm very lucky because I'm sure there are loads of managers who get fed up with their artists music or maybe never even liked it in the first place!
I'm very lucky to be earning my living doing something I love so much.’
Organising big gigs like Loch Lomond and Murrayfield would add more worries to the existing day to day running of a band, but Marlene takes it all in her stride and escapes from it by going to Skye where she ‘gets away from the phones!’
So has the ex-Florence Nightingale found her ideal job or will she go back to looking after the sick?
‘I don't envisage going back to nursing.
At the time, it was the ideal job, as is the management of Runrig now.
I tend to get completely engrossed with what I am doing and do it to the best of my ability,’…and that's running Runrig.
Sales support officials biennial conference 1992
The 1992 sales support officials conference took place in Craigforth on 3 and 4 November.
Addressing the main theme ‘Forward through change’, Roy Nicolson detailed two major changes over the past year that were designed for progress.
Firstly there was the review of the distribution network and secondly PEARL was introduced.
He then highlighted our tremendous service reputation — built on the abilities of the whole staff.
He wanted to make sure that people still enjoyed working for Scottish Amicable and that above all the strong corporate spirit of ‘amicability’ should prosper.
In John Cowan's Look at IFA Sales Performance he cited his own career as an example of rapid change.
From sales support to head of IFA Sales in 24 years —‘Brilliant!’
John pointed out that Scottish Amicable was one of the big six offices securing between them 60 per cent of the total IFA business in 1991.
He was looking to 1993 for a further drive into fresh markets.
The last session of the day was presented by Grant Spence who fielded 10 of the most requested PEARL questions.
Chairman David Nairn thanked Grant for the open manner with which he had answered these questions and brought the first day's business proceedings to and end.
Team spirit was to be a vital ingredient in the evening as we sported our Amicable T-shirts and caps at the Hollywood Bowl.
Ten teams of five vied for the coveted Amicable mugs.
Val Graham's team secured the prize to thunderous applause after a playoff.
Top individual striker's award went to Pam Wright with a mean and magnificent 154 points.
Special mention goes to Dominic Hay of Leys as our intrepid cameraman on the night.
He appeared and re-appeared snapping everything that moved or didn't — such as the bowler whose fingers got stuck in the three finger holes when attempting to launch.
Nil points but no harm done!
In Jim Smith's presentation on Wednesday morning — AR Division Present and Future — he said that diversification of distribution meant that Scottish Amicable had changed with the times and was not risking all in relying on one source of business.
His objective was for AR production to be 25 per cent of Scottish Amicable new business in three to four years which means an effective doubling of AR production in that period.
Once again Scottish Amicable service standards will be a trump card in this ‘winner takes all’ situation.
In the second session of the morning Gordon Burnett and Alan Robertson from O & M described the recent branch survey.
Gordon stressed that the aim was to produce an efficient service to our customers and was not merely a means of policing staff levels.
This would be ongoing and he hoped would involve two-way communication with the ‘front line’ units of sales division in order to produce better resource planning.
Ian Oswald and Phil Telford then detailed the review of branch procedures that would involve the development of Formlink, enhancement of the LAN system and an appropriate reduction in unnecessary clerical tasks.
After coffee, Lyn Staniforth gave her own personal view on how she saw her role as an office admin manager.
In the key area of sales she believes in persuading the inspectors to trust the sales support with their administration.
In her words, ‘At Leeds we've done a deal; they do the sales, we do the admin.’
She gave other useful pointers regarding service, training and other staff matters that have obviously helped Leeds branch in maintaining their position as a highly effective new business unit.
After a buffet lunch with various head office guests, Mike Bloy and Morton Henderson led a discussion and syndicate session entitled Managing People Through Change which analysed the various factors both physical and emotional that the modern manager must be aware of in order to react and communicate in a positive and constructive way.
Maurice Paterson concluded on an optimistic note with references to the many new faces at the sales support conference.
Changes have also brought about better opportunities and more varieties of job with greater interest and challenge.
This high note was sustained as Maurice later compered a traditionally Amicable evening.
Sue Veasey, Steven Leiper, Shirley Cooke and Anne Tait rose to the occasion with excellent speeches to round off a very enjoyable event.
Have you ever felt like a Tennis Ball?
This was my distinct feeling when nervously trying to set up my first foray into journalism.
I wanted to ‘do’ someone I knew a little, but when I approached my number one seed, he served me up Roy as a better choice (Roy just happened to be on holiday so not able to comment).
I called Roy on his return and the rally continued with him immediately attempting the return to my original candidate.
Fortunately Roy was only toying with me, eventually agreeing to participate in good spirit.
Turning next to a time for my ‘house call’ we realised that, in golfing terms, we were only a drive and five iron apart.
We agreed therefore to conduct the interview in our local hostelry.
What was I thinking about!!
And so it was then, that on a cold, Tuesday October evening I set off for my first match…
THRIVING ON CHAOS
Roy, a Project Leader within the Technical Development area of Systems, by his own admission lives life in ‘headless chicken mode’.
His philosophy is to cram as much as he can in, to get as much as he can out.
Born in St Andrews, his father was a mechanic to trade and worked as a service manager.
His mother, being skilled in the art of selling, had many varied jobs.
His one younger brother works in the furniture business.
When Roy was three the family moved to another famous place, Elderslie.
The birthplace of the Scottish patriot William Wallace, it lies west of Glasgow on the outskirts of Paisley.
This was home throughout his school days until he returned to St Andrews to attend the University.
During one University break Roy had a job packing boxes in a lemonade factory.
Through a contact of his mother, he then obtained regular work at Bauteil in Glasgow.
This company made safety critical switch gear for oil rigs in the North Sea and Mexican Gulf.
He found sweeping the floor too boring and manoeuvred himself into a role making electrical control panels.
This breaking of demarcation rules plunged Roy into the centre of a possible strike situation which threatened to halt production.
The next year Roy was allowed back, this time ‘working’ as a draughtsman.
He drew three phase electrical diagrams with a less than comprehensive knowledge of the subject in hand.
In the third year, he at last had a role that matched his skills, successfully designing graphics panels for use in the computer control of switch gear.
On securing his BSc at University, he considered a permanent position with Bauteil, but decided to look for something with better prospects.
With a plan of gaining experience for a couple of years then broadening his horizons by moving overseas, Roy came to Craigforth for an interview.
Impressed by the career potential and the overt friendliness personified by Helen Rivers (then in staff department, responsible for recruitment) he joined the company.
His first position was as a Trainee Programmer in Systems Technical Development working for Peter Davie.
He has been there now for over ten years.
His roles have meant a lot of work in ‘behind the scenes matters’, looking after the systems that underpin the Company's computer facilities.
Readers will however, be more familiar with some of Roy's other historical work.
In the days before packages were available, it was he who wrote the programs for LETGEN (for letter generation) and later designed E-Mail (our electronic mailing system) and Viewdata (the facilities used by agents).
He has had to be able to turn his hand to almost anything.
At one point he was involved in all aspects of selling some of our software.
It sounds straightforward, but became like a marathon through a molasses maze of rules, regulations and other difficulties before securing a profitable sale.
Nowadays his time is spent between his own project work and his team of eight technical staff.
He is the Co-ordinator for Imaging, with a remit covering the Systems Technical and Operations sides of these major developments.
He enjoys the management part of his role, leading his team in the modern way, encouraging upward feedback, including comment on his managerial effectiveness.
His own effectiveness looks suspect with his desk strewn with papers, but this is the only way he can work — the more chaotic the better.
In fact when the cleaning lady has an ‘audit’ of his desk and tidies up the heaps, it is a ‘nightmare’, taking him up to half a day to get back on track.
As a member of the Company's Enterprise Programme EP92, he tended to ‘jump-in’ during quiet spells in exercises.
This attempt to promote activity often caused panic and havoc.
Roy likes the ongoing aspect to EP — small groups of participants regularly meeting to discuss work related matters and making a point of getting together outside work.
Roy is currently organising a day which will include golf and mountain biking in the Trossachs.
It was through EP that Roy got involved in a project centred on upward feedback, a subject which he finds of great interest.
Roy and his wife Sheila live in the historical village of Bannockburn.
Handywork around the house has tended to regularly involve a ‘family bailout’.
He has made an impressive start though to DIY, successfully wallpapering a cupboard — inclusive of feature border!
For fitness, Roy plays in the Systems 5-a-side football every Wednesday lunchtime.
For the eleven a-side version he is a St Mirren supporter and confirmed ‘Bud’.
(St Mirren is a Paisley based Scottish league football team and a Buddie is someone from Paisley).
In the past Roy has had interest in several sports, each one having many stories attached.
At eleven he was keen on athletics until hit on the head by a shot putt.
His enduring memory is coming round in hospital, many hours after the incident, to the voice of Tiger Tim Stevens a local DJ.
During his early teens he moved on to rugby.
However a serious injury sustained during a training session on the sands at Prestwick halted his playing career.
A comeback some years later was aborted following a broken arm.
For Roy, being born in St Andrews and having a keen golfer for a dad, it was inevitable that he would eventually be bitten by the bug.
A member of the picturesque Aberfoyle Golf Club, with a respectable 15 handicap, Roy remembers his inauspicious beginnings.
The two incidents which were called to mind related to the Company golf scene.
The first was hacking round Crieff, eventually posting a horrendous score of 112, with Roy Nicolson as his playing partner.
The second was turning up to play, appropriately attired, Robert McLaren and Willie Thomson dressed in a St Mirren football top, jeans and Adidas trainers.
Roy likes music of any kind, from mainstream classical to U2.
Pinned down to favourites he confessed to liking REM and has recently revived his Talking Heads collection.
Favourite literature, like his music, can come from any quarter.
He reads anything and everything from Alexander Solzhenitzyn to Sue Townsend and Ian Banks.
Selection criteria tends to be whatever is cheapest in ‘Bargain Books’.
At the moment he is working his way through Swing Hammer Swing by Jeff Torrington, a humorous novel about urban deprivation in the Gorbals.
The one thing Roy will definitely make a point of reading is innovations catalogues.
He is mesmerised by gadgets and the latest labour saving devices.
His collection includes erogonimic fat pens, night driving glasses and chinese boading balls (for relaxation).
The shot putt and resultant hospital visit was not an isolated incident in Roy's life.
As a schoolboy prank he leaned forward to staple the boy in front's jacket to his chair.
The boy behind pulled Roy's chair away leading to another hospital admission.
A spike through the foot whilst climbing railings to get to a rugby match and a knock-out blow when practising walking backwards along the kerb are others.
This selection were at least self-inflicted, with the theatre of operations restricted to himself.
There are an equivalent number of situations where Roy has affected the innocent.
When living in his Stirling flat he contrived to flood the downstairs neighbours — three times!
On another occasion he bravely went on to the roof to assess the wind damage to his television aerial but slipped and just managed to save himself by clinging to the guttering — not however, before dislodging a slate which bulleted downward and sliced its way effortlessly into the bonnet of his neighbour's brand new car to form a kind of dorsal fin.
Another unfortunate to cross paths with Roy was on a business flight.
Roy just managed to get the last seat on the plane and was making his way down the cabin, trying to secure space for his luggage.
He opened one locker only to see its contents cascade out, repeatedly bashing the head of the man sitting under it like a scene from a Laurel and Hardy film.
The man turned out to be Alan Stewart, the comedian, who managed to force a smile as Roy apologised.
Roy does not have definite ideas on the future.
The mix of helping to innovate and introduce change within the Company together with the constant technological advances in the market-place ensure there are always plenty of challenges.
It is clear that for Roy at any rate his philosophy for life is one that works for him.
A colourful raconteur, his adventures would make a feature film I would pay money to see.
ULSS demise
Friday 28 August 1992 marked the end of an era for Unit Linked Service section (ULSS).
Formed in 1981 ULSS helped set up and launch the first Scottish Amicable unit-linked policy — the Capital Investment Bond.
This was launched on 26 February 1981 and was closely followed by the Maximum Investment and the Flexicover Plan.
The section has serviced these contracts through good times and bad — remember the stock market crash in 1987?
Although I wasn't there at the time, just mention it to those who were and watch their colour change to grey!
Recently the volume of work arriving in the section increased dramatically mainly due to the launch of the Unit Linked Home Purchaser.
Consequently the section — work and staff — is now integrated into Claims department.
Hopefully this will lead to a more evenly distributed workload.
To mark the occasion ULSS staff past and present met up for an evening.
As you can see from the photos a good time was had by all!
Civil War comes to Christleton Village Fete
Yes once again the Village Fete sees our Fanciful Pretender ready to join the procession as he has for the past 15 years.
Each year the local fete has a different theme and this photograph won second prize at the village show some weeks later.
We don't know if it was the judge or just a passing joker who wrote the card ‘the last person to look like this was shot’.
A good time was had by all and who knows, next year the theme could be Television Adverts, when he will surely expect to get first prize as the TV Captain Chaos look alike.