

Business transfer to new company
BNFL is planning to transfer the commercial uranium enrichment business at Capenhurst into a subsidiary company.
This company, to be called Urenco [Capenhurst]Ltd, will be owned by International Nuclear Fuels Ltd, the subsidiary formed by BNFL to develop its overseas business and participate in international joint ventures.
Negotiations are currently in progress with partners in Urenco Ltd, the Angle-German-Dutch enterprise, with the aim of converting the partnership into a holding company.
Subject to agreement, the Capenhurst enrichment business will be transferred to Urenco Ltd, which will be one third owned by BNFL.
The move is needed to secure profitability which has fallen due to world-wide over capacity in uranium enrichment.
BNFL's civil enrichment business is set to lose about £6 million in 1992–93.
With effect from September the Capenhurst site will be divided into two.
Some 600 of the workforce will transfer to the subsidiary company.
The rest, about 550, will remain with BNFL plc, continuing with the dismantling and decommissioning of the old diffusion plant.
They will also run the plant providing enrichment for defence purposes until the end of the contract with the Ministry of Defence next year.
Convert
BNFL remains fully committed to the civil enrichment business, but has to minimise its current losses.
It sees restructuring of Urenco as the means to convert a loss-making business into one with potential for growth and profit.
For the Capenhurst staff who will transfer to Urenco [Capenhurst]Ltd employment terms and conditions will be broadly similar to those currently in place.
Any changes will be a matter for local negotiation with Staff and Trade Union representatives.
In the longer term the level of non-Urenco business at Capenhurst will decline significantly as decommissioning is completed and the site cleared.
BNFL will seek to identify new projects for the site but the numbers of BNFL employees at Capenhurst are expected to fall significantly by the mid to late 1990s.
It is hoped that the run down can be achieved by voluntary severance and redeployment.
Stepping out in style…
A COLOURFUL sight greeted tourists at the Sellafield Visitors Centre this month — a party of Morris dancers decked out in rustic costume.
The baldricked and garlanded dancers, from Thelwall in Cheshire, entertained audiences with a traditional display which coincided with news that a record number of visitors had flooded in to see the BNFL exhibition.
The total so far this year is 53,000 — more than double the number during the same period in 1991.
The visit of the Morris Men was arranged with the help of BNFL safety auditor David Pratt, of Risley, who has been a member for the past two years.
David says their dances are based on routines which began in Cotswold villages.
‘The origins of Morris dancing are lost in the mists of time.
There are records of it going back hundreds of years all across Europe and it is presumed it was based on fertility influences.’
GOLDEN WONDER!
We're tops again
YOUR award-winning BNFL news has been voted Britain's number one company newspaper for the second year running.
At a glittering prize-giving dinner in Liverpool's Adelphi Hotel it beat 150 other company journals to win the British Association of Industrial Editors Gold Award for an unprecedented second time.
Editor  had already received the class winner's trophy in the section for newspapers published 10 or more times a year when TV and Radio personality Barry Took opened a sealed envelope to reveal the evening's top award.
who also picked up trophies for best new editor and a special award for most promising newcomer, said: ‘I was quite simply amazed.
I believe the Gold Award has never been won by the same publication two years running, so after our success last year I thought BNFL news would be out of the frame.
‘There was a cheer as we lifted what is the country's highest award in industrial journalism.
to say I was delighted would be a bit of an understatement.’
The Gold Award was the pinnacle in a string of achievements for BNFL news and sister publications Sellascene and Risley News.
The three publications, all produced by the same team, have collected a total of nine top awards from the BAIE this year at national and regional level.
BNFL news beat 62 other company newspapers in its class including quality titles from major companies such as Shell, British Gas, National Power, TSB, Telecom, BP and Nuclear Electric.
In all, a record 1,387 entries were submitted to the Editing for Industry Awards coming from throughout the United Kingdom, Europe, Africa, India, South east Asia and the United States.
from BNFL's films, Video and Advertising section also collected an Award of Excellence at the awards for Over The Fells, a video which promotes the attractions of West Cumbria and the Sellafield Visitors Centre.
The national competition successes come just a few weeks after site newsletter Risley News was voted the north's Newsletter of the Year at the Guardian Editing Awards, staged by the Northern region of the BAIE in Manchester.
BNFL News has also had the honour of representing Great Britain in a prestigious European editing competition.
the paper was selected by the BAIE to take part in a Federation of European Industrial Editors' association competition.
The FEIEA Grand Prix attracted entries from 12 European nations.
Results will be announced at their July meeting in Switzerland.
Buxton is given a standing ovation
IT WAS BNFL which drew the applause at Buxton at the end of the Company-sponsored Quest for New Musicals, which has been described as a ‘resounding success.’
The Quest, which reached its grand finale earlier this month, attracted a massive entry of 491 new works from Britain and the rest of the world.
And its impact is set to reverberate around theatreland for some time to come.
BNFL's publicity manager  said: ‘The success of the project is underlined by the applause we have received from writers, critics, cast members and audiences for our involvement.’
Amd  Director of Corporate Affairs and Company Secretary, said her first UK Festival of Musicals was a ‘resounding success’ adding: ‘I believe that the whole project has been a first class example of how industry and the arts can work together for the good of the community.’
After considering the huge number of entries, the panel of independent judges, led by artistic director Richard Stilgoe and patron Andrew Lloyd Webber, came up with a shortlist.
The result was a series of workshops at Buxton Opera House when professional teams brought the shows to life.
Revival
Stars like Joanna Lumley, Hayley Mills and Joan Plowright have been happy to give their support, and BNFL's major sponsorship has been joined by Nuclear Electric, Norwest Holst and the Manchester Evening News.
At Buxton, as part of Questfest ‘92, BNFL also backed a highly successful major revival of Ivor Novello's The Dancing Years.
Other events have included the European premiere of a New York musical and two charity galas.
Among the charities to benefit will be the Prince's Trusts and the National Deaf children's Society.
THERE FOR THE TAKING
FOLLOWING the successful introduction of dispenser units for BNFL News at risley site last month, changes to our distribution system are now to be brought in at chapelcross.
From the June issue, your paper will be available only from the new blue and white dispenser units, which will be placed in prominent locations.
The new dispenser system is set to be phased in on other BNFL sites at a later date.
BNFL News editor  said: ‘The dispensers will be placed so that no one will have to go out of their way to pick up a copy and they will be topped up regularly.
‘With the current desk delivery some people are getting their copy a week after others.
A pick-up system will be far more efficient for the workforce and the company.’
Technology post for David Evans
DAVID EVANS, director of Reactor Division, is to take over a new post as director of Reactor Technology, working on BNFL's input into the Reactor Study Programme being co-ordinated by the Nuclear Utilities Chairmen's Group for the 1994 Industry Review.
Mr Evans, whose appointment takes effect from September 1, will be executively responsible for the Reactor Technology Programme under phase 2 of the BNFL reactor study and the industry-wide overseas reactor option work.
He will be succeeded as Director of Reactor Division by Bill McLaughlan who will be responsible for all aspects of the Division's business, comprising Chapelcross and Calder Hall, Sellafield site services, the BNFL input into the CHP Project, and local aspects of phase 2 of the BNFL Reactor Study.
Mr McLaughlan will be based at Chapelcross.
His successor as Director of Transport Division has been named as Chris Loughlin, currently Counsellor, Atomic Energy in Tokyo, a post he has held since June 1990.
WHAT THE PAPER SAY
Our ‘Sally’ lands a bouquet
SELLAFIELD is used to being the Aunt Sally of the nuclear industry as far as some sections of the Press are concerned.
So it was very refreshing to find one experienced and respected journalist ready to throw plaudits at the plant.
In a four-page article for the American Magazine, Nuclear Industry, former Science Editor of the Financial Times David Fishlock wrote about the Greening of Sellafield.
‘For years, the environment took a backseat to production…
Not any more.
Now it's a model for how to clean up the wastes from bygone days,’ said the article.
Fishlock took a candid historical look at Sellafield from its early days when it was ‘a motley collection of stained concrete hulks’.
He catalogued the ‘alarms and excursions that were to make Windscale [as it was then known]internationally notorious’.
Then he painted a completely different picture of the plant today…‘the new buildings are transforming Sellafield's appearance.
they are still large, windowless cathedrals of concrete — but they are colourfully clad.’
Fishlock added: ‘Sellafield today is seen, not as a liability, but as an asset to tourism in the Lake District’ and he believed it was equipped ‘for a more environmentally conscious 1990s in a way other parts of British industry have scarcely begun to address.’
On the right track
The Sunday Post, the Scottish tabloid made famous by Oor Wullie, shares a lot more English breakfast tables than people realise.
So it was heartening to read an in-depth article on the transport of spent nuclear fuel from Torness to Sellafield.
The paper's reporter, not identified unfortunately, followed a typical movement between reactor site and reprocessing plant in fine detail and with excellent perception of the subject.
The article headlined ‘The Nuclear Express!’ was full of good positive statements about this transport and concluded: ‘It had been an eye-opening day for me on Britain's safest train’.
Vitamin clue
A new theory on what can cause childhood leukaemia was covered by several newspapers including the Times which said the Health Department was considering changing its advice ‘in the light of evidence that injections of vitamin K, given to half the babies born in Britain, may increase the risk of leukaemia’.
The findings were published by Professor Jean Golding of the Institute of Child Health in Bristol after a study of 111 children born in Avon between 1965 and 1987.
But, the Daily Telegraph reported she said her results should be treated with caution…‘we need more research to see if the results are reproduced’.
Nigel Hawkes presented a well-balanced article in the Life & Times section of The Times on Britain's family of Magnox reactors.
He talked mainly to John Collier of Nuclear Electric and Bridget Woodman of Greenpeace.
There was no mention of BNFL's two Magnox stations and in a basically factual article Hawkes made this comment: ‘By now their [Magnox stations]capital cost is largely written off and the electricity they do generate is cheap.
It thus makes every kind of sense to Nuclear electric to try to keep them going’.
Finally let me record an item put out by Reuters News Agency which did not receive much publicity.
The Dutch Economy Minister, Koos Andriessen, said in an interview: ‘In the long term the energy problem will not be solved without nuclear power’.
According to reuters, ‘his comments are the strongest signal yet that the Netherlands may be ready to expand nuclear capacity’.
MINERS WARM TO IDEA OF NUCLEAR IN THEIR CLUB
SCOTTISH miners have backed a call for an integrated energy policy INCLUDING nuclear power.
Delegates at the Annual Congress of the Scottish TYUC in Perth voted by a significant majority in favour of a motion tabled by the Scottish NUM.
They also heard the chairman of the STUC energy committee, Harry McLevy, spell out the grounds for continued investment, arguing that the case for nuclear power is so big it cannot be ignored and must be incorporated into any energy policy for Scotland.,
Among those attending the conference were Chapelcross trades unionists & names .
The motion in favour of nuclear power, coming as it did from the Scottish NUM, represents a significant breakthrough in trades union thinking on energy issues.
Said: ‘It's the first time I can remember there being a vote in favour of nuclear power.
Usually we have managed to get things through at TUC conferences — just.
Heartened
‘But it was very surprising that the miners actually put things forward.
I think it reflects all the hard work put in on convincing people of our case.’
In fact, the Chapelcross contingent had gone to Perth prepared to fight hard to win the day.
‘We did a lot of leafleting,’ explained Alex.
‘I was outside the hall leafleting when the debate was called.
‘I thought I would just get in and catch the end but it was over in minutes.
It's a big step forward.’
TGWU secretary to the shop stewards and a member of the National Campaign for the Nuclear Industry, was unable to attend this year's conference, but was heartened by the vote.
‘Scottish trades unions are strong supporters of nuclear power,’ explained Joe, who acknowledged all the good work done by the NCNI and by delegates to the TUC.
‘In general we feel that, as far as nuclear power is concerned, it's beginning to be far more acceptable.
We seem to be getting our message across.’
Our cheque proves just the ticket
THE official launch of WINCH, the Wirral Initiative for Needy Children, at Tranmere Rovers Football Club was given a healthy start, thanks to £1,000 donation from BNFL.
Part of that money was immediately spent on the printing of tickets for a pop concert at Tranmere's ground to mark the public launch of the appeal.
Capenhurst Training and Education officer, Jim Dunne, explained that the scheme aims to enlist the support of 28,000 children in the Wirral area.
‘We have the backing of more than 70 schools and each one is planning sponsored events to raise money throughout the year.
‘Each school will try to enlist the support of a company, like BNFL, and it is intended to present a bumper cheque to Children in Need on TV in December.’
Brian looks forward to a fresh challenge
BNFL's new Director of employee Relations, Brian Kerr, says he is looking forward to the challenge of his new job, an extension of the role he has exercised within the company since the 1960s.
Brian, who hails from Warrington, has spent almost his entire career in personnel in one form or another, ever since, in fact, he assumed the old fashioned title of ‘Labour Relations Manager’ at Sellafield in 1966.
When he joined the UKAEA in 1956 his first job was in accounts, followed by a short period in commercial.
In 1969 he moved to Capenhurst as industrial relations manager and progressed to become a member of the Works Board.
He moved to risley in 1979 when he was created Company industrial relations manager.
In 1985 the corporate staff and industrial relations roles were brought together and he was appointed Company personnel manager [employee relations].
Brian says his only regret is giving up responsibility for Risley Site Services.
Married with two children, he lives at Saughall, near Chester, and his outside interests included being a member of Chester City Council.
‘I have been on the parish council at Saughall for more years than I care to remember — eighteen,’ he said.
‘And I have just completed a second, three-year term as chairman.’
Since 1979 Brian has managed to combine all his other duties with that of being a Cheshire magistrate and he also serves as chairman of the Cestrian Trust for kidney dialysis.
Brian's new Company role is incorporated into the Human Resources Directorate headed by Director Alan Hanslip.
Appointed Assistant Director, Employee Development, is alex Milroy.
New role for Dr Bill
A MAN who has combined a distinguished academic career with that of conspicuous service to the nuclear industry, Dr Bill Wilkinson has retired as Deputy Chief Executive of BNFL.
But the former Cambridge graduate, who joined the industry 33 years ago, will continue to serve as a non-executive director.
Dr wilkinson, awarded the CBE in 1987, joined UKAEA Springfields in 1959.
After gaining a doctorate in Chemical Engineering he spent three years lecturing at University College, Swansea and then, in 1967, he became Professor of Chemical Engineering at Bradford University.
When he rejoined the nuclear industry at Risley he became assistant director, Research and Development, in the Reprocessing Division.
He was subsequently appointed director, Reprocessing Engineering Division, and became technical director and also a main board member in 1984.
Bob's a winner
THERE was a tremendous response to last month's super BNFL news Environmental competition and the lucky winner was Robert Lawton from enrichment Plant Projects Office at Capenhurst.
Robert correctly answered the 10 questions, the answers to which were all to be found in the BNFL publication ‘Our Environment’, and a cheque for £150 is on its way to him.
Also in the money are George Hitchell from Company Quality Assurance Department at Risley and Yvonne Woodman of Engineering Department at Chapelcross.
George was second out of the hat and picks up the £100 second prize, while Yvonne is £50 better-off in third place.
BNFL news IN BRIEF 
‘Grass’ is safe
ENVIRONMENTAL monitoring on beaches at Sellafield have been stepped up following the discovery of a grass-like substance.
Routine monitoring detected radioactivity on some of the substances but not others.
However, there is no likelihood of harm to members of the public associated with any of the items which have been found.
They have been identified as a type of coral-like single-cell organism and the radioactive materials detected are in line with authorised effluent discharges from Sellafield during the past year.
Sign up
THORP, the flagship of BNFL, is on the lookout for a logo.
the design chosen will be used on stationery, lapel badges, divisional vehicles etc., and will represent the concept of the state of the art plant.
There is a first prize of £100 in vouchers and a crystal trophy.
The runner up receives £50 in vouchers.
Entries, with your name, site and building number on the back, should be sent to  .
On camera
WHAT promises to be a good video has just come out — but don't go to your local hire shop for a copy as it's a BNFL production.
A group of directors and employees got together for a discussion group and the resulting lively debate was recorded on a video currently doing the rounds of BNFL sites.
First in
HAMPSHIRE engineering company Gravatom Projects Ltd has chosen the Westlakes science and Technology Park for its northern base.
The eight-strong team of engineers and draughtsmen are the first outside tenants to move into the prestigious development, at Ingwell, near Whitehaven.
They will provide a design service for clients, including BNFL at Sellafield.
Karaoke
THE West Cumberland Hospital children's ward will be among those benefiting from a karaoke night being held at SASRA's Falcon Club on June 4.
Tickets, at £3 each, are available from the club and there is a late bar on the night.
People in the news
Pot-bellied Romeo is a sty star
PUT this in the piggy bank!
Mossburn Community Farm, near Lockerbie, is now £3,000 better off — thanks to Chapelcross.
The cash, with a promise of a further £2,000 during the next two years, was handed over by site superintendent Peter Jenkinson and personnel boss Sue Tandy to Mossburn manageress Juanita Wilson.
And two of the farm's residents — Joker the heifer and Romeo the Vietnamese pot-bellied pig — were there to cast an approving eye over the proceedings.
Chapelcross community fund came up with the cash which will be used to provide visitors' toilets at the centre and to assist in its general operation.
Juanita said: ‘We've applied to various groups for assistance and BNFL are the only conglomerate who have had faith in what we are trying to do here.’
The centre, a registered charity, opened last year and is designed to promote animal welfare and provide a leisure facility.
Sue said: ‘We're confident of the success of Mossburn and hope it will prove to be a real crowd-puller.’
Proud day as Joe receives his BEM
IT was a proud moment for Chapelcross and union convenor Joe Weild when the site's T&GWU; chairman was presented with his British Empire Medal by the Lord Lieutenant of Annandale, Eskdale and Nithsdale.
The formal ceremony was held in the Chapelcross training annexe and Joe's family and colleagues watched as Captain Ronald C Cunningham-Jardine, representing the Queen, pinned on the medal.
Joe, who has worked on site for more than 30 years, is a founder member of the National Campaign for the Nuclear Industry.
He became a shop steward in 1971 before taking over as Transport and General Workers Union convener 10 years ago.
Joe's predecessor, the late Eric McCauley, was awarded a BEM in 1981.
Duncan's gift from outer space
DUNCAN Bond, the 13-year-old son of Springfields site visits officer, Eric, is still competing with his father for possession of a coloured sticker representing the flight of the Atlantis space shuttle.
For the historic gift was forwarded to Eric by former astronaut Col Bill Phailes, who flew a mission on the shuttle in 1985 and who was in a party of 24 Americans visiting Springfields.
Col Phailes, a payload specialist, is attached to the USA Industrial College of the armed forces and was on a UK fact-finding tour with colleagues.
It was in fact their ninth annual such visit to Springfields and the party also took in Sellafield.
‘We were talking about radiation transmitted from the cosmos and he mentioned about his space flight,’ explained Eric, who thought nothing more of it until he received the signed sticker through the post.
The accompanying letter said how much they enjoyed the tour of Springfields and said Eric could pass on the sticker to his son.
The only problem now is that the sticker, which depicts the shuttle soaring over the earth, is just too good to hand over.
‘I think I may allow Duncan to bluetack it to his bedroom wall,’ said Eric, with just a hint of a compromise.
Dr Sue Pens a winner…
SPRINGFIELDS' Dr Sue Ion has put pen to paper to tell the story of the successful development of Water Reactor and AGR fuel at the plant.
And her article, published in the bi-monthly journal of the Institution of Nuclear Engineers, has won the institution's Pinkerton Award.
Judges were impressed by the ‘outstanding merit’ of her contribution, on the Process Development in Nuclear Fuel Fabrication.
Dr Ion, head of BNFL's research and development team at Springfields, was presented with the award at the fifth annual dinner of the North West branch.
She said: ‘I was very honoured and privileged to receive it.
The article was a review of process developments over the years and the way changing technology has impacted on fuel design.
With characteristic modesty she added: ‘I felt that the award was a tribute to the teamwork of others over the years.’
BOB TELLS THE WORLD HOW BNFL DOES IT!
BNFL's message was spread world-wide last month by Company Publicity manager Bob Williams.
Bob was invited to be a speaker at the 19th World Industrial Advertising Congress in Geneva, alongside top industrialists including British Aerospace Chairman Sir Graham Day.
He gave the 100 delegates an hour-long presentation on BNFL titled ‘Making Sense of a Sensitive Issue’.
Bob said: ‘This is another example of our campaign being recognised by the advertising industry as one of the most successful of its type.’
ANOTHER GREAT COMPETITION FOR news READERS
WIN a super mini-break for two in the heart of Cheshire
THINK of Cheshire, and Cheese and grinning Cats spring to mind!
And you'll be grinning too if you're the winner of our super weekend special break holiday worth more than £200.
YOU and a companion will stay for two nights at the luxury half-timbered Alvaston Hall Hotel.
Bed and breakfast are included in this prize.
THIS mid-Victorian building is set in 15 acres of gardens.
There are 88 tastefully-furnished bedrooms, each with its own en-suite facilities.
THE Alvaston Hall has a superb leisure complex offering the last word in relaxation with sauna, jacuzzi, swimming pool and tennis courts.
There will even be a chance to join in some aerobic sessions.
WHILE staying at the hotel — there is easy access from junctions 16 and 18 on the M6 and Crewe railway station is nearby — you will have the opportunity to visit the exotic Stapeley Water Gardens, Bridgemere Garden World or the Cheshire candle workshops.
And entry tickets are FREE!
Or you can pop into the ancient Roman City of Chester for a spot of shopping.
ALL you have to do is enter this competition, courtesy of Cheshire Tourism, is to answer the three simple questions.
1
Which creature from Cheshire was made famous in Alice in Wonderland?.
2
Which motorway runs north-south through Cheshire?
3
In which city can you find Cheshire's Roman walls?
THE competition is open to entries from BNFL employees and retired staff only.
The results will be announced in BNFL News June edition.
The judges decision will be final.
GENERATING POWER TO SAVE LIVES
A LITTLE more light has come into the lives of children at a Romanian hospital with the arrival of a BNFL generator which once provided back-up power for Capenhurst's E21 centrifuge plant.
The diesel unit is now providing vital emergency power for lighting and medical equipment at the 600-bed Eudamex hospital near Bucharest, which is currently suffering up to three blackouts a day.
Capenhurst Design/Project Engineer Jeff Peet and the power plant were part of a six-vehicle convoy of medical equipment from the Operation Christmas Child aid organisation, which arrived in Romania last month.
He said: ‘They were desperate for an emergency power supply.
You can imagine what happens if a child is undergoing surgery or is on a life support machine when the electricity is cut.’
Mission
It took three days to reach the town of Clujnapoca, where the generator was loaded on to a romanian aid wagon for the final stage of the journey.
Jeff, who drove a lead car, explained: ‘We knew there was a building site there and after a few dollars had changed hands the construction workers used one of their cranes to transfer the three-and-a-halfton generator.’
It was his third mercy mission to Romania and he plans to join another convoy in December.
Kevin Buchan, of Capenhurst's transport section, has also volunteered his services as a driver for a convoy setting out this month.
Jeff added: ‘BNFL people from several sites have collected food and clothing for us to take out in previous years and I would be grateful if people could help again.
I can assure them it is a VERY worthy cause.’
Site scoops second award
CAPENHURST'S safety record which last year won it a certificate of merit from the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents has earned it a second award this year.
RoSPA has awarded the site its bronze award for continued improvement in the field of occupational safety.
Safety Officer, Dave Johnson, who has been promoting a number of initiatives, commented: ‘It reflects the workforce's commitment to better safety standards.’
PIPING HOT STUFF AT THORP!
Plant passes tests with flying colours
MORE and more areas of BNFL's THORP plant are coming to shape as contractors and commissioning teams strive towards the February 1993 deadline for all areas to be under the control of the Commissioning Group.
BNFL News has again been into the flagship plant to bring you the latest reports.
THERE was a testing time in store for members of THORP's Chemical Separation Process team who found themselves in hot water recently.
They were taking part in a crucial first safety commissioning test when hundreds of tons of hot water were pumped through a section of the plant's miles of piping…and it all passed with flying colours.
The tests, conducted under the watchful eye of Nuclear Installations Inspectorate teams, aim to prove the safety of the Highly Active Cycle system, which uses steam ejectors to pump highly active liquor around the plant.
The first of a series of tests, which will be continuing into next year, it involved a team effort from several areas of the superplant.
Alan Dobson, Commissioning Manager, THORP Chemical Separation Process, said: ‘This series of tests were scheduled for later in the year.
When a chance came up to do them early we took it, although it meant we only had nine working days to fit in with Magnox Shutdown.
‘It was also fortunate that NII inspectors were on site looking at THORP training arrangements and they were particularly interested in these tests.’
Alan added: ‘The pipework tested forms a key THORP effluent route and involves the pipebridge connection to the Magnox Separation Plant and various effluent treatment facilities, so there was a lot of co-operation between various BNFL sections and contractors.
The whole exercise was 100 per-cent successful and the equipment exceeded design requirements.’
Ian Hepworth, HA Cycle commissioning team leader, said: ‘It was a major under-taking.
The pipebridge section alone held five tons of hot water when it was full and in all we must have pumped hundreds of tons around the system.
‘It was also the first time that steam, which is the lifeblood of THORP was introduced into the highly active area.’
Experts from Davy McKee, the commissioning contractor, worked closely with BNFL commissioning teams during the test sequence.
Shear satisfaction…
IT WAS shear joy for commissioning teams and contractors staff at THORP's Head End as yet another crucial part of the £1.85 billion superplant was completed this month.
Shear Cave equipment, designed, supplied and installed by Davy McKee was formally handed over to BNFL commissioning teams.
The 16-tonnes Shear Pack is the remotely controlled machine which cuts up fuel assemblies ready for the next stage in reprocessing, the chemical separation of the various elements.
Our top team of problem solvers
WHEN your car won't go you send for a very nice man from the breakdown services — but what do you do if something's not quite right in your £1.85 billion reprocessing plant?
The answer is you send for those very, very nice man [and women]from THORP Site Design Office.
And so far on the mammoth project the TSDO troops have been sent in successfully thousands of times.
Mechanical Manager Ewan Smith explained: ‘With a project as big and as complex as THORP technical snags are bound to crop up during construction and later in commissioning.
‘We act as back up to the contractors and commissioning teams who call in TSDO to help sort out problems large and small, which I am happy to say we do quickly in the vast majority of cases.’
TSDO is the Sellafield arm of Risley's THORP design office and the majority of staff are seconded from Risley.
The snags they sort out can be as simple as making sure a contractor understands plans properly to having to re-design equipment found to need modification when it is being installed.
E & I Manager Chris Dodwell said: ‘With the switch from construction to commissioning our role is changing as are the type of queries coming in.
At this stage in the project every query is a priority and requires instant attention.
‘It is a tremendously exciting time as such a huge project nears completion.’
The man overseeing TSDO teams at Sellafield is Engineering Manager John Turnbull.
He said: ‘Although TSDO play a supporting role they are a crucial part of the overall success of the project and as such deserve recognition for the tremendous job they are doing.’
Motoring news
VETERAN VISITORS RALLY ROUND!
ADVANCES at the leading edge of technology are what usually make the news at Sellafield.
But some decidedly dated machinery recently became the talk of the site.
A convoy of vintage vehicles toured the complex and the sight of 10 pre-1918 cars almost brought BNFL's Cumbrian plant to a standstill.
Members of the Veteran Car Club of Great Britain arrived at the Visitors Centre for a visit, part of which involved a site coach tour.
However, after a few hurried calls from Information Officer David Curry permission was granted for club members and their families to take the tour bus route at a slightly slower pace.
David said: ‘The reaction on site was amazing.
Reactors
‘People are more used to seeing BNFL vans or contractors’ trucks running around, so when 10 vintage cars trundled past they were gobsmacked.
‘A nice touch was that all the vehicles lined up outside our very own veterans, Calder's four reactors, for an historic picture.’
THORP was another stop on the route.
The oldest member of the convoy was a 1901 Thanomile trike which had to make the journey around site on a trailer because its engine had expired the previous day.
Veteran Car Club member Gowan Coulthard, of Maryport, organised the visit.
Other cars included a pre-1918 Buick, a Sunbeam and a 1910 renault AX, which belongs to Max De Redder from Great Clifton near Workington.
Club Chairman Nigel Bradshaw drove his immaculate 1913 four-and-a-half litre Talbot 25 round Sellafield.
Impressed
He said all members of the 42-strong group, on a weekend rally to the Lakes and Cumbria, were impressed.
He added: ‘You cannot but be impressed by the size and complexity of Sellafield.
I found it so interesting I will certainly be going back for a closer look.’
news round
GEORGE WAS AN EARLY STARTER
A MAN who carried out some of the early development work on the gaseous diffusion and centrifuge technology at Capenhurst has retired after 37 years at the plant.
George Goodall arrived in 1955 as assistant experimental officer with just four A-levels to his credit, his progress to further education having been interrupted by two years' National Service.
But he studied part time to become, first an Associate of the Royal Society of Chemistry, and then, in 1980, a Fellow of the Society — its highest accolade.
He retired as Principal Chemist, R&D , in Chemical and Metallurgical Services.
George also travelled extensively in Europe when he became involved with URENCO.
More recently, his contributions to BNFL include a short spell participating in the development of vitrification at Sellafield and the setting up of the company research laboratory at Springfields.
George spent his early childhood in his home town of Liverpool but was evacuated to North Wales after the outbreak of war.
‘In some ways it was like going back in time, living in the mountains where there was no electricity or running water.
I remember having to wash and bathe in the river!’
He soon became fluent in Welsh and has never forgotten the basics of the language, despite his move to Irby on the Wirral where he lives with his wife Beryl.
The couple have two children Kevin, an Oxford graduated chemist, and Helen, who is a trainee teacher.
George says he will miss the many contacts he has made in BNFL and URENCO over the years but is looking forward to spending more time on his hobbies, particularly gardening, walking and amateur dramatics.
Yvonne has chequed out
GENERAL clerk Yvonne Bristow from Risley, has retired after completing 13 years in Systems and Equipment Engineering Department.
A cheque for £250 was presented to Yvonne by senior manager Andrew Taylor on behalf of her friends and colleagues.
She is hoping to buy garden furniture and a barbecue so she can enjoy the summer months in style.
Her hobbies are reading and gardening, and she intends to relax, put her feet up and enjoy her retirement.
Soon Yvonne will be packing her bags and jetting off to Greece for a holiday in the sun.
Later on in the year she is travelling to South Africa to visit her daughter Michelle and grandaughter Taryn.
She also has two sons Paul and Steven.
Yvonne receives her cheque from Andrew Taylor as colleagues look on.
DECADES OF DEVOTION TO R and D
THE custom-built plants at Sellafield, revolutionising the way we treat and reprocess fuel, reflect great credit on the industry, said Warren Baxter when he retired as manager of Plutonium Research Group in Sellafield Technical Department.
Warren began work at Sellafield on the day the UKAEA was formed in 1954 — originally in the R & D branch which later became part of BNFL.
He has had a hand in most of the major developments on site, but says B205 — Magnox reprocessing — has brought him most satisfaction.
‘It was built as the first main processing plant to support the basic nuclear industry of the country and, of course, it has also processed fuel from Japan and Italy.
B205 has been the lifeblood of BNFL,’ he said.
Settled
Warren, 61, has been involved in all aspects of reprocessing research and development.
He was made a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry and a chartered chemist.
Originally from Manchester, he settled in Whitehaven and he and his wife Catherine have three sons, who work on site.
‘Neil works in Sellafield Technical Department, Ian works in Engineering and Peter is a fitter in the Fuel Handling Plant,’ said Warren.
Colleagues presented him with video editing equipment which was handed over by Michael Larkin, senior manager in Research Group.
Motoring news
BURN-UP BREN'S BAVARIA BOUND
SPRINGFIELDS catering supervisor Brenda Cowell is a lady who loves life in the fast lane.
For bubbly Brenda, who recently passed her motorcycle test, is now the proud owner of a speedy Suzuki GS 500E.
And a passion for two-wheels helps with her other hobby.
For the past three years Brenda has been learning German at the Open Learning Centre on site and she puts it to good use on frequent trips abroad.
In the past she has gone as a pillion passenger on husband Steve's bike.
But this year Brenda will be piloting her own machine after trading in her Honda 125 for the super Suzuki.
It was on an earlier trip to Germany that Brenda took up the challenge to pass her bike test.
Fellow tripper Dave Caley, who also works at Springfields, suggested that to mark her birthday — the one which life is supposed to start at — she should do something special.
Brenda reckons having her own bike has a few benefits.
She can now take twice as much clothing then she was allowed on previous trips and she can travel at her own speed, instead of low flying across Europe with Steve, who is a THORP contractor with John Brown Engineering at Sellafield.
He says he is very proud of his wife's achievement, but is a bit worried she may become a better rider than him and he will end up being relegated to the pillion seat in future.
Gren light for the voltswagon
AMERICA'S utilities have enough capacity, either on line or planned in the next decade, to accommodate 40 million electric vehicles.
The calculation has been made by the Edison electric Institute, Department of Energy and electric car industry officials.
But EEI President Thomas Kuhn acknowledged that even the most optimistic environmentalists do not believe anything like that number of electric vehicles will be on the streets, even in the next 20 years.
Stick up drivers are round the bend!
BOB Phillips of Information Services at Risley sent us some motoring observations which we felt were worth sharing…
The British are supposed to be a staid, shy, retiring lot — and especially when they're driving.
For us there's none of that devil-may-care grand prix bravado that the Italians and French go in for.
If you're ever taken your car on the Continent you must know the typical situation — being overtaken on an S-bend by four nuns in a Renault 4.
So why, then, are we so eager to inform every other driver on the road that Surfboarders Do It Standing Up, or that Rugby Is Played By Men With Odd-shaped Balls?
Why, oh why, do we implore others to Honk If You Had It Last Night?
Sex
Stickers in car windows have become a new and vulgar form of motorway madness.
Is there a single Escort, Allegro or Sierra the length and breadth of the land which isn't emblazoned with some message the driver is desperate to convey to fellow motorists?
Most of them, of course, are pure machismo, alleging fearless sporting prowess or irresistible sex appeal, but some are sadly implausible.
Does anyone really believe his other car is a Porsche?
Some stickers are downright perplexing.
Why do we need to know that another vehicle has Show Dogs In Transit?
Should we be giving them a wide berth for fear of rampant Rottweilers lunging at our wing mirrors?
On second thoughts, it might not be such a bad idea, if only for a different reason.
Even Rampant Rottweilers are preferable to an XR2 with a double row of headlights blazing as it roars up behind you and a sticker in the back window which taunts you with ‘Blondes Have More Fun’ as it races past into the distance.
FORD'S FLASHY FLYER
THIS is probably the first view of Ford's flashy new flyer that other drivers will get…as it zooms past.
For it is the long awaited Ford Escort RS Cosworth — unveiled earlier this month — and it can go from O to 60 faster than most cars can reach half that speed.
The 2.
O litre, intercooler turbocharged, four-wheel-drive, fuel injected supercar puts out a massive 227bhp, which means 60mph comes up in a shade over five seconds on your way to a highly illegal 140.
Described by its makers as the ‘ultimate Ford’, the RS Cosworth will soon be a regular sight on the rally circuit as it will form the mainstay of the Ford works team.
The car's striking styling is said to give exceptional aerodynamics and high speed directional stability.
The price is to be announced later this month, but the word is you need £20,000 plus to own one…and then you could start saving up for the insurance!
And here is the green good news…
G00D news in the areas of environmental discharges and exposure to radiation is announced in BNFL's annual Health Safety and Environmental Report for 1991 which is published this month.
The report, which covers activities at all sites operated by the Company, underpins a new policy statement by BNFL which focuses attention on current environmental performance and potential improvement.
Chief Executive Neville Chamberlain said: ‘We have concerned ourselves with environmental care for many years and are proud of our achievements so far.
‘However, we aim to reduce the effects of our activities on the environment to a practicable minimum.’
BNFL's investment programme includes =100 million spent at Sellafield specifically to cut radioactive discharges.
Statistics show that all discharges and disposals of radioactive waste there during 1991 were within the authorised limits set by Government departments — as were all facilities and sites operated by the Company.
Storage of various liquid effluents on site at Sellafield since the early 1980s, pending the completion of new waste treatment plants designed to remove the most significant radioactivity, has been a contributory factor in reducing the level of discharges.
Now, with the completion of these treatment plants and THORP, BNFL is seeking to vary discharge authorisations, but even allowing for projected increases in some contributions, the overall total dose resulting from the discharges will remain very low.
The maximum radiation exposure of members of the public resulting from BNFL's activities was also well below the level recommended by the International Commission on Radiological Protection of one millisievert a year.
For instance, unusually avid eaters of fish and shellfish living near Sellafield, and regarded as a ‘critical’ group, received a maximum of just 0.18 mSv.
In the area of occupational safety, only nine workers received more than 15 mSv during 1991, compared with 122 in 1990 and 1, O16 in 1986.
The Company actually works to a dose restriction level of 20 mSv, which is well below the legal limit of 50 mSv.
BNFL backs the best
BNFL is supporting the Lancashire Best Kept Village competition sponsored by the National and Provincial Building Society.
The Company is providing trophies for the village schools' competition and a wayside seat for presentation to the winning hamlet.
DOCTOR'S NOTES
Spotlight on study teams
SPRING is well and truly here.
Politicians, who appeared on our doorsteps like snowdrops nodding their heads wisely in the cold seasonal winds, have disappeared as promptly with the warmer weather.
Now, as we search out lighter clothes and last year's beachwear, we dejectedly contemplate the rolls of flesh they reveal.
This is the real time to take up those abandoned New Year resolutions — eat less, eat more healthily and take more exercise!
It is also time to take note of less transient events.
These are the ongoing studies of the possible relationship between parental work and various children's disorders.
I want to draw your attention to all those people working behind the scenes within BNFL to make sure that this study is carried forward.
To do the work requires an enormous amount of effort beavering away among old records, checking, copying and encoding.
This is done by dedicated groups of individuals in medical, personnel and dosimetry, health statistics and genetics departments.
They seldom get any credit in public, so this is a special thank you, and some public recognition, to this quiet and committed band.
There have been a couple of announcements in the past few months which should be of interest to us.
The first concerns the National Registry of Radiation Workers' study.
This is the big UK study of the causes of death of radiation workers.
It started in 1976 and it says something about the timescale over which these sorts of things have to be planned that the first results of any value appeared 16 years later.
The study came up with two main conclusions.
The first was that the estimates of risk of death from cancer which are used to predict for radiation work — mainly from A-bomb victims — seem to be borne out by these early results.
This was expected.
What was unexpected was the marked deficit of smoking related deaths.
It is still unclear whether this is due to some intrinsic characteristic of people who became nuclear workers, or more likely because of the reduced opportunities or smoking allowed by work restrictions.
Whatever the case, the finding is cheering,
Also getting a lot of media attention was the National Study of Childhood Cancer, which is going to look at a number of background environmental factors in all children's cancers during the next five years.
BNFL, along with the electricity industry, have felt it right to contribute substantial support to this initiative.
So far as radiation is concerned, the major factor to be examined is cross-country variation in natural exposure, from radon and such-like.
Hopefully, this will deal with such questions as, ‘If Gardner is right, why aren't there a lot of cases of childhood leukaemia in Devon and Cornwall where natural radiation levels are high?’
What this study won't do is to tell us much about specific industries such as our own because the numbers involved will almost certainly be too small to pinpoint effects so precisely.
JAPAN HAS THE YEN TO BUY BRITISH
BNFL is to build two state-of-the-art electronic radiation detection systems — developed for the company's flagship THORP plant — for the Japanese.
The two special instrument systems, costing half a million pounds, are to be supplied to the Japanese Atomic Energy Research Institute at Tokai Mura.
And the deals have been described as ‘helping establish BNFL as a supplier of nuclear plant control and instrumentation systems at an international level’ by the project team's control and instrumentation engineer, Dr Howard Hampson.
Design
He added: ‘The two systems, an Alpha Drum Monitor and a Neutron Coincidence Counter, are results of development and design expertise from both Risley and Sellafield built up over recent years.
They represent a viable spin off from the THORP project control and instrumentation activities.’
The project team is led by Risley-based Dr Hugh Battenbo.
Other members are Risley mechanical engineer Sukumar Ghosh, Sellafield development scientist Chris Orr and Risley commercial manager Stuart Sykes.
Grenville Harrop, THORP project manager, said: ‘BNFL needed a long duration, high investment development programme to provide specialist radiological instrumentation that satisfied our own new plant requirements.
‘This resulted in an extension of the available technology that can be applied to nuclear plant for process, safety and safeguarding purposes.
‘The award of this contract shows how BNFL are, quite rightly, seen as technological leaders in the field.’
A runway success…
A BNFL sponsored conservation award has been won by a company which used extensive landscaping and environmental work in developing a former RAF site.
The Fylde Civic Conservation Awards scheme, now in its 10th year, is supported by a number of major companies in the area, including Guardian Royal Exchange and British Aerospace.
BNFL's Graham Codd works manager of NOFC and associated plants at Springfields, presented a certificate and plaque to Larry Allday, representing exhaust silencer company cheswick UK of Warton.
Its new research and development centre is shielded from surrounding countryside by extensive landscaping and the project won the scheme's Premier Award.
New role for ex-News man Bill
THE Company has appointed former BNFL News editor Bill Anderton to the post of Chief Press Officer.
Bill, 44, who has 25 years experience in national and regional newspapers, was formerly the BNFL's senior press officer.
He takes over from Bob Phillips who has been appointed manager of Information Services, Corporate Affairs Directorate.
Springtime is party time
SPRINGTIME is the best time for partying at Springfields.
That's what retired employees from the plant decided on a show of hands this year when they were given the option of switching the event to Christmas.
The majority of the 850 former workers were asked for their opinions after a suggestion that they revert to a festive dinner — the original idea when the tradition was established in 1963.
‘We had a small group saying they wanted to move it back, but there was an overwhelming vote to keep it as it is,’ said Carmel Hall, secretary of the organising committee.
The drill this year was the same as before, with a fleet of buses bringing the partygoers from pick-up points all across Lancashire to the Springfields restaurant.
Guests were welcomed by John Glanville, Assistant Director of Reprocessing, and treated to a free bar and waiter service by 60 helpers.
The volunteers were drawn from all sections of the workforce, from shopfloor to management, and were backed-up by catering staff working behind the scenes to produce the buffet meals.
Entertainment was in the capable hands of instrument mechanic Dennis Brown, who acted as compere and arranged for a guest appearance by Blackpool duo Rendezvous.
Boost for small firms
BNFL is to plough £15,000 into a local organisation whose aim is to support new businesses and create jobs in an area with one of the highest levels of unemployment in Lancashire.
Preston Business Venture will receive the money over three years to help keep the group afloat and continue providing free, independent and confidential help to small firms throughout the region wishing to set up or expand their businesses.
During 1990/91 alone, the venture helped create 272 full-time jobs and 104 part-time jobs.
In addition, almost 300 individuals receive assistance each month.
Sport news
Kev just misses marathon target SECONDS OUT FOR THE ‘MIGHTY ATOM’
SELLAFIELD pocket dynamo Kevin McCluskey started his 1992 running season with a solid performance in this year's London Marathon.
Kevin, who at five feet tall weighs just eight stone, finished in 23rd place in the men's race in two hours 14 minutes and 49 seconds.
Seven times consecutive winner of the Windscale marathon Kevin, who works in Research and Development, has completed three international marathons — Dublin, Belgrade and Reims — and was aiming to beat his last time of two hours 14 minutes.
‘I wasn't impressed with my time,’ said Kevin, a member of Copeland Athletics Club.
‘I plan to run another in the autumn and will be aiming for a more polished performance.’
RISLEY runners turned in some excellent times over the 26.2 mile course and the best of a valiant bunch was Mervin Ward from Internal Audit.
Mervin completed his third London run in a blistering time of two hours 55 minutes.
The 37-year-old began training 16 weeks before the event, running about 40 miles a week.
A member of the Warrington Road runners, he took up the sport six years ago.
‘I got out of breath drying myself after a bath and I realised I was a bit overweight,’ said Mervin, who now tips the scales at just over eight stones!
Modestly, he said of his time: ‘It was good.
I was chuffed.’
Derek Milne, who was running in his fourteenth marathon, was disappointed with his time of four hours 12 minutes.
‘I was running just 20 miles a week in my build up for the race.
It just proves that you can't hope to turn in a worthy performance if you haven't done sufficient preparation.’
said Derek, from THORP Design Office.
His training partner, Stan Leigh, who works in Information Services, achieved his target time of three hours 20 minutes, but picked up a hamstring injury along the way.
Don Cribb from Systems and Equipment Engineering Department, was attempting his first London Marathon.
He crossed the line in three hours 44 minutes.
John Shore from Operations at CAPENHURST enjoyed taking in the sights of the capital as he completed his second London event in three hours 45 minutes.
Occasion
‘This time was a much more pleasant occasion,’ said John, 45, who has been running for the last seven years.
‘I ran around 50 miles a week in training and was determined to be in good shape, I couldn't remember a thing after 15-miles three years ago,’ he said.
SPRINGFIELDS had four runners taking part in the marathon including two ladies, Val Roberts and Sarah Smith.
Val, who works in Research and Development, is a member of Springfields Running Club and regularly competes in 10k road races.
She is aiming to raise up to £1,000 for the charity Relate.
Val finished in four hours 10 minutes, just nine minutes and six seconds behind Sarah from the sites Fuel Division Project Engineering Department [FDPED].
Sarah, 27, was attempting her first marathon, but admits it has given her the ‘bug’.
She hopes her efforts will raise £700 for St Catherine's Hospice.
George Kirk, who works in Chemical Plants, battled round in four and a half hours while John Kenny from FDPED finished in three hours 18 minutes.
Double up for the cup
TWO Yorkshire club sides will play each other in the BNFL National Cup final at Knowsley Road, St Helens, on Sunday, May 24.
Hull Dockers, last years beaten finalists, and Skirlaugh, both from Humberside are expected to bring a sizable following across the Pennines for the showpiece Open Age final — the highlight of the British Amateur Rugby League calender.
Lancashire's only representatives in the cup final double-header are Waterhead of Oldham.
They will contest the National Youth Cup final with East Moor of Wakefield, which kicks-off at 1.30 pm.
THREE welfare organisations in West Cumbria have been given a tremendous boost, thanks to the golfers who took part in last year's Sellafield Pro-Am golf tournament.
Copeland Age Concern, Copeland Care and Repair and West Cumbria Hospice At Home each received £2,500 from the proceeds of the 1991 event, which was held at Seascale.
Head of Sellafield, Grahame smith made the presentations to representatives from the groups.
Competition organiser cheryl Ireland has already pencilled in June 29 as the date for this year's Pro-Am.
If you would like to enter a team contact 
IT'S NO PICNIC!
Tough going as E-Team triumph at Hanging Rock
Courageous Calder crew get their men across
FORGET the A-Team.
When it comes to guts and determination the E-Team have got what it takes.
The Calder crew recently found themselves hanging about…150 feet above a Cumbrian gorge.
It was all in a good cause however, because they were taking part in a five-day team building exercise.
The group, made up of 10 members of Calder's E shift plus one each from engineers section and technical department, were sent out to Stanley Ghyll Gorge, in Eskdale.
During the course the group had been briefed on the technical skills and safety requirements needed to complete the task.
They had to come up with a plan of action on how to set up a Tyrolean Traverse to safety cross the 80 foot wide gorge — and come back again.
Undaunted they set about flinging ropes over and, one by one, clambered across the yawning gap.
Calder training manager, Bill Vaudrey, said: ‘The team knew they were taking part in an exercise called ‘Operation Picnic at Hanging rock’.
Success or failure was in their own hands and the outward bound instructors acted only as safety supervisors.
Once the team was at the gorge everyone pitched in to complete the task.
‘The course aims to improve team building skills, plus individual motivation and commitment.
I think everyone who took part got a lot out of it and BNFL got back employees better for the experience.’
As well as the traverse, the course included raft building, abseiling, climbing and orienteering.
Bill added: ‘They were the first Calder team to tackle one of these events and we hope to send others in the future.
the course has met its objectives in every way.’