

WISE in action — hands on experience of new technologies
Programme of Activities
The activities are devised for girls and provide an opportunity for ‘hands on’ experiences of new technologies.
Whilst the equipment on each vehicle is not identical, opportunities are provided for work in Mechanisms; Microelectronics, Pneumatics; Microprocessors for Control and Communication.
It is the intention to monitor constantly the level and type of equipment carried and in fact three of the buses have recently been equipped with Computer Aided Design.
All vehicles carry videotapes and illustrative material and are designed to accommodate up to sixteen girls working in pairs at eight work stations.
Community Involvement
Schools are encouraged to hold open evenings for parents, governors and industrialists and to regard a visit by a WISE bus not as an isolated incident but one which is part of a wider programme of equal opportunity activities.
Some quotes in support of the WISE bus programme
‘The enthusiasm and excitement generated was a delight to see’
‘I feel sure that this will lead to many of the girls following courses in Technology next year and hopefully, eventually seeking jobs in technology in industry’
‘Many we thank the sponsors…for the excellent opportunities we have enjoyed’
‘The Governors were very excited about the scheme’
‘There was overwhelming enthusiasm throughout the Authority’
and from the girls themselves
‘I found…that girls can do activities as well as boys’
‘It made me feel more confident’
‘It taught me that an engineer can do a whole range of things and not just fiddle around with cars in dirty overalls’
‘I liked everything’
and perhaps most importantly of all:
‘It was fun’
The bus programme is administered and staffed by Trent International Centre for School Technology
Trent International Centre for School Technology [TICST]is commissioned by the Equal Opportunities Commission and the Engineering Council (joint sponsors of the WISE Project which began in January 1984) to operate converted buses as mobile teaching/exhibition vehicles to support a programme of activities which will bring to the attention of girls (particularly 13–14 year olds at option time), parents and the general public, the roles and opportunities for women in Science and Engineering.
The WISE Bus Programme began in the Autumn of 1984 and such was the success of the original vehicle that an additional coach (sponsored by British Gas) was commissioned in May 1986.
Further sponsorship by British Gas has enabled WISE II to be refurbished and work stations updated during the Summer of 1988.
WISE III (sponsored by Department of Education & Science; Manpower Services Commission; Independent Television Association; Esso UK plc, Pilkington Brothers, plc, The Smallpeice Trust and the National Westminster Bank plc) was launched in October 1987.
Sponsorship by the Electricity Supply Industry enabled WISE IV to be launched in February 1988.
As a result of new sponsorship from the Engineering Industry Training Board and the Department of Trade and Industry (East Midlands) WISE I has been refurbished and introduced into a programme for the Midlands from March 1989.
During the period 1987–89 the programme has benefited from a fuel sponsorship provided by Esso UK plc.
The vehicles are available for:
Teaching/dissemination activities in selected LEAs on a regional basis
Conferences, exhibitions and public relations exercises
Since the launch of the first bus the vehicles have been used for periods of between one and three weeks in some 70 LEAs and schools throughout England, Scotland and Wales.
Quite apart from members of the public who have seen the buses at exhibitions and conferences, it is estimated that more than 45,000 school girls have benefited from ‘hands on’ experience of new technologies.
We are encouraged by the success of this venture which is seen as being a very important contribution, not only to the WISE programme but in extending the influence of technology to more girls, particularly now that the subject is included in the National Curriculum.
New sponsors are constantly sought to maintain and extend the WISE bus programme
How to book a bus
Through the generosity of sponsors buses are available to LEAs and to schools (which would normally combine to form a group of two or three) and are delivered free of charge.
Local organisers are responsible both for the academic and technical staffing of a vehicle whilst it is in their charge.
By whatever route the initial contact is made, a WISE information pack is usually made available to organisers well before the visit.
Each vehicle is delivered by a driver/technician who helps staff set up and become familiar with the equipment.
Buses can be booked by contacting:
WOMEN INTO SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING (WISE) VEHICLE PROGRAMME Operated by the WISE Vehicle Programme Unit The Nottingham Trent University
WISE initiated by The Engineering Council and the Equal Opportunities Commission)
INTRODUCTION
The WISE Vehicle Programme has been in operation for many years now, following the launch of the original WISE I bus in WISE Year 1984.
To date, six vehicles have been converted (five buses and one trailer) as mobile teaching/exhibition units each providing a programme of ‘hands on’ technological activities for girls in the 13–14 age range.
Whilst the work stations on each vehicle are not identical opportunities are provided for work in:
Mechanisms; Microelectronics; Pneumatics; Microprocessors for Control; Structures & Forces Simulation; Computer Aided Design and Communication.
Since the launch of the WISE I bus in 1984 vehicles have been used for periods of between one and three weeks in some 100 LEAs and 1000 schools throughout England, Scotland and Wales, quite apart from the members of the public who have seen the vehicles at exhibitions, conferences and special events.
THE PROGRAMME
School visits
Programmes can be organised for groups of schools via an LEA representative such as TVEI, Equal Opportunities, Careers, or other Educational initiatives eg EBPs, SATROs, Neighbourhood Engineers etc.
Other programmes are organised by a school teacher, who accepts the responsibility of arranging a programme for their own and two or three neighbouring schools.
It is suggested that schools should arrange for each group of girls (12–16 per group) to spend a minimum of 1 to 1 hours covering at least two of the workstations, preferably using the kind of equipment with which they are unfamiliar, although it would appear that whilst some of the equipment may be available in schools, girls commonly claim that it is only the boys who gain access to it!
Responses from schools following visits, and the evaluation study undertaken in 1991, demonstrate that one of the most significant features of the vehicle programme appears to be that they are ‘for girls only’, ‘it's special for us’.
Whilst some girls have indicated that they were not, and are still not, particularly interested in pursuing an engineering or science career, nevertheless they have appreciated being made aware of the possibilities and opportunities which are available.
Organisers of visits are encouraged not to treat the exercise as a ‘one–off’ event, but to extend the programme to include awareness meetings for parents, visits by local engineers/technicians (women where possible) and to forge links between the school and local industries and other appropriate equal opportunity initiatives.
100,000th girl presentation
In October, 1991, The Rt Hon Angela Rumbold, CBE, MP, who at that time chaired the Government's ministerial group on women's issues, presented Georgina Wicks (14) of La Saint Union Convent School, London, with a certificate to commemorate her becoming the 100,000th girl to gain experience of technology on a WISE vehicle since the beginning of the WISE campaign.
WISE VI
Back in November 1990 the Open College offered the WISE campaign a modern design coach, only three years old ‘free of charge’, as it was no longer being used by them.
The Nottingham Trent University seized the opportunity and became sponsors of WISE VI, which, after a major refurbishment programme, was launched at the Royal Festival Hall in London in November 1991.
This vehicle now has a full school programme as well as being present at special events.
It recently generated considerable interest from delegates attending the 3rd World Conference on Engineering at Portsmouth.
The teaching equipment on WISE VI has been developed by the Faculties of Engineering and Environmental Studies, and the WISE Vehicle Programme Unit.
Additionally, these sections have made a financial contribution to the sponsorship.
WISE V
British Rail representatives have recently expressed their wish to site their sponsored trailer in BR training centres around the country.
A pilot programme is running during the Autumn Term 1992 at Ilford Training Centre enabling girls from local schools to visit the trailer.
As well as bringing girls into an industrial environment, this programme provides an opportunity for girls to see Signal and Telecommunications ‘at work’.
If this pilot scheme is successful other areas in the country will be included in the future.
Special events
Increasingly over the years, we have been requested to provide WISE vehicles for a variety of special events.
Alternative careers — a number of LEAs have mounted events involving school pupils in non–traditional activities providing girls (and boys) with the opportunity of ‘having a go’ at a variety of activities across the whole employment range.
In addition to the WISE vehicles such experiences for girls have included milking cows; tractor driving; plumbing, bricklaying and electrician work.
(Boys have been engaged in flower arranging, ‘care’ activities and theatrical make–up).
Grimsby was the venue for such an event in Summer 1991.
Conferences/Exhibitions — at the request of sponsors WISE vehicles have been involved in major national events including the Design & Technology Education Exhibitions in Birmingham and Harrogate, Higher Education Conventions, Careers Fairs and sponsorship seeking events.
STAFFING
Sponsorship for WISE vehicles does not permit the full time staffing of vehicles whilst they are on school visits.
However, the driver/technician who delivers the vehicles spends as long as is needed, normally 1–2 hours, with the teacher/technician who is to be responsible for the duration of the programme, demonstrating the work stations and ensuring that the workings of the vehicle are fully understood.
Any problems which may subsequently develop can normally be dealt with by discussion over the telephone and only in extreme cases is it necessary for a WISE technician to make a return visit before the end of the programme.
However, in the case of ‘special events’ where a professional member of the WISE team is required to be present, organisers are asked to provide any necessary overnight accommodation, travel and subsistence costs.
CURRENT SITUATION
Even with six vehicles it is not possible to visit more than a small percentage of the schools in England, Scotland and Wales.
Currently the schedule for the vehicles is arranged until the Autumn of 1993, with many more requests on file.
The feedback currently available indicates that the numbers of women reading engineering have increased to 15% (from 7.8% in 1982–83), but much more still remains to be done and industry's most pressing problem in the 1990s will be to attract, recruit and retain the high calibre of technologically literate young people they will need.
THE FUTURE!
It goes without saying that more WISE vehicles are needed to develop a programme which would enable many more schools to receive visits on a more regular basis.
But this will not happen without sponsors coming forward to become participants in the WISE vehicle programme Sponsorship may be in the form of:
—
total sponsorships of a vehicle (normally for an initial period of 3 years)
—
joint sponsorship of a vehicle, in co–operation with other sponsors
—
sponsorship of one or more work stations on the vehicles
—
sponsorship of a general nature for publicity materials, etc
All contributing organisations receive acknowledgement on their specific vehicle as it travels hundreds of miles between schools, demonstrating commitment to the need for technology based skills for girls as well as boys.
Sponsors are also featured on all publicity material relating to the WISE vehicle programme.
Further details in relation to the WISE vehicle programme, from the point of view of potential users and/or sponsors, can be obtained from the Coordinator of the WISE vehicle programme :
THE WISE VEHICLE PROGRAMME UNIT
A few comments from many in support of the WISE Vehicle Programme
‘…
In , both girls and staff found the visit of the bus a positive and profitable experience, and the school received excellent publicity.We would be keen to repeat the exercise…put us on your waiting list once more.’
‘Five girls are now considering a career in Science/Engineering as a result of their time on the WISE bus.’
‘The youngsters who visited your trailer were full of enthusiasm for all they had seen and done.
It was an opportunity, which they should value, and should certainly help them in their career choices.’
‘The girls responded with considerable enthusiasm and undoubtedly gained a great deal from the experience.
…One of the topics came up in the following week's Science lesson…the girls took great delight in showing the boys how to perform the tasks!…the improvement in their confidence was most marked.’
‘The bus really fulfils a need and I would hope to make arrangements for a return visit in the near future.
It was so useful to talk about careers in a practical setting.’
‘I think that the picture of a member of staff having to forcibly eject girls via the emergency exit in order that they could catch the school transport home speaks for itself!’
‘The enthusiasm and excitement generated was a delight to see’
‘I feel sure that this will lead to many of the girls following courses in Technology next year and hopefully, eventually seeking jobs in technology industry’
‘…we would welcome the opportunity of using the bus again next year.’
‘…the girls were very excited about it, because it was for them and there was an opportunity to use the equipment’
‘The tour of the WISE bus into a number of our schools was very successful and there can be no doubt that it created a great interest amongst staff, girls and parents’
An unsolicited letter from an Oxford College Admissions Tutor
‘…
As you know, I am a tutor for Admissions of an Oxford College and part of the task is to visit schools.
Obviously I am always interested in finding out how schoolchildren are preparing for careers in engineering.
I visited a school in the North West recently and the school told me that they had a considerable number of girls applying to university to read engineering about two years ago.
Since then, numbers had dropped markedly and they conducted some research to find out how this had happened.
They discovered that the sudden rise in the numbers of girls wanting to read Engineering coincided entirely with a visit to the school from the WISE bus.
I am sure you already now that the WISE activities are important but I am just telling you all this in confirmation of your instincts…’
SIGNAL AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS ENGINEERING
Dear Teacher
I am glad to have the opportunity of welcoming you to WISE V — this special mobile classroom which British Rail Signal and Telecommunications Engineering has funded is to provide your pupils a chance to experience the excitement of working on the equipment on board.
I hope that as a result of visiting the vehicle, you will be more aware of the career possibilities in Science and Technology and of the interesting and fulfilling work opportunities they offer.
The country does not have enough engineers, technicians and technician engineers to meet present demands, and we are very well aware of the great shortfall there will be in the 21st century unless more young people, especially girls, take up these careers!
As one of the United Kingdom's leading industries, employing considerable numbers of engineers and scientists, we naturally have to plan for our future, which includes making sure that there will be adequate supplies of technical and scientific employees in the years to come.
With the ‘demographic shift’ of the 1990's we must take every opportunity to encourage more girls and young women to follow what I firmly believe to be a most rewarding of careers.
By donating this vehicle to the WISE campaign, British Rail Signal and Telecommunications Engineering hope that the thousands of girls who will have lessons on it, will at least keep their options open and that many will take up careers in Science and Technology later on.
Since the launch of the WISE 1 bus in 1984 the five vehicles have been used for periods of between one and three weeks in some 90 LEAs and 850 schools throughout England, Scotland and Wales.
Quite apart from the members of the public who have seen the vehicles at exhibitions and conferences, it is estimated that more than 100,000 school girls have benefited from ‘hands on’ experience of new technologies.
A few quotes from the many in support of the WISE vehicle programme:
WISE vehicles are available to LEAs and to schools (which would normally combine to form a group of two or more) and are delivered free of charge.
Local organisers are responsible both for the academic and technical staffing of a vehicle whilst it is in their charge.
Further details are available from :
The Nottingham Trent University
Dear Teacher
RE: WOMEN INTO SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING (WISE) VEHICLE PROGRAMME — WISE VI: SPONSORED BY THE NOTTINGHAM TRENT UNIVERSITY
I am delighted to have the opportunity of welcoming you to WISE VI — this special mobile laboratory which The Nottingham Trent University has funded to provide your pupils and colleagues with a chance to experience the excitement of working with the equipment on board, which has been developed by the:
Faculty of Engineering
Faculty of Environmental Studies and
Trent International Centre for School Technology
The Nottingham Trent University has sponsored this vehicle (the first Institution of Higher Education to do so) because of its concern that too many young girls reject the Science and Engineering option without any real insight into the satisfaction it offers.
No industrial society ought to accept that almost half the population can, in effect, be disenfranchised from Technology at such an early age.
It is for this reason we have put our resources into the WISE vehicle programme and why we welcome your co–operation.
The country does not have enough engineers, technicians and technician engineers to meet present demands and we are well aware of the additional shortfall there will be in the 21st century created by the ‘demographic shift’ of the 1990s, unless more young people, especially girls, take up these careers.
I hope that as a result of visiting WISE VI you, your colleagues and pupils will be more aware of the career possibilities in Science and Technology and of the interesting and fulfilling work opportunities they offer, both through study in further and higher education and subsequently employment.
Your co–operation would also be appreciated in encouraging parents and local industrialists to take the opportunity of visiting WISE VI, thus giving positive support to the next generation of technologists.
As one of the United Kingdom's leading institutions of Higher Education employing and educating considerable numbers of technicians, engineers and scientists, we naturally have to plan for our future, which includes ensuring that there will be adequate supplies of well educated technical and scientific employees in the years to come.
Thank you for receiving WISE VI and I am sure that through our joint efforts, the visit will achieve the objectives we all support.
Yours sincerely  