

HEALTH & SAFETY at WORK etc.
ACT 1974, Petroleum (Regulation) Acts 1928 & 1936
RENEWAL OF LICENCE TO KEEP PETROLEUM SPIRIT
If you intend to continue storing petroleum spirit you must complete the enclosed renewal application form and return it to this address before the date of expiry of your existing licence.
If you intend to discontinue storage you must notify your intention in writing to this office, in accordance with the conditions of your existing licence, in order that the necessary safety measures may be seen to.
FAILURE TO DO EITHER OF THE ABOVE THINGS MAY MEAN THAT YOU WILL BE CONTRAVENING THE PROVISIONS OF THE ABOVE LEGISLATION.
NO FURTHER REMINDER WILL BE ISSUED.
CHECKLIST
GUIDELINES FOR ANSWERING TELEPHONE
1.
Always speak politely, clearly and state ‘good morning/afternoon—Trading Standards Department’.
2.
Take precise details ie. name of caller, telephone number, exact message, if they would like the recipient to return the call, etc.
Ensure name of caller is correct.
If at all unsure, ask caller to spell it out.
3.
Always take message to recipient immediately.
If they are unavailable, leave the message on their chair.
If they are absent, pass the message to an appropriate staff member, or call the person back to explain that you are not able to pass the message on until they return to work.
4.
If you receive a call for the Directorate, always call them Mr. ie. Mr Rushton, Mr Marwick, etc.
5.
Never shout or call across the room.
If you have a call for someone, transfer it to the nearest phone or go over to them to tell them you have a call.
If they are unable to take it, take a message (see 2&3).
6.
If you are on a call, and you hear another phone ring and there is no one else about to answer it.
interrupt your call (with an apology) and answer the other phone.
If you are on a personal call, and another phones rings, ask the caller to call you back later.
CHECKLIST
Procedure for booking ITSA Courses/External Courses
1.
After approval has been given by Directorate/Divisional Officer: =
Phone ITSA/Organisation to provisionally book delegate(s) onto course.
State course title, date, LRC and name(s) of delegate(s).
2.
If course is being held locally:
Find out if delegate is an ITSA member or is entitled to any discounts.
If an ITSA member, find out what Branch.
Find out if there are any dietary requirements.
Complete registration/booking form ie. name of delegate(s), designation, address etc.
Photocopy registration/booking form 1 for TRA file
Send original form to ITSA/Organisation.
3.
If course is being held outwith travelling distance:
Follow procedures as set out in No. 2
Find out when the course is due to start.
Phone British Rail to find out train times.
Speak to delegate(s) who will advise of their preferred travelling time and return time.
Send memo to Chris Boyle requesting return travel warrant,(sample attached).
Take copies of memo for TRA file and personal file(s).
If requiring bed and breakfast for the night before:
Phone hotel where course is being held, provisionally book accommodation.
Confirm in writing taking copies for TRA file and personal file(s).
If course is not being held in a hotel, phone Mel at Portman Travel who will recommend accommodation nearby.
Follow procedure as above.
4.
Type up itinerary for delegate,(sample attached).
5.
File all related documentation together (ie. booking form, travel warrant request, hotel accommodation confirmation) in TRA file
6.
Record all courses booked in Yellow Training File (AB) giving course title, dates, where held and the organisation.
Then enter the above details onto the Training Records database held on Reflex.
7.
Inform HW of details of course bookings, name of delegate, dates, total cost etc.
8.
Update TRABUDGE list.
Issue TRADBUDGE list to CMG and AB at the end of each month.
9.
Inform Divisional Officer and Delegate giving copies of itinerary and course details (if requested).
10.
Issue joining instructions to delegate(s) when received.
LEAVERS — CHECKLIST
1.
After approval from Directorate, acknowledge resignation letter (see attached).
2.
Calculate entitlement to holidays using ‘annual leave table’(see attached).
Refer to annual leave register to find out how many days employee has taken.
Subtract holidays taken from entitlement.
If there are any holidays outstanding, ask employee when he/she wishes to take them before leaving.
It is prudent to discuss this also with the appropriate Divisional Officer.
In extreme circumstances if it is not possible to take leave before leaving due to work demands then it may be possible for the employee to be paid.
Approval for this should be given by GWM or MAR and SW’ form (see No. 4).
3.
Check with employee to ensure all outstanding overtime, expenses, mileage claims etc. have been submitted.
Ensure there is no petty cash owed and arrange for any outstanding telephone bills to be paid.
NB.
Do not pay employee for any credit hours owed in flexi–time.
Employees should be advised to use up all excess hours before leaving.
4.
Complete Notification of Termination form (SW2).
Photocopy for personal file, send original to Salaries & Wages (see attached).
5.
Complete Superannuation resignation form (S/RES), photocopy for file, send original to Salaries then Superannuation section (see attached).
6.
Complete Car Allowances form (SA4).
Code appropriately for ‘leaver’.
Photocopy for personal file, send original to Finance Dept (see attached).
7.
Ensure flexi card and any other relevant items ie. keys, warrant cards etc. are returned prior to departure.
INCOMING MAIL
Everything to be opened and date stamped (see Guidelines A).
Refer to circulation list (copy attached) for distribution of magazines etc.
JMD's mail is given to JMB after being date stamped.
JMB has her own mail book.
Carol gets Consumer Education mail unopened.
Do not open any mail marked ‘Confidential’— date stamp envelope only.
Mail for GWM, MAR and Support Services (including Advise Shop) is written into the incoming mail book then distributed to them (see Guidelines E).
Any mail which is taken out of either GWM's MAR's or CMG's out–trays should be marked out in the mail book (see Guidelines C).
GUIDELINES — OPENING MAIL
A) Open immediately — before 10.00am Sort into: cases/letters of complaint/urgent Show to Director/CMG for guidance Follow instructions on checklist — date stamp etc.
Deliver immediately All other mail to be date stamped (see checklist) and delivered a.s.a.p.
B) Any other mail delivered into Department ie. afternoon delivery — open immediately (see A) and deliver a.s.a.p.
C) Outgoing mail to be picked up from all Divisions and GWM/MAR/CMG out–trays before 10.00am and at 11.00 am, 1.00 pm, 3.45 pm (2.45 pm — Friday).
D) At 4.00 pm (3.00 pm — Friday) all outgoing mail to be taken down to mailroom.
Any late mail — find out if urgent If so — 1st Class stamp, if not — 2nd Class stamp Take down to Reception (before 6.00 pm).
E) Ensure that all mail for the Directorate is actioned.
In JMD/s absence — mail to JMB as usual.
JMB to determine action.
In JMB's absence — written in JMB's mail book then to JMD.
In JMD and JMB's absence — mail written in JMB's mail book and passed to GWM/MAR/CMG for advice.
Non–urgent mail left for JMB.
Any urgent mail, take a photocopy for JMB's information and deal with appropriately.
In GWM's absence — IB to determine action.
In IB's absence — pass mail to GWM.
In GWM and IB's absence — pass mail to MAR/CMG/JMB for advice.
In MAR's absence — pass mail to JMB.
In MAR and JMB's absence — pass mail to GWM/CMG for advice.
OVERTIME — CHECKLIST
1 Check number of hours worked on each date is correct.
2 Check salary grade of claimant.
If PO1 or above refer to FIN22 — Honorarium payments.
PO1 — Premium rates (ie. x1 Monday — Saturday, x2 on Sunday)
PO2/PO3 — Plain time —(ie. x1 Monday — Sunday)
PO4/PO5 — Plain time — maximum of 3 hours per week
PO6/PO7 — no payment
(also refer to memo dated 3/2/92 — honorarium only granted in exceptional circumstances).
3 Check what day overtime worked then total all hours.
ie. if Monday to Saturday — x1 (then total) if Sunday — x2 (then total) if plain time — x1 (then total)
4 Complete SW5 — Overtime payments form.
(a separate form for each division — ie. SI, FT, SS, MET & QA).
Advice Shop and Consumer Education are part of Support Services.
5 Get Divisional Officer to sign.
Photocopy (SW5 only).
Send original to Finance Dept, Reg HQ.
File photocopies plus overtime claim forms in FIN15.
6 Fill out register of honorarium payments (FIN22).
(Calculate to the nearest hour, half hour or quarter hour)
ie. Convert: ½ to 0.25 ¼ to 0.50 3/4 to 0.75 
NEWSPAPERS
Daily Papers
3 x Scotsman — JMD GWM Fair trading
1 x previous nights Evening News
1 x Daily Record — Fair Trading (to Special Investigations then Fair Trading on a Friday)
1 x Midday edition of Evening News — must be collected at approximately 1.00 pm everyday — give to GWM then Special Investigations on the same day.
Any other newspapers are given to E Sheret ie Sun, Advertisers, East Lothian News, etc.
Weekly Papers
Scotland on Sunday — GWM then Special Investigations
Guardian (on Tuesday)— Consumer Education
PAYMENTS OF NEWSPAPERS
Newspapers must be paid for, out of petty cash, on a Friday every week to: I & A Shand Newsagents 560 Gorgie Road Edinburgh (Tel.No. 031.443.2865)
STAFF SICKNESS/SPECIAL LEAVE PROCEDURE — PERSONNEL
SICKNESS:—
a) SW4: Complete details of the first day of illness and code the type of illness.
(NB.
The first day of illness may be Saturday or Sunday)
(i) Send the pink copy to Denise, Salaries & Wages on that day
(ii) Send the blue copy to Denise, Salaries & Wages when the date of return of work can be completed
(iii) Keep the white copy for a departmental record
(vi) Complete ‘blue book’ with dates, details of absence (including no. of working days absent)
(NB.
Do not send the time advised of the illness code sensitive illnesses appropriately)
b) Sickness forms to be completed:—
(i) If absence is less than 3 days — completed self certification form required on return to work
(ii) If absence is more that 3 days but is less than 7 days, post out self certification form to be completed and returned
(iii) Ensure doctor's certificate is received for 7 days or more illness
Do not send any copies/originals of self certifications/doctors lines to Salaries.
All self certs & doctors certificates go in personal files.
For all sickness over 4 days (including Saturday/Sunday) telephone Denise, Salaries & Wages.
give her details of sickness ie. name, employee no., date of self certificate/doctors line, when up to etc.
c) Computerised Records:—
(i) Update Reflex absence records each week on Friday morning
(NB.
No. of days absent — include only working days)
(ii) Copy updated disc (x2)— give copy to CMG and AB and issue every Monday am
SPECIAL LEAVE:—
a) SW4: Complete details of the first day of special leave and code the type of special leave
(i) Send both the pink and blue copies to Denise, Salaries & Wages when the date of return to work can be completed.
(ii) Keep the white copy for a departmental record.
(iii) Complete ‘blue book’ with dates, details of special leave (including no of working days absent)
(iv) See (c)(i) & (ii) Computerised records — update Reflex absence records.
COMPENSATION FOR EXCESS TRAVELLING TIME
Gives eligible staff 50% compensation for all excess travel time incurred ie. employees who require to be relocated permanently or temporarily to new work locations.
The scheme will not apply to staff who are contracted to work at multiple locations.
(i) Excess travelling time: =
The time spent travelling from residence to new work location less The time spent travelling from residence to old work location.
(ii) Compensation will be based on travelling times derived from the employees normal mode of transport.
Employees must notify their Head of Department where the normal mode of transport is changed and the Head of Department will determine if any adjustment is to be made to compensation and arrangements.
(iii) Compensation will be made for 50% of the difference between the travelling times as defined in para. (i) above and will be applied, where appropriate, for a period of up to 4 years.
(iv) Compensation will be made in one of 3 ways: =
— payment for the appropriate excess time (see para. (ii)) at the employee's plain time rate of earnings.
— an adjustment to the working hours.
— a combination of the above.
The Head of Department will determine on an individual basis the manner in which the above compensation will be made.
COMPENSATION FOR EXCESS TRAVELLING EXPENSES
An employee incurring additional travelling expenses is paid an allowance equal to the difference between the cost of travelling: =
— from hone to new place of work and from home to old place of work.
The allowance is paid for 4 years and is based upon bus fares.
The full amount of excess travelling expenses can be reclaimed.
NB.
This assumes that home address does not change during the transfer period(s).
EXCESS TRAVELLING TIME/TRAVELLING EXPENSES FORMS
These forms are completed and submitted to Denise, Salaries & Wages.
(Take a photocopy for file FIN 14).
(See attached)
Staff let us know how many days they have worked for the month.
Divisional Officers must sign to confirm.
The figure is entered on the sheet.
For Excess time payments — the amount is calculated by multiplying the number of days worked by the daily rate in the excess hours column.
For Excess travelling payments — the amount is calculated by multiplying the number of days worked by the daily rate in the expenses column.
To Calculate Excess Time
ie. Excess travel time = 20 minutes each way Total = 40 minutes daily
Staff member works 17 days in the month
Daily rate = 50% of 40 minutes = 20 minutes
20 minutes divided by 60 minutes = 0.33
Excess Time Payment = No. of days x Daily rate
= 17 x 0.33
= 5.61
To Calculate Excess Travelling Payments
ie. Excess travel costs 20p each way in bus fares Total = 40p daily
Staff member works 17 days in the month
Excess Travel Payment = No. of days x Daily rate
= 17 x 40p
= 6.80 
GUIDE TO LIBRARY SERVICES LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL.
DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING
INTRODUCTION
1.
The library was established in May 1975 on local government re–organisation.
It has undergone a process of continual expansion of stock and services as a result of department mergers and additions to the Planning Department's remit.
2.
All members of staff are encouraged to use the library for reference and research.
This guide is intended to provide a brief outline of resources and services.
SUBJECT COVERAGE
3.
The wide range of departmental interests is reflected in the library stock and subject coverage.
The collection includes books, periodicals, reports and files on land use planning, land reclamation, economics, employment, transport, social issues and the environment.
3.1 Current holdings comprise over 16,000 books, 5,000 indexed committee reports and 100 periodical titles.
There are extensive collections of Regional Council committee papers and minutes, government circulars and press cuttings.
The central filing system for most divisions of the Department is located in the library.
CATALOGUES AND INDEXES
4.
Books and files are classified by subject and arranged on shelves and in filing cabinets by the alphabetic class mark or alpha–numeric file code.
4.1 Access to most of the collection is by a series of card catalogues and indexes which allow retrieval by subject and author in the case of books and by subject in the case of files.
All new members of staff are offered a short library briefing as part of their induction course.
Advice and assistance in using the catalogues is freely available to all staff on request to Fred Penfold or Anne Elliot.
4.2 From January 1990, new book acquisitions have been catalogued on a compute database which allows more extensive search facilities than is possible using the card indexes; eg. truncated word search on title or series title, and using boolean operators to join search terms.
4.3 These records have been transferred to the recently acquired Soutron library management software package which provides a user–friendly, menu–driven enquiry screen.
The results of an enquiry can be printed out and retained for reference if required.
All members of staff are encouraged to make use of this facility and library staff will be pleased to provide training and assistance.
Retrospective conversion of earlier catalogue records is under way.
COMMITTEE REPORTS COLLECTION
5.
The Library holds a comprehensive collection of the Department's reports to Regional Council committees.
The reports are indexed by subject and location as appropriate on a card index.
From September 1990, this index has been entered on a compute database which permits more advanced searches and improves ease of retrieval.
BORROWING BOOKS AND FILES
6.
All reference–only items in the Library are marked with a ‘NOT TO BE TAKEN AWAY’ sticker.
Other Library material and files may be borrowed subject to completion of the record card inside  the book or file.
There is bo fixed loan period and items are recalled when requested by another member of staff and at twice–yearly intervals for stock–taking purposes.
All members of staff are requested to return files and books as soon as they have finished with them and immediately on receipt of a recall notice.
BOOK ACQUISITION
7.
The Library acquires material to assist staff with their research and project work.
Subject to budgetary restraints, suggestions for book purchases are always welcome.
All requests should be made to Fred Penfold.
PERIODICALS
8.
The Library subscribes to around 100 periodicals.
A full list of titles is available on request.
Certain specialist titles are circulated to the appropriate officers or sections on arrival; all other general titles are placed on display and most are available on loan.
Selected articles of interest are listed in the monthly Library Bulletin.
INTER–LIBRARY LOANS
9.
Books and journal articles can be obtained through the national inter–lending service co–ordinated by the British Library.
In additional, the Department has access to the Planning Exchange Library and Information Service.
Any items appearing in its weekly information Bulletin may be borrowed or obtained as a photocopy as appropriate.
Bibliographic searches of the Planning Exchange database can be obtained on request.
LIBRARY BULLETIN
10.
A monthly bulletin is prepared and circulated to each section.
The bulletin lists new book acquisitions and a selection of articles from periodicals received.
Requests for copies of items in the bulletin should be made to Fred Penfold or Anne Elliot.
CENTRAL FILING SYSTEM
11.
The Library has an extensive collection of files for correspondence and papers on all aspects of the Department's work.
The Economic Development Division maintains its own filing system; all other divisions use the central filing system for official correspondence and papers except for certain specialised project files which are held on the divisions.
Guidance and assistance on filing procedures is available as required.
LIBRARY STAFF
12.
The undernoted staff are available with queries regarding library and filing matters.
Dear Mr Heyes
CONTRACT 4870(A): INVOICE 3827
Recently I informed you that Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive had not invoiced Lothian Regional Council for it s contribution towards the cost of cross–boundary contract 4870(A) since October 1991.
Consequently you arranged for the issue of invoice 3827, dated 16 November 1992.
The invoice covers the period from October 1991 to October 1992 and is for 8865.70.
Before contract 4870(A) was let we agreed to contribute 8206.14 per annum towards its cost.
therefore the invoice is for a larger sum than expected, which may be due to an increase in contract price on the anniversary of its letting to compensate for price inflation.
I note that you withheld 190.08 from Wilson's Coaches during July to September 1991.
This was the result of the operator failing to provide adequate information on the number of passengers carried and would not be paid until you had assessed the operator's performance.
I suspect that this withheld payment has been authorised, contributing to the increased cost.
I would be grateful if you could inform me how the figure on the invoice was calculated.
In the interim I am returning the invoice for your consideration.
Yours sincerely 
DEPARTMENTAL PRACTICE NOTE DPN8/90 PUBLIC CONSULTATIONS
1 INTRODUCTION
During the past two–three years the Planning Department has undertaken a number of major consultation exercises, e.g. Opencast Coal Alteration, Green Belt: Review of Boundaries, Pentland Hills Regional Park Local Plan, Edinburgh Area Public Transport Study, Reservoir Strategy.
2.
Although the scale of each consultation exercise, and the make–up of the consultation list has differed depending on the topic in question, there are a number of key tasks which have to be carried out.
As each project is carried out by a different team/official, there has often been a lack of standard advice to guide the consultation exercise.
The following note is intended to act as a basic guide for future consultation exercises, to ensure a standard practice is adhered to wherever suitable.
3.
The Department is becoming aware of the need to respect the special requirements of different sectors of the community when conduction consultation exercises, especially the needs of women, the disabled and ethnic minorities.
However, there is little advice regarding how their needs can be catered for.
this note will set out some ideas which can be applied where suitable.
4 CONSULTATION LIST
The Department has prepared a Master Consultation List.
The details of consultees names and addresses have been entered on the computer and are stored on several disks.
(Contact Steven McGavin,).
A paper copy of all addresses recorded on the system is also retained by Steven McGavin, for reference.
So far the source of consultees names is the series of recent consultation exercises already carried out by the Department and the Metro Development Group.
5.
The package used allows the records in the Consultation List be ‘flagged’ to enable extracts to be taken from the Master List.
It is therefore possible for entries to be ‘flagged’ according to the requirements of any mailing exercise.
6.
The Consultation List has been entered on the Wordstar Standard Mailing package.
It is possible to produce labels and personalised letters using this system.
It has its limitations however, and it is therefore hoped to put the information onto a more versatile system run on the SUN.
Andrew MacKay will be giving this further consideration.
The benefits of such a system would be that the Consultation List would be available on all computer terminals, and therefore all personnel could be permitted to update/alter details, e.g. contact names, addresses, to ensure the records are as up–to–date as possible at any time.
7.
Before any Consultation exercise is carried out it is recommended that the accuracy of the contact details of Community Councils and any changes to Regional and District Councillors are checked by contacting:
8 The Wordstar Mailing package will allow addresses to be printed onto letters, as well as labels.
As it is unlikely that the Director will wish to individually sign several hundred letters, it is suggested that the following steps are taken:
a Extract relevant addresses from Master Mailing List onto floppy disc, using ‘flagging’ system;
b prepare letter/s printed on unheaded paper (if using different letters for different consultees, ensure separate references put on each letter type);
c arrange for letter/s to be signed;
d use signed unheaded letter/s to copy onto headed notepaper;
e load resulting copied paper into ‘single–sheet’ fed printer, e.g. Rm 3.15, or 2.1., and ring addresses from floppy disc.
NB. 8a and e will alter once the Sun mailing package is operational.
9 Any letter announcing a public consultation exercise should be written in simple, straightforward and ‘user–friendly’ language, and include the following points:
a reason for consultation;
b period of consultation;
c location, timing and any special arrangements for examining lodged documents/exhibitions;
d location, timing and special arrangements for public meetings;
e any other special arrangements e.g. to meet needs of ethnic minorities, disabled;
f contact name and address for enquiries and responses.
10 PUBLICITY
Apart from circulating relevant material to those members contained in the mailing list that are considered to have an interest in the particular planning exercise in question, there are a number of basic publicity measures which should almost invariably be carried out, i.e. place an advertisement in the relevant local papers; lodge relevant documents at suitable venues accessible to the public.
11 ADVERTISEMENT FOR NON–STATUTORY CONSULTATION
a This should contain:
i a reference to reason or Council approval for the consultation exercise;
ii where responses should be sent;
iii by when responses should be submitted;
iv where and when documents can be seen;
v if there is an exhibition/public meeting, when and where these are to take place.
b A draft Advert should be prepared and sent to the Regional Information Office, Regional Chambers, advising which newspaper/s should print the advert and on which dates (if relevant.)
The signatory for non–statutory adverts can be either the Director of Planning or the Regional Secretary.
If the latter is chosen, supply the details and request the Regional Secretary's Department to prepare the advert and arrange for its publication.
c It is suggested that Adverts are placed in the following papers, depending on the areas involved in the Consultation Exercise: Scotsman (Friday) Evening News (Friday) Dalkeith Advertiser (published weekly, Thursday) East Lothian Courier (published weekly, Friday) Lothian Courier (published weekly, Thursday)
The newspapers will require several days notice and this should be allowed for when notifying the Regional Information Office.
If an advert is to be placed in the Scotsman and/or the Evening News, as these are daily papers, it is important that the day/date is specified clearly to the Regional Information Office.
d It may also be suitable to advertise in those newspapers which are distributed free.
The costs are fairly low, but coverage is extensive.
Relevant newspapers include:
— Lothian Times (part of the Scottish County Press group);
— Edinburgh Herald and Post;
— Edinburgh and Lothians Post;
— there are a number of local/community newspapers, e.g. Tollcross, Times, Old Town & South Side News, which may be suitable for particular publicity exercise.
These should be checked with the list maintained by the Regional Information Office.
As some newspapers are published only every two months, it is important to plan well in advance.
12 STATUTORY NOTICE
a The form of a statutory notice, i.e. for Structure Plan and Local Plan intention to prepare/submission/modification should follow that set out in the Town and County Planning (Structure and Local Plans)(Scotland) Regulations 1983. (1983 No 1590 (s. 149)).
b All statutory notices should be signed by the ‘proper officer’, which is the Regional Secretary.
The Regional Secretary's Department should be asked to prepare the Notice and arrange for its publication.
Provide the staff with details of where and when documents will be available for consultation, any other relevant information i.e details of exhibitions/public meetings; when responses should be submitted; and also supply details of which newspapers it is recommended should be provided with the Notice.
c There are certain minimum requirements for location and timing of statutory notices, and these are set out in the Regulations.
These can be summarised as:
— place the Notice in the Edinburgh Gazette; and
— place the Notice in each of two successive weeks in at least one local newspaper.
The above should be complied with, but it may also be advisable to advertise in a wider range of newspapers (see para 11 c and d).
13 LODGING DOCUMENTS
The minimum requirement will be to lodge relevant documents in the Regional Planning Department's foyer to be available for public inspection during normal office hours.
However, it is also recommended that documents are lodged in District Council Planning Department Offices, and if relevant also in other District council venues (if these are located in settlements different from the Planning Department offices; and in Edinburgh also in the decentralised offices, two of which are now open, at West Hailes and Craigmillar.
It will be necessary to confirm (initially by phone, followed up by letter) with each venue that the documents can be lodged there, during the relevant period, and that they will be prepared to oversee members of the public viewing documents.
Standard Venues;
Additional Venues:
14 It is also suggested that documents are lodged in public libraries.
If the topic relates to the entire Region, sufficient documents should be sent to each District Council's Library Headquarters, to allow distribution of the documents to each branch Library and for headquarters use.
If however the topic relates to a more limited area, documents could be sent to the relevant branch libraries (see Appendix) and to the District Library HQ.
Ensure that agreement has been reached with the libraries about making documents available for consultation before this facility is publicised.
A number of Council's operate mobile libraries, and sufficient copies of the documents should be made available to meet their needs.
As the mobile libraries have limited space, confirm with Library HQ's that they are willing and able to carry the relevant documents/information before distribution.
Also confirm the number of mobile libraries in operation at that time, as these alter from time—to—time.
Library Contacts:
15 ADDITIONAL PUBLICITY ARRANGEMENTS
There are a number of further publicity measures which can be carried out, beyond the basic measures of placing a press advert and lodging documents for public inspection.
The use of some or all of these additional measures will depend on the exercise, time available and willingness to cover higher publicity costs.
Ideas should be discussed with the Regional Information Office as early as possible, and their advice sought.
16 PRESS/NEWS RELEASE
a Prepare a draft press release, and if this includes quotes from the Chairman of the relevant Committee, seek his approval.
The release should include ‘Notes for Editors’ on basic details not suitable for inclusion in the release text, including a contact name and phone number.
b Send the press release to the Regional Information Office, Regional Chambers, advising which newspapers should be provided with a copy.
c Include any photographs (see next section).
d State whether there is an embargo on the use of the press release, and when the embargo is lifted.
e It may also be relevant for the press release to be sent to relevant technical journals..
17 It will probably be suitable to send the press release to those newspapers considered suitable for placing statutory notices (see paragraph 11 c).
It is also suggested that  the release is sent to the Glasgow Herald and the Scottish County Press; the latter group covers a number of local papers (some of which are also considered suitable for Statutory Notices, see paragraph 11c).
However, all the above named newspapers are available to the public at a cost.
Many members of the public cannot afford to buy papers regularly and would therefore miss out on the invitation to take part in consultation exercises.
This problem can be overcome by making full use of the newspapers distributed free throughout Lothian Region (see para 11d).
There is no guarantee that a press release will actually be printed.
It may be of benefit to contact the newspapers direct, before sending the press release, to encourage interest in the topic.
This will not be necessary of course, if the free papers are paid to publish adverts/notices (see para 11d).
One of the significant benefits of using the medium of the free newspapers is that the information will get to those special needs groups (women, ethnic, disabled) who, for a variety of reasons, may not have access to other newspapers.
18 PHOTOGRAPHS
If it is intended to issue a photograph with the press release, e.g. of an exhibition, or the Chairman opening/previewing the exhibition; this should be arranged through the Regional Information Office.
The Regional Information Office will arrange for a press photographer to take a number of photographs.
Probably a week's notice is sufficient, with the photographs taken several days before the press release is to be distributed.
Timing is critical, especially if it is intended that the press release is to be issued before an exhibition is opened, yet the photo is to show the exhibition being opened by the Chairman.
to overcome this problem it is suggest that the photos are taken of the Chairman previewing the exhibition.
19 Discuss the possible requirements with the Regional Information Office and the Chairman (if necessary) in plenty time, to ensure any problems are resolved early.
20 EXHIBITIONS
If it is intended to set up an exhibition in the foyer at (note address omitted), it is necessary to book the foyer area, and to ensure sufficient display boards will be available:
21 In the past it has been standard practice to have exhibitions open only during normal office hours.
This can be very restrictive, and may be unsuitable for those at work outwith Central Edinburgh, or those tied to the home during the day:
a It may therefore be worthwhile considering the suitability of opening/manning exhibitions for at least one evening per week, e.g Thursday evening to match late–night shopping when many make the special trip into Central Edinburgh.
the decision will depend on the availability of manpower, willingness of security to keep the office open, and the nature of the consultation exercise.
Taking such a decision although costly in staff time, may over criticism that exhibition hours are designed to suit the staff rather that the public!
It will be important to publicise the extended opening hours, to ensure the staff time is not wasted through the public's ignorance of the service being provided.
b Alternatively, the Regional Chambers foyer could be used.
This is open, and supervised, until 8.30pm every midweek evening.
Arrangements should be discussed with the Regional Information Office, and once agreed, publicised well.
22 It is also worthwhile considering whether exhibitions should be set up elsewhere, close to the area/s most affected by the exhibition proposals.
It may be suitable to establish min–exhibitions, rather than full–scale replicas of the main exhibition.
It is worth considering the following:
a Venues:
i Should be accessible to the disabled;
ii Open at suitable times;
iii Preferably a building which forms a central focus for the area, i.e. library, community centre, church hall.
iv The safety requirements/provisions of the venue.
Venues will have capacity limits set with regard to fire safety.
Ensure that venues of a suitable size are chosen with regard to the likely attendance, to avoid turning people away.
Also ensure exhibition (and seating) layouts are such as to avoid obstruction of extinguishers, alarms, exits; that equipment is safe and stable; and that circulation/emergency evacuation is not impeded.
b Manpower
i Should be located where the exhibition can be supervised, if only to avoid the material being stolen (known to have happened to one of the Green Belt min–exhibitions);
ii Consider the value of manning the exhibition by a planner, even for limited periods.
This can be costly but may be essential if the material re–  quires explanation.
Publicity material should make clear when staff will be available.
c Arrangement:
i Once venues have been chosen, check with the governing bode, e.g.
— Libraries: Chief Librarian for the District Council;
— Community Centre: District Councils Recreation Departments;
— District Council Offices: District Councils Administration Departments.
that it would be suitable to display the exhibition, and whether or not it can be readily supervised by existing staff;
ii Once agreement have been reached contact the local representative, e.g. branch librarian, local District Office administrator to confirm the details, check if display boards etc are available and thank for their cooperation.
Ensure they are given a contact name and phone number.
23 PUBLIC MEETING
In many cases public meetings are set up by the local Councillor, Community Council or local groups, and arrangements are therefore the responsibility of the organiser.
However, where the Department decides to hold a public meeting, the following points should be considered:
a Venue:
i Should be accessible to the disabled;
ii Should have unimpeded access to toilet facilities for the disabled;
iii Should be easily and safely accessed by public transport;
iv Should have a public address system.
It may also be necessary to consider the availability of a roving radio microphone (controlled by a member of staff) to handle questions from the floor.
The Metro Development Group have made use of, and been satisfied with, the public address facilities provided — A & R Martin & Co., 26 Roseneath Place, Edinburgh 
v Should either have facilities for, or capacity to use, video, slide projection, exhibition space.
Check if venue has facilities, and request a ‘practice run’, otherwise use own equipment.
Ensure sufficient power cable is available to suit layout of venue.
iv Should meet the capacity/layout requirements of the meeting within the restrictions set by the safety regulations (see para 22 a, iv)
b Arrangements:
The most likely venues for public meetings will be school halls and community centres.
As with the arrangements for exhibitions, it is recommended that firstly the agreement of the responsibly body is sought, followed up by a discussion with the headmaster and janitor/caretaker about the specific needs for the meeting.
School Halls: Department of Education (721—2177/2288).
Community Centre: District Council's Department of Recreation.
24 POSTERS AND CONSULTATION LITERATURE
a Posters
A good method of publicising exhibitions or public meetings is by producing and placing advertising posters in the area surrounding the forthcoming event.
The design and printing of the posters should be discussed at an early date with the Cartographic Unit.
Local shopkeepers, community centres, libraries and other local venues should be asked to display prominently the posters for a few days preceding the consultation date/s.
This will ensure that people who may not receive the ‘message’ via the media will not be excluded from participating.
b Literature
An effective way of encouraging public response to a consultation exercise is to produce attractive, readily understood literature.
Avoid using ‘official’ language, and present the facts/information in simple, user–friendly language, accompanied by simple sketches/photos/diagrams which will improve public understanding.
consult the Cartographic Unit on design, timing and costs of producing such literature.
25 USE OF THE MEDIA (OTHER THAN NEWSPAPERS)
a Regional Council Initiative:
As far as I am aware no direct use has been made by the Department of radio and television for publicity.
However, the Regional Information Office circulates press releases to radio and TV channels, and where the topic is interesting, coverage is usually guaranteed.
It may also be worthwhile exploring additional access to radio coverage.
There are a number of local news/chat programmes, especially during daytime hours, on both Radio Scotland and Radio Forth, which may be willing to broadcast details of consultation/exercises/exhibitions etc.
The benefit of this form of publicity is that it could reach those in the home (women, unemployed, disabled) and especially those who cannot make use of the coverage in newspapers (i.e. the blind).
b Press Initiative:
The opportunity may be available to gain publicity as a result of an approach by radio or TV seeking information and/or an interview.
Any interview or request for comments should be directed to the Director/Assistant Director and/or Committee Chairman.
If it is thought likely that an approach will be made from radio or TV, organise factual material and brief the Director/Chairman.
26 CERTIFIED COPIES
On completion of a consultation exercise, and once approval has been granted to the final report, it is normal practice for certified copies of a statutory document to be prepared.
Arrangements should be made with the Regional Secretary's Department for the required number of certified copies.
It is likely that copies will be required for SDD, each of the District councils, Livingston Development Corporation, and for this Department.
27 SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS
The preceding sections have set out general requirements/considerations which should be applied (as suitable) for any public consultation exercise which will be undertaken.
A number of the requirements for the general public will also cater for special needs groups (women, disabled, ethnic minorities).
However, the Department is becoming increasingly conscious of the need to involve those sectors of the community with special needs, who in the past have not been encouraged to get involved in public consultation.
The following measures are suggested for consideration.
Cost, manpower and time availability will influence the number of measures that can be applied to any one public consultation exercise.
28 WOMEN
Consider the benefits of the following:
a submitting press releases to the free local newspapers;
b submitting details to local radio stations;
c holding exhibitions and public meetings at local venues;
d extend opening hours for exhibitions, especially if these are being held in City Centre locations.
29 DISABLED
Apply the following measures where suitable:
a include the main disability organisations in the sub–mailing list for the particular consultation exercise (see Master List);
b submit details to local radio stations (especially helpful to the blind);
c through the Regional Information Office arrange for the submission of press releases to the free local newspapers and to the Talking Newspapers for the Blind:
d venues for exhibitions/public meetings should be accessible for those in wheelchairs, and for public meetings, toilet facilities should also be accessible for wheelchair users.
This information should be stated on any publicity material:
e use large–print text for exhibition material;
f consider the choice of colour contrast/hatching of exhibition material to overcome problems of those experiencing colour blindness;
g supplies summaries of reports to the Superintendent, Blind Society for Welfare and Teaching, 4 Coates Crescent, Edinburgh.
The information will be included in their Talking Tape (Newspeak, Co–ordinator — Brian West) and also passed onto their social workers.
The talking Tape is issued monthly — check with the coordinator re deadlines.
The service covers all of Lothian Region (and the Borders).
[There is another Talking Tape Service—Lothian Sound, but this is limited to Edinburgh I believe, and concentrates on extracts from the Evening News].
h provide sign language interpreters (for the deaf) at public meetings.
Interpreters are provided by:
Scottish Association of Sign Language Interpreters, 31 York Place, Edinburgh (557 6370).
Due to a shortage of interpreters it is essential to request their services well in advance.
It is suggested that it be assumed that there will be a need for an interpreter at public meetings, and that this is planned for.
If a series of meetings is planned, an interpreter should be available at least at one of the meetings.
The availability of these facilities should be well publicised.
Signers find it easier to work if those they are communicating with are all seated in one area.
The arrangements should be discussed with the signer prior to the meeting, and staff prepared to guide people unobtrusively to the designated area.
The layout/lighting will be important considerations.
Some venues have an induction loop fitted to assist hearing aid users.
Where this is available, the audience should be made aware of it (by notices, or by an announcement by the Chairman at the beginning of the meeting).
30 ETHNIC MINORITIES
The following measures should be considered:
a include the Lothian Community Relations Council (LCRC) in the sub–mailing list;
b include the ethnic organisations in the sub–mailing list for the particular consultation exercise (see Master List).
The master list includes about a dozen organisations covering the main ethnic groups.
However the LCRC has a more extensive mailing list, containing social and religious ethnic groups which it may be appropriate to consult during a particular consultation exercise.
A copy of this list is held in the Library (file ref JS(1)).
The accuracy of any contact names/addresses can be confirmed with the LCRC:
c Although most of the ethnic organisations will be chaired by an English–speaking member (as advised by LCRC), it may be appropriate to consider either preparing material in the main ethnic languages, offering this facility if there is a demand and/or arranging for translator, if requested, at public or group meetings.
As this has never been attempted by the Department, there is no experience to guide such actions.
However, it is recommended that the following are contacted prior to planning/setting up translation facilities:
d it is suggested that, prior to setting up any exercise involving ethnic organisations, reference is made to:
— Ethnic Minorities Profile (Library ref JO:FI:BSE)
—(Planning Department, representative on the officers' Group on Race Relations).
APPENDIX I: LOCATION OF BRANCH LIBRARIES
APPENDIX II: VENUES FOR EXHIBITIONS/PUBLIC MEETINGS
The following details and comments have been provided by the Metro Development Group, as a result of experience during a major consultation exercise.
Further venues/details can be added at a future date.
CENTRAL AREA/OLD TOWN
Royal Museum of Scotland Lecture Theatre, Names and addresses omitted
Comments: High quality auditorium with comfortable seating for over 250 people, with an adjacent tea room which is closed at evenings, and can be used to mount an evening–only exhibition.
Venue facilities include the use of tables, chairs, microphones, overhead projection equipment on stage, with a remote controlled projector, and the services of a projectionist.
Used for two public meetings.
Charge was 75 per hour, for the duration of the public meeting only.
LRC Planning Department Note address omitted
Comments: Very poor lighting arrangements, and relied upon Illumination for Metro Development Group's own exhibition board–mounted spot lights.
Netherbow Centre — Note names and addresses omitted
Comments: Small but high quality auditorium, with comfortable seating for up to 75 people, and costing 50 for an evening.
Wheelchair accessible from side entrance.
Exhibition area in foyer of the Centre, which has been well used in the past by CEDC, and which has the advantage of being open on Saturdays.
Exhibition area not wheelchair friendly.
Not used owing to venue size.
St Cecilia's Hall — Note names and address omitted
Comments: Seating for around 200 people in 18th Century concert hall, which is attached to the University Faculty of Music.
Organiser doubted its suitability for a Metro event owing to nearby building site noise, heavy use for music rehearsals and inability to black–out glass roof.
St Patrick's Cathedral Church — note names and addresses omitted
Comments: Hall was in a poor state of repair, and was awaiting sale and/or redevelopment.
NEWINGTON AREA
St Peter's Church and Church Hall — names and addresses omitted
Comments: Large wheelchair accessible hall, with seating for around 150 people.
Includes a stage.
Previously used for Fringe events.
Good catchment for local northern Newington community.
Charged approximately 7.50 per hour for the public meeting, and a lesser amount for the exhibition space.
Exhibition mounted in lobby to the rear of the church, with stepped access from the front entrance.
Supervised wheelchair access possible via a church side entrance.
Queen's Hall — Note names and addresses omitted
Not used for reasons of catchment area and likely cost.
CAMERON TOLL AREA
Cameron House Community Centre (LRC)— Note names and addresses omitted
Comments: Heavily used hall and rooms with movable partitions.
Hall seating for around 100 people.
Large catchment area.
GILMERTON
Gilmerton Community Centre (LRC)— Note names and addresses omitted
Comments: Wheelchair accessible facilities, with meeting in a hall seating around 100 people.
Exhibition mounted in a wide corridor adjacent to the hall.
Busy central and convenient location of local community.
LIBERTON
Liberton Kirk Halls — Note names and addresses omitted
Comments: Small complex of halls which is the focus of much activity within the local community.
Large hall used for public meetings, with seating for around 150 people, and a small hall used for exhibition.
Liberton High School Hall — Note names and addresses omitted
Comments: Large hall seats up to 250, with large stage.
BROUGHTON/CANONMILLS AREA
St Philip's Church — Note names and addresses omitted
Comments: Small and rather dark building with stepped access only.
Well used by play–groups, dance classes and senior citizen groups etc.
Seating for around 90 people.
GOLDENACRE AREA
St James Church and Church Hall — Note names and addresses omitted
Comments: Fairly large hall with seating for at least 100 people.
Church south aisle made for an attractive and popular exhibition venue.
Exhibition space and hall for this venue and for St Philip's (above) were changed at 7.50 per hour.
DAVIDSON'S MAIN
Holy Cross Church All — Note names and addresses omitted
Comments: Exhibition slightly cramped in hall foyer, but was well attended.
Seating for around 100 people in a small but clean and bright hall.
Good location for local community and used extensively for other events/activities.
However, stepped access only.
CREWE TOLL/PILTON AREA
Ainslie Park Leisure Centre — Note names and addresses omitted
Comments: New, modern facilities of high quality.
Lift to first floor available, giving wheel–chair access to one large ‘Function Room’ and a smaller room commonly used for play–groups.
Function Room fairly large, and good seating for around 100 people.
Exhibition mounted on a bright, well illuminated landing, and could be positioned to be clearly visible from the Centre entrance.
Exhibition board lighting and clear signposting ensured a good attendance.
Not charged for exhibition space.
Good location, large catchment, and a large number of people entering and leaving the building.
MUIRHOUSE
Craigroyston Community High School — Note names and addresses omitted
Comments: Large school hall with seating for over 200 people.
Stepped access.
Was considered a good location for a public meeting.
The event was arranged must later that the other meetings, and was not publicised in the consultation literature maildrop.
Despite advertising in the local press, only two people appeared to have arrived.
The meeting was  cancelled .
TELEPHONE MESSAGES
MR MASON
5 March 1992
KEITH RIMMER PHONED RE GIS.
HE WILL CONTACT YOU TOMORROW MORNING.
SYLVIA MURRAY PHONED TO SAY THAT IN HER LETTER SHE HAS PUT MARCH 17, AS BEING THE DATE OF THE NEXT RAUCS MEETING, WHEN IN FACT IT SHOULD READ WEDNESDAY 18 MARCH.
THE MEETING IS STILL AT 2.00PM WITH A PRE MEETING AND IS AT ROSEBERY HOUSE.
SHE APOLOGIES IF SHE HAS CAUSED ANY CONFUSION.
DR HAZEL
18 August, 1993
MR IAN ROWDON OF HALCROW WOULD LIKE TO MEET YOU FOR AN INFORMAL CHAT/INTRODUCTION.
HE GAVE NEXT FRIDAY AS A DATE, BUT YOU SAID THAT WAS NOT POSSIBLE.
HIS SECRETARY IS NOW TRYING TO ARRANGE ANOTHER DATE AND TIME.
I SAID I WOULD CALL HER BACK WITH THE POSSIBILITY OF ARRANGING A DATE.
Thurs. 2nd Sept. at 11.00am?
BRUCE DIXON IS NOT ABLE TO MAKE THE LIGHTING CONTRACT MEETING ON TUESDAY 24TH.
IT IS HIS SILVER WEDDING ANNIVERSARY AND HAS TAKEN THE DAY OFF.
HE WAS WONDERING IF THE MEETING WOULD BE CHANGED (Liaise with Stewart)
TPA PHONED TO ASK WHAT SHOULD BE DONE WITH YOUR PERSONAL MAIL.
WILL YOU BE COLLECTING IT, OR HAVE THEY TO POST IT ON?
Post it on to here!
MR GEOFF WELCH PHONED (4.00PM) HE IS COMING UP TO EDINBURGH NEXT WEEK AND WAS WONDERING IF HE COULD ARRANGE TO SEE YOU FOR HOUR.
(HE USED TO WORK WITH YOU).
I SAID I WOULD PHONE HIM BACK WITH A DATE AND TIME, BUT DID SAY YOU WERE BUSY.
HIS NUMBER IS .
IF I DO NOT PHONE HIM BEFORE FRIDAY, HE IS STAYING WITH MR JOHNSTON IN EDINBURGH 
WEDNESDAY 25TH AT 4.00PM?
I cannot attend Pipeline Industries Guild Dinner on 15th Oct.
Telephone Mr Bennett  — Apologise for delay in getting back — I had to confirm holiday arrangements!.
GET INTO A BLUE MOOD
Press Conference and Photocall to preview the Blues Festival Caledonian Brewery, Slateford Road, Edinburgh Friday 6 July at 12noon
Eric Milligan, Convener of Lothian Regional Council, the major sponsors of this year's Blues Festival, Mike Hart of the Jazz Festival and Russell Sharp of the Caledonian Brewery will be outlining the programme and highlights of the forthcoming Blues Festival at an exclusive preview at the Caledonian Brewery on Friday 6 July at 12noon.
(Press Conference in the Brewery Sample Room)
The musical flavour will be supplied by Edinburgh's own Tam White and the Caledonian Brewery are laying on some of their amber liquid and pies to give you just a taste of what the atmosphere will be like during the weekend 13–15 August.
Tickets for each session of the Blues Festival start at 5, weekend passes for all sessions cost 25, from the Jazz Festival Box Office or from the Caledonian Brewery.
For further information on the press preview please contact  
For further information on the Blues Festival Programme or to set up interviews with musicians performing at the Blues Festival please contact:
5 August Programme
12noon Press Conference in the Brewery Sample Room
12.20–1.30pm approx — Photo Opportunities with Tam White performing in the Brewery venue.
Refreshments will be provided 
EDINBURGH PRESENTS ITS CASE FOR NEW GALLERY
The Edinburgh Partnership will present the case for the Dean Centre to become the new Gallery for Scottish Art on Tuesday, July 20 at 11.30 am.
Senior representatives of Lothian Regional Council, Edinburgh District Council and Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise Limited, which make up the Edinburgh Partnership, will join to explain why Edinburgh should be the location for the gallery.
There will be a full visual presentation of the case for the Dean Centre and copies of the submission documents will be available at the news conference.
Note to editors: You are cordially invited to send a reporter and photographer/camera crew to the Dean Centre, Belford Road, Edinburgh at 11.30 am on Tuesday, July 20.
Issued by  .
FIRST STEPS TO COUNCIL TAX START THIS WEEK
This week, householders in Lothian will receive an introduction to the Council Tax in the shape of an enquiry form which will provide the basis for Council Tax bills in April next year.
Filling in these forms correctly will ensure that the first Council Tax bills will be as accurate as possible and take account of any entitlements to discount, exemptions or rebates.
Councillor David Begg, Chair of Lothian Regional Council's Finance Committee, said ‘We hope that the introduction of the Council Tax can be less problematic than our experience of the poll tax.
It is in everyone's interest to fill out these forms accurately at the outset so that the necessary deductions and exemptions can be made.
Incorrect information or forms not returned simply mean that the Council will send out full bills in April and causes inevitable delays in sorting out individual circumstances.’
There is a statutory financial penalty for non return of forms which starts at 50 rising to 200 for repeated non–compliance.
The forms that are issued will give householders the first indication of the valuation band their property has been placed in and which will be used to calculate the level of council tax.
There is, however, no appeal against the provisional banding possible at this early stage.
No appeals are possible under the legislation until 1 April although obvious errors can be amended.
Copies of the first draft valuation list will be available for public inspection at Edinburgh City libraries, Lothian Regional Council's Department of Finance, Chesser House, Lothian Regional Headquarters and District Council Headquarters.
People currently entitled to benefit who received rebate under the community charge will automatically receive a claim form along with the council tax enquiry forms.
Benefit forms will be supplied on request to other council tax payers.
Lothian Region are providing an enquiry helpline for those who may have difficulties with completing the forms.
Councillor Begg continued: ‘Although at first glance, the council tax does not appear to be as complicated as the community charge, it is still a very complex tax compared to the rates.
The calculations of discount, rebates and transitional relief make administration difficult but with the co–operation of the payers, the Regional Council hopes to make the transitional arrangements as easy as possible.
I have no doubt that, as with any new tax, there will be teething troubles, indeed we still await necessary regulations to complete our preparations, but our aim is to ensure a high percentage of accurate bills going out in April and to minimise the difficulties at the outset.’
END
Notes for Editors
A copy of the enquiry form is attached for your information.
LOTHIAN ANNOUNCES COUNCIL TAX LEVELS
Council tax levels ranging from 294 for the lowest value property band to 882 for the highest have been proposed by Lothian Regional Council's Finance Committee.
The levels are based on a budget for next year which has reduced the burden on local tax papers by 24.3 million (17.1%) from last year.
In addition, savings worth 19.6 million have been identified without a major effect on services.
Chair of the Finance Committee, Councillor David Begg, said: ‘Our aim was to keep Council Tax levels as low as possible by prudent financial management.
We have achieved this to such an extent that had the Community Charge still been in operation it would have been 40 less than last year's figure.
‘It should be stressed that no debts arising from non–payment of the community Charge have been added on to the Council Tax bills.’
The Regional Council's total revenue budget for 1993/94 is 633 million with the biggest spending departments Education (322 million) and Social Work (127 million).
For the savings exercise 4.8 million has been cut from the education budget, 3.1 million from social work, 2.7 million from local tax collection, 2,3 million from police, 1.8 million from highways and 1.5 million from transport.
As a proportion of overall budgets education savings are the smallest at 1.6% while Social work has also experienced a relatively small cut of 2.7%.
‘We have made reductions without eating into key service provision and have protected the most vulnerable sections of the community’, said Councillor Begg.
‘Considerable savings have been made by improving efficiency in our central adminstration where savings of 6.3% have been achieved.’
Based on a household with two adults —assuming no rebates or transitional relief — people in Lothian living in property valued at 58,000 and above will pay more under the Council Tax than they did under last year's Community Charge.
Dear Mr Anderson
Mr Mason has asked me to thank you very much for the invitation to attend the announcement of the name of the winning architect chosen to design the new Museum on 13th August.
Unfortunately he will be on leave at that time but will be represented by Mr P S Young his Senior Deputy Director who will be delighted to attend the presentation and the lunch which follows.
Mr Mason sends his best wishes for the success of the event.
Yours sincerely,
MR MASON THANKS THE SCOTTISH PLANT OWNERS ASSOCIATION FOR THE KIND INVITATION AS A TOP TABLE GUEST TO THE FORT–FIRST ANNUAL DINNER OF THE ASSOCIATION AT THE FORTE CREST HOTEL IN GLASGOW ON THURSDAY 6 FEBRUARY 1992, AND HAS MUCH PLEASURE IN ACCEPTING.
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHWAYS
REGISTER OF GIFTS/HOSPITALITY/ENTERTAINMENT
Name of organisation offering invitation, dates etc.
SCOTTISH PLANT OWNERS ASSOCIATION, 6 FEBRUARY 1992(7.30PM)
Nature of invitation (copy to be attached)
ANNUAL DINNER — TOP TABLE GUEST
Relationship to Department of Highways, e.g. client, contractor, official body, etc.
Is invitation being accepted?
Reason (please give details)
If the hospitality etc. takes place during the day, has annual leave/flexi–leave been approved?
Will the invitation be reciprocated please give details
Signed 
LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Council’)
DEPARTMENT OF MANAGEMENT AND INFORMATION SERVICES
EMPLOYMENT PROTECTION(CONSOLIDATION) ACT 1978 (as amended)
ADMINISTRATIVE, PROFESSIONAL, TECHNICAL AND CLERICAL
Statement of Particulars
Name: Date of commencement of employment with Lothian Regional Council
Post: Date from which this Statement of Particulars is effective
Grade/Spinal Column Points: Date of Issue
1.
Place of Employment
1.1 You are employed in the service of the Council initially at…but following consultation and mutual agreement with the appropriate trade union you may be required to service at another of the Council's establishments.
The location of your place of employment may also be changed by use of the ‘Code of Practice on Employee Redeployment and Transfer’.
A copy of that document may be seen, by prior arrangement, at the Administration Unit, RHQ.
2.
Recognition of Previous Service
2.1 The Council may recognise previous service with another employer for certain occupational conditions of service including: annual leave entitlement, maternity leave and allowance, periods of notice and sickness allowance.
In terms of these arrangements the Council does recognise all previous service with any local authority.
For these purposes a local authority is one of the employers listed in the Redundancy Payment (Local Government)(Modification) Order 1983.
Your reckonable service for these provision is…
2.2 For the purposes of your continuous period of employment with the Council in respect of the following statutory provisions under the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 (as amended) your continuous service will count as follows: =
Redundancy (payment)— The Council recognises/does not recognise service with your previous employer.
Continuous service dates from…
Unfair Dismissal — The Council recognises/does not recognise service with your previous employer.
Continuous service dates from…
Maternity Leave — The Council recognises/does not recognise service with your previous employer.
continuous service dates from…
3 Your terms and conditions of employment (including certain provisions relating to your working conditions) are covered by existing collective agreements negotiated and agreed with a specified trade union or unions (see paragraph 12 below) recognised by the Council for collective bargaining purposes in respect of the employment group to which you belong.
These arrangements are embodied in the Scheme of Conditions of Service as adopted by the Council (hereinafter referred to as ‘The Scheme of Conditions of Service’) relating to your group as well as in other documents which are equally available to you within the Administration Unit.
From time to time variations in your terms and conditions of employment will result from negotiations and agreement with the specified union or unions, and these will be separately notified to your or otherwise incorporated in the documents to which you have reference.
The Council undertakes to ensure that future changes in these terms will be entered in theses documents, or otherwise recorded for you to refer to, within 28 days of the change.
The principal conditions at the time of issue of this statement are set out below.
For any subsequent amendments to these particulars, please refer to the agreements mentioned in this paragraph.
4.
Salary
(i) Your current basic salary for a standard working week is…per year, within the salary scale…by increments to…in accordance with the agreement relating to your grade.
(ii) The standard working week for your group is 36 1/4 hours.
Your working week is one of…hours.
(iii) Authorised overtime is/is not payable.
(iv) You are paid monthly in arrears by credit transfer.
(v) The standard working arrangements are 8.30 am to 4.40 pm from Monday to Thursday and 8.30 am to 3.50 pm on Friday, with a lunch break extending to 45 minutes each day.
 (iv)The council has approved a scheme of Staggered/Flexible Working Hours, the provisions of which apply/do not apply to your post.
5.
Leave
(i) Your basic annual leave entitlement is 20 days, to be increased by 5 days after 5 years reckonable service (prior to the commencement of the leave year, which commences on 1 October and finishes on 30 September).
(ii) There are 10 general or public holidays each year.
(iii) In addition, a further 2 days leave are granted during the leave year.
(iv) The provisions containing any restrictions on taking leave, and those relating to the calculation of pay during annual leave and on general or public holidays, are contained in the Scheme of Conditions of Service, as are any provisions relating to accrued holiday pay
6.
Sickness
Subject to the conditions set out in the Scheme of Conditions of Service (which also deals with absence through injury), your entitlement to sickness allowance is a s follows:
Service at Commencement of absence from duty.
Full Allowance for.
Half Allowance for.
Less than 1 year 5 weeks 5 weeks
1 year but less than 2 years 9 weeks 9 weeks
2 years but less than 3 years 18 weeks 18 weeks
3 years but less than 5 years 22 weeks 22 weeks
5 years or more 26 weeks 26 weeks
The above allowance is inclusive of any Statutory Sick Pay to which you may be entitled.
Should you qualify for National Insurance Benefit including Dependents' Allowance, this will be deducted from full sick pay.
Where half plus Statutory Sick Pay or any National Insurance Benefit, including Dependents' Allowance to which you are entitled exceeds your normal pay, the amount in excess of your normal pay will be deducted from the half pay allowance.
In the case of a woman who elects not to pay the full National Insurance contribution the full National Insurance benefit to which she would have been entitled if she had not so elected is deducted from the sickness allowance.
7.
Notice
7.1 (a) You are required to give the Council…weeks notice of termination of employment.
(b)(i) Subject to the Statutory minimum Periods of Notice set out below the Council is required to give to you…weeks notice of termination of employment.
(ii) Statutory minimum Periods of Notice:
Period of Continuous Employment Minimum Period of Notice
Four weeks, but less than two years one week
Two years, but less than twelve years one week for each year of continuous employment
Twelve years, or more Twelve weeks 
8.
Pension
Under statute you are required to make provision for your pension.
One option, which is not a condition of employment is that you join the Local Government Superannuation Scheme.
Although membership of the Scheme is not compulsory you are strongly recommended to participate.
You are eligible to join providing you are at least 16 years old and work for 15 hours or more per week.
The Local Government Scheme is a final salary scheme.
This means that your benefits are related to your earnings and service; the employer guarantees that the promised benefits will be paid.
Forms of application and details of the benefits of joining the Scheme are available from the Administration Unit.
The Local Government Superannuation Scheme is contracted out of the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme.
9.
Grievance Procedure
If you have a grievance relating to your employment, please refer to the procedure agreed by the Council and set out in the document attached to this statement of particulars.
10.
Disciplinary Rules
The disciplinary rules applicable to you and agreed by the Council will be found in the documents referred to in paragraph 3 above.
If you are dissatisfied with any disciplinary decision relating to you, you have a right to apply for a review of the decision to the next level of officer specified in the procedure referred to in paragraph 3 above.
11.
Maternity Leave/Pay
Where a female employee becomes pregnant, she may have rights in respect of maternity leave, with or without pay; maternity pay; and the right to return to work.
These rights may be statutory or in accordance with the Scheme of Conditions of Service.
Pregnant employees are, therefore, advised to enquire at the Administration Unit about these rights no later than fourteen weeks before the expected confinement and preferably earlier.
12.
Membership of a Trade Union
This Council, as your employer, supports the system of collective bargaining in every way and believes in the principle of solving industrial relations problems by discussion and agreement.
For practical purposes, this can only be conducted by representatives of the employers and of the employees.
If collective bargaining of this kind is to continue and improve for the benefit of both, it is essential that employees' organisation should be fully representative.
The Council is associated with other local authorities represented on the national and provincial councils dealing with local authorities' services.
It is equally sensible for you, too, to be in membership of a trade union representing you on the appropriate negotiating body, and you are encouraged so to do.
You have the right to join a trade union and to take part in its activities.
Details of the specified trade unions on the appropriate negotiating body are available for you to refer to in the Administration Unit.
13.
Extra Mural Employment
(i) If your salary grade is below PO1 (that is below spinal column point 35 within the APT & C grades) you are permitted to engage in extra mural employment provided it does not have  any adverse effect on you performing the normal duties of your post.
(ii) If your salary grade is PO1 or above you are not permitted to undertake extra mural employment without the written approval of your Head of Department.
Signed as evidence of receipt of a copy of this written statement
…
Date…
JOB DESCRIPTION
SECTION:
The postholder will be placed in one of the enforcement sections and will participate in the Department's programme of rotation for Senior Trading Standards Officers and Trading Standards Officers.
POST:
SENIOR TRADING STANDARDS OFFICER/TRADING STANDARDS OFFICER — CAREER GRADE
RESPONSIBLE TO:
HEAD OF SECTION AS APPROPRIATE
PURPOSE OF JOB
Under the guidance of a Head of Section the postholder will enforce all Trading Standards legislation, investigate complaints and provide advice and assistance to trade, industry and consumers as appropriate.
MAJOR TASKS/JOB ACTIVITIES
To undertake the inspection of trading premises and the testing, verification, examination and sampling of equipment, goods, services, facilities and selling claims for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the legislation enforced.
To keep him/herself appraised of legislative and technical developments and changing trading practices as they affect the trading standards functions.
To provide advice and guidance to businesses to enable them to comply with the requirements of the legislation enforced.
To collect statistical information and general intelligence with regard to the trading environment within the Region.
To investigate allegations of offences against trading standards legislation.
In relation to those incidents of a less serious nature to take corrective action by way of advice, caution or such other means as may be appropriate.
To ensure that proper records are maintained for all work undertaken.
To ensure the care, custody and proper use of standards and equipment allocated.
To be responsible for the collection and safe handling of fees and other monies due to the Regional Council.
To ensure that his/her own working practices and those of the staff for which he/she is responsible, comply with the Safety Policy and to report to their Head of Section any incident affecting health or safety.
Address trading and other organisations on Trading Standards issues as related to the functions of the Department.
To co–operate on joint exercises with other Divisions as appropriate.
To participate and where necessary assist in the training activities of the Department.
To assist and encourage and supervise where appropriate junior staff in the proper performance of their duties.
To liaise with other authorities in the ‘Home Authority Principle’.
Drive in pursuance of duties.
To undertake other such relevant duties as the Director may determine.
RESPONSIBLE FOR
Such subordinate staff, including enforcement officers, as may be determined by Senior Management.
DECISIONS MADE IN COURSE OF JOB
Interpretation of legislation.
Determine offences and decide on compliance with technical standards.
Recommendation of appropriate action to be taken in cases of non–compliance with legislation.
To determine and monitor working practices of the staff for which he/she is responsible and to ensure compliance with all policies and procedures.
SUPERVISION RECEIVED
The postholder is expected to organise his/her work after allocation of specific projects but will complete returns showing visits made, their number and nature.
The postholder is required to report regularly to the Head of Section on these activities and operations.
As the postholder progresses through the career grade, direct supervision will be restricted to the more complex and demanding issues.
CONTACTS
Staff of the Trading Standards Department Other officers of the Regional Council Officers of other local authorities Police and Firemaster Public Analyst and officials from other technical and scientific bodies Staff of other advisory groups Senior management within trade, industry, banking and commence eg (Chairmen and Directors of local, national and international companies) General public Voluntary bodies Procurator Fiscal 
EDUCATION/VOCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS REQUIRED
Diploma in Trading Standards or equivalent professional qualification.
EXPERIENCE REQUIRED
Progression through the career grade is controlled by the postholder's proven ability to undertake increasingly more complex and demanding duties.
On attaining the level PO2 and above the job title will alter to Senior Trading Standards Officer.
COMPLEXITY
The postholder is expected to develop expertise in the area of his/her current specialism while retaining a good working knowledge of all other areas of the Department's statutory requirements.
A detailed working knowledge of the legal system including court procedures is required together with an understanding of the availability and need for internal and external technical and scientific expertise in pursuance of enforcement action.
Salary progression is controlled by the postholder's ability to demonstrate an understanding of the breadth and depth of the full range of trading standards issues, normally achieved through the Department's practice of rotation.
CREATIVITY
To organise and monitor the workload and performance of junior enforcement staff as appropriate.
Vary tactics and approach to enforcement duties to obtain maximum return from each situation.
Preparation or reports for possible prosecution.
Giving advice to importers, manufacturers, traders and the general public on UK and EEC legislation and Codes of Practice.
React to change in trading practices identifying mischiefs and potential remedies.
JOB DESCRIPTION
SECTION:
The postholder will head one of the Department's enforcement/advisory sections and participate in the Department's rotation of such posts.
POST:
HEAD OF SECTION
RESPONSIBLE TO:
DIVISIONAL OFFICER as appropriate.
PURPOSE OF JOB
To lead, control and co–ordinate the day to day activities of a specialist section of professional and enforcement/advisory officers.
Each section undertaking a specialist Trading Standing enforcement/advisory role.
MAJOR TASKS/JOB ACTIVITIES
To organise and direct staff in the day to day operation and administration of the section.
To assist in the overall management of the Division.
To allocate and prioritise the work of the section.
To assist, encourage and supervise the staff of the section in the proper performance of their duties.
To undertake more complex complaints, investigations and enquiries and to advise the staff of the section in the direction of investigations, giving support and guidance on the interpretation and application of legislation.
Prepare and submit reports to Divisional Officer and Directorate as requested.
Under instruction and guidance from the Divisional Officer, assist local trade, industry and commerce develop Quality Assurance Management systems.
To monitor, advise and produce guidance notes, when appropriate, on all new legislation affecting work of the section.
To ensure that all complaints and enquiries directed to the section are competently handled.
To approve all warning letters prepared in the section.
To advise the general public, trade and industry, banking and commence on Trading Standards matters relating to the specialism of the section.
To represent the Director on Citizens Advice Bureaux Management Committees.
To carry out all functions and duties of a Trading Standards Officer as required.
To undertake other such relevant duties as the Director may determine.
RESPONSIBLE FOR
Typically
1–3 S.T.S.O.s/T.S.Os or Senior Advisors 1–3 Senior Enforcement Officers or 9–12 Advisors.
1–2 Enforcement Officers or General Assistants Trainees as appropriate Additionally any staff allocated to the Section on Secondment
DECISIONS MADE IN COURSE OF JOB
Decision made in relation to directing subordinate staff.
Day today decisions in relation to the operation and control of the section.
Advising staff on the proper interpretation and application of legislation.
Contributing to decisions made by the Divisional Officer on matters relating to the section's specialism.
Determining the appropriate action to be taken in cases of non–compliance with legislation.
SUPERVISION RECEIVED
The postholder is required to report regularly to the Divisional Officer on the activities and operations of the section.
The postholder is also required to bring to the immediate attention of the Divisional Officer matters of a more complex and demanding nature.
CONTACTS
Staff of the trading Standards Department.
Other officers of the Regional Council.
Officers of other Local Authorities.
Police and Firemaster.
Public Analyst and officials from other technical and scientific bodies.
Staff of other advisory groups.
Senior management within trade, industry, banking and commence (e.g Chairmen and Directors of local, national and international companies).
General public.
Voluntary bodies.
Procurator Fiscal.
EDUCATIONAL/VOCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS REQUIRED
Diploma in Trading Standards or equivalent professional qualification.
EXPERIENCE REQUIRED
Considerable post qualification experience essential.
COMPLEXITY
The postholder is required to provide a high level of expertise in his/her current specialism to senior management and the other Divisions while retaining a detailed knowledge of all other areas of the Department's enforcement/advisory provisions.
To maintain and review the operational practices in relation to change and development with the specialism.
To provide the general public, trade and industry etc., with a comprehensive service associated with the work of the specialist section.
To exercise a staff management function in respect of the areas controlled.
CREATIVITY
Preparation of reports to Divisional Officer and Directorate.
Preparation of prosecution reports to the Procurator Fiscal of a more complex and demanding nature.
Organise the deployment of staff in the section with a view to maximising efficiency and effectiveness.
To identify changes and trends in trade and consumer practices and as a consequence research and recommend appropriate enforcement/advisory techniques.
To monitor and develop procedures within the section with a view to improving performance.
LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL DEPARTMENT OF WATER AND DRAINAGE
TENDERS PROJECT: NIDDRIE YARD REFURBISHMENT
The following Contractors were issued tender documents for the above project.
The tenders are due to be returned not later than 3.00 pm on Tuesday 2 February 1993.
Special Instructions:— Please contact Mr J J Dunn (445 4141 Ext 1759) to arrange for documents to be collected immediately they have been opened.
Dear Sirs
TRANENT/MUSSELBURGH SEWAGE DISPOSAL SCHEME PRESTONPANS PUMPING STATION OUTFALL FOR STORM SEWAGE AND EMERGENCY OVERFLOW
As part of the Tranent/Musselburgh Sewage Disposal Sewage Scheme it is proposed to construct a sea outfall to serve the Prestonpans Pumping Station.
I enclose for your informatin a copy of drawing no EL1055/108 — the longitudinal section and EL1055/III — the location plan of this outfall.
The works will consist of a 1200mm diameter reinforced concrete pipe with a 300 mm concrete surround and this will be constructed in open trench.
The pipe will extend some 77 metres from the mean high tide mark, 19 metres of which is below low water mark, which will leave the outlet submerged at all states of the tide.
A galvanised steel bar grill on the end will prevent access up the pipe.
It is intended to start work around April 1993.
Other interested parties hvae been notified and I await their replies.
I should, however, be grateful if you would advise me as early as possible if you have any comments regarding the proposals.
Yours faithfully
DEPUTE DIRECTOR: PROJECTS 
LOTHAIN REGIONAL COUNCIL
Dear Sirs
NORTH BERWICK SEWAGE DISPOSAL SCHEME FIDRA ROAD PUMPING STATION NEW ROADS AND STREET WORKS ACT 1991
Please find enclosed two copies of drawings Nos EL 1213/180 and 181, highlighted to show possible areas for a proposed pumping station at Fidra Road, North Berwick and the associated pipeline route to West Beach.
Please return one copy of the drawing marked up to show details of the position and approximate depths of any of your proposed or existing services which may be affected by the Works.
We plan to carry out a borehole survey starting during hte week beginning 26 April 1993.
I would appreciate advance details of services likely to be affected by the boreholes.
Borehold locations are marked on the drawings.
If you require further information please do not hesitate to contact my assistant Mr Hill.
Yours faithfully
SENIOR DEPUTY DIRECTOR
Encl   
TRANENT/MUSSELBURGH SEWAGE DISPOSAL SCHEME CONTRACT 5 (BALFOUR BEATTY CONSTRUCTION NORTHERN LTD) PRESTONPANS INTERCEPTOR SEWER
Resident Engineer's Report for month ended 30 November 1992.
Pipeline
Completed cleaning out the pipeline.
Continued with finishing works at the manholes, tidying up chambers, bolting down blank flanges to access tees, roping cable ducts and securing covers.
THis works is now 95% completed.
Carried out granolithic finish to benching in MH16.
Emergency Overflow Chamber
Fitted handrails to chamber roof slab.
Hung safety chains over the outgoing pipes here and at the upstream connection manhold.
Granolithic work was 75% completed in this latter chamber.
Constructed the additional manhole at hte south end of the overflow chamber, connecting the existing manhole at the Saltworks development to the new system.
Reinstated apart form footpath surfacing.
Outfalls
Carried out granolithic benching work to the existing chambers on Outfalls 7 and 9.
General
Proceeded with tidying up the beach from MH4 eastwards.
(MH1 to MH4 was carried out earlier).
The main objects are to remove all construction materials from the beach area and to disperse boulders where these formed the access road along the beach.
Cleared the area around the overflow chamber, removing the access bridge and ramps.
The track/footpath from MH27–MH24 was 95% completed.
Vehicle barriers, as requested by ELDC, were erected around the car park area where the main compound is sited and around part of the reinstated area of MH28 — Summit MH.
The site offices were  taken off on 18 November.
Two small cabins replaced these for the remainder of the finishing works.
Compound fencing is still in place.
Contract Amount £1,599,163.71
Valuation to 30.11.92 £1,473.00
Comments
Substantial Completion was agreed on 16 November.
The bulk of remaining works consists of beach clearance and removal of access roads, concrete finishing and tidying up of the ECB between MHs 14 and 21 and landscaping at Outfall 1 and hte stretch MH24 to MH27.
The access bridge next to the boat compound is to be removed early in December.
Seeding of grassed areas will have to wait until the Spring.
Some re–seeding may be required to the areas previously sown and which suffered from early frosts.
The upfilling of section sof beach on the south side of the old fly ash block, which was agreed by the Director at the request of ELDC Councillors, has been held back from the Contractor.
I was not happy that this extra would be carried out economically within the Contract, prncipally because of created access problems and likely extensions being sought.
Probably this work should be done by direct order to a local plant contractor.
Time elapsed is 65 weeks (Substantial Completion at 63 weeks).
Work down is effectively 100%.
The following minutes will be taken as forming part of the Contract Documents: =
1 Mr D Leishman highlighted several points in the detailed specification of the contract documents.
2 There is no supply of potable water available to the Contractor.
The Contractor will be required to provide his own supply for drinking water etc.
There are several hydrants located in the working areas which will provide supplies of raw water.
3 The compliance with Health and Safety Regulations was emphasised.
All men on site will be required to wear hard hats and safety boots at all times within the designated areas.
Anybody not complying with these regulations will be removed from site immediately.
These regulations apply to all personnel on site, including visitors.
The hard hat area will require to be clearly marked on site.
4 The Contractor's present were issued with amended tender document pages 1/15 and 1/19 together with new pages 1/15A and 1/15B.
These are to be inserted in the tender document.
These pages include extra items 13.13, 13.14, and 13.15.
5 Washing out of Concrete lorries will only be permitted in an area adjacent to the raw water reservoir.
Care will be required to prevent pollution of the burn.
The contractor will be required to make good this area at his own expense on completion of the works.
LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL DEPARTMENT OF WATER AND DRAINAGE REPORT ALMOND VALLEY TRUNK SEWER
1 BACKGROUND
The Rivers almond and Avon are the two major rivers in West Lothian which carry sewage effluent to the Forth Estuary.
Of the two the Almond has the poorest water quality as it serves four sewage works directly viz Whitburn, Blackburn, East Calder and Newbridge and two works by tributaries, Fauldhouse via the Breich Water and Winchburgh via the Niddrie Burn.
In addition Harthill sewage works operated by Strathclyde Region discharges to the How Burn a headwater tributary of the Almond (part of Harthill known as Greenrigg is in Lothian Region).
The existing populatin served by the works excluding Harthill is 115,000 and about 202,750 population equivalent allowing for industry.
With the exception of Whitburn New the standard of effluent set by the Forth River Purification Board is the Royal Commission Standard ie BOD 20 mg/l which is dependent on at least 8 times dilution in the receiving waters to achieve a river water quality adequate to support fish life.
The demise of deep coal mining and hte cessation of mine water pumping into the almond catchment in the early 1970s has depleted river flows to the extent that dry weather flows in the river are now quite inadequate to assimilate increased volumes of sewage effluent from developing areas.
This Report refers only to these sewage works discharging directly the almond.
2 FORTH RIVER PURIFICATION BOARD STUDIES
The FRPB has been concerned about the water quality of the River Almond (Class 3/4) for some time and in June 1988 a River Almond Model Study Group was set up to monitor the deteriorating river quality.
The Group's FInal Report, published in December 1990 after two intensive surveys in 1986 and 1988, highlighted the need for better operational control of the sewage works and the need to prevent incidental pollution.
The Report also called for much stricter consent conditions for each works and explored the desirability of transferring sewage loadings either within the catchment or by diversion to the Edinburgh sewerage system.
The aim of the 1990 Report was to establish a programme of works improvements within an agreed timescale to allow the River Almond to meet the objective of salmonid fishing quality ie Class 1.
3 EC URBAN WASTE WATER TREATMENT DIRECTIVE
Tentative proposals in (2) above were overtaken in May 1991 when the above Directive came into force whereby under Article 5 the River Almond was identified as a ‘sensitive area’ and ‘waste water shall be subject to more stringent treatment than secondary treatment by 31 December 1998 for all discharges from agglomerations of more than 10000 p.e.’
It is understood that areas which are subject to eutrophicationin addition to BOD, SS and COD reductions shall have a minimum reduction of nitrogen and phosphorus of 70% and 80% respectively.
The latter requirement would probably apply to all four treatment works but as yet the FRPB have not indicated if and where phosporous reduciton would apply.
4 EXISTING SEWAGE TREATMENT WORKS
4.1 WHITBURN
4.1.1 Works Description
The works comprises an old works designed to Royal Commission standards completed in 1965, being the first activated sludge plant in West Lothian and a new works with similar process completed in 1975.
The new works has discharge consent condition sof BOD 10 mg/l, SS 10 mg/l and Ammonia 5 mg/l.
The old and new works are practically idential and comprise: =
(a)
Inlet works with overflow weirs, 2 No comminutors, screened bypass, grit channels and flow measurement
(b)
Storm Tanks — 10 No rectangular (total vol 1360 msup3;)
(c)
Primary Tanks — 4 No 13.0 dia (total volume 1090 msup3;)
(d)
Aeration Tanks — 2 No, 4 aerators (Total volume 1300 msup3;)
(e)
Final Tanks — 4 No 13.0 m dia (Total volume 1200 msup3;)
(f)
Heated Sludge Digestion — 1 No Primary and 1 No Secondary Tank
(g)
Sludge Dewatering — Flottweg Centrifuge
(h)
Sludge Drying Beds — 2 No (2500 msup2;)
Design Data
Each works is designed to treat 480,000 galls/day ie 2182 m 3 /day 
4.1.3 EXISTING CONDITIONS
The estimated spare capacity of the works is 3300 p.e ie Housing 2200, industry 1100.
Consent Compliance
In April 1991 a new compliance classification of effluent analysis was adopted by FRPB whereby ‘borderline’ ie 20% of consent figure was abandoned and compliance means absolute limits ie Pass or Fail and over the last four samples on the new basis Whitburn New had 0% compliance.
On the same basis Whitburn Old had 50% compliance.
Works were put in hand to improve the final effluent and in October 1992 Whitburn New (Ammonia Standard 5 mg/l) and Whitburn Old had 100% compliance.
However with 95% ile river flow upstream of the wroks discharge of 77.9 l/s (ref 1990 Report by Almond Study Group) giving a dilution ratio to dwf of 2.5 and a Class 4 classification the FRPB propose to impose higher consent standards.
4.2 BLACKBURN
4.2.1 Works Description
The sewage works was built in the mid 1960s and secondary treatment is by biological filtration to the Royal Commission standard.
LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL DEPARTMENT OF WATER AND DRAINAGE TRANENT/MUSSELBURGH SEWAGE DISPOSAL SCHEME PRESTONPANS PUMPING STATIONS DETAILED SPECIFICATION INDEX
DS2 LOCATION OF WORKS
a) The pumping station is located immediately to the west of Prestonpans, East Lothian, behind a high sandstone wall on the north side of the B1348 coast road.
The site is known locally as ‘Galloways Yard’.
b) The inlet and storm overflow to the pumping station run northwards towards the coast crossing under the B1348.
c) The storm overflow continues from the coast line across a rocky foreshore to 19 m beyond the level of mean low water spring tides.
d) The tripple rising mains cross under the B1348 and then run roughly parallel to it on its north side heading west.
DS3 ACCESS TO SITE
Access to the works is via the B1348.
Access to the pumping station and the shaft adjacent to it is to be via the existing entrance through the site's perimter wall/ It will NOT be permitted for form any new access.
DS4 WORKING AREAS
There are 5 designated working areas
a) The main working area comprising of the pumping station site ‘Galloways Yard’ behind the sandstone wall.
Drg No EL1055/128.
This area is available for hte full duration of the contract period.
Site accommodation is to be within this area.
b) The area shown on Drg No EL1055/105 to allow for the construction of the rising main.
The period of occupation of this area must not exceed 12 weeks.
c) The areas shown on Drg Nos EL 1055/106 and 108 to allow for the construction of the inlet sewer and storm overflow from the pumping station to the top of the beach.
The period of occupation of this area must not exceed 40 weeks.
d) The area shown on Drg No EL1055/129 to allow for the construction of the link from the existing ‘Cut Hill’ underground pumping station to the inlet sewer.
The period of occupation of this area must not exceed  40 weeks.
e) The area shown on Drg No EL1055/108 to allow for construction of the tidal part of hte storm overflow and other works on the beach.
Included in this area is a temporary access road from the B1348 coast road to the beach.
This is availble for the full duration of the contract period.
DS5 SECTIONAL COMPLETION AND PROGRAMMING FOR MAIN WORKING AREA, SITE OF PUMPING STATION
Sequence
Description
Completion by Week
1
Erect security fencing and gate.
Establish site huts.
3
2
Begin Main excavation
3
Main Construction of Pumping Station
4
Vacant the inside of the Pumping Station and hand over to the Engineer the righ to allocate access periods during hte Mechanical/Electrical installation (Note:— In all other respects the Main Contractor still retains responsiblity)
50
5
Complete external works while maintaining access into the station.
During major external excavations Mechanical/Electrical Contractors to provide 48 hrs notice of major delivery requirements.
Carry out any internal works required to assist the Mechanical.Electrical Contractors and orderd by the Engineer.
Access allocation over this period controlled by the Engineer.
70
6
Take over the inside of the station again and complete the fitting out.
Access and co–operation to be provided to Mechanical/Electrical Contractors over this period as they carry out final installation and commissioning work.
80
DS6 SECTIONAL COMPLETION ADN PROGRAMMING INLET SEWER AND STORM OVERFLOW TO TOP OF BEACH
Sequence
Description
Completion by Week
1
Start tunnelling operations by forming shaft in main working area.
2
Construct inlet and storm overflow  tunnels to pumping station 
Construct inlet and storm overflow tunnels beneath road.
3
Fence and strip working area as DS4C
Start of period
4
Construct S) 1 + MH1 and open cut sections of inlet sewer and stem overflow to top of beach.
5
Reinstate working area DS4C.
40
DS7 SECTIONAL COMPLETION AND PROGRAMMING RISING MAIN
Sequence
Description
Completion by Week
1
Start laying rising main
Temp road diversion to allow laying rising main beneath B1348 as DS
Start of period 1
3
Lay rising main  beneath B1348
4
Reinstate B1348 and remove Temperary diversion
3 weeks from Start of period 1
5
Continue laying rising main to the north of B1348
Start of period 2
6
Complete rising main
7
Reinstate track and working area
12 weeks after STart of period 2 but not after week 80
DS8 SECTIONAL COMPLETION AND PROGRAMMING WORKS ON THE BEACH
Sequence
Description
Completion by Week
1
Form temporary access road to beach as DS15 and 4d and drg no EL1055 130 and 108
2
Construct Storm overflow.
Connect inlet sewer to existing MH from previous contract.
Dear Sirs
SETTING FORTH ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
I refer to your letter of 28 July 1993 requesting information for hte above study.
I have passed copies of your letter to the Projects and Water Operations divisions of this department who will reply to you regarding abstractions and sewage treatment works dispersion.
With regard to flood defences, the Regional Council has no powers under the Coast Protection Act for this area.
Coastal Protection is the responsibility of riprian owners; however I would point out that Port Edgar Harbour belongs to the Council and is administered by the Planning Department.
The only water course in this area of which this department has carried out a flood study is the Gogar Burn, which discharges to the River Almond at Edinburgh Airport.
Please note that both this department adn the Forth River Purification Board should be consulted over any proposals to discharge surface water to water courses.
Yours faithfully
AREA MANAGER (EDIN/MID): DRAINAGE 
LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL DEPARTMENT OF WATER AND DRAINAGE MINUTES OF MEETING
Subject DIRECTORATE MEETING
Held at FAIRMILEHEAD Date 30.07.93 Time 0830 hrs
File reference WD1A/6/14/HB/7/MS
Present 
Additional Circulation List A & B
Fairmilehead Office
New Works Inspectors have moved to new accommodation on ground floor.
Other uniformed staff have moved to new Portacabin.
Arrangements are being made to transfer remaining Water Operations to ground floor in main building and thereafter Meter Section/Work Study/Transport Co–ordinator and BUsiness Plan Team.
Departmental Training Plan
On–going
Senior Management Development Course for Assistant Directors
Nomination — A McRostie
MAnaging for Performance
Department not in a position to undertake this at present.
LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL
Dear Mr
PAYMENT FOR DAY SHIFT BREAK
I refer to your query regarding the above and would advise as follows: =
(a) The day shift (7.30–16.00) is part of your shift rota
(b) It should be treated exactly the same as any of your other three shifts.
However, on the matter of payment for breaks the following are the points which must apply for any shift worked whether Day, Night, Early or Back shift.
(a) If during a break you are not allowed to leave your station and may be called on to perform some duties, you are entitled to be paid for that break.
(2) If during a break you are allowed to leave your station for that period you are not entitled to payment.
I have been advised that situation (1) applies to your Night, Early and Back shifts but that situation (2) applies to your Day shift.
In the above circumstances I believe you are being paid correctly.
Yours sincerely
PRINCIPAL: ADMINISTRATION 
LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL
Dear
REGRADING OF CONTROL ROOM OPERATORS
I refer to our meeting on Thursday 15 July 1993 and your subsequent letter dated 27 July 1993 and repeat that your reqest for back dating of your regrading will require to be discussed with the Department of Management and Information Services and, if agreed, must then be approved by the Personnel Committee.
I would also advise that prior to commencing negotiations on the matter of a new working pattern, also discussed at the meeting, it is necessary for me to formulate proposals.
I will contact you as soon as any information is available on either matter.
Yours sincerely
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR — OPERATIONS 
TENDERS
1 A Tender list is received (sample attached) which shows a list of tenders expected, the deadline for receipt and where they should be returned to.
Note the deadline in the RTOS section diary and check that there is a return address.
2 The Tenders list is held at reception and all tenders which arrive should be ticked off in pencil on the list at reception.
3 If tenders arrive early, they will be held in the safe in the Admin Section.
4 If tenders arrive late but before tenders have been opened they will beincluded.
If not they will not be accepted.
5 Tenders placed in the safe should be kept in the gorups that match the tender list with the deadline date on an A4 piece of paper on top.
6 When the deadline arrives all the tenders should be taken with the list to:
i)
the Director
ii)
the Senior Depute Director
iii)
Administration Officer
7 Once opened by those at 6 they should be returned to the person/area that prepared hte list.
This is shown on the form.
ON CASUAL OVERTIME
AP5 and Below
Overtime.
In accordance with conditions of service
Travel.
See Chart Appendix A.
Subsistence Lunch.
Will be paid if you are required to be at work over the lunch period (ie 1200–1400) and there is no Council establishment at which a lunch could be obtained.
A tea may be paid if overtime is outwith normal hours or a dinner if you have to work up to and after 8.30 pm, on the same basis as the lunch.
(ie at another location).
A tea and dinner will not be paid for the same evening's work.
Above AP5
Overtime.
Only payable for planned overtime in accordance with LRC policy.
Travel.
If overtime is not paid travel to own base may be reimbursed.
Otherwise per chart.
Appendix A.
Subsistence.
If overtime is not paid subsistence can be claimed at own base.
Otherwise per subsistence for AP5 and below.
A Break must be taken if subsistence is claimed.
CONTRACTUAL OVERTIME SATURDAY AND SUNDAY 1 WEEKEND IN 2
Week 1.
5 working days in a week
Week 2. 7 workind days in a week
12 days
12 days/2 weeks = 6 days, Average working week Caluclation A is for those employees who have less than 5 years service and are therefore on 20 days annual leave
A 6 days average working week x 20 = 24 days 5 days normal working week 24 days -20 days = 4 extra days
Calculation B is for those employees who have more than 5 years service adn therefore on 25 days annual leave
B 6 days average working x 25 = 30 days 5 days normal working week 30 days -25 days = 5 extra days 
ABSENCES
1 After 1  day's absence, supervisors should phone or go to the person's house to find out
a)
the reason for absence
b)
when they will resume
2 After  2 days' absence, supervisor should again try to make contact by telephoning or going to the person's house.
3 After 3 days absence, the employee is required to contact the department, as it will be their 4th day without contact.
If no notification is made prepare the first absence letter to be issued.
4 After 4 days absence, if no notification is made by 10 am or after the mail is received then issue letter one.
5 If again after 5 working days there has been no notificatin issue letter two.
6 If again after 5 working days no notification issue letter three.
7 After the employee has been issued the final letter wait a further 5 working days.
If there is still no contact, advise Payroll of termination date, which would be their first day of absence.
Please also note that after an employee has not contacted them they are not entitled to pay.
Advise the Area Manager then inform Payroll.
Once an employee has contacted it is up to the discretion of the Area Manager to decide if they are entitled to pay for their period of absence.
DISTRIBUTION OFFICER
SRD 1 Introduction/Job Outline
SRD 2 How do you see youtself working with the existing other distribution officer?
Do you foresee any problems?
SRD 3 Experience and knowledge of distribution system
SRD 4 Waterborne Hazard Problem
MS Simulated Big Problem
MS 5 Tell me how you dealt with a recent consumer complaint about water supply being interrupted — your response ——Actions?
HB 6 What are your views on the coming changes in the industry, both internally and externally generated?
Business plan
Uniformed staff review
HB 7 Tell us about your worst situations/customers?
SRD 8 How do you react to the increasing importance of customer relations and attitudes to the general public?
MS 9 What alterations, if any, would you suggest be made to existing arrangements (in association with existing other distribution officer)?
MS 10 What is your experience in — monitoring others — WO/Squads Contractors.
— training
HB 11 How do you organise and prioritise your workload?
SRD 12 Tell us why you should get the job?
SRD 13 Any other questions — interviewing panel — candidate
SRD 14 Anything else you want to tell us?
LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL DEPARTMENT OF WATER AND DRAINAGE JOB DESCRIPTION
Division: Administration
Post: Clerical Assistant
Responsible to: Assistant Administration Officer
Purpose ofJob
To perform the routine tasks of the section and maintain certain databases on the McDonnell Doublas system and several Personal Computer based systems.
Major tasks/Job activities
Data input
— Training Records
— Absence Monitoring
— Occupational HEalth
— Complaints
— Any other systems which may be developed
 Photocopying 
Stamping and Labelling Time Cards
Tea Monies
Preparation of Applicatino Forms
Answering phones and taking messages but not responding to queries
Leave Cards
Filing
Other duties as directed by management
Responsible for (ie number and type of staff)
None
Decision made in course of job
None
Supervision received
Close supervision of all tasks 
Contacts
Payroll Section
Recruitment, Training and Office Services Section
Word Processing Section
Assistant Admin Officer
Admin Officer
Education/Vocatinoal Qualifications Required
None
Experience Required
Keyboard/Computer experience
Other Factors 
EDINBURGH/MIDLOTHIAN (DRAINAGE) P SHERLOCK ASST.
AREA MANAGER (EDIN/MID) DRAINAGE N WHITNEY
LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL WATER AND DRAINAGE DEPARTMENT DATES OF MEETING
LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL DEPARTMENT OF WATER AND DRAINAGE EAST LOTHIAN — TRIAL PERIOD — PROPOSALS
1 2 x 2 week cycle as per attached rotas
2 Stand–by — 1 in 4 — as per rotas
3 Gradings as outlined for each of the groups
4 Acting duty payments
a)
will be paid for Holiday and Sickness cover only
b)
will not be paid for any stand–by duty coverage
c)
will not be paid for coverage of routine Free and Rest days off within each group
5 Full co–operation on all aspects of training and production of station manuals to enable full flexibility of staff between work locations
6 Any relief cover required will be offered on a fair and equitable basis
7 Vacancies and Protection
As part of the re–organisation, a reduction in staff is envisaged
Any vacancies therefore should be filled from within the Supply and Filtration function wherever possible
As part of the re–organisation negotiations a revised working rota, attendance hours and bonus scheme has been worked out to ensure that existing employees contractual earnings are protected
In normal recruitment procedures, where applications are invited from as wide a range as possible and where interviews subsequently take place any protection an employee may have had previously ceases.
In the circumstances of the current re–organisation however, employees will be allowed to retain the new level of protected hours, in a higher grade post if the result is a saving due to the reduction in staff numbers, either in the post they are vacating or in a lower graded post further down the structure or if his replacement is being appointed on the grade and hours required in the final structure.
It should be noted that in the case of any movement of staff between posts any current grade protection will not be transferable to the new post.
Annual Leave
As a result of the re–organisation the current system of contractual average payments for annual leave is inappropriate.
The proposed new system is that whether on holiday or off sick the employee is paid for what theywould have earned had the attended work (Subject to conditions of pay relating to full/half pay sickness entitlements and unauthorised absence).
In addition however the number of  days' holiday allowed  of at weekends would be limited as follows: = 
This would allow 2 x 2 weeks holidays to be taken per year for (1) plus 1 x 1 weeks holiday to be taken per year for (2).
9 Public Holidays
Working — Normal Conditions apply
eg 8 hours worked — 8 at basic 8 x plain time plus 1 day in lieu
If public holiday falls on a Free or Rest Day
Paid 8 hours Holiday for day and option to either: =
1) Transfer Free/Rest day to another working day and be paid x 1.5 or 2 respectively
OR
2) Transfer Free/Rest day to another working day and take the day off.
Time off in lieu or transferred day must be taken prior to the end of hte leave year or in the case of hte September holiday as soon as reasonably possible after the end of the leave year.
LOTHIAN REGIONAL COUNCIL
Dear
FURTHER EDUCATION
I refer to your letter dated 6 July 1993 and would advise that after consideration, I have decided that I cannot grant permission for day release.
I must further advise that if you decide to proceed with evening classes the Department will not meet the cost of your course.
Yours sincerely
AREA MANGER (EDIN/MID): DRAINAGE 
SUMMARY OF NALGO SUBMISSION TO FINANCE COMMITTEE — 7 OCTOBER 1992
1.
The reality of the offer is that whilst the Council is honouring National agreements they are also tearing up local agreements.
2.
Paragraph 33(b) and 890 of the National Conditions of Service cover all aspects of the Management Offer with the following exceptions.
staff currently on GS3 are being offered an extra £5 per year — or 10p per week.
staff currently on GS1/2 are being offered an edtra £137 per year — or £2.60 per week.
extra payments above grade shall be applicable for calculating overtime payments.
3 By replacing the new technology allowance with a personal allowance staff who are currently on GS1/2 have had their earning capability curtailed by £300 per year or £6 per week.
4 By deleting the new technology agreement all new entrants shall no longer receive the ‘low pay supplement’ of £763 per year.
5 The result of deletion of the new technology agreement is that hte majority of staff will have an allowance of £763 per year replaced by a personal allowance of £468 per year.
6 Our memebers have had to fight to ensure that national agreements are honoured.
They are now fighting to ensure that the Council honours it's local agreements.
7 All the information which substantiates the above statements are contained in the full NALGO submission.
NALGO SUBMISSION TO FINANACE COMMITTEE — 7 OCTOBER 1992 REVISED PROPOSAL FOR THE INTRODUCTION OF COUNCIL TAX
1.
THE OFFER
1.1 Members voted overwhelmingly to reject the Management offer on gradings and conditions associated with Council Tax posts.
Following separate secret ballots which were held on Friday 2 October 1992, the GS graded staff voted to reject by a 3–1 majority and this was followed by the AP graded staff recording a 4–1 majority in favour of rejection.
1.2 Both categories of staff also voted in favour of taking industrial action in pursuance of a better deal.
1.3 These emphatic results have given the trade union a clear mandate to pursue a better settlement and we are therefore not in a position to accept the current offer.
1.4 
STAFF APPOINTED TO THIS POST WOULD NO LONGER RECEIVE THE NEW TECHNOLOGY ALLOWANCE OF £763.
1.5 INSTEAD STAFF CURRENTLY EMPLOYED AND CURRENTLY RECEIVING NEW TECHNOLOGY ALLOWANCE OF £763 WOULD BE PAID A PERSONAL ALLOWANCE IN ADDITION TO THE NEW SUBSTANTIVE GRADE OF GS3.
THIS PERSONAL ALLOWANCE WOULD BE AS FOLLOWS:
GS1/2 STAFF: £468 GS3 STAFF: £768
1.6 This allowance is based upon staff who are at the top of the grade at the present time and translates into the following:
1.7 The above figures relate to staff who are currently paid at the top of their grade.
An assimilation arrangement will apply to staff on spinal column points below their grade maximum.
1.8 Management have offered further inducements and these can be summarised thus: =
consolidation of personal allowance for the calculation of overtime.
index linked to future pay awards
continued payment of allowance if employee is redeployed to a GS graded post.
personal allowance would be applicable to payments for sickness and maternity.
1.9 All of these inducements — except overtime payments — are currently enjoyed by staff.
It can therefore be seen that these inducements are not quite as attractive as they seem at first sight.
AFFECTED STAFF = GENERAL SCALES
2.1 This proposal applies to all full time staff who secure a job as a Council Tax Assistant.
2.2 The proposed structure allows for 144 posts to be designated as Council Tax Assistants.
2.3 The current figures of full time staff graded on the GS grades are: = 
2.4 The proposed structure allows for the following staff to be graded on GS in the Exchequer Division:
2.5 The structure and grades for the Assessors Department has yet to be decided upon.
3.
REASONS FOR REJECTION
3.1 The Personal Allowance of £468 for GS1/2 Staff compares unfavourably with the allowance of £763 given for New Technology.
3.2 The earnign potential of staff — despite a regrading has been curtailed.
This can be illustrated below:
3.3 The proposed earning potential gives staff the following:
3.4 Thereby after a regrading to GS3 and replacing NEw Technology Allowance with a PErsonal Allowance staff would suffer the following consequences.
THEREFORE: NO ONE HAS IN EFFECT BEEN REGRADED.
3.5 In addition to this the Trade Union has very reluctantly accepted the principle of job cuts and by agreeing to accepting the deletion of New Technology Allowance for all new entrants have agreed to those staff suffering a wage cut.
This can be illustrated thus: =
4.
ESTABLISHED POSTS
4.1 Before any new structures are agreed there are already 63 less full time jobs than there was prior to the introduction of Council Tax.
4.2 GRADING PROPOSALS
By deleting the entitlement of all new staff to New Technology Allowances Management are in effect cutting wages: = 
4.3 We would therefore submit that if anyone is getting a good deal it is most certainly not our members.
5.
ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF
5.1 Although the jobs for staff at this level are now multifunctional and therefore more complex management have refused to move on the current gradings.
5.2 Staff on the AP grades are expected to supervise members of staff who have had the job complexity reflected in their gradings.
This can be illustrated by the decision to grade other comparable posts within the structure at a higher level than those proposed for this category of staff.
5.3 There is therefore a strong case for a full review of these gradings to be carried out.
6.
SUMMARY
6.1 Even at this later hour the Trade Union has illustrated it's willingness to talk to and avoid confrontation.
Our members believe the justice of their case is strong, and have instructed us to carry forward their argument.
6.2 WE HAVE DONE ALL IN OUR POWER TO AVOID INDUSTRIAL ACTION AND CONTINUE NEGOTIATINS, WE ASK THE COMMITTEE TO ILLUSTRATE THEIR WILLINGNESS TO DO THE SAME.