

Abstract
This thesis explores the relationship between subjective risk when driving and drivers’ subsequent memory for everyday driving situations.
Relationships are considered in the context of the wider literature on arousal and memory.
In the first study subjects drove a set route around Cambridge giving verbal risk ratings; they then performed an unexpected free recall task.
Drivers tended to recall situations which they had previously rated as risky.
A series of laboratory studies explored this result.
In these studies subjects watched films of actual driving situations in a simulator and were given subsequent recognition tests.
In the first laboratory study subjective risk was only associated with improved recognition sensitivity for the most potentially dangerous situations.
In generally safe situations feelings of risk appeared to impair recognition.
These results were replicated in two further laboratory studies using different judgment tasks and stimuli.
These results could be explained by subjective risk causing the focusing of attention in driving with a consequent enhancement of memory for central details at the expense of memory for peripheral details.
To directly test the attention focusing hypothesis a laboratory study defined central information with respect to risk in driving situations.
Then an on-road study found that drivers did indeed recall more central details than would be expected from risky situations.
There thus appear to be two relationships between subjective risk and memory in driving.
The first is an overall tendency for subjects to recall risky situations.
This is assumed to be largely because such events are rare and distinctive.
The second is a tendency for subjects to recall central details of risky situations at the expense of peripheral details.
This is consistent with recent studies on attention focusing in eyewitness testimony.
Some implications of these results for eyewitness testimony and for the psychology of driving are considered.
Acknowledgments
The work reported in this thesis was sponsored by General Accident Fire and Life Assurance Corporation plc and carried out at the Medical Research Council's Applied Psychology Unit in Cambridge and I thank Alan Baddeley and all at the unit for making the work possible.
My greatest debt is to my supervisor in Cambridge, John Groeger, for support and friendship.
In addition to discussion and supervision from John throughout the research and writing up I have benefited considerably at various points from the help of Debra Bekerian, Ivan Brown, Andy Macleod, David Routh, Fraser Watts, and many others.
Thanks are due also to all those who took part in the experiments, especially those who asked common sense questions which I frequently found extremely difficult to answer as a cognitive psychologist.
Thanks too to all those at the unit who helped with technical and administrative aspects of the work, particularly Sue Allison, Lillian Astell, Bob Edwards, Peter James, and Moira Stephenson, and to those at Cambridgeshire County Council Department of Transportation for providing access to accident reports and traffic flow figures around Cambridge.
On a more personal note, life in Cambridge has been made wonderful fun by the grads at the unit, Mark Coulson and all at Clare Hall, particularly the boys from Stiffy and The FT.
Life in general has been made wonderful by Linda, whatever words I say…
Preface
Cognitive psychologists must make a greater effort to understand cognition as it occurs in the ordinary environment…pay more attention to the details of the real world in which perceivers and thinkers live…come to terms with the sophistication and complexity of the cognitive skills that people are really capable of acquiring, and with the fact that these skills undergo systematic development.
A satisfactory theory of human cognition can hardly be established by experiments that provide inexperienced subjects with brief opportunities to perform novel and meaningless tasks.
(Neisser, 1976, pp.7-8).
It is important for psychologists to study driver behaviour.
Approximately half a million people die in traffic accidents every year and it is almost always possible to trace the causes of a traffic accident back to some form of human error.
However, there is another reason for psychologists to study drivers.
This is alluded to in the quote above from Neisser's 1976 book ‘Cognition and reality’.
The reason is that driving provides a unique opportunity to study the nature and development of an extremely complex cognitive skill for which humans have no obvious evolutionary preparation and yet one which enormous numbers of people acquire, often without any formal training.
This thesis attempts to make use of one particular aspect of driving which makes it nearly unique in everyday life.
This is the fact that driving can be dangerous.
It is one of the only everyday activities in which a person's mistake or misfortune can lead to immediate injury or death.
This makes driving an ideal context in which to understand the concept of subjective risk and explore its relationship with memory.
Researchers in other areas with an interest in the effects of emotional arousal on memory have had to rely on staged events, rare occurrences or laboratory analogues.
Driving provides an opportunity to study the effects on memory of an easily identified, commonly experienced type of emotional arousal with real world implications.
The aim of this thesis is to explore the memories that drivers have for everyday driving situations and to decide how such memories may be affected by the feelings of risk they experienced in the situation.
This is intended to both inform theories of driver behaviour and to provide a realistic applied test of and extension to theories about emotional arousal and memory which have been developed in other areas.
Despite the somewhat aggressive stance suggested by the quotation from Neisser, I assume that a mixture of experimental and naturalistic research is necessary to understand real world problems.
The thesis contains a mixture of research in the laboratory and on the road in an attempt to first observe phenomena in actual driving, then explore them in a laboratory setting, before finally returning to actual driving to attempt to validate the laboratory results.
Chapter 1
The Psychology of Driving: Memory and Risk
This chapter discusses the types of involvement memory may be expected to have in driving and reviews the role of subjective risk in driving.
In order to provide some context in which to discuss these issues a broad overview of the driving task will first be introduced.
This regards driving as a combination of skills which can be grouped into a three level hierarchy.
The various skills in this hierarchy are considered particularly with regard to the distinction between automatic and controlled processes, a distinction which will be important when considering memory for driving.
The Driving Task
Driving is a task which has many components ranging from overlearned perceptual-motor skills to complex aspects of judgment and decision making.
Individual components can themselves be divided further, McKnight and Adams (1970) for example divide just the perceptual-motor components of driver training into approximately 1,500 separate tasks.
It is thus not surprising that there is no single psychological theory of driving which adequately describes all components of the task.
A common approach to understanding the relationship between different components is to regard driving as a hierarchy of processes (e.g. Aasman, 1988; Michon, 1985; Rockwell, 1972; Summala, 1985).
The most common division is a three level hierarchy similar to the one described by Bötticher and van der Molen (1988; van der Molen & Bötticher, 1988).
The bottom level, the operational level, involves aspects such as maintaining road position and the use of the car controls.
The next level, the tactical level, is involved in negotiating junctions and situations such as overtaking.
The top level, the strategical level, is required for tasks like route planning and estimating travel time.
Other researchers have used different labels to describe the same distinction, for example, control, manoeuvring and strategical levels (e.g. Janssen, 1979; Verwey, 1990).
Clearly this division of tasks into three types is only useful if there are clear psychological differences between the tasks at different levels.
One psychological distinction which has often been used to contrast different tasks in driving is the degree to which tasks can be performed automatically.
Automatic and Controlled Processes
There is relatively little controversy about the nature of the operational level.
In normal driving, performance at this level is assumed to be the result of automatic processing.
Automatic is used here to reflect the distinction commonly made between automatic and controlled processes (e.g. Posner & Snyder, 1975; Shiffrin & Schneider, 1977; Schneider & Shiffrin, 1977).
Controlled processes are generally assumed to be voluntary, flexible and capacity limited while automatic ones are highly efficient, unavoidable, resistant to modification, not subject to capacity limitations and able to occur without awareness (LaBerge, 1981).
Theories of automatic processing assume that processes which were initially controlled can often be converted into automatic ones with sufficient practice.
J. R. Anderson (1976, 1983; Neves & J. R. Anderson, 1981), for example, assumes that this occurs through a process of knowledge compilation in which repeated applications of declarative knowledge create task specific procedures which can be activated without the need for involvement from more general high level processes.
Learning to drive is often regarded as a prime example of this conversion.
Aspects of driving such as clutch control and gear changing are initially extremely difficult and require considerable concentration, being easily disrupted by other tasks.
However, with sufficient practice such tasks are performed automatically, without the need for attentional resources.
Indeed, performance of a concurrent task appears to cause only very limited impairments to many aspects of driving (e.g. Brown, Tickner & Simmonds, 1969; Duncan, Williams, Nimmo-Smith & Brown, 1991) and in some cases a distraction like listening to the radio may actually prove beneficial (Brown, 1965).
It is rather more difficult to categorise the nature of processing at the tactical and strategical levels, even within the relatively simple dichotomy between controlled and automatic processes.
Tasks at these levels often involve controlled processes, this appears to be clearly demonstrated by the common observation that a driver may cease a conversation before carrying out a complex manoeuvre.
Here the task seems to be capacity limited and the driver is acting to increase the resources available for the manoeuvre.
The demonstration that such tasks can involve controlled processes does not mean that they always do, even tasks at the operational level may be performed as controlled processes, for example, when starting to drive an unusual vehicle.
Moreover, some apparently higher level tasks may in fact be performed automatically.
Much recent research in social cognition has stressed that many apparently complex tasks satisfy all or many of the conditions for being automatic in this sense (e.g. social categorisation — Higgins, Rholes & Jones, 1977; Higgins, 1989; causal attribution — Bargh, 1984; social interaction — Langer, 1978).
The possibility of automatization of tasks at the tactical or even strategical level appears to be consistent with views of driver behaviour which regard normal driving as being primarily controlled by the simple maintenance of safety margins (e.g. Summala, 1976; Summala, 1988).
However, it may also be consistent with more recent approaches which stress a more cognitive view of driver behaviour.
A number of researchers have suggested that previous exemplars of complex driving situations are represented as concepts or schemata which may be automatically activated upon encountering new situations (e.g. Dubois, 1991; Fleury, Mazet & Dubois, 1988; Groeger, 1988, 1989; Riemersma, 1988).
This would provide a framework in which it would be possible to understand automatic processing at the tactical level.
The idea that driving situations may be represented as concepts or schemata could also have important implications for memory about driving situations.
For instance it might be predicted that aspects of situations which were highly inconsistent with a pre-existing schema would be better recognised than relatively consistent aspects, but less well recalled.
The role of schema consistency in memory research will be considered more extensively in Chapter 5.
Another approach is provided by researchers who have recently been attempting to model driving using a production system architecture (e.g. Aasman, 1988; Hale, Stoop & Hommels, 1990; Michon 1988).
These researchers attempt to provide simple rules which could be applied as productions at the tactical and even strategical levels.
Michon (1988) in particular suggests that driver training should avoid providing information at a declarative level but rather give rules which are easily proceduralized to minimize the need for the driver to ‘think’.
Driving and Memory
Despite the growth of research into everyday memory and memory in applied settings (e.g. Gruneberg, Morris & Sykes, 1978, 1988a, 1988b) and the research and theorising which has been done over some 50 years on the psychology of driver behaviour, there has been virtually no research which directly looks at memory in driving.
Clearly memory plays some part in many aspects of the driving task, one way to identify tasks in which memory may play an interesting role is to look at situations in which a failure of memory is observed.
Reason and his colleagues have developed a questionnaire which investigates the frequency of a number of behaviours among normal drivers.
This questionnaire, the driver behaviour questionnaire (DBQ), was designed particularly to look at driving errors from the type of perspective Reason has adopted elsewhere (e.g. Reason, 1984, 1990; Reason & Mycielska, 1982), however, it additionally provides an important insight into the frequency of various types of memory failure in driving.
Table 1.1 lists six items from the DBQ which appear to imply some form of memory failure.
The means given beside each item are taken from Reason, Manstead, Stradling, Baxter & Campbell (1988) who had 520 drivers fill in the 50 item questionnaire.
The DBQ is answered on a six point scale from 0=NEVER to 5=NEARLY ALL THE TIME.
Most of the mean frequencies in this table fall between 1=HARDLY EVER and 2=OCCASIONALLY.
Although all these behaviours appear to describe some form of memory failure, the actual role memory is playing in the task in each case differs considerably.
It is possible to divide the behaviours into three main types on this basis, tasks involving prospective memory, those involving memory for behaviour at the operational level, and those involving memory for behaviour at the tactical level.
Prospective Memory Failures
Forgetting to renew tax or insurance, and forgetting that lights are on full beam, and to some degree taking the more usual route by mistake, are unlike the others in that they appear to represent failures of prospective memory e.g. forgetting to do something.
Here the failure may occur despite the fact that the episode in question has been adequately stored and is potentially retrievable (if actually asked at the time the drivers could have probably correctly retrieved the information that they were uninsured /driving on full beam /on the wrong route), the problem is instead that the driver fails to use the knowledge available at the correct time.
The study of prospective memory is a topic which has attracted relatively little research and is not well understood, however, there has recently been an increase of interest in this area (e.g. Ceci & Bronfenbrenner, 1985; Harris, 1984; Ellis, 1988).
Memory for Events at the Operational Level
The most common of the behaviours in Table 1.1, forgetting which gear you are in, appears to be an example of lack of memory for a task at the operational level which is normally performed automatically.
The failure to recall the current gear suggests that gear changing often does take place without a specific episodic memory being formed, in fact it is likely that this is the normal state of affairs, the relative infrequency of the failure being reported probably simply reflects the fact that the need for conscious awareness of the current gear is itself rare.
It seems likely that this is typical of tasks at the operational level, such tasks can be performed automatically and no episodic memory for their performance is normally formed.
The importance of the procedural knowledge underlying the task only becomes clear in unusual circumstances, where for example the performance of a procedure is interrupted or the precise requirements are changed, e.g. when driving a new vehicle with different control characteristics.
Memory for Events at the Tactical Level
Forgetting where your car is parked seems to be an example of impaired memory for a relatively complex event at the tactical level.
The question in the DBQ refers specifically to multi-level car parks, the assumption here seems to be that such memory failures are particularly likely in this context because of the similarity in appearance of different floors in such a car park, however, there has been some work looking at memory for car parking in situations where more information is available.
Baddeley (1986) and Pinto and Baddeley (1991) report studies of memory for parking locations in the Cambridge Applied Psychology Unit's car park.
For regular users of the car park (members of staff) recall of parking position was extremely good the same day, falling dramatically with the number of interpolated parking episodes.
For experimental subjects tested after retention intervals ranging from 2 hours to 1 month memory was surprisingly accurate and was not affected by retention interval unless other parking episodes were iterpolated.
When this was the case there was an interaction between retention interval and interpolated parking episodes.
These results were taken as supporting a temporal discrimination hypothesis of the same type that has been used elsewhere to describe short term verbal recency effects (e.g. Bjork & Whitten, 1974).
The above research on car parking makes it appear that memory in such situations is remarkably similar to memory in more traditional laboratory paradigms.
The other item from the Reason et al.study bearing directly on memory for events at the tactical level, ‘waking up’ with no recollection of the previous road, however, is a rather more striking possibility and appears to be related to phenomena which have recently attracted interest in the literature on the psychology of driving.
Highway Hypnosis and Driving Without Awareness
There has been recent interest in a phenomenon variously known as ‘highway hypnosis’(Brown, 1991; Wertheim, 1991; Williams, 1963), DWA —‘driving without awareness’(Horne, 1992) and DWAM —‘driving without attention mode’(Kerr, 1991).
Unfortunately, despite recent discussion of such phenomena there is almost no actual research into the nature or frequency of these states.
It may, however, be useful to make a distinction between two different types of state to which such labels have been applied relatively indiscriminately by different authors.
The first type of state is the case where monotonous driving on featureless roads, particularly motorways/highways, has been claimed to lead to the driver falling into a trance-like state in which they may fail to adequately respond to changes in the road environment.
Although the existence of such a state might have important legal implications in cases where accidents take place, as Horne (1992) argues, such states have yet to be adequately differentiated from simple sleepiness.
The second and for this thesis the more interesting suggestion is that in an otherwise normal driving situation a driver may report ‘waking up’ to find that they have no recollection of having driven some previous part of the journey, despite the fact that they completed relatively complex manoeuvres during the period.
It is this state whose frequency may be estimated by the Reason et al.study.
Another estimate of its frequency may be obtained from the EPQ (Error Proneness Questionnaire) of Reason and Mycielska (1982) which is concerned with more general absent-mindedness in everyday life.
The EPQ contains 30 questions about everyday errors, one of which is:
‘How often in the course of driving a car, taking a walk, or some routine activity, do you ‘wake up’ to discover that, for the moment at least, you have no recollection of the places you have just passed through or the things you have just done?’
Reason and Mycielska refer to this as a ‘time-gap experience’ and found that more than half their sample of 85 psychology undergraduates and postgraduates reported such experiences as happening more than once a month.
Of course the question in the EPQ does not refer solely to driving and the population they sampled are unlikely to be driving particularly regularly.
This suggests that such states may in fact occur in other situations such as the ones they suggest (e.g. taking a walk or engaging in a routine activity).
Because terms like highway hypnosis, DWA and DWAM have been used somewhat indiscriminately in the literature previously this thesis will reserve them exclusively for the hypothetical trance-like state which may be a precursor to motorway accidents and use Reason's term ‘time-gap experience’ to refer to this second phenomenon.
There are of course many questions which have not been addressed about such experiences.
In addition to deciding whether such phenomena really are characteristic of some particular identifiable driving state further research is needed to decide a variety of questions, for example: Do such experiences depend on the driver being tired?
Are all drivers equally likely to experience them?
Do they happen only on routes which are well known to the driver?
What generally causes the driver to ‘wake up’?
How long do such experiences last?
Is driving actually impaired in such a state?
How complex a driving situation can be negotiated in this state?
It is possible that time-gap experiences represent driving at the tactical level which is conducted without controlled processes being involved, the assumption here is the common one that unless a stimulus event receives conscious attention it will not be stored in long term memory (e.g. Bargh, 1984; Broadbent, 1958; Moray, 1959; Shiffrin & Schneider, 1977).
There are of course two major problems with taking time-gap experiences as evidence for driving with automaticity.
The first is the empirical problem that without formally testing memory in such circumstances it is impossible to know whether there really is a memory impairment in such circumstances and if so how complete it actually is.
The second problem is the more general difficulty of defining exactly what relationship should be expected between automaticity and memory.
The common theoretical assumption is clearly stated by William James:
‘Whatever future conclusion we may reach as to this, we cannot deny that an object once attended to will remain in the memory, whilst one inattentively allowed to pass will leave no traces behind.’
(James, 1890, p.427).
The distinction in memory between events consciously attended to and those not consciously attended to may not be as clear as was implied by James.
It has recently become clear that an action becoming automatic does not necessarily mean that it cannot be remembered.
It has been proposed that some extremely simple aspects of the environment — spatial and temporal location of information and its frequency of occurrence — may be coded automatically without the requirement of conscious attention (Hasher & Zacks, 1979, 1984).
There is also currently much debate about the possibility of a dichotomy between explicit and implicit learning and memory (e.g. Lewandowski, Dunn & Kirsner, 1989; Nissen & Bullemer, 1987; Reber, 1989; Roediger, 1990; Schacter, 1987) with many researchers suggesting that the acquisition of knowledge about even apparently complex relationships proceeds without conscious awareness.
Even when the use of general attentional resources is required from the subject it appears that the amount of cognitive effort does not directly determine the quality of memory (Mitchell & Hunt, 1989).
Moreover, memory may be impaired for a variety of reasons, lack of initial attention is not the only possible explanation.
It is possible for example that time-gap experiences simply reflect events which were so banal that they could not be distinguished from other memories for similar previous driving.
Without exploring drivers’ memories for driving in other circumstances it is impossible to know what normal memory performance in driving would be expected to be.
One area of driving research which has produced some serendipitous results bearing on drivers’ memory in normal situations results from attempts to investigate drivers’perception of traffic signs (e.g. Johansson & Backlund, 1970; Johansson & Rumar, 1966; Luoma, 1988, 1991; MacDonald & Hoffmann, 1991; Milosevic & Gajic, 1986).
Although this research has largely been conducted with the intention of studying perception rather than memory, the frequent use of recall tests gives some insight into the overall levels of memory performance and the possible dissociations between initial perception of road signs and subsequent memory for them.
Detection of and Memory for Road Signs
Johansson and Rumar (1966) stopped over 1,000 drivers by the roadside 710m along the road from a road sign placed there by the experimenters and asked the drivers to describe the last road sign they had seen.
If they were unable to describe it they were then asked whether it was of a particular type.
For one of the road signs they used, as few as 17% of drivers were able to correctly answer at least one of the two questions.
Johansson & Backlund (1970) tested a further 5,000 drivers and found broadly similar results.
Milosevic and Gajic (1986) found even lower recall percentages in a similar study, with between 2% and 20% of drivers correctly identifying the previous sign and never more than 6% of drivers able to correctly identify the sign before last.
The conclusion given in both the Johansson studies was simply that the probability of a driver actually detecting a road sign is extremely low, but that some signs are more likely to be detected than others.
Summala (1984), however, suggest that it is not the detection of signs but memory for them which is likely to be faulty.
They examined drivers’ responses to signs similar to those used by Johansson and Rumar by measuring changes in speed in response to the sign.
They found that there were no significant differences between the signs in the frequency with which they elicited some speed change from the driver (in the Johansson and Rumar study there were very considerable differences in memory performance depending on the sign used), although the degree of this change was related to the information on the sign.
Their conclusion was that most of the road signs in such studies are in fact initially detected and that differences found between signs and the poor overall performance in the Johansson and Rumar study must be to a large extent a memory effect.
This interpretation is strengthened by a recent study by Fisher (1992) who also found poor recall for previous road signs although in this study drivers were not required to stop since the experimenter was posing as a hitch-hiker.
Fisher's study also suggested that recall was not a good measure of whether a road sign had been heeded.
A similar dissociation between, eye fixations, behavioural responses and actual recall of a sign is shown in Luoma (1991).
Another study by Luoma (1988) reports data for some details of the environment other than road signs, in particular houses, roadside advertisements and pedestrian crossing lines on the road.
In this study the experimenters recorded the driver's visual fixations and also asked the driver questions about each target just after it had been passed.
In fact the houses in this study were never recalled, but as they were never fixated this is not surprising; the roadside advertisements, the pedestrian crossing lines and some of the road signs in the study, however, were often fixated without being recalled immediately afterwards.
Although the overall levels of recall in this study are relatively uninformative because the subjects knew that there would be subsequent memory questions, the dissociation between fixation and recall strengthens Summala and Hietamiki's claim that low levels of recall are not necessarily a result of failures of perception.
The implication for memory research of the above research on road sign detection appears to be that even when objects have been initially detected by a driver and the driver's behaviour has been appropriately modified by their presence, the driver may not be able to describe the object even very shortly afterwards.
Indeed the general levels of performance in road sign recall tasks appear to be extremely poor, even in tasks which would superficially appear to be relatively easy.
Memory at the Strategical Level
Clearly memory will also play important roles at the strategical level in driving.
One of the questions from Reason et al.(1988) not included in Table 1.1 was ‘[how often do you]plan your route badly, so that you meet traffic congestion you could have avoided?’
Although the reference to memory is not as direct as in the other questions it is clear that such decisions at the strategical level are based on memory in at least two separate ways.
Much route planning will rely on some form of memory for the potential routes available, either in terms of a cognitive map of the environment or procedural knowledge of following the route (e.g. Evans, 1980; Thorndyke & Hayes-Roth, 1982; van Winsum, Alm, Schraagen & Rothengatter, 1990).
In addition such strategical decisions may be based on episodic memories for particular instances of driving the planned route, for example, the memory that you encountered road works at a particular junction recently and that it should thus be avoided until they have been completed.
Various aspects of memory in normal driving have been briefly discussed above, although none of this research has directly explored drivers’ memories for everyday driving situations it is clear that there are likely to be important differences in memory for different types of information which would be potentially available to the driver.
The evidence available suggests that events at the operational level will be fully automatic in normal driving and that there is unlikely to be any episodic memory available of them subsequently unless unusual circumstances occurred to force controlled processes to be used.
The situation is not so clear for events at the tactical level.
Memory for parking a car appears to be generally very good at least in allowing the driver to specify its current location several hours later.
On the other hand it appears that on occasions drivers may have no memory at all for road signs which they have just seen or for relatively complex manoeuvres which they have only just performed.
Memory for Accidents
One special case of memory for driving situations which has obvious practical significance is reports given about road traffic accidents to the police and to accident researchers.
Concerns are frequently raised about the accuracy of reports given by drivers and other witnesses to accidents (e.g. Hakkert & Hauer, 1988; West, Elander & French, 1991).
There is often relatively poor agreement between different witnesses’ accounts of the accident and where an objective record of an event is available dramatic discrepancies between subsequent descriptions and the recorded event have often been found (Egberink, Stoop & Poppe, 1988; Humphreys, 1981).
Researchers have noted that such reports appear to be easily biased by social stereotypes (Diges, 1988) and the way in which data is collected (Sheehy, 1981).
Surprisingly, few researchers have considered the potential influences on memory of the traumatic nature of being involved in or witness to a road accident.
In the more general field of eyewitness testimony there is a very substantial literature about the effects of such arousal on subsequent memory, this area will be reviewed in Chapter 2.
The fact that researchers in the psychology of driving have not stressed the potential effects of such arousal is particularly surprising given that feelings of risk are often considered to be one of the most important variables in the control of normal driving.
Driving and Risk
Many psychological theories of driving suggest that feelings of risk play an important role in regulating behaviour, either as a quantity to be controlled (Wilde 1982, 1988) or avoided (Summala 1976), or as feedback in a learning theory approach (Fuller 1988).
Much of the interest in risk as a variable has arisen from the apparently contradictory implications of two influential theories about the role of subjective risk in driving, risk homeostasis theory (RHT) and zero-risk theory, thus these theories will be briefly described and the role which subjective risk plays in them will be discussed.
Risk Homeostasis Theory
People are generally sensitive to many dangers, when drivers approach a sharp bend in the road their natural reaction is to slow down.
This awareness of risks and subsequent action to lessen them has been labelled risk compensation (e.g. O'Neill, 1977).
RHT is a theory which explains risk compensation as a result of individuals adopting a target level of risk.
The central implication of RHT is that people will not only act to reduce their perceived level of risk when it exceeds the target level, they will also act to increase it when it is below the target level.
RHT has been largely developed by Wilde (e.g. Wilde, 1982, 1988, 1989; Wilde & Murdoch, 1982) and has been offered as a model both of the effects of safety legislation on population accident statistics and of individual behaviour.
There is some evidence for RHT at both these levels (e.g. Adams, 1988; Trinkle & Gelau, 1992), and the implications of RHT for accident countermeasures are considerable and often surprising (e.g. McKenna, 1988; Wilde, 1989).
However, for the purposes of the current research the important point is not necessarily whether RHT is correct but whether one of the main propositions underlying it is correct.
This proposition is stated by Wilde (1988) as ‘at any moment of time, an individual road user experiences (or expects to experience) a certain amount of subjective accident risk’(p.444).
This appears to be in conflict with Summala's claim that ‘it is inconceivable that drivers would continually operate under such emotional stress’(Summala, 1988, p.494), and an alternative description of driver behaviour developed by Summala has been described as zero-risk theory.
Zero-Risk Theory
Zero-risk theory as described by Summala (1974, 1976; Summala, 1988) suggests that a driver generally feels no subjective risk of accident, and stresses that normal control of behaviour is governed instead by the adoption of adequate safety margins.
The assumption here is that ‘when [a driver]happens to feel subjective risk or fear he often tends immediately to eliminate this feeling by certain behavioural changes’(Summala, 1976, p.239), a major cause of accidents is thus that drivers have too high a ‘subjective risk threshold’.
The predictions of zero-risk theory in terms of accident countermeasures are often at variance with those from RHT, thus there has been considerable debate about the relative merits of the two theories (e.g. Evans, 1986a, b; McKenna, 1982, 1985, 1988; Wilde, 1984, 1986).
The central point in this context is, however, the role of subjective risk in the two theories.
In fact the concept of subjective risk is surprisingly similar in both theories, the differences lie largely in the role it is assigned in the control of behaviour.
Wilde (1988) does accept that like physiological arousal feelings of subjective risk are not necessarily focal in the driver's consciousness but he claims that there is continual level of subjective risk which the driver will become aware of if asked to report on it or if there are sudden changes in level.
This level of subjective risk is similar to a crucial part of the Summala model which is a ‘subjective risk monitor’ which is sensitive to the subjective probability of an adverse event and the degree of the negative consequences associated with that event, the only difference is that while Summala claim that the level of subjective risk output by this monitor is generally nil, Wilde (1988) assumes that it is only ‘psychologically nil’(p. 444).
The Concept of Risk
Before discussing the evidence from research into the subjective risk experienced when driving it is worth clarifying the term subjective risk.
Summala (1988) distinguishes between three different types of risk frequently referred to in the driving literature.
The first of these is the objective risk of an accident, normally assessed at a societal level by considering accident statistics for different population groups or road locations.
The other two uses of the term risk both refer to a particular person's assessment of risk, Summala uses the term ‘subjective risk’ only for estimates of risk made when no fear is actually experienced and uses the term ‘ostensive risk’to describe situations where a person actually feels fear.
Although this terminology is consistent with the zero-risk theory idea that subjective risk is almost never felt, it has not been widely adopted.
For this thesis a similar three-way distinction will be adopted but using terms which are slightly more consistent with their general use elsewhere in the literature.
‘Objective risk’ is used in Summala's sense to refer to the actual accident likelihood.
‘Estimated risk’ will be used for the cases where a person is making an estimate of risk while not actually in a situation to experience the risk they are estimating.
The term ‘subjective risk’ will be reserved for cases where some degree of physical danger is actually experienced.
Subjective Risk
There are a number of studies which suggest that it is sensible to think of subjective risk when driving as a continually fluctuating quantity which may be related to both estimated and objective risk.
Physiological measures which have been equated with subjective risk when driving are galvanic skin response (GSR)(e.g. Helander & Söderberg, 1973 — described in Summala, 1976; Hulbert, 1957; Preston, 1969; Taylor, 1964) and heart rate (Rutley & Mace, 1972), both of which are often used as measures of physiological arousal.
Taylor (1964) in particular noted that the distribution of GSRs over distance travelled corresponded very closely to the distribution of actual accident figures over the same distance.
GSR as a measure can, of course, be criticised for the fact that it is known to be closely related to the subject's expectancies and preparations for action.
Heart rate also appears to increase in the subjectively dangerous situation of entering a motorway (Rutley & Mace, 1972), however, this is harder to explain purely in terms of increasing attention and expectancies since these would normally be associated with a decrease in heart rate.
Other measures which are clearly associated with subjective risk while driving are cognitive load as measured by dual-task performance (e.g. Harms, 1986, 1991; Hoyos, 1988) and verbal ratings of the chances of being involved in a near miss (Watts & Quimby, 1980).
The Watts and Quimby study also demonstrated a relationship between subjective and objective risk, there was a correlation of 0.37 between subjective ratings of the chance of being involved in a near miss and objective risk, measured as accidents divided by mean traffic flow at a site.
Estimated Risk
It is interesting to note that the correlation between objective and subjective risk measured by Watts & Quimby (1980) is of a similar magnitude to the correlation between estimated risk and objective risk reported by Brehmer (1987)— Brehmer in fact uses the term subjective risk, however, in this study subjects were not actually driving or even simulating it, thus it seems more appropriate to regard this as estimated risk.
Brehmer had subjects attempt to estimate the number of road accidents occurring at various junctions and compared these estimates with the actual figures.
His studies are particularly interesting in the fact that the accuracy of judgments of estimated risk did not appear to be affected by driving experience.
Indeed there were no significant accuracy differences between driving instructors and 13-year-olds with no driving experience; he concludes that such judgments are based on general experience about the nature of moving objects.
Also of interest from the Brehmer studies is the observation that accident statistics were almost universally overestimated.
The overestimation of estimated risk is at first sight surprising, both because the common assumption that an underestimation of true risk might be a major cause of road accidents (e.g. Evans, 1991, ‘among the factors contributing to drivers’ speed choice is a systematic underestimation of the probability that they will be killed’, p.152) and on the basis of previous research on the estimation of risks.
Lichtenstein, Slovic, Fischhoff, Layman and Combs (1978) for example in a study on the judged frequency of a variety of lethal events found that the frequency of deaths from road accidents was systematically underestimated in relation to other causes of death.
However, the Lichtenstein et al.result is best understood in the general context of overestimation of low values and underestimation of high values which has been observed in tasks as diverse as relative loudness estimation (Stevens & Galanter, 1957) and the estimation of the relative number of black and white dots in a stimulus (Varey, Mellers & Birnbaum, 1990).
When considered in relation to the length of time you would have to wait at any particular junction in order to observe an accident it is probably accurate to characterise road accidents as low frequency occurrences.
In contrast with feelings of subjective risk, authors dealing with estimates of risk have often regarded estimated risk as a multidimensional concept (Glendon, 1987; Hale, 1987; Johnson & Tversky, 1984) in which context can influence the relevance of different dimensions.
Risk estimates certainly appear to be relatively malleable, there is evidence that increasing the availability in memory of risk-related information alters people's subsequent assessments of risk both for the overall frequency of lethal events (Lichtenstein et al.1978) or specifically for the risks involved in traffic situations (Groeger & Chapman 1990).
Although it is not clear that subjective risk can be biased in this way theories of driving which stress a schematic or conceptual representation of the environment (e.g. Dubois, 1991; Fleury, Mazet & Dubois, 1988; Groeger, 1988, 1989; Riemersma, 1988) might suggest that biases in the perception of the environment would indirectly lead to biases in subjective risk, either because risk is an important aspect of such schemata or because subjective risk would result from the inconsistency between the environment and pre-existing schemata.
General Discussion
Memory clearly plays some role at all levels of the driving task, however, there is relatively little research which looks directly at drivers’ memories for driving situations.
It appears that memory in this sense can be quite varied, for situations where memory is important, e.g. remembering where your car is parked, memory appears to generally be fairly good.
However, for aspects of driving where memory for events is not so clearly necessary it may be surprisingly poor.
Drivers may normally have no memory at all for actions performed at the operational level, moreover, there is a suggestion that in some circumstances memory for actions and information at the tactical level may also be almost entirely absent.
There has, however, been very little research which looks directly at this issue and thus at this stage suggestions about the normal levels of memory performance or about the variables which may influence it remain largely speculative.
A variable which has played an important role in many theories of driving behaviour is subjective risk and it seems likely that this may have important influences on drivers’ memory for situations for a number of reasons.
One possibility is that time gap experiences may cease when something dangerous is likely to happen.
The deviation of a situation from expectations, the breaking of safety margins, or the recognition of a potentially dangerous situation may produce subjective risk which is likely to coincide with the need for attentional resources, which if provided might cause an enhancement of memory.
This suggests another reason why memory might be related to subjective risk, simply because it is advantageous to the organism to have memory organized that way (c.f. J. R. Anderson, 1990).
In order to learn from dangers which have been previously encountered it may be necessary for such events to be stored in memory even if more mundane ones are not, this would provide an adaptive reason for situations in which subjective risk was present to be specially treated in memory.
Although driving itself is an extremely recent skill in evolutionary terms, such a link between potential danger and memory may have proved useful in many other situations (e.g. McGaugh, 1990).
However, the major reason to think that there is an important link between subjective risk and memory is that in other areas of psychology there have almost always been found to exist significant relationships between arousal and memory.
It has been suggested that subjective risk in driving may have many similarities with emotional arousal in other circumstances, thus the best way to make predictions about the potential effects of subjective risk on memory for driving situations is to review the general literature on the relationship between arousal and memory.
The assumption made above was that it would be useful for subjective risk in driving to promote accurate memory and thus aid the driver in avoiding such situations in the future.
It can be seen by the same argument that if the effect of subjective risk was to systematically alter memory in any other way this would also have important consequences for the future avoidance of dangerous situations.
As will be discussed in the following chapter there is evidence that in some circumstances arousal may in fact impair or systematically bias memory.
If this were the case in driving it would have important implications for peoples’ ability to learn to avoid danger.
On these grounds alone the relationship between subjective risk and memory for driving situations clearly deserves some research.
Chapter 2
Arousal and Memory
Although there is to the author's knowledge no previous research which has investigated relationships between subjective risk when driving and subsequent memory for driving situations, there have been numerous studies which consider the influences on memory of constructs such as mood, arousal or stress.
There has recently been a very considerable interest in the effects of mood on memory, see for example the volume of papers edited by Kuiken (1991).
There appear to be reliable effects of mood congruency in recall (Blaney, 1986; though see Parrott and Sabini, 1990) and some evidence for state-dependent learning with moods (Bower, 1981; though see Bower & Mayer, 1985).
Mood in such circumstances, however, generally refers to a state such as depression typically continuing for relatively long periods of time, often hours or days.
Although moods are likely to be important in driving, subjective risk as defined in the previous chapter appears to be more similar to concepts such as emotional stress or arousal as they are used in the memory literature.
This chapter reviews a wide range of literature which bears on relationships between arousal and memory.
A number of general theories which have been used to account for such relationships are first described and evidence bearing on them is discussed.
Then a large number of results from research on arousal and memory are briefly reviewed.
These results come from a wide variety of sources, ranging from laboratory experiments using electric shocks to analyses of one person's memory over a number of years, from experimental subjects’ memories of autopsy slides to normal people's memory for hearing about Kennedy's assassination.
Some of the apparently contradictory findings from such studies are then discussed in some detail and an attempt is made to reconcile the differences in results from different types of research.
Finally a few general relationships are selected on the basis that they are likely to be relevant to the research on risk and memory for driving situations which is described in the following chapters.
A Consensus of Opinion?
An area in which much research on the effects of emotional stress or arousal on memory has been conducted is that of eyewitness testimony.
Clearly it is of interest to know whether the memories of witnesses to crimes are likely to be altered by the often stressful nature of being a witness to or a victim of a crime.
The general consensus of opinion on the subject — both among potential jurors and among memory experts — appears to be that extreme stress will impair memory, E. F. Loftus (1979) reported that 67% of a sample of over 500 students felt this to be the case.
Kassin, Ellsworth and Smith (1989) found that 70% of a sample of 63 experts felt that this phenomenon is reliable enough for psychologists to present in court-room testimony — the experts in this study generally had a PhD in psychology and over half of them reported having actually testified about eyewitness testimony.
This opinion is shared by Deffenbacher who concludes the consideration of arousal in a recent review of research on eyewitness testimony with the statement that ‘the effect of arousal on witness accuracy is now also reasonably clear.
In those studies where violence level or intensity of personal threat has been successfully manipulated, accuracy has been reduced for all or a major subset of witnesses’(Deffenbacher 1991, p.395).
However, this may only represent one side of the story.
In the most comprehensive review of emotional arousal and eyewitness testimony to date, Christianson (in press) concludes that ‘in considering the Kassin et al.(1989) study, there is little evidence to support the view that emotional stress is bad for memory.
Such general statements seem unwarranted both in the literature and practical settings.’
Indeed some recent papers in experimental psychology have appeared to conclude that the effects of emotional stress are exactly the opposite to those suggested by Deffenbacher.
Heuer and Reisberg (1990), for example, conclude a recent study on eyewitness memory with the statement ‘we know from prior evidence that emotional arousal triggers vivid recollection.
The current study indicates that emotional arousal in fact triggers vivid and accurate recollection’(p.505).
The prior evidence to which they refer is largely work on ‘flashbulb memories’(e.g. Brown & Kulik, 1977) which will be discussed later in the chapter.
This does indeed seem at first sight to demonstrate that some of people's most vivid, detailed and enduring memories are precisely the memories they have about situations in which they experienced high levels of emotional arousal.
Clearly there is no complete consensus regarding the effects of emotional arousal on memory, the reason for this is that there is no single simple relationship which holds for all types and degrees of arousal on all types of memory performance.
To decide which effects may be relevant to subjective risk when driving the main findings in fields concerned with emotional arousal and memory and some of the theories which have been used to account for them will be briefly reviewed.
Theoretical Accounts of Arousal and Memory:
The Inverted-U Hypothesis
Attempts to explain relationships between emotional arousal and memory have frequently used frameworks which were originally developed as descriptions of the general relationship between arousal and task performance.
Although there have been theories in this area which would suggest a linear relationship between arousal and performance (e.g. Hull, 1943) the most common claim is that the two variables are related by the curvilinear pattern known as the inverted-U hypothesis (e.g. Hebb, 1955).
This proposes that with increasing arousal task performance is improved until an optimal level is achieved and that thereafter further increases in arousal are associated with a decrement in performance.
The inverted-U relationship has been empirically demonstrated for a number of different tasks (e.g. Courts, 1942; Stennett, 1957; Bolanger & Feldman, described in Malmo 1959), however, it is often regarded as a purely descriptive relationship rather than necessarily implying that arousal per se is affecting performance.
The Yerkes-Dodson Law
An extension of the inverted-U relationship is known as the Yerkes-Dodson law (from Yerkes & Dodson, 1908).
This states that different tasks will have different optimal levels of arousal and proposes that the optimal level of arousal for a task is inversely related to its difficulty.
Although the inverted-U and the more specific Yerkes-Dodson law were initially related to task performance generally, they have frequently been assumed to predict the same pattern of results with performance in memory tasks.
However, it is important to remember that the optimal of level of arousal for performance on a task is not necessarily the same as the optimal level for memory of the task (e.g. Hamilton, Hockey & Rejman, 1977).
Although the Yerkes-Dodson law appears to be able to make more detailed predictions than the simple inverted-U relationship, a major problem in testing the Yerkes-Dodson law is to decide a priori which of two tasks is the more demanding.
This is made particularly difficult because no specific psychological mechanism is necessarily proposed to explain the relationships underlying the effect.
However, a separate proposal was made by Easterbrook (1959) which describes an underlying mechanism which is often assumed to be responsible for both relationships.
Easterbrook's Hypothesis
Easterbrook's hypothesis assumes that increases in arousal are associated with a narrowing of the range of cues utilized by an organism in performing a task.
Initially this focusing of attention is hypothesized to improve task performance by concentrating resources on the salient aspects of stimuli.
However, with increases beyond the optimal level relevant cues will be ignored resulting in a decrement in performance.
This can be seen to be in accordance with the Yerkes-Dodson law if it is assumed that more difficult tasks are those which require greater attentional capacity (c.f. Kahneman, 1973).
There is an additional prediction about the relationship between arousal and memory which is commonly made from Easterbrook's hypothesis.
At low levels of arousal it is assumed that attention is divided among many cues so there will potentially be some memory for all cues.
At high levels of arousal, however, not all cues will be attended to and memory will clearly be impaired for those which were not.
This has led to researchers making a distinction between central and peripheral information in a scene and the assumption that arousal will impair memory for peripheral details but improve it for central ones (see particularly Christianson, in press).
A phenomenon from the eyewitness testimony literature which had often been considered an extreme effect of attention focusing in line with Easterbrook's hypothesis is known as ‘weapon focus’(Johnson & Scott, 1976; Kramer, Buckhout & Eugenio, 1990; E. F. Loftus, 1979; E. F. Loftus, G. R. Loftus & Messo, 1987).
It is suggested that when someone is threatened with a weapon during a crime the victim may focus his or her attention on the weapon to a degree which may subsequently hinder identification of the assailant.
Empirical Evidence for the Inverted-U Hypothesis
Although the theories described above are all frequently cited in the memory and eyewitness testimony literatures, all three theories have been the subject of considerable criticism in the more general literature on arousal and performance.
These criticisms take two main forms, the first is the difficulty in actually finding data which unequivocally support any of the hypotheses, the second is the problem of deciding exactly what is meant by arousal.
Before considering the status of arousal as a concept some of the problems in obtaining empirical support for any of the three relationships will be discussed.
As M. W. Eysenck (1982) points out, unless studies collect data over a large range of different arousal levels, there are relatively few patterns of results which are actually inconsistent with an inverted-U relationship.
This problem, as will be discussed later in the chapter, is particularly germane to the memory literature where studies often employ only two levels of arousal (for example those studies reviewed in Deffenbacher, 1983).
This of course provides a situation in which no possible combination of results could falsify an inverted-U relationship.
Moreover, even those studies where there does seem to be a clear relationship over a number of data points at different arousal levels (e.g. Courts, 1942; Stennett, 1957; Bolanger & Feldman, described in Malmo 1959) can often be criticized for the possibility that the task used to induce arousal actually requires greater levels of attention at higher levels of arousal itself.
Although the Yerkes-Dodson law provides an additional prediction which can be tested, it suffers firstly from the problem that it is often impossible to define task difficulty a priori and secondly that even when this is done successfully it is very hard to be sure that task difficulty does not itself affect arousal.
Such problems have led Neiss (1988) to conclude that the inverted-U relationship is probably true but only in the psychologically trivial sense that performance is impaired when the subject is either sleepy or facing an imminent external threat.
Empirical Evidence for Easterbrook's Hypothesis
Tests of Easterbrook's hypothesis have generally involved dual task paradigms in which the effects of arousal on a main task and a subsidiary task are compared.
The assumption is that increasing arousal should reduce the number of peripheral cues used and thus impair performance on the subsidiary task while improving performance on a main task.
M. W. Eysenck (1982) reviews 49 such studies, most of which are compatible with the idea that arousal reduces the range of cues utilized.
Since the dual task paradigm is the one normally considered in relationship to Easterbrook's hypothesis it should be noted that at least one alternative paradigm, perceptual dominance, produces completely contrary results, in non-aroused conditions central stimuli dominate attention while with mild arousal peripheral stimuli dominate (Shapiro, Egerman & Klein, 1984; Shapiro & Johnson, 1987; Johnson & Shapiro, 1989; Shapiro & Lim, 1989).
Although the evidence from laboratory studies is sometimes equivocal, the general principles which actually apply to performance of complex tasks in real life appear to be relatively clear.
In a summary of research conducted in genuinely dangerous environments (e.g. parachute jumps, war, deep sea diving), Baddeley (1972) concludes: ‘A dangerous situation will tend to increase level of arousal which in turn will focus the subject's attention more narrowly on those aspects of the situation he considers most important.
If the task he is performing is regarded by him as most important, then performance will tend to improve; if on the other hand it is regarded as peripheral to some other activity, such as avoiding danger, then performance will deteriorate’(p.545).
The conclusion that the effects of arousal will depend on the subject's interpretation of the importance of the task at which they are engaged is extremely important in interpreting studies of arousal and memory which are discussed later in this chapter.
One other important point emerging from M. W. Eysenck's (1982) review is that different methods of producing arousal appear to show rather different effects on the main and subsidiary tasks.
For example electric shocks or anxiety generally impaired a secondary task and left the main task unaffected, however, using incentive or noise as an arousal manipulation often improved main task performance leaving the secondary task unaffected.
Although both these patterns of results are consistent with Easterbrook's hypothesis the differences make it hard to actually predict an expected pattern of results for any new experimental manipulation of arousal.
This highlights the second major difficulty with the theories, the general assumption that there is a unitary dimension of arousal.
The Concept of Arousal
The idea that arousal, or activation, constitutes a unitary physiological dimension was important to a number of theorists particularly in the late fifties (e.g. Duffy, 1962; Lindsley, 1951; Malmo, 1959), however, it has since become clear that the numerous physiological measures which have been taken as different indices of arousal are in fact not highly correlated (Cattell, 1972).
It has become more common to treat physiological arousal as being based on two or three separate and partially independent systems (e.g. Hockey, 1979; Lacey, 1967; Neiss, 1988, 1990; Vanderwolf & Robinson, 1981; Venables, 1984), for example by proposing separate general effects of arousal, activation and effort (Pribram & McGuiness, 1975).
To deny that there is single quantity that can be characterised as arousal makes it much more difficult to generalize the results of research using any particular measure or manipulation of arousal to other situations.
Making predictions about the effects of new stressors is particularly difficult given that combinations of stressors may actually counteract each other rather than being additive in their effects (Hockey, 1984).
Despite such problems, particularly in attempts to define specific neuropsychological correlates to all its forms, the concept of arousal, or activation, continues to be widely used in psychology (e.g. K. J. Anderson, 1990; Revelle & D. A. Loftus, 1990).
Despite difficulties in interpreting arousal as a unitary physiological concept, it may make sense as a psychological one.
Thayer (1986, 1989), for example, has shown that self-report measures of how peppy, active or vigorous a person feels correlate well with a broad range of physiological measures of arousal, usually better than the intercorrelation of such measures with one another .
Nonetheless, Thayer distinguishes two separate psychological dimensions of arousal, one ranging from feeling tired to feeling energetic and the other ranging from feeling calm to feeling tense.
One line of research which does appear to support the idea of arousal as an important psychological construct while simultaneously making empirical tests of its effects more complex is the work of H. J. Eysenck on individual differences (H. J. Eysenck, 1967; H. J. Eysenck & M. W. Eysenck, 1985).
H. J. Eysenck proposed that a fundamental difference between introverts and extraverts is their chronic levels of arousal, introverts having generally higher levels of arousal than extraverts.
Although it is not clear that the extraversion-introversion dimension is the only personality factor related to arousal (M. W. Eysenck & Folkard, 1980), there is now considerable evidence that there are individual differences in both levels of arousal and the effects of additional arousal (e.g. Blake, 1967; Colquhoun & Folkard, 1978; Revelle, Humphreys, Simon & Gilliland, 1980).
This of course means that in principle the same minor arousal manipulation may impair the performance of one subject and yet improve the performance of a different subject and nonetheless remain consistent with an overall inverted-U relationship.
Despite this difficulty, when successfully controlled for, individual differences can be used to provide an additional manipulation of arousal and have been shown to produce the typical interaction between arousal and retention interval in memory discussed below (Howarth & H. J. Eysenck, 1968).
Other Theories of Arousal and Memory
In addition to the theories discussed above which are concerned with the effect of arousal on performance generally, there are also a number of theories which consider directly the effects of arousal on memory.
One such theory is the ‘Now Print!’ mechanism (Brown & Kulik, 1977; Livingston, 1967a, 1967b) which has been proposed as a special memory mechanism which operates only at times of great arousal to encode specific details of the situation, this will be briefly considered when evidence about flashbulb and vivid memories is discussed below.
Another mechanism which has previously been considered important is the repression of emotional events (Freud, 1915/1957), although there is some support for such an effect in the long term studies of personal memories discussed later, repression as a mechanism has received relatively little attention in the recent literature in cognitive psychology.
It was, however, the dominant theory driving some of the earlier experimental work on arousal and memory.
Laboratory Studies of Arousal and Memory
A classic study on short term verbal recall seemed to show that reading highly emotional words impairs memory, a finding which at the time seemed to support notions of repression.
In the study (Levinger & Clark, 1961) emotional words were shown to produce higher fluctuations in galvanic skin response (GSR) than non-emotional ones, free-associates produced to these words were less likely to be subsequently recalled than associates of non-emotional words produced at the same time.
This effect, however, appears to interact with retention interval in a way that is not necessarily consistent with repression interpretations.
Subsequent studies (e.g. Kleinsmith & Kaplan, 1963, 1964; Parkin, Lewinsohn & Folkard, 1982) have found that recall for associates to emotional words, or even nonsense syllables evoking high GSRs, is worse after short retention intervals (e.g. 2 minutes) but better after longer intervals (e.g. 7 days).
One problem with the above studies which used GSR to different words as a manipulation of arousal is that the words producing high arousal were not necessarily the ones which would have been predicted a priori.
This is particularly clear given that the result was also obtained using nonsense syllables rather than meaningful words (Kleinsmith & Kaplan, 1964).
In a study by Maltzman, Kantor and Langdon (1966) using a priori classifications of high and low arousal words, recall for high arousal words was significantly better than that for low arousal words both immediately and after 30 minutes, this highlights the sometimes counterintuitive capacity for artificial stimuli to elicit arousal.
However, using more natural stimuli, traffic safety films, Levonian (1966, 1967, 1968) has also shown that arousal can impair immediate memory while enhancing performance on a delayed memory questionnaire.
This interaction between arousal and retention interval does appear to be robust.
Revelle and D. A. Loftus (1990) review 24 studies using a variety of arousal manipulations and learning conditions, 18 of these studies show the expected interaction of arousal with retention interval.
Eleven of these studies actually show the striking reminiscence effect where recall in the arousal condition is actually better after a delay than immediately after learning.
There is also some evidence for a similar effect in more applied settings (Scrivner & Safer, 1988), however, this may be more appropriately considered to be an example of hypermnesia with repeated testing (e.g. Payne, 1987).
Theoretical Accounts of the Interaction with Retention Interval
The interaction between arousal and retention interval has been interpreted as evidence for Walker's action decrement theory (Walker, 1958; Walker & Tarte, 1963) which assumes that memory traces require a period of consolidation which can be enhanced by arousal, but which initially inhibits access to the trace.
M. W. Eysenck (1976, 1977, 1982), however, reviews evidence against this interpretation focusing particularly on a number of cases where arousal appears to improve immediate retention.
A general information processing approach which appears to account both for the effects of arousal on task performance and the interaction between arousal and retention interval in the memory literature has been proposed by a number of researchers (e.g. Broadbent, 1971; Hockey, 1979).
This view holds that arousal improves the rate of information transfer from input to output but potentially impairs the use of information in short term memory.
According to this view the inverted-U relationship between arousal and performance has two quite separate components.
Improvements in performance with increasing arousal at low levels are taken to be a function of the increasing speed on information transfer.
Decrements at high levels are assumed to be the result of the impairment to short memory.
This approach has been extended into the ‘tick rate hypothesis’(Humphreys & Revelle, 1984; Revelle, 1989) which considers the rate of information sampling to be the important underlying factor.
Increasing rate of environmental sampling with arousal improves information transfer but creates interference in short-term memory from competing information being sampled.
Despite the interference in short term memory, the overall increase in information sampled will improve long term memory.
This theory has also been phrased in terms of firing thresholds in neural nets (Revelle & D. A. Loftus 1990).
There does, however, appear to be very little evidence to directly support such theories which thus remain largely speculative.
Studies Using Arousing Stimuli
Most of the studies discussed so far have used laboratory tasks, often ones in which the source of arousal is artificial and quite separate from the material to be remembered.
Of course this is not necessarily the case in a more complex setting such as memory for driving situations.
In such a setting arousal is expected to arise naturally from the situation confronting the driver and it is likely to be memory for the source of arousal which is of particular interest (e.g. memory for the behaviour of another vehicle involved in an accident).
Fortunately there have been a large number of more recent studies which have used more meaningful manipulations of arousal.
There are number of different ways in which more naturalistic studies have been conducted ranging from laboratory studies using slides and films to field studies which have recorded people's memories for staged or naturally occurring arousing events.
A broad range of different types of research that are relevant will be considered below.
The first important difference between such research and the earlier laboratory work is that in such research the items to be remembered are generally themselves the source of arousal.
Studies which use arousing stimuli as the items to be remembered often produce results which can be described simply in terms of von Restorff effects.
A von Restorff effect (Wallace, 1965) refers to the common finding that a single distinctive item will tend to be remembered better than surrounding ones, a phenomenon which has often been linked with an impairment in memory for immediately preceding and following items in a list (Brenner, 1973; Detterman, 1975, 1976; Erdelyi & Blumenthal, 1973).
Thus studies which, for example, have involved showing subjects a series of slides with just a few of them being arousing, e.g. autopsy slides (Kramer, Buckhout, Fox, Widman & Tusche, 1991) or disfigured faces (Christianson & Nilsson, 1984), have shown impairments in memory for paired associates to the arousing stimulus or anterograde amnesia for subsequent slides.
Nonetheless, subjects in such studies will almost always remember having seen the arousing stimuli themselves.
It seems inappropriate to regard this enhanced memory for the arousing slide as being evidence for arousal per se affecting performance — the arousing stimuli are of course different from the normal ones in numerous ways.
Schmidt (1991) reviews a wide variety of von Restorff-like effects and argues that many of them can be explained using a single theory of distinctiveness.
He defines distinctiveness as an item's incongruity with respect to active conceptual frameworks.
However, Schmidt specifically excludes emotional stimuli from any general theory of distinctiveness on the grounds that such stimuli ‘lead to both physiological and psychological processes too complex and varied to be explained solely in terms of incongruity’(Schmidt, 1991, p.537).
Although memory that an arousing slide has been presented is generally likely to be extremely good, there is evidence that the types of details remembered about such a slide may be different from those remembered from more mundane slides.
A number of studies have used a similar methodology to the paired associate learning experiments but concentrated on memory for details of the arousing slides themselves (Christianson & E. F. Loftus, 1991; Christianson, E. F. Loftus, Hoffman & G. R. Loftus, 1991).
In the Christianson and E. F. Loftus (1991) study subjects were shown a series of slides with a critical slide showing either a woman cycling (neutral condition), a woman lying on the ground near her bicycle and bleeding from a head injury (arousal condition), or a woman carrying her bicycle (unusual condition).
The unusual condition was included to provide some control for von Restorff effects.
The critical memory test in each condition involved a central detail (the colour of the woman's coat) and a peripheral detail (the colour of a car in the background of the slide), while watching the slides, subjects rated the affective quality of the picture.
Memory was tested by cued recall, using slides in which both the woman and the peripheral car were missing and subjects had to describe the missing details, and by recognition, four-alternative forced-choice (4AFC) tested using an additional three slides with the colours of the peripheral and central information changed.
Both recall and recognition for the central colour detail was unaffected by condition, but the peripheral detail was best recognized and recalled in the neutral condition and worst in the arousal condition.
The results from the unusual condition fell in between those from the other two conditions.
When the recall instructions specifically requested the colour of the coat, however, recall for this central detail was significantly better in the arousal condition than in the other two.
These results seem to be consistent with the idea of attention focusing in the arousal condition, hence improving memory for the central detail at the expense of peripheral information.
Indeed, asking subjects their first thoughts on seeing the critical slide confirmed that they were more likely to be thinking about the woman than the general environment in the arousal condition.
Although the results from the unusual condition were slightly equivocal, the difference in results between the central and peripheral detail suggests that there is more than just a von Restorff effect present.
Christianson et al.(1991) explored this result further by considering the role that eye movements play in the findings.
They found that the same pattern of results was obtained even when only one eye fixation per slide was allowed, always on the central detail.
In a separate experiment they actually monitored the eye fixations of subjects while watching the slide and found that in the arousal condition subjects fixated more often on central details, though for less time per fixation.
However, in that particular experiment there was no significant difference between conditions in memory performance for the peripheral detail although the central detail was better recalled and recognized in the arousal group.
They interpret the studies as showing that not only are central details more likely to be attended to in the arousal condition, but that since even when only one eye fixation is permitted the same results occur, there must be differences in the processing of arousing material in addition to the original attentional effect.
This argument of course relies on the questionable assumption that eye movements adequately describe the distribution of attention to a stimulus.
Although such studies give a great deal of information about the memory for individual arousing slides, they may be unrepresentative of normal situations.
This is because the arousing slide in such studies comes as a complete surprise to subjects rather than being part of a continuing series of related events.
The next extension from such situations to increase the realism is to show arousing situations in a naturally occurring context, for example by showing the build up to a crime or road accident.
Studies Using More Realistic Scenarios
A large number of studies have been conducted with particular reference to eyewitness testimony in an attempt to decide what the effects of high levels of arousal at the time of a crime are likely to be on the testimony of a victim or witness.
One of the most often cited studies is that by E. F. Loftus and Burns (1982) in which 266 subjects watched a short film of a bank robbery.
There were two versions of the film, in the violent version a small boy had been playing outside the bank and was shot in the face as the robbers made their getaway.
In the non-violent version of the film the same boy appeared, but instead of showing the shooting incident the film continued with scenes inside the bank.
The critical test item in the memory phase was the number 17 written on the boy's football jersey.
Only 4.3% of the subjects in the violent condition could subsequently recall the number on the jersey whereas 27.9% in the non-violent condition were able to despite actually having seen the boy for a shorter period of time.
Similar results were obtained when the memory test was a 4AFC recognition test using different numbers as alternatives.
E. F. Loftus and Burns interpreted these results as retrograde amnesia produced by mental shock, and suggested that the impairment occurred at the time of storage of the memory.
Similar results have been reported from other studies using filmed events in the same way, with arousal being manipulated by the violence of the incident depicted in the film (Clifford & Hollin, 1981; Clifford & Scott, 1978).
One important caveat to the E. F. Loftus and Burns study is that the test of memory could be considered to be one for a peripheral detail.
When in a separate study using the same stimulus material subjects who had watched the film were contacted approximately seven months later, 46% of the subjects who had viewed the violent film could still recall the essence of the film while only 21% from the non-violent condition could (Christianson & Loftus, 1987).
Clearly then the arousal condition has not impaired all forms of memory for the story, the arousing scenario itself appears to be more memorable than the non-arousing version.
Other studies have used a series of slides making up the story instead of a film.
This typically increases the control the experimenter has over the situation, however, the results of these studies have been much more varied.
One of the most interesting of these studies is by Christianson and E. F. Loftus (1987).
In this study subjects watched a series of 15 slides showing a mother and 7-year-old son.
The pair leave home and walk through town, look for a taxi, take the taxi to school, and then the mother makes a phone call and returns home.
In the arousal condition the same beginning and ending to the sequence was used, but in the middle the boy was hit by a car and shown lying on the car bonnet bleeding heavily before being transported to hospital.
While watching the slides subjects wrote down the most distinctive feature of each slide.
Subjects were given a memory test after either 20 minutes or 2 weeks.
In the test phase subjects first attempted to recall the features they had written down and then performed a 4AFC recognition task attempting to identify the slide they had viewed from among three distractors showing a slightly different view of the same scene.
The results appeared to show that irrespective of retention interval the recall task (assumed to be a test of central information) showed performance on the critical slides which was best for subjects who viewed the arousing version of the film.
The recognition test (assumed to be a test of peripheral information), showed the reverse result, with recognition performance being worse for subjects in the arousal condition.
Six months after the original experiment 89% of subjects from the arousal condition could still recall the essence of the story while only 51% from the neutral were able to.
Christianson and E. F. Loftus interpreted these results as supporting the idea of attention focusing in the arousal condition consistent with Easterbrook's hypothesis.
Although the Christianson and E. F. Loftus (1987) study appears to tell a convincing story in terms of attention being focused on central information in the arousal condition, other studies have not produced such clear results.
An earlier study using the same type of stimulus material (Christianson, 1984) showed impaired recall of central events in the neutral condition, but only at long retention intervals (2 weeks rather than 12 minutes) and no significant difference between conditions on the 4AFC recognition test for peripheral details.
A critical difference in this study was that subjects simply sat and watched the slides while physiological measures were recorded, a similar procedure to one used recently by Heuer and Reisberg (1990).
Heuer and Reisberg performed a very similar study to the Christianson and Loftus (1987) one.
Here subjects watched a series of 12 slides, this time a mother and son visit the father at his work-place, the mother calls a cab and departs.
In this study the difference between conditions was that in the neutral set of slides the father was a car mechanic seen fixing an engine, while in the arousal version the father was a surgeon operating on a badly injured patient.
In this study the subjects simply watched the slides while their heart rate was recorded and they listened to a sentence describing the event in each slide (e.g. ‘Father was able to find the broken connection’ versus ‘Father was able to restore the severed limbs’).
The crucial memory tests were administered two weeks later and consisted of a free recall phase and a 4AFC recognition test for a series of 120 specific questions related to aspects of the 12 slides.
The 120 recognition items were categorized into central and peripheral details by four judges, using Rosch's (1978) basic level as a criterion.
The basic level ‘is that level of abstraction that is appropriate for using, thinking about, or naming an object in most situations in which the object occurs’(Rosch, 1978, p.43).
Any detail falling below this level was regarded as peripheral.
Information given in the recall protocols was categorized into central and peripheral using the same technique.
Although there were additional conditions in the Heuer and Reisberg study the interesting comparison is between the arousal and neutral conditions.
Surprisingly the recall data appeared to show enhanced recall of information in the arousal condition, both for peripheral and central information, though this contrast only reached significance for the central information.
In the 4AFC recognition test memory was again enhanced for the arousal group, particularly for the critical group of slides, this improvement, however, was again present both for peripheral and central details.
Arousal in this study appeared to have a beneficial effect on memory for both types of information quite contrary to the predictions of Easterbrook's hypothesis and to the results of the Christianson and Loftus (1987) study.
Some possible interpretations of this difference are given at the end of this chapter.
Staged Events and Field Studies
In an attempt to increase the realism of events used to study the effects of arousal, several investigators have attempted to stage events which would be expected to induce arousal.
One of the most cited examples of such research is an unpublished study by Johnson and Scott (1976) where subjects waiting for an experiment overhear a violent argument next door followed by a person coming through the room carrying a bloodied letter opener.
Although subjects in the study could almost all subsequently remember seeing the weapon they were worse at identifying the person holding it than in a comparable condition where the subjects had heard an ordinary conversation followed by a person passing through the room carrying a pen.
A study by Peters (1988) showed a similar result comparing subjects’ memories for a nurse giving them an inoculation with that for a researcher subsequently encountered, they found that face recognition was impaired for the nurse, another result suggesting memory impairment for an arousing event.
It is possible that the presence of the weapon, or the actual injection taking place is important in such results.
For comparison, Toglia, Payne, Nightingale and Ceci (1989) found that the threat of taking a blood sample alone did not appear to affect overall levels of performance at list learning, face recognition for a nurse who did not in fact take a blood sample or cued recall for an earlier conversation.
In addition, Leippe, Wells and Ostrom (1978) have used a staged theft methodology where higher levels of arousal actually seemed to improve face recognition.
It seems possible, however, that the latter two studies were using substantially lower levels of stress than the former two and this may well account for the difference in results.
The most realistic arousal conditions, although normally the least controlled memory tests come from studies which have looked at memories for actual crimes.
Yuille and Cutshall (1986), for example, interviewed 13 witnesses to an actual shooting incident and found that the most highly stressed witnesses actually gave marginally more detailed statements.
This methodology unfortunately confounds proximity to the actual events with arousal since the most stressed witnesses were naturally the ones most closely involved in the incident.
However, it is clear that the high levels of stress they reported experiencing did not have disastrous effects on their ability to recall the event.
Similar findings are reported in Yuille and Cutshall (1989) and Fisher, Geiselman and Amandor (1989).
Kuehn (1974) in an analysis of victim reports of 100 crimes found that crimes in which the victim was threatened by a weapon were neither more nor less completely reported than those in which no weapon was used.
However, he did find that injured victims provided less complete reports than uninjured ones and that victims of robberies provided more complete reports than the victims of rape or assault.
Although a number of researchers have argued that the only relevant research in eyewitness testimony is that which involves actual crimes (Clifford, 1978; Lindsay & Wells, 1983; Malpass & Devine, 1980), there are major difficulties with carrying out such research.
In addition to the lack of experimental control and the near impossibility of determining the true details of the actual event, the subjects in such studies are often difficult to contact initially.
A further problem is that in most cases the witnesses’ recollections of the events may have been biased by descriptions already given in interviews with the police and discussions they may have had with others.
In other cases witnesses may not be prepared to relive the actual events for research purposes (for example, the actual victim in the 1986 Yuille and Cutshall study).
An alternative source of personal memories of highly stressful events is to interrogate subjects’ autobiographical memories for any event which they personally found highly stressful.
One particular branch of such research which has recently caused considerable activity and controversy is the field of ‘flashbulb’ memories and this will be considered first before more general research on autobiographical memories is discussed.
Flashbulb Memories
In 1973 Esquire magazine asked a number of famous people where they had been ten years earlier when they heard that John Kennedy was assassinated.
Brown and Kulik (1977) were struck by the fact that people were generally able to answer this question without difficulty, the important point being not that they remembered the assassination but that they remembered apparently irrelevant details such as where they were and what they were doing when they heard the news.
Although the specific physiological mechanism which they proposed to explain the effect, based on Livingston's (1967a, 1967b)‘Now Print!’ theory has attracted little support, the basic demonstration of a surprising ability to report such memories even after considerable delays attracted a great deal of interest and has now been found in a large number of studies (e.g. Bohannon, 1988; Christianson, 1989; Colegrove, 1899; McCloskey, Wible & Cohen, 1988; Pillemer, 1984; Winograd & Killinger, 1983; Yarmey & Bull, 1978).
McCloskey et al.(1988) argue that it is not necessary to propose a separate memory mechanism such as that proposed by Brown and Kulik (1977) to account for flashbulb memories.
They argue instead that flashbulb memories can be regarded as an extreme but normal type of autobiographical memory — though see also Schmidt and Bohannon (1988) and Cohen, McCloskey and Wible (1988).
Some variables which have been regarded as important in forming flashbulb memories are the emotionality (Bohannon, 1988; Christianson, 1989; Pillemer, 1984), consequentiality (Brown & Kulik, 1977; Christianson, 1989) and surprisingness (Brown & Kulik, 1977; Christianson, 1989) of the event and the amount it is rehearsed (Bohannon, 1988; Brown & Kulik, 1977).
Neisser (1982) also argued that it was not necessary to propose a separate memory system for flashbulb memories, he suggested that rehearsal was the most important component of the phenomenon, noting particularly that such memories are not necessarily veridical, instead he emphasised the role such memories may play as a connection between personal and public history.
However, several studies have suggested that rehearsal may not be that important a factor (Pillemer, 1984; Winograd & Killinger, 1983).
Where it has been assessed, the variable which most consistently predicts both degree of elaboration and the consistency over time of such memories appears to be the emotionality of the original event (Conway, 1990).
This appears to be particularly important where long retention intervals are involved (Pillemer, 1984).
Vivid Memories
The importance of emotionality in flashbulb memories is consistent with research which has considered autobiographical memories generally rather than memories associated specifically with newsworthy national or international events.
These studies have indicated that people may have particularly vivid memories for personal events of particular emotional importance to them individually (Christianson & E. F. Loftus, 1990; Conway & Bekerian, 1988; Pillemer, Goldsmith, Panter & White, 1988; Pillemer, Rhinehart & White, 1986; Rubin & Kozin, 1984; Strongman & Kemp, 1991; Wagenaar & Groeneweg, 1990).
Indeed in the Rubin and Kozin (1984) study subjects were asked to describe ‘flashbulb memories’ without the constraint that they had to be related to newsworthy events.
In this study only 4 out of a total of 174 memories reported were actually related to public events.
When asked to think particularly of traumatic events (Christianson & E. F. Loftus, 1990, Experiment 1), rather than vivid memories per se, the main types of situations described were the death of relative (18% of the memories that were described) divorce of parents or friends (14%) or traffic accidents (14%).
Both flashbulb and vivid memories can be inaccurate and do show some forgetting over time (McCloskey et al., 1988) and there certainly are memories of this type which do not necessary involve emotional arousal at the time.
Nonetheless, it seems reasonable to conclude, as Heuer and Reisberg (1990) did, that many of peoples most vivid memories are related to events of high emotionality.
Such research of course suffers from the problem that there is no suitable control in terms of memory for more mundane events, nor are there adequate methods for actually determining the accuracy of the memories reported.
These problems can be addressed by studies where individuals have conducted long term studies of their own memories.
Single Case Studies of Autobiographical Memory
One of the most impressive techniques for investigating autobiographical memory is the personal study of the experimenter's own memory.
In such studies records of a very large number of events are taken over a considerable period of time and memory for the events is subsequently tested.
Unfortunately this method is enormously time-consuming and only two major studies have been conducted (though see also White, 1982).
Although the conclusions of such studies are in principle limited to the memories of the two individuals who conducted them (Linton 1975, 1978, 1982, 1986, and Wagenaar, 1986), both researchers were potentially interested in emotion as a factor in memory and the studies provide an enormous database of everyday events for which memory has been systematically tested.
Linton reports ‘small and unimpressive’(1982, p.87), though positive correlations between emotionality and recall.
These correlations, however, apparently increase when emotionality ratings are made at the time of recall and may increase with the age of the memory (Linton, 1986).
She also reports that ‘negative memories’ were systematically less available than others (1986, p.59).
Wagenaar (1986) also found that memories rated as unpleasant at the time were less well recalled than pleasant ones (for durations of up to two years), despite this, events with higher emotional involvement ratings (‘moderate’ to ‘extreme’) were generally recalled better than those with lower ratings (‘nothing’or ‘little’) at all retention intervals studied, though again this was a relatively small effect, r(1603)=0.07.
The sampling of events in these two studies was not completely random (see for comparison Brewer, 1988), nonetheless the studies do suggest that although emotionally arousing circumstances can sometimes be well remembered even after very considerable delays (c.f. Wagenaar & Groeneweg, 1990) it seems unlikely that actual feelings of emotional arousal at the time are either necessary or sufficient to cause dramatically enhanced memory.
Moreover, in the case of negatively valenced emotions there is evidence that they may actually impair recall.
General Discussion
At the beginning of this chapter the apparently contradictory conclusions from Deffenbacher (1991), Christianson (in press) and Heuer and Reisberg (1990) were quoted.
This final section will attempt to use the material reviewed to reconcile these conclusions and provide predictions about the relationships between subjective risk and memory for driving which will be explored in the experimental chapters.
Deffenbacher (1983) reviewed the literature available on the relationship between emotional arousal and eyewitness testimony and concluded that the results were consistent with the idea that the general inverted-U relationship between arousal and performance could be used to account for the memory findings.
In his 1991 paper he reviews subsequent studies and states that ‘there seems little reason to alter this interpretation at present’(Deffenbacher, 1991, p.388).
Deffenbacher's argument is that those studies which show enhanced memory in arousing circumstances are operating on the ascending portion of the inverted-U function, while those which show impairment are operating on the descending portion of the curve associated with high arousal levels.
This argument does provide a plausible explanation for the differences between the results from some of the memory studies described earlier.
The assumption is that studies such as the Toglia et al.(1989) and Leippe et al.(1978) studies are characterized by generally low levels of arousal, whereas studies such as those by Peters (1988) and Johnson and Scott (1976) have been successful in inducing the higher levels of arousal assumed to be associated with violent crimes.
Thus his argument is that although both effects exist, the important effect as far as eyewitness testimony is concerned is that high levels of arousal in actual crimes are likely to lead to impaired memory performance.
It should, however, be remembered that the evidence from studies of eyewitnesses in actual crimes is equivocal (Kuehn, 1974; Yuille & Cutshall, 1986).
A more serious problem with Deffenbacher's approach in terms of the ability to generalize the results to other settings is that his distinction between studies which did and did not successfully manipulate violence level or personal threat can be argued to be post hoc.
It will not always be possible to decide a priori whether any new arousal manipulation in a different setting should operate on the lower or upper portion of the curve.
Nonetheless his advice may be the most appropriate for expert witnesses to give in court cases where the levels of arousal are clearly at the most extreme (e.g. rapes and assaults, Kuehn, 1974).
If Deffenbacher is correct in his conclusion that effective arousal manipulations result in an impairment of memory, how is it possible for Heuer and Reisberg (1990) to conclude just the opposite, both from their experimental results and a review of previous research?
Although it can be argued that the arousal manipulation in their particular study could be operating on the lower portion of the curve, it does appear that numerous studies on vivid and flashbulb memories have suggested that highly emotionally arousing life events are remembered in surprising detail over very considerable retention intervals.
If some special mechanism such as that implicated in the ‘Now Print!’ theory (Brown and Kulik, 1977; Livingston, 1967a 1967b) were operating in cases of flashbulb memories it is likely that similar findings would have been observed in the eyewitness testimony literature.
There does not seem to be any strong evidence for this.
In fact, the most remarkable aspect about flashbulb and vivid memories appears to be neither their detail nor their accuracy but rather their longevity.
This is consistent with the idea that the importance of such memories is that they provide and anchoring point between personal and public life (Neisser, 1982) or a coherent autobiographical history for the individual (Conway, 1990).
The fact that these memories are often associated with emotional situations is interesting but dangerous to interpret given that there is no easy way to estimate the number of similar emotional situations which did not lead to such memories.
This problem is highlighted by the studies of Linton and Wagenaar which do make some attempt to sample a range of autobiographical events, both of which while showing slight memory improvements for emotional items appear to show memory impairments if the items were regarded as unpleasant.
In understanding the effects which may be observed of subjective risk in everyday driving the most important studies are likely to be those using moderate levels of arousal.
Generally the results from these studies can be interpreted in terms of Easterbrook's hypothesis, however, before applying the hypothesis indiscriminately to memory results it is necessary to remember the limitations of the hypothesis with regards to task performance generally.
These limitations are well captured in the earlier quotation from Baddeley (1972) and can be extended to memory research.
In interpreting memory results in terms of Easterbrook's hypothesis there appear to be three important questions to ask and these will be considered in turn.
1.
What task is the subject actually performing?
The importance of considering the task which the subject is actually performing is made clear by the difference in results obtained from studies using different tasks during the arousal manipulation.
Christianson and Loftus (1987) had subjects write down the central detail from each slide and Christianson and Loftus (1991) had them evaluate the affective quality of each slide, both these studies showed results which appeared to be consistent with Easterbrook's hypothesis.
Christianson (1984), Heuer and Reisberg (1990) and Christianson et al.(1991, Experiment 3), however, all simply had subjects watch slides without any particular task being specified, none of these studies showed clear support for the hypothesis.
This appears to be as would be predicted from the Baddeley quotation — where the subject is performing an important task arousal causes attention to be focused more centrally on it, improving performance.
However, where the task is not regarded as important arousal has a different effect, merely causing distraction.
Thus attention focusing may only be observed where there is a well-defined task which is regarded as important by the subject.
2.
How is the task related to the source of the arousal?
The source of arousal is critical for a number of reasons, in addition to the considerable literature suggesting that arousal is not a unitary physiological dimension, there is the problem that in memory tasks an external source arousal may simply distract subjects while memory for an arousing item itself may be subject to von Restorff effects.
In fact, it seems likely that many of the studies of memory for arousing stimuli (e.g. Christianson & Loftus, 1991; Christianson et al., 1991) are not showing any effects at all which should be directly attributed to the subject's general level of arousal.
This is suggested particularly by the fact that there is no evidence of retrograde or anterograde effects around the arousing slides.
This may be also true of studies which have used a series of slides as the arousing stimuli rather than a single one.
Christianson & Loftus (1987), unfortunately, report their data in such a way that it is difficult to know whether retrograde and anterograde effects were present, however, there was clearly no interaction of effects with retention interval (20 minutes versus 2 weeks).
3.
What defines central versus peripheral information?
The studies using arousing stimuli with many components and exploring memory for different aspects of the stimuli separately (e.g. Christianson & Loftus, 1987, 1991; Christianson et al., 1991; Heuer & Reisberg, 1990) have the additional problem of deciding a priori which aspects of a stimulus are central and which are peripheral.
There is no clear single definition of this difference and authors do not use the distinction consistently.
Christianson (in press) argues that the number on the victim's football jersey in the study by Loftus and Burns (1982) is a peripheral detail, however, in his own study (Christianson & Loftus, 1991) the colour of the victim's coat is regarded as a central detail, this distinction appears to be essentially arbitrary.
An alternative approach was adopted by Heuer and Reisberg (1990) in their study.
Here details were categorized as either central or peripheral using the distinction that items below Rosch's idea of a basic level of categorisation (Rosch 1978) were regarded as peripheral.
This method at least appears to have some principled rationale underlying it, however, Rosch herself stresses that the basic level is not necessarily fixed (Rosch, Mervis, Gray, Johnson & Boyes-Braem, 1976), but depends both on the interaction required with the object and the expertise of the observer (Tanaka & Taylor, 1991).
Moreover, it should be noted that according to this distinction the central detail in the Christianson and Loftus (1991) study might well have been categorized as a peripheral detail.
It is clear that a standard definition of central and peripheral information is necessary before studies using this distinction can be compared with one another and a clear pattern of results described.
If the central-peripheral distinction is to be linked with Easterbrook's hypothesis it is necessary to take into account the task which is being performed, thus central information should be only that which is necessary for successful performance of a well-defined task.
In those studies where the subject's task is to simply watch slides it is not clear how to make this distinction, and indeed such studies have not shown clear differences between memory for central and peripheral information.
Where the task has been to make judgments of affective tone or extract central information from a slide, differences have emerged between central and peripheral details and this may well reflect the fact that attention to arousing information or central information (which are assumed to be the same thing) is explicitly required for task performance.
Note that this proposed definition of the central/peripheral distinction is completely consistent with Rosch's notion of a basic level.
Unlike Heuer and Reisberg's use of the distinction, however, making explicit reference to the task performed allows the definition of the basic level to depend on context in the way Rosch suggests (e.g. Rosch et al., 1976; Rosch, 1978).
Conclusions
Research about vivid and flashbulb memories suggests that in exceptional circumstances, for example serious car accidents, memories of events are formed which are exceptional in their longevity.
However, it is not clear that such memories are completely accurate and it is unlikely that arousal at the time of encoding is the only important factor in creating such memories.
Other factors such as the personal and public importance of the event are equally likely to be of significance and it seems inappropriate to regard such memories as providing evidence for a general enhancement of memory related to increased arousal or emotion.
If there is a single function relating arousal and memory it seems likely that it takes the inverted-U shape which is often suggested to describe the relationship between task performance and memory, with memory impairments occurring at very low or very high levels of arousal.
It is, however, possible that applied research which demonstrates impairments in memory at high levels of arousal does so because of differences in attention, e.g. weapon focus, rather than general effects on all aspects of memory.
There is as yet little evidence that some effects which appear to be important in the laboratory can be demonstrated in more applied settings, for example the interaction between retention interval and arousal, and individual differences in the effects of arousal on memory.
A special case of such research arises in the situations where the item to be remembered is also the source of arousal.
Here two separate effects may be observed, firstly a distinctiveness effect where a single arousing item in a series is likely to be well remembered simply because it is different from the other items, and secondly an effect which has been described as similar to Easterbrook's hypothesis in general task performance.
The way Easterbrook's hypothesis has been applied to memory research is by making a distinction between central and peripheral information associated with the arousing item.
The assumption is that in cases of arousal, memory for central information will be enhanced while memory for peripheral information will be impaired.
Although these differences appear when the item to be remembered is a source of arousal, it is not clear that memory differences for central and peripheral information are actually related to general effects of arousal on performance.
Such memory differences appear instead to be limited to the single arousing item and not appear for the immediately following ones although general physiological arousal would be expected to still be present.
An additional difficulty with the central-peripheral distinction as it has been used by researchers is the rather ad hoc definition of the difference.
One possible approach to clarifying the distinction has been suggested.
This is to attempt to define information as either central or peripheral to the task at which the subject is engaged during encoding rather than central or peripheral per se.
This distinction may be relatively easy to make in memory for situations encountered when driving.
In this case it may be possible to define the main task for the subject in terms of the demands necessary for driving the car.
This chapter has reviewed a wide range of research which may bear on relationships between subjective risk and memory for driving situations.
A general inverted-U function has been described which suggests that memory may be best for intermediate levels of subjective risk, being impaired in cases of either unusually high or low subjective risk.
In addition, two important effects have been described which relate to memory for the arousing events themselves.
Firstly, if they are isolated unusual events, risky situations may be well remembered because of their distinctiveness in a way which is analogous to a von Restorff effect.
Secondly, when considering the types of detail remembered it is likely that attention focusing as described by Easterbrook's hypothesis may be important.
It is possible that risky situations may lead to enhanced memory for information centrally important to driving in the situation but show impairments in memory for information peripheral to the driving task.
Chapter 3
Risk and Recall on the Road I
A distinction was made in the first chapter between three types of risk, objective, estimated and subjective, and the assumption was made that subjective risk is closely related to the concept of arousal as it has been used in much memory research.
One of the first questions which this thesis attempts to answer is whether these three definitions of risk can be sensibly used, and if they can, how are the three types of risk related to one another?
Since the role of subjective risk is of particular importance in theories of driving, one part of this question is simply whether drivers are aware of subjective risk, either as a feeling which is occasionally present in immediately dangerous situations but otherwise non-existent (consistent with a zero-risk theory of driving) or as a continually fluctuating level which they can be aware of when questioned and which they attempt to match to some target level (consistent with RHT).
Previous research related to memory for driving situations has been confined largely to exceptional situations (e.g. actual accidents) or memory for specific items (e.g. road signs).
The little evidence available about the level or accuracy of memory in everyday driving situations suggests that it may be surprisingly poor.
However, testing memory for a specific item like a road sign does not tell the researcher about overall levels of memory which may have been quite good for other details.
Some questions which need to be addressed are what the overall quality of memory for driving is like, what types of detail can or can not be remembered, and what variables, both psychological and environmental, are related to memory?
Study 1
Subjective Risk and Subsequent Recall
This study was intended to explore some of the previously discussed concepts while subjects are actually driving a car in normal urban traffic environment.
It was designed to address three particular questions.
1.
Are subjects aware of risk when driving?
This study differentiates between the three types of risk described in Chapter 1, objective, estimated and subjective.
Objective risk has previously been measured in two different ways.
The first definition, as in the studies described by Brehmer (1987), is simply the total number of accidents recorded at a particular junction, the advantage of this measure is that it is a relatively easy number to obtain and easy for subjects to understand.
The second measure of objective risk is that used by Watts and Quimby (1980), the total number of accidents occurring at a junction divided by the average traffic flow at the junction.
This second measure has the advantage of corresponding more closely to the theoretical risk of accident faced by any randomly chosen individual road user passing through the junction.
However, it is a more difficult number for subjects to actually understand and make their own estimates of.
Making an estimate of the second measure of objective risk would mean estimating the number of accidents per ten million vehicles (or some other large denominator).
In addition to sounding complex to subjects, this appears to be a two step process, estimating both accidents and traffic flow and combining the two estimates to make a final number.
As the intention in this study was to have subjects make estimates while they were driving it was decided that this would be unnecessarily difficult.
Instead the first measure of objective risk, total accident numbers, was chosen as the number for subjects to estimate.
A preliminary exploratory questionnaire study made it clear that subjects find it very difficult to give accident figures unless they have some anchors for their estimates.
In this earlier study a group of subjects gave unconstrained accident estimates for various manoeuvres at a set of traffic lights (original statistics from Hall, 1986).
This method produced significant differences between mean estimates for different manoeuvres, F(22,286)=1.92, p<0.01.
Moreover, these differences did seem to reflect the objective figures — the correlation between mean estimate and the actual figure across the 23 scenarios used was 0.702, p<0.01.
Unfortunately, the subjects found these estimates extremely difficult to make and the differences between subjects’ estimates was enormous.
Annual accident estimates for a single manoeuvre with an actual accident figure of 33 ranged from 0 to 450.
To avoid some of the problems associated with such a broad range of responses it was decided to limit the potential variance in accident estimates for the following study.
This was done by giving subjects a maximum number of accidents which their estimates could not exceed.
Measures which other researchers have described as corresponding to subjective risk have been changes in heart rate or GSR and subjective estimates of the chances of being involved in a near miss (Watts & Quimby, 1980).
None of these measures directly assesses a driver's feelings of risk.
The first two are physiological measures which are related to arousal but which the driver may not actually be directly aware of.
Even as measures of arousal they have problems, they are difficult to record and analyse, and they may be dependent on things which are related only indirectly to either arousal or subjective risk (e.g. preparations for action, expectancies, physical effort involved in driving).
Moreover, as was suggested by Thayer (1986, 1989), the simplest and most representative single overall measures of arousal may be verbal ratings.
The approach used by Watts and Quimby does not have these problems, however, it encourages the subject to focus on the external environment in order to answer the question, moreover it makes the assumption that subjective risk is determined only by the chances of a near miss, it may clearly relate to other factors as well(e.g. severity of consequences in an actual accident, presence of a police car, unpredictability of pedestrians).
In actually measuring subjective risk while driving it seems appropriate to encourage drivers to think about the external environment in a more normal way and answer questions about subjective risk with reference to their internal states.
Nonetheless, for subjects to use a scale reliably it is necessary to anchor a scale of subjective risk estimates to possible outcomes, the procedure used in this study to measure subjective risk is a compromise between these requirements.
Assuming that it is possible to collect information about estimated and subjective risk from subjects, it will clearly be of interest to see to what extent other variables are related to these measures.
This is done both in terms of subjects characteristics (e.g. age, sex, driving experience, accident history, previous knowledge of Cambridge roads) and situational factors (e.g. speed driven, number of other vehicles present, time spent at junction).
2.
What can drivers recall about situations they have driven through?
In an ideal memory study drivers would be unobtrusively monitored during a range of everyday driving situations and subsequently questioned about the events.
There are, however, a number of problems with such an approach.
It would be extremely difficult to assess the accuracy of recalls when the information available to the driver could not be exactly determined.
It would be problematic stopping drivers in the course of ordinary driving for research purposes, and it would be impossible in such circumstances to record variables such as subjective risk while they were actually driving.
An alternative approach, and the one which is adopted in this study, is to have drivers explicitly performing a driving experiment, though not one that appears to be related to memory, and to present them with a surprise memory test later in the experiment.
This approach clearly has the disadvantage that subjects may not be driving in their normal manner, however, the information available to the driver can be accurately recorded on video and it is possible to have them give ratings of both subjective and estimated risk.
Since there is relatively little research available on which to base assumptions about the type of information a subject will have available in memory it seems that recall should be as free as possible in terms of overall content.
However, since the study is conducted in an area known to most of the subjects it is important that the memories reported should be specific to the drive just completed rather than general knowledge about that area of Cambridge.
Many of the variables which may be related to subjective risk may also be related to subsequent recall of situations.
Making a video record of the drive both makes it possible to check the accuracy of memories and to record driving variables which may also be related to memory.
3.
Is subjective risk when driving related to subsequent recall?
Although the primary aims of this particular study are to simply explore the concept of risk in driving and the nature of memory for driving generally, the principle aim of the thesis as a whole it to decide whether memory for driving situations is related subjective risk at the time.
In order to compare risk and memory it is necessary to have the two available for the same well defined events.
This creates the constraint that the situations recalled should be those at which risk ratings were given.
Such situations should also be those for which objective statistics are available.
This means that the fundamental unit of analysis, both for this study and for most of the other studies reported in this thesis, is the junction.
This has the advantage of being an area for which accident statistics are routinely recorded as well as being easy to specify to subjects and involving many of the more interesting aspects of driving.
It is not completely clear what the predictions of the literature on arousal and memory would be for this task.
One possible prediction might be based on the inverted-U relationship between arousal and performance, this would imply that with increasing risk memory would first improve and then decline.
However, it is not clear where on this hypothetical curve normal driving would lie, thus both enhancements or impairments of memory with increasing risk could be explained within this framework.
A more specific prediction might be produced on the basis of Easterbrook's hypothesis, this would state that memory for central details would be enhanced with increasing risk, while memory for peripheral details would be impaired.
Although there has been some ambiguity in previous research about the central-peripheral distinction, it is relatively clear in this case that central should refer to the information which is actually required for the task of driving, the remainder being peripheral.
Method
Subjects
These were 30 drivers who had responded to an advertisement placed in a local newspaper.
Subjects ranged in age from 21 to 61 and all had held a full British driving licence for at least three years.
They were divided into three groups by reported average annual mileage and the groups were balanced for age and the number of years licensed as shown in Table 3.1.
There were 5 men and 5 women in each group.
Stimuli/Apparatus
Subjects drove a Vauxhall Astra along a 21.4 mile route in and around Cambridge, see Figure 3.1.
The route started with approximately 4 miles of fairly quiet roads (not shown in Figure 3.1) to allow the subjects to get used to the handling of the car and to practise performing the two judgment tasks.
The main route was chosen to include 40 junctions representing a range of different junction types, traffic flows, and accident histories.
Further details of the 40 junctions including accident histories and mean annual traffic flow figures are given with an enlarged map of the route in Appendix 1.1.
A Panasonic F-10 video camera was attached to the passenger's seat head rest and this was used to record an unobstructed view straight ahead through the windscreen during the drive.
The camera was focused on infinity and positioned near the mid-line of the car.
Procedure
Subjects were tested individually in a session lasting approximately 90 minutes.
The main study consisted of two phases as follows:
Judgment Phase:
Subjects drove the car once around the route shown in Figure 3.1.
Directions were given by the experimenter who was seated in the rear of the vehicle.
At each of the 40 junctions the driver made two judgments.
A junction where judgments were required was signalled by the experimenter sounding a tone when the vehicle was at the centre of the junction.
The two judgment tasks were described to them before the drive as follows.
Risk rating:
‘Give a rating on a scale from 1 to 20 to indicate the risk you are feeling at the moment the tone sounds.
A rating of 1 would mean that you feel there is no possible way in which an accident could occur in this situation, a rating of 20 would mean that you feel that you could be involved in an accident at any moment.’
Accident estimate:
‘I have obtained the police accident reports for each junction that you will drive through and have counted all accidents that have been reported in the last three years on any part of the junction.
I want you to estimate this figure for each individual junction.
I have included all accidents involving at least one motor vehicle, sometimes these will also have included pedestrians or cyclists.
Remember that minor accidents not involving injury are not normally reported to the police.
No more than 20 accidents have been reported at any junction on the route, so your estimates should not exceed this figure.’
Drivers were asked to give the risk rating immediately they heard the tone and it was emphasized that this rating should be one of what they were already feeling when they heard the tone rather than a subsequent assessment of the risk present.
They were, however, encouraged to delay their accident estimate until they had thought specifically about how busy the junction would normally be and how it might appear in other conditions.
Although subjects gave the risk rating immediately on hearing the tone it was stressed that their safety should be the main consideration, thus they should not attempt to perform any judgment task until they felt comfortable with the driving situation.
It was also stressed that they were free to terminate the experiment at any time.
The two judgment tasks were practised twice on the roads preceding the actual test route, once when turning left at a large roundabout and once when turning right at an unsignalized T-junction.
The drives were all conducted in daylight avoiding rush hours.
Subjects were told that the quality or safety of their driving was not being assessed and they were encouraged to drive as normally as possible.
Before starting the drive and after completing it subjects filled in a questionnaire in which they were required to rate their ability at 12 different standard driving manoeuvres.
These were the 12 different manoeuvres required during the drive.
These ratings were collected for ongoing research in debiasing (see for example Groeger and Chapman 1990) and they will not be described further in this thesis.
Recall Phase:
The recall part of the experiment started approximately 50 minutes after the first and 10 minutes after the last of the junctions had been driven through (the exact times varied considerably depending on driving style and traffic conditions).
Subjects were asked to attempt to remember the 40 junctions for which they had given ratings.
Subjects were asked to bring a particular junction to mind and then describe the events at that junction in as much detail as possible.
Subjects were asked to continue describing different junctions until no more stood out in their memory but not to attempt to recall all the junctions, nor to deliberately recall them in the order they had been driven through.
These descriptions were tape recorded.
Subjects were finally shown a map on which the route was marked and they were asked to indicate those sections of the route which they had previously known.
All subjects were paid for their participation in the study.
The video records of each drive were subsequently analysed to obtain various additional measures described below.
Results
The drive through the 40 junctions (not including the practice section) took an average of 40 minutes the shortest time being 34 minutes and the longest being 57 minutes.
The video records of two of the 30 drives were incomplete following equipment failures, thus those measures requiring the complete video record are reported for 28 subjects only.
The results are divided into two main sections.
First the results from the judgment tasks are reported and relationships between these judgments and a variety of objective measures are explored.
In the second section the recall results are reported and relationships between risk and recall are analysed.
Judgment Tasks:
Subjects generally found the judgment tasks relatively easy to perform and were able to give their first rating immediately upon hearing the tone in almost all cases.
One subject used a wide range of accident estimates but gave a risk rating of one at all 40 junctions.
He was the only subject who gave this pattern of judgments.
In view of the potential theoretical significance of this pattern of responses this data was included in the following analyses.
The overall mean risk rating was 4.20, standard deviation 3.89, the overall mean accident estimate was 7.40, standard deviation 4.62.
Table 3.2 gives the mean risk ratings and mean accident estimates for the 40 junctions together with a number of other measures that will be described later.
The actual distribution of responses across the 20 possible risk ratings and 21 possible accident estimates is shown in Figure 3.2.
In addition to demonstrating the marked reluctance of subjects to use odd numbers in the middle of the range, the figure makes it clear that the distributions of the two ratings were rather different, the modal risk rating was 1 whereas the modal accident estimate was 10.
An analysis of variance with two within subject factors, judgment task and junction, and two between subject factors, sex and annual mileage group, shows that the overall difference between the two judgment tasks is significant, F(1,24)=27.27, p<0.01.
As was expected there is also a main effect of junction, F(39,936)=13.12, p<0.01, more importantly there was an interaction between judgment task and junction, F(39,936)=3.89, p<0.01.
This suggests that subjects were able to dissociate the two scales where appropriate, for example, junction 17, entering a dual carriageway from a slip road, received the fourth highest mean risk rating of the 40 junctions, 6.47.
However, it received a mean accident estimate, 6.90, which is below the average for the 40 junctions.
This appears to be an accurate assessment of the fact that although joining high speed roads almost always feels dangerous there had in fact been relatively few accidents recorded at that site in the three year period studied.
There was also a significant sex by annual mileage group by junction interaction F(78,936)=1.42, p<0.05.
This complex interaction is not large and is difficult to interpret, more important is the fact that no other interactions or main effects were significant at the 0.05 level.
This indicates that there are no large overall differences in the judgment tasks dependent on the sex or annual mileage of the driver.
The Department of Transportation for Cambridgeshire County Council provided police accident reports for each of the previous three years (1986-8) over the entire route.
These descriptions were analysed to calculate a measure of the objective risk of accident at a junction.
The measure used was simply the total number of accidents reported at a junction in this period.
Accidents were included in the total if at least one motor vehicle was involved and the reported site of the accident was within 50 yards of the centre of the junction.
The Department also provided current (1989) traffic flow figures for most of the roads used in the study.
The figures available were measures of the average total traffic flow recorded over a 16 hour period on weekdays (excluding Fridays).
From these figures it was possible to calculate the number of vehicles passing through each of the 40 junctions over the same period.
In a few cases data were not available for some of the more minor roads entering a junction.
In such cases estimates were made based on overall patterns of traffic flow, site knowledge and data from similar roads nearby.
The total number of accidents and the calculated average traffic flow at a junction are given for the 40 junctions in Table 3.2.
An additional measure of objective risk which is similar to the one used in the Watts and Quimby (1980) study was obtained by simply dividing the number of accidents by the traffic flow (note that the units of this measure are essentially arbitrary).
Relationships between Measures
The first question of interest is whether the various measures of risk are related to one another, this is initially addressed by calculating correlations between the four measures.
Rather than simply obtaining average values for the 40 junctions and correlating the averages, hence obscuring the variance in individual subjects’ responses, the procedure described in Dunlap, Jones & Bittner (1983) was followed and average correlations were calculated.
Correlations between pairs of measures across the 40 junctions were calculated for each subject individually, the 30 correlations obtained in each case were then averaged using Fisher's z transformation (Silver and Dunlap 1987).
Correlations calculated this way are generally smaller than those that would have been obtained by correlating the averages but because they do not average out the variance from different subjects they provide a more realistic assessment of the size of an effect for any individual subject.
These correlations are given in Table 3.3 taking the degrees of freedom as the sum of those for individual subjects (Guilford & Fruchter 1973).
This naturally produces very large degrees of freedom meaning that even relatively small correlations may be significantly different from zero.
The proportion of the total variance such correlations account for is of course small and their importance should be judged accordingly.
Accident estimates and risk ratings are strongly related for individual subjects.
Both are also related to the measures of objective risk.
For both measures (total accidents and accidents per 1000 vehicles) the correlation with accident estimates is significantly higher than that with risk ratings (for total accidents t(1137)=4.23, p<0.01, for accidents per 1000 vehicles t(1137)=2.74, p<0.01).
For both accident estimates and risk ratings the correlation with total accidents is significantly higher than that with accidents per 1000 vehicles, t(1137)=9.79, p<0.01 and t(1137)=7.13, p<0.01 respectively.
For accident estimates this is as would be expected since subjects were specifically estimating the total number.
For risk ratings, however, it is interesting that feelings of risk should be less closely related to a measure of objective risk which corrects for traffic flow than one which fails to.
Indeed, while it is significantly greater than zero, p<0.05, a correlation of 0.076 accounts for an extremely small amount of the total variance in subjects’ risk ratings.
To better interpret these relationships correlations with a number of other variables were considered.
In addition to the judgment results a number of additional measures were taken from the videos made during the drive.
Individual junctions were defined by two fixed points which could be readily identified from the video record.
The first point was always sufficiently before the junction such that signposts for the junction were included in the video and the second point was approximately 100 yards after the junction.
The time taken to pass between the two points was recorded from the video for each junction and the number of vehicles visible in that period was also recorded.
The time taken to pass through a junction ranged from 11 seconds to 4 minutes 31 seconds, mean 41.4 seconds.
The number of vehicles recorded at a junction ranged from none to 105, mean 10.4.
The distances between the two points were measured for each junction so that the driver's mean speed at a junction could also be estimated.
Table 3.2 gives the main measures for each of the 40 junctions, the measure of recall is described later.
The measure of previous knowledge here is the percentage of the 30 subjects who reported knowing that junction at least moderately well previously.
Prior knowledge ranged from seven of the subjects who previously knew all 40 of the junctions down to one subject who previously knew just six, the mean number known was 29.6.
Table 3.4 is an extension to Table 3.3 including the correlations with four further variables.
Correlations with time at junction, average speed over junction and the number of vehicles seen at the junction are calculated from the video record for 28 subjects only.
The correlations given with whether the junction was previously known or not is a point biserial correlation with data from all 30 subjects potentially available, data was coded as 1 if the junction was previously known and 0 if unknown.
A more comprehensive table showing correlations between variables an their associated degrees of freedom is given in Appendix 1.2.
Once again some of the correlations, while significantly greater than zero are still extremely small.
However, it is clear that a major factor in both risk and accident estimates is how busy the junction was.
The negative correlations between risk measures and the speed at junctions seem initially counterintuitive, however, speed is strongly negatively correlated with the number of vehicle seen, r(1064)=-0.564.
It is likely that the important point is simply that busy junctions take longer to drive through, thus they gave rise to lower average speeds.
Any tendency for driving fast to feel dangerous was hence obscured by the more substantial effect of business.
Summary of Judgment Results
Ratings of subjective risk appeared to be relatively easy for most subjects to give.
These ratings were significantly lower than the accident estimates and interacted differently with junctions, nonetheless, risk ratings and accident estimates were highly intercorrelated.
Risk ratings and accident estimates were both significantly correlated with the two measures of objective risk, time spent at the junction, vehicles seen, and the average driving speed at the junction (negatively).
In all cases the correlation of accident estimate with the other variables was higher than their correlation with risk ratings.
Recall Phase:
None of the subjects reported having expected a memory test and most reported finding it extremely difficult.
Several subjects reported that they felt that they would be able to give far more information if they were permitted to recall the junctions in the order in which they had been driven.
Coding the Descriptions
Each subject's descriptions were subsequently compared to the video tape of the drive.
Because these videos were not available for two subjects the recall data is reported for 28 subjects only.
The first process in scoring the data was to assign descriptions to particular junctions, this was done by the experimenter.
About 80 percent of the total descriptions could be unambiguously assigned to one of the 40 junctions, either because the subject knew the road names or described the junction or events in sufficient detail for the description to be uniquely associated with one situation on their video.
In nine cases a subject described a situation which was not at one of the 40 junctions of interest, these were either descriptions of junctions on the practice route or events which occurred between junctions on the route, these were not coded.
This left a total of 171 descriptions of junctions from the 28 subjects.
To ensure that descriptions corresponded to memories for events from the drive that subjects had just completed, as recorded on the video tape, descriptions were eliminated from the analysis if they included no correct details about the actual events at the junction.
This was designed to be a very generous criterion, minimal examples of correct details could be ‘We didn't have to wait at the lights’ or ‘There were several cars ahead of us’.
Simply describing the junction itself, even in considerable detail, was not sufficient for a description to be scored as a correct memory of the drive.
This was specified because such descriptions might reflect only recruitment of previous knowledge about the junction.
The reason that an extremely lenient criterion was adopted was simply that subjects generally gave very little detail about the situations they actually recalled correctly.
Examples of the transcribed tape for two of the subjects and the way in which they were scored are given in Appendix 1.3.
Because there was relatively little detail given and there were generally so few junctions remembered correctly, no attempt was made to analyse the types of information that were actually given in the descriptions, specifically, no attempt was made to classify details as central or peripheral.
It was rarely possible to unambiguously identify incorrect memories, where descriptions were produced which did not clearly correspond to any junction on the video there was usually no way to decide what event the description represented an incorrect memory for.
Such descriptions may have represented incorrect initial perceptions, confabulations, memories for previous drives, confusions between events at two or more similar junctions or correct descriptions of information not captured by the video camera.
Because of the ambiguity in interpreting data of this type and the relatively small amount of it encountered the analysis will concentrate solely on descriptions which were scored as correct recalls.
There were 136 descriptions of junctions that were coded as correct memories of the drive.
For the analysis of the recall data the basic unit of analysis will simply be whether a junction was correctly remembered or not.
No distinctions will be made between the amounts and types of detail actually given for particular junctions.
Recall Results
Subjects correctly recalled a mean of 4.9 junctions each (min 2, max 8).
Some junctions were clearly recalled more often than others (Cochran's Q=220.5, df=39, p<0.01), ranging from junction 17, entering a dual carriageway from a slip road, which was correctly recalled by 14 of the 28 subjects to 11 junctions which were never correctly recalled.
Seven of these 11 were junctions at which the driver had simply gone straight ahead past a minor road.
To see which variables were related to a subject recalling a junction, point biserial correlations were calculated with each junction being scored as a 1 for a subject that recalled it and 0 for a subject that did not.
Relationships with all the variables obtained and the degrees of freedom used in assessing significance are given in Appendix 1.2.
Correlations across junction variables are all calculated individually for each subject and then averaged using Fisher's z transformation.
Only those correlations which were found to be significantly greater than zero at the one percent level will be discussed here.
The highest correlation of any variable with recall was the correlation with risk rating, r(1064)=0.294.
There were also significant correlations with the actual accident statistics, r(1064)=0.142, average weekday traffic flow, r(1064)=0.236, accident estimate, r(1064)=0.278, the time spent at the junction, r(1064)=0.246, the number of vehicles visible in the film, r(1064)=0.201, and the average speed at the junction, r(1064)=-0.118, all of which are to a large degree measures of how much would actually have been happening at the junction.
Note that there is no significant relationship between whether a subject recalled a particular junction and whether they had known it previously, r(phi)=0.022, df=1064.
The recall instructions were specifically designed to make it difficult for subjects to use previous knowledge in the task and attempts were made to prevent them from mentally retracing the route, a strategy which several of them would otherwise have adopted.
The lack of relationship between previous knowledge and recall suggests that the procedure was successful in preventing this.
The most interesting relationship in the data is the relatively high correlation between risk ratings and subsequent recall and it is worth investigating this in more detail.
The correlation between risk and recall remains significant even when the effect of any other single variable is partialled out.
Nonetheless, there is more than one pattern of results which could produce a significant average correlation between risk and recall.
One possibility is that certain junctions are both intrinsically more memorable and more risky than others.
A second, and more interesting, possibility is that subjects are actually recalling the situations in which they personally felt at risk irrespective of any other features of the junction.
If this were the case then a junction would only be more likely to be recalled if the subject had actually felt at risk even if they knew it to be a generally dangerous junction.
The first possibility can be assessed by using the mean risk ratings and the percentage of subjects recalling a junction given in Table 3.2.
There is a very high correlation across the 40 junctions between risk and recall, r(38)=0.791, p<0.01.
Note that the actual magnitude of this correlation coefficient is partly a result of reducing the variance in the data by correlating averages rather than averaging correlations.
This demonstrates that there are indeed certain junctions which both tend to be rated as risky and tend to be recalled by many subjects.
Simply calculating correlations across the 40 junctions there are also significant correlations of recall with accident estimate, r(38)=0.722, p<0.01, the time spent at the junction, r(38)=0.690, p<0.01, the number of vehicles seen, r(38)=0.517, p<0.01, and the actual accident statistics at the junction, r(38)=0.310, p<0.05.
It thus seems likely that the junctions which are recalled may be simply the large congested ones, ones which also happen to be risky.
To assess directly the differences between situations which were recalled and those which were not recalled each subject's mean accident estimate and risk rating was calculated separately for situations which they recalled and those they did not.
These mean ratings, together with the number of vehicles at the junction and the time spent there, are presented in Table 3.5.
The relationship found in the correlations is confirmed, risk ratings were a mean 2.6 points higher for the junctions subsequently recalled and accident estimates were 2.9 points higher.
Similarly, significantly more traffic was seen and the junction took significantly longer to pass through.
This confirms that although the junctions a subject recalls are the ones at which they reported subjective risk, they are also the busy ones and the ones the subject regards as likely to be the most dangerous in other conditions; this means that actual feelings of risk may not be solely responsible for the effect.
However, the above pattern of results does not exclude the possibility that feelings of risk were directly associated with the enhanced recall, to assess this possibility directly it is necessary to use the junction as the unit of analysis rather than the subject.
Table 3.6 shows the comparison for each junction of the occasions on which it was recalled correctly with those on which it was not.
To make this comparison the analysis was limited to the 29 junctions which were recalled by at least one subject.
The effect of making the comparison within junctions is to exclude any factors intrinsic to the junction (e.g. its size, location, distinctiveness) from the results.
If the relationship between recall and other measures is entirely mediated by characteristics of the different junctions we would expect to find that within an individual junction there would be no consistent differences between those occasions when it was recalled and those when it was not recalled on any of the other variables.
In fact there is a significant difference in risk ratings, the difference between ratings, 1.2 points, is smaller than that when the analysis is done by subjects but is still present.
The fact that there is a difference comes as no surprise, after all, a completely empty, uneventful drive through a junction would be expected to be both less memorable and less risky than an occasion when the junction was full of traffic.
The surprise is that there are in fact no significant differences between any of the other three variables when this comparison is made.
The difference for accident estimates approaches significance but the differences in vehicles seen or time at junction do not.
This seems to imply that drivers’ ratings of subjective risk are related to their subsequent recall of junctions in a way that is at least partially independent of the actual amount of traffic present and their assessment of the likelihood of accidents at the junction in other circumstances.
One final question to answer is what form the relationship between risk ratings and memory takes.
This is not trivial to assess since the measure of recall is binary and there are relatively few points at the high levels of risk.
However, if the number of situations correctly recalled is divided by the number not recalled at each level of risk it is possible to get some picture of the relationship.
The solid line in Figure 3.3 shows this relationship, data is aggregated into pairs of adjacent risk ratings to avoid zeros appearing in any category.
For risk ratings above about eight this appears to demonstrate a fairly clear inverted-U relationship, however, it should be remembered that higher points on the risk scale are based on relatively few data points.
The total number of observations for each of the ten points in increasing order of risk rating are as follows: 532, 230, 146, 75, 64, 24, 13, 16, 9, 11.
A more important problem with this treatment of the results is that it assumes that any particular rating means the same for all subjects.
In fact, the final point on this graph is almost exclusively attributable to one subject who gave a rating of 17 or over on nine separate occasions during the drive.
With this subject's data removed the results look rather different (the dotted line in Figure 3.3), the three remaining occasions on which ratings of 19 or 20 were given (now from three different subjects) were actually never recalled, however, it would be unwise to base any firm conclusions on results from just these three situations.
Summary of Recall Results
The overall amount of information given in the descriptions was relatively low.
This may partly reflect the fact that many aspects of the situation (road layout, signs, shops etc.) were deliberately excluded on the basis that they could have been obtained from previous local knowledge.
The lack of detail in recalls made it impossible to adequately divide information into central and peripheral, however, in the sense that most information given was related to events on the road, the information which was recalled should probably be categorized as largely central to the task of driving.
The probability of correctly recalling a junction appears to be related to many of the same things as subjective risk — traffic seen, time spent at the junction, objective and estimated risk.
However, the most striking result is the relationship between the ratings of subjective risk themselves and the subsequent probability of recall.
Not only is there a significant relationship between the two, but this relationship remains significant even when comparisons are made within individual junctions, a procedure which leaves no significant effect on recall of estimated risk, number of vehicles seen or the time spent at the junction.
There appears to be some evidence that the relationship between ratings of subjective risk and the probability of subsequent recall is not linear.
For risk ratings of eight or lower there does not appear to be any relationship, recall being consistently rare, this of course constitutes the bulk of the data, 983 of the 1,120 situations scored.
Above this point there is a dramatic increase in the probability of recall with increasing risk ratings.
Because there were relatively few situations which received the highest risk ratings it is not possible to clearly assess whether this increase continues for all ratings, there is some evidence that it may not since once one unusual subject's data was removed the three situations receiving the highest subjective risk ratings were in fact never recalled.
Differences Between Subjects:
Although individual differences are not the primary concern of this work and the number of subjects is relatively small, it is interesting to see what effects may by present.
Three measures not previously reported were also collected.
The first of these was the free speed at which a subject chose to drive on an unobstructed section of road.
Since it was impossible to guarantee that any section of normal roads would be free from other traffic, speeds were calculated from the video on four separate sections of road.
The sections used were shortly after junctions 2, 4, 17 and 39.
The driving was considered to be unobstructed if there was no other vehicle immediately ahead in the film.
This was the case for at least one of the sites in all 28 films.
For each subject the free speed was calculated as a proportion of the prevailing speed limit at the site and where there was more than one site available the average value was taken.
Nine of the 28 subjects were found to have been exceeding the speed limit on at least one of the four occasions.
The other two subject variables of interest were collected in a subsequent experiment and were thus available for only 25 of the subjects from this study.
These were the number accidents the driver reported having being involved in over the past five years and the number of near misses they had experienced in the previous year.
Both these numbers were given as part of a short questionnaire about their driving histories.
In addition the following details were known about each driver: age, sex, annual mileage, and the number of years they had held a driving licence.
Correlations between all these variables and the various measures used in the study are given in Appendix 1.2, only the most potentially interesting ones will be considered here.
Correlations were calculated across the largest number of subjects possible in each case, this can be 30, 28 or 25, see the degrees of freedom in the correlation table in Appendix 1.2.
There were no significant correlations between the number of junctions recalled and any of the subject measures, the largest value was a correlation of -0.367, d.f.
=23, p=0.071, with the number of accidents reported over the last five years.
This might suggest that people with better memories for driving situations have fewer accidents.
However, the number of subjects is very small for such an analysis and self reported accident estimates themselves are not a very reliable measure.
There was a significant correlation between the number of accidents reported and the mean free speed, r(23)=0.620, p<0.01, and a negative correlation with the number of years licensed, r(23)=-0.414, p<0.05.
The number of near misses reported was significantly correlated with annual mileage, r(23)=0.418, p<0.05 and with the mean accident estimate given during the drive, r(23)=0.414, p<0.05.
These and the other subject correlations in the appendix all appear to be broadly consistent with the expectations for this type of study.
Given the small number of subjects in the sample and the fact that there are no significant correlations between subject variables and either of the variables of particular interest, risk ratings and number of junctions recalled, they will not be considered further.
Discussion
Types of Risk:
This study was designed to make a distinction between three different concepts of risk: objective, estimated and subjective, the variable of particular interest being subjective risk.
One of the questions most central to this research was whether drivers can generally report fluctuating levels of subjective risk.
In fact subjects generally found it relatively easy to understand the rating required and found no difficulty in using it thus the general conclusion from this study is that drivers do report fluctuating levels of subjective risk.
However, several caveats need to be attached to this conclusion.
The fact that subjects used a range of numbers may of course only reflect the demands placed on them by the experiment.
Given 20 numbers to use, subjects may have assumed that the quantity the experimenter was interested in must vary in some way, if their own feelings did not, they may simply have based their responses on aspects of the environment which did vary, e.g. their speed, proximity to other vehicles etc.
In addition one of the subjects did not show any fluctuations in risk ratings, in debriefing he explained that he certainly could imagine many risky situations, but he had not encountered any during the drive.
Although this could be seen as evidence that subjective risk was not present for this subject, it could equally be regarded as a self presentational bias on the part of the subject who may have felt that feeling risk would imply dangerous driving.
Subjective risk ratings, surprisingly, were only very weakly related to the objective risk of accident as assessed by the actual number of accidents divided by the average traffic flow.
The correlation of 0.37 reported by Watts & Quimby (1980) was of course based on the averaging of ranked data from all subjects.
Applying this procedure to the data from this experiment would give a correlation of 0.16, still rather lower than the figure from Watts and Quimby.
The reason for this may largely be the types of road used in the two studies, the roads in the Watts and Quimby study were divided approximately equally between rural and suburban areas and thus provides much greater variations in traffic flow, and hence objective risk, than those used in this study.
Watts and Quimby also used many sites which were not at junctions, sites which generally ranked extremely low on both subjective and objective risk.
These factors increase the overall spread in their data and may have allowed a higher correlation between the measures.
The fact that subjects could report fluctuating levels of subjective risk does little to discriminate between theories of risk in driving largely because these theories do not make sufficiently specific predictions about this subject.
The fact that there were generally fluctuations in rated subjective risk might appear to contradict zero-risk theory.
However, the overall distribution of ratings, the majority being very low numbers with the occasional higher one, might equally be seen as supporting the idea that subjects are generally feeling no risk at all but occasionally give a high number with the activation of the ‘subjective risk monitor’(Summala, 1976).
Similarly, although Wilde (1988) claims that a potentially variable level of subjective risk is necessary for RHT, a prediction of RHT is that subjects would modify their behaviour in order to actually experience constant levels of subjective risk which would only alter if they changed their ‘target level of risk’.
The success subjects should be expected to have in this matching process and the situations under which they would change their target levels are not clear.
Subjects’ estimates of risk appeared to be broadly sensitive to differences in the actual accident statistics at the range of junctions encountered.
The average correlation observed, 0.32, between a subject's estimates and the true figures is only slightly lower than the correlation of 0.4 reported in Brehmer (1987) and any difference could be accounted for by the different range of actual accident statistics used in the two studies.
The variables which are most highly correlated with estimated risk are the subjective risk rating given at the same time (r=0.512) and average traffic flow as recorded by Cambridgeshire County Council (r=0.398, see Appendix 1).
Since the intercorrelation of these two variables is only 0.251, it appears that risk estimates may have been sensitive separately to both the feelings of danger experienced and the general amount of traffic at the junction.
Recall Performance:
The generally low levels of memory which had been expected were obtained.
However, this may have largely been caused by the difficulty of the actual recall task.
The memory task may have been made inappropriately difficult by preventing subjects from using strategies such as mentally retracing the route and scoring as correct memories only aspects of the situation which could not have been provided from previous knowledge.
Indeed, there is no doubt that with appropriate cueing subjects could have recalled considerably more information about many aspects of the drive.
In many cases the actual amount of information given in the recalls was minimal, limited to whether a subject had to wait at the junction and whether there was other traffic around at the time.
This is consistent with the types of variables which were correlated with recall of a particular junction — the amount of traffic seen and the time spent there.
It is also consistent with the type of situation which was almost never recalled — going straight ahead past a minor road.
There are two clearly different ways in which the failure to recall such situations could be explained.
One could either argue that the lack of action required by the subject at the time prevented any memories from being encoded, or that the lack of aspects of the situation which were specific to that particular drive made it extremely difficult to actually retrieve a memory for it.
One surprising aspect of the recall results was that they did not seem to be related to previous knowledge of the junctions, it had seemed possible that even simple junctions would be memorable if they had not been previously encountered.
This could have been explained either as an effect of the greater attention required to drive through unfamiliar junctions, or by the novelty of the stimuli making them more distinctive in memory.
Any such effects may, however, have been countered by the difficulty in uniquely describing a junction which was not previously known.
This issue will be discussed further in Chapter 5 where the predictions of schema theory in relation to memory for driving are considered.
If any relationship did exist between recall and previous knowledge it may simply have been obscured by the binary nature of scoring junctions as either known or not known and the fact that most of the subjects actually knew most of the junctions previously.
Risk and Recall:
There is no doubt that subjects in this study were more likely to recall the situations in which they had experienced risk.
This result was particularly striking when junctions were considered individually and it became clear that this relationship was at least partly independent of the amount of time spent at the junction, number of vehicles seen and the judgment of estimated risk made at the same time.
A number of different theoretical accounts for this finding will now be considered in turn.
Experimenter Effects
The simplest account for the relationship between risk and recall in this study was that subjects recalled the risky situations because they knew it was an experiment about risk, this knowledge could have affected their performance both at encoding and at retrieval.
While subjects were actually driving around they were required to give risk ratings, this may have caused them to concentrate unusually on the risky situations and think about them to a much greater degree than they would have normally.
Added to this, at the time of retrieval subjects may have simply assumed that since this was an experiment about risk, the experimenter really wanted them to recall the risky situations.
Because of this subjects may have ignored memories of mundane situations and concentrated instead on recalling the ones which they remembered as risky.
With a study designed the way this one was there is very little that can be done to decide whether this relatively uninteresting possibility is the major factor determining the results, the studies in the remainder of this thesis are, however, designed to address this problem.
A von Restorff Effect
Even if subjects are deliberately attempting to recall the risky situations it would still be interesting that they are able to do so in a way that makes them distinct from all the other situations encountered.
One thing which could account for a greater distinctiveness in memory of risky situations would be the idea that risky situations constitute a small number of rather unusual items among a large number of more similar ones.
This would of course be analogous to the typical von Restorff effect in which a single distinctive item is better remembered than the rest of a list.
Certainly risky situations did appear to be unusual events, the top 50% of the rating scale was only used for 6.5% of the situations encountered.
Equally importantly, those which were remembered appear to have been unusual in more than the fact that they were busier than other situations, risk appears to have had a quite separate effect.
An Inverted-U Relationship
Some of the difficulties with interpreting results from many experiments as supportive of an inverted-U relationship were discussed in Chapter 2.
However, if a full inverted-U is observed in a single experiment as in some of the early experiments on task performance and arousal, the evidence appears to be particularly clear.
On initial inspection the curve in Figure 3.3 appears to show just such an inverted-U relationship, however, on closer scrutiny it is clear that the points which represent a downturn in the curve are not based on enough data to make them reliable.
It is possible that there is quite genuinely some impairment of recall for the most risky situations, however, such risky events were simply extremely rare.
The only way to test this possibility would be to have data from many more such risky events.
It is perhaps fortunate that such events are in fact rare and it would clearly not be ethical to increase their frequency, instead, the ascending portion of the curve which is clearly present will be considered in more detail.
This portion of the curve is consistent with the idea that in normal driving levels of risk are low and that the increases in this level observed in most of this study correspond to levels still below the optimal level for performance on the memory task.
Easterbrook's Hypothesis
A mechanism which was proposed in Chapter 2 for explaining the inverted-U relationship was that of attention focusing occurring at higher levels of arousal in line with Easterbrook's hypothesis.
While this may provide some explanation of improvements in memory with small increases in risk, the clearer implication of attention focusing is that the types of detail remembered in high arousal conditions should be more central than those in low arousal conditions (Christianson, in press).
Although it might have been possible to attempt some form of categorisation of the types of detail which were recalled at different risk levels, it is not clear that the data from this study are really powerful enough to support such an analysis.
Relatively little detail was actually available from the recalls and the between subjects variability was extremely large.
Another difficulty with making distinctions about types of detail given is that the way the recall test was structured may have encouraged subjects to report mostly central details and no attempt was made to interrogate subjects’ memories for details which may have been peripheral.
These problems are addressed in later studies.
Conclusions
The most important finding from this study was simply that drivers were able to comfortably give ratings of subjective risk.
These ratings seemed to vary in a way which was related to variables such as the amount of traffic present in the situation and estimated risk.
Subjects were able to recall many of the junctions they had driven through, though the quality of this recall was variable.
There was strong evidence for a link between the probability of recalling a junction and the level of subjective risk reported by the subject when driving through the junction.
However, because of the limitations in the design of the study it was not clear to what extent the link between subjective risk and recall was caused by less interesting factors such as the type of memory test used, the fact that risk ratings were previously given by the drivers, and the expectations subjects may have had of what the study was about.
In order to control these factors and investigate the relationship between risk and memory further, most of the remaining studies reported in this thesis use simulated driving in a laboratory setting.
Chapter 4
Risk and Recognition in the Laboratory
In the previous study subjectively risky situations were more likely to be subsequently recalled than their less risky counterparts.
However, the reasons for this were not clear.
Making risk assessments while they were driving may have caused drivers to think about risks in the situations to a greater extent than they would have in the course of normal driving.
Moreover, the use of recall as a measure of memory may have meant that subjects were using thoughts about risk as a retrieval cue, indeed they may have assumed that it was this information that the experimenter was most interested in.
Although risk seemed to be the variable with the most direct relationship to the probability of a driver recalling a situation there were many other aspects of each situation which were not analysed.
Since such information will differ from one drive to the next it is difficult to assess the role which this variable information plays in memory.
The previous study allowed the collection of around 20 hours of video tape of driving in Cambridge under normal conditions.
The purpose of the study described in this chapter was to use these tapes to explore drivers’ memories for these situations when they were viewed under laboratory conditions.
Using a recognition test to measure memory for the stimuli makes it possible to assess any general biases in responding separately from subjects’ actual ability to correctly recognize individual stimuli.
It has the additional advantage that every subject can be shown identical films, thus interpretations of differences in performance are not limited to comparisons between junctions.
One problem with the type of on-road research used in Study 1 is that each situation encountered is unique to a particular driver and can not be repeated.
This meant that in order to have a measure of subjective risk for a situation it was necessary to have subjects give ratings in each case.
In a simulated setting, however, it is possible to produce identical situations for all drivers, this means that much greater control is available over the precise testing circumstances for each subject.
Additionally, if it is found that feelings of risk in the simulator are similar to those experienced when actually driving, and there is reasonable consistency between subjects in assessments, it is possible to infer the feelings of risk a subject is likely to experience when confronted with a particular situation without actually asking the subject to give ratings at the time.
Study 2
Recognition Memory in a Video-Based Experiment.
The purpose of Study 2 was to carry out a laboratory task which allowed measurement of feelings of risk and a controlled test of memory for driving situations.
The driving simulator at the Applied Psychology Unit allows subjects to sit in the shell of a car and watch videos of driving situations projected at near life size.
To be able to compare results from the simulator with those previously obtained on the road it was decided to have subjects perform precisely the same judgment tasks that had been used in Study 1, giving ratings of subjective risk and estimates of accident statistics.
To provide more easily quantifiable measures of memory performance, Study 2 used a recognition paradigm.
Piloting recognition tests for films gathered in Study 1 made it clear that for subjects who know Cambridge moderately well recognizing a particular Cambridge junction from among distractors is relatively easy, thus to avoid ceiling effects it was decided to use multiple different films of various individual junctions as recognition stimuli.
Method
Subjects:
The subjects were 36 drivers, 18 of them men, 18 of them women, who had responded to the newspaper advertisement described for Study 1.
Twenty-five of these subjects had taken part in Study 1.
They were divided into three groups on the basis of self-reported average annual mileage and the groups were balanced according to age and number of years licensed as shown in Table 4.1.
There were 6 men and 6 women in each group.
All subjects were paid for their participation.
Stimuli:
The stimuli in this study were videos recorded during Study 1.
The video in each case showed an unobstructed view through the windscreen of a car during the drive through the junction.
Each video started sufficiently before the junction to allow signs for the junction to be seen and lasted until the car was approximately 100 yards past the junction.
The films were selected to show only 10 of the possible 40 junctions, details of the junctions chosen are given in Table 4.2.
The 10 junctions were chosen to represent a range of different junction and manoeuvre types and a corresponding range of mean risk ratings and accident estimates.
For each of the 10 junctions six films were chosen as exemplars of that particular junction.
These exemplars were chosen to reflect a range of different traffic situations within each junction and were intended to be representative of the full set of 28 films of each junction available from the drives in Study 1.
Films were excluded if weather conditions made viewing difficult, if for example the windscreen wipers were used, or if the total length of the film would exceed one minute.
Although the length of the film in seconds differs between exemplars, the six films of any particular junction show exactly the same distance travelled by the car between two fixed points.
Further details of the 60 films used in this study are given in Appendix 2.
Individual films were separated by a 10 second featureless blue field.
Films had no sound track but those shown in the judgment phase had a 1.5 second tone recorded in the middle of the manoeuvre at the point in the junction at which subjects had given ratings in Study 1.
Four different tapes were made, two for the judgment phase, two for the recognition phase.
Each tape contained 30 films, recognition tapes each contained 15 films from each of the two judgment tapes.
Apparatus:
Films were shown in the Applied Psychology Unit's driving simulator.
This is the front half of a Vauxhall Astra mounted in a darkened room with the driver's seat in its normal place but the windscreen glass removed.
All car controls are in place but subjects were not required to use them in this experiment.
Approximately four metres away from the driver's head position is a large white screen (1.5 metres high by 1.7 metres wide).
A Sony VPH-1040QM video projector is mounted under the bonnet of the car and projects onto the full extent of the screen.
Films were played on a Panasonic AG-6200 VHS video cassette recorder controlled by a Panasonic NV-A850 Auto Search Controller.
Procedure:
Subjects were tested individually in the driving simulator.
The experiment consisted of two phases, first a judgment phase and then a recognition phase, each phase lasted approximately 25 minutes in total.
Between the two phases subjects answered two brief questionnaires which together required approximately five minutes to complete.
The first questionnaire was about their driving experience including the questions about accidents and near misses that were reported in Study 1.
The second questionnaire was a revised version of the questionnaire given in Study 1 for ongoing work on debiasing.
Judgment phase:
Subjects watched 30 films, three exemplars of each of the 10 junctions.
When the subjects heard the bleep in the centre of each junction they performed the same two verbal rating tasks that were used in Study 1, first a risk rating, then an estimate for the actual accident statistics for the junction.
The phrasing of the questions and the scales used were as in Study 1.
Recognition Phase:
Subjects watched a further 30 films, again three exemplars of each of the 10 junctions.
Fifteen of the films, the targets, were exactly the same pieces of film that had been shown in the judgment phase.
The other 15 films were distractors, these were chosen from the exemplars of the same junctions which had not been seen by the subject before.
After each film was seen subjects had to decide whether they had seen the film section before or not and give a rating of their confidence in their decision.
Partial randomization of presentation order was achieved using the video controller.
On each tape the 30 stimuli were blocked into six groups of five films and the presentation order of these six groups was randomized for each subject with the constraint that no two exemplars of a single junction could appear consecutively.
Subjects were assigned to one of four different conditions with three subjects from each annual mileage group assigned to each condition.
The different conditions were shown different tapes as shown in Table 4.3.
This division of subjects meant that every individual film was rated by 18 subjects in the judgment phase and by 18 in the recognition phase, appearing to nine of the 18 subjects as a distractor and to the other nine as a target.
Results
The results are divided into two main sections.
In the first section the risk and accident judgment results are reported and compared with the on-road judgments from Study 1.
In the second section the recognition results are analysed using signal detection theory measures.
Initially overall relationships between risk and recognition sensitivity are sought.
Then, in a more exploratory analysis, relationships between risk and recognition within the exemplars of individual junctions are examined.
Judgment Results:
The mean risk ratings and accident estimates for the 60 films are given in Table 4.4 with the recognition results.
To obtain a general impression of differences among the stimuli and between the rating tasks the ten junctions were compared in an analysis of variance.
There were two within subject factors, judgment task and junction (the ratings from the three different exemplars of each junction were first averaged for each subject)
There was a significant main effect of judgment task, F(1,35)=5.22, p<0.05, mean accident estimates being 0.98 points higher than mean risk ratings.
There was also a main effect of junction F(9,315)=24.90, p<0.01 and an interaction between judgment task and junctions F(9,315)=4.362, p<0.01.
The data from Study 1 for the 10 junctions was used for comparison in two analyses of variance, each with one between subjects factor, Study 1 vs.
Study 2, and one within subjects factor, junction.
The data for risk ratings and accident estimates were considered separately and are plotted in Figures 4.1 and 4.2 respectively.
For risk ratings there was no significant main effect of study, F(1,64)=0.59 and no significant interaction between junction and study F(9,576)=1.77.
There was, however, still a significant main effect of junction F(9,476)=21.61, p<0.01.
For accident estimates there was a significant main effect of study (F(1,64)=7.88, p<0.01), the mean accident rating from Study 1 was 2.1 points higher than that from Study 2.
There was also a main effect of junction F(9,576)=28.35, p<0.01 but no significant interaction between experiment and junction (F(9,576)=1.14).
For comparison Figures 4.3 and 4.4 show the mean length of the films of each junction and the mean number of motor vehicles visible in the films.
Error bars show one standard deviation to give some idea of the variability among the six films.
As can be seen from the graphs, there is relatively little difference between the 10 junctions in the length of the films.
However, there are more substantial differences in the number of motor vehicles visible.
Across the full 60 films these two measures are nonetheless fairly strongly related to each other(r(58)=0.45, p<0.01).
There are significant correlations between risk ratings and both these measures, r(58)=0.32, p<0.05, with the length of the film and r(58)=0.39, p<0.01, with the number of vehicles visible.
Neither of the measures is significantly correlated with accident estimates, r(58)=0.16 with length of film and r(58)=0.17 with number of vehicles visible.
Discussion of Judgment Results
Subjects appeared to make judgments which were remarkably consistent with those given when actually driving.
The interaction between risk rating and accident estimate across the ten junctions suggests that subjects were able to sensibly dissociate the two judgment tasks in the laboratory setting.
Moreover, the lack of interactions between study and junction suggests that the stimuli used in Study 2 represent the full set of drives through the junctions well and that the judgment tasks being performed in the laboratory are similar to those performed on the road.
Subjects in this study clearly knew that they were not objectively ‘at risk’, nonetheless, their subjective ratings are consistent with them experiencing similar feelings to those they would have on the road.
The only significant difference between the studies in judgment task was the main effect for accident estimate.
As the 20 point scales being used are essentially arbitrary it is not clear what interpretation should be put on this difference.
Groeger and Chapman (1990) have demonstrated that different orienting tasks can dramatically alter the magnitude of accident estimates.
The use of both risk and accident scales may be calibrated by the subjects with respect to the range of stimuli they encounter.
Although subjects in this study viewed the films in randomized orders the subjects from Study 1 always performed the rating tasks first on relatively empty roads.
If subjects rated these junctions as relatively low on accident estimates then the types of transfer bias which Poulton (1989, p.238) describes could have caused the first few low judgments to inflate subsequent ones.
This would not necessarily occur for the risk ratings since these may have been initially quite high because of the drivers’ unfamiliarity with the car when giving the first ratings.
Unfortunately the practice ratings from Study 1 were not recorded so it is not possible to test this hypothesis.
Clearly, simply watching films in the simulator is not the same as actually driving.
Nonetheless it is an extremely engaging task — subjects would often press the brake pedal as the film showed the rapid approach to a junction, and some even reported feeling ‘slightly car sick’ by the end of the experiment.
The consistency of both ratings between actual driving and the laboratory does suggest that subjects performed these tasks in the same way in both cases.
It also seems likely that subjects ‘feel’ subjective risk in the laboratory in much the same way that they experience it when driving.
This suggests that it is sensible to explore aspects of subjective risk in the controlled environment of even this relatively crude simulator.
Recognition Results:
No subjects reported having expected a memory test even though many of them had already taken part in Study 1.
This was a consistent finding in all the research reported in this thesis, it seems to reflect the fact that even simulated driving tasks are highly engaging and quite unlike the tasks psychologists usually ask their subjects to perform.
This meant that even the more suspicious members of the Applied Psychology Unit's general subject panel who took part in later studies appeared to be genuinely surprised when they were given subsequent memory tests.
The mean number of hits was 9.2 and false alarms 4.4 (each out of a possible 15 per subject).
This makes it clear that the subjects found the recognition task difficult.
The overall hit rate (hits — false alarms), however, is significantly better than chance (t=7.55, df=35, p<0.01).
There were no significant differences in hit rate between the three experience groups, F(2,33)=0.57, or between males and females F(1,34)=0.06.
The mean numbers of hits and false alarms for the ten different junctions are shown in Figure 4.5 (the maximum possible number of either is nine).
To gain some impression of the differences between junctions, the 60 values of hit rate are treated as independent measures in an analysis of variance, this reveals that there are no significant differences between the 10 junctions in hit rate F(9,50)=0.48.
There is no significant correlation between hit rate and either risk rating (r(58)=0.13) or accident estimate (r(58)=0.05) across the 60 films.
The number of hits and false alarms for individual films is given in Table 4.4.
Although the hit rate does not differ significantly between junctions there do seem to be substantial differences between individual films.
In fact, within individual junctions it looks as though there may be a relationship between risk and recognition.
The results for the junction which received the highest risk ratings, junction 9, will be considered to illustrate this, see Table 4.4.
For the most risky two exemplars, films 53 and 54, the corrected hit rate is very high, for the least risky exemplars of the same junction, films 50 and 51, corrected hit rate is extremely low.
This raises the possibility that any effect of risk may operate only within individual junctions and not across all junctions.
Note that for film 49, although the corrected hit rate is zero there does appear to be a very strong tendency to say ‘yes’ whether or not the film has been seen previously.
It would be useful to have a measure of such bias that is independent of the actual hit rate.
This requires the analysis of the data using signal detection theory.
Since confidence ratings were obtained in addition to Yes/No responses it is possible to plot ROC curves for either subjects or stimuli and hence calculate separate measures of recognition sensitivity (i.e. the ability of subjects to discriminate targets from distractors) and response criterion bias (i.e. the tendency to give particular types of response independently of any knowledge a subject has as to whether a film was a target or distractor).
In this case calculating recognition measures for individual stimuli is initially of more interest than doing so for individual subjects thus the data is aggregated across subjects.
Each film appeared nine times as a target and nine times as a distractor.
It could receive a response ‘Yes’ or ‘No’and a confidence rating from 1 to 7, this gives 14 possible responses which any film could receive from a subject, Table 4.5 shows the distribution of responses among these 14 categories.
In order to plot ROC curves for individual films it is necessary to have a relatively large number of responses in each category.
The 14 categories were thus collapsed into six as shown in Table 4.5 to increase the number of responses in each category.
The most common use of signal detection theory is to calculate parametric measures of sensitivity (d') and bias.
However, when each subject only provides a single value for the estimate of signal detection variables (as in this case where data is aggregated across subjects), Locksley, Stangor, Hepburn, Grosovsky & Hockstrasser (1984) recommend that nonparametric measures are used.
Following McNicol (1972) a nonparametric overall measure of recognition sensitivity for individual films was calculated from the collapsed data, this measure, P(A), corresponds to the area beneath the ROC curve plotted for a film, aggregating the data from all subjects.
P(A) can potentially range from 0 to 1 although numbers less than 0.5 would indicate performance worse than chance.
P(A) normally ranges between 0.5 for chance performance (i.e. no ability to discriminate between targets and distractors) to 1 for perfect recognition.
A separate measure of response bias, the non-parametric measure B (McNicol 1972) was also calculated.
When calculated for an individual subject this measure corresponds to the point on a confidence rating scale where the subject is indifferent between targets and distractors.
To understand its meaning in this case it is necessary to consider Table 4.5.
As long as P(A) is greater than 0.5 (i.e. subjects are performing above than chance level), category 1 in the collapsed scale should be used more often for targets than for distractors, conversely category 6 should be used more often for distractors than for targets.
B is that notional point on the scale which would be used equally often for both.
Thus if a film received a value of B=2 it would mean that the responses ‘Yes, 5’, and ‘Yes, 6’ were given equally often to targets and to distractors.
Note that despite this tendency to give far too many false alarms the subject's overall recognition sensitivity could still be quite good, the subject has simply traded false alarms against misses.
For the collapsed scale B can range between 1 and 6, unbiased responding would give a value of 3.5.
A lower number than this generally indicates a tendency to make too many false alarms, a higher number generally indicates a tendency to make too many misses.
For the 60 films the mean value of P(A) was 0.70 (range 0.43 to 0.96) and the mean B was 3.21 (range 2.00 to 4.83).
Analysis of variance across the 60 films treated as independent measures shows that there are no significant differences between the ten different junctions either in recognition performance (F(9,50)=0.36) or in response bias (F(9,50)=1.84).
There is no significant correlation across the 60 films between mean risk rating and either P(A), r(58)=0.14, or B, r(58)=0.07, or between accident estimate and either measure r(58)=0.06 and r(58)=0.03.
There is a significant overall correlation between the length of a film and P(A), r(58)=0.43, p<0.01, calculated over all 60 exemplars.
There is, however, no significant correlation between P(A) and the number of vehicles visible in the film, r(58)=0.25.
The lack of a correlation between risk and P(A) is the same result that was observed using hit rate as the measure of recognition performance.
However, this is not what was expected from Study 1 where recall seemed to be strongly related to ratings of subjective risk.
Relationships Within Particular Junctions:
Although there is no overall correlation between risk ratings and the recognition measures, it was observed with the hit and false alarm data that there were large differences between the various exemplars of an individual junction, differences which may have been related to risk.
The nature of these differences can be crudely assessed by calculating the correlation between the two measures across the six exemplars of each junction separately.
The correlation between risk and P(A) across the six exemplars of each junction ranges substantially, from -0.67 to 0.88, though only one of these ten is significantly different from zero with only four degrees of freedom (for junction 2, r=0.88, p<0.05).
However, the magnitude and direction of the correlations appears to be related to the overall mean risk rating for the junction.
Figure 4.6 shows the correlations across the exemplars of each of the ten junctions plotted against the mean risk rating for the junction.
Over these ten points there is a correlation of 0.88 between the two measures, p<0.01, 8 degrees of freedom.
When calculated the same way there is no tendency for the mean risk rating for a junction to determine correlations with accident estimates, r(8)=-0.047, nor is there any similar relationship between risk and the response bias measure B, r(8)=-0.21.
The fact that the relationship between risk and P(A) is dependent on the actual levels of risk involved is not unexpected.
An inverted-U relationship would have predicted different magnitudes and directions of correlation for different risk levels.
However, the directions that it would have predicted are exactly the opposite of the ones actually observed in this study.
The relationship observed in the previous study (see Figure 3.3) would also predict different effects at different risk levels.
In that study changes in risk at lower levels seemed to be unrelated to recall performance while at higher levels there was a positive correlation between the two.
However, as can be seen from Figure 4.7, there does not appear to be any overall relationship between mean risk rating and P(A) in this study.
The pattern evident in Figure 4.6 is then not a general one, instead it only emerges when the analysis is done within exemplars of each junction separately.
Moreover, rather than simply reflecting a stronger relationship between risk and memory at higher levels of risk, the relationship visible in Figure 4.6 actually has both a negative and a positive component.
There seem to be two opposed relationships between risk and memory, each effect operating on a different type of junction.
For the three most risky junctions the mean correlation between risk rating and P(A) is positive and significant, r=0.80, df=12, p<0.01.
For the three least risky junctions the mean correlation is negative and significant, r=-0.58, df=12, p<0.05.
All these correlations of course come from mean values for stimuli aggregated across subjects and are thus likely to be overestimates of the true size of any effect in individual subjects (Guilford & Fruchter 1973, Dunlap, Jones & Bittner 1983).
However, since the calculation of P(A) requires the aggregation of data across subjects and each subject only rates 30 of the 60 stimuli it is not possible to calculate average correlations in this case.
To better illustrate the differences in performance for different junctions Table 4.6 shows the results from Study 2 divided into categories by mean risk rating.
Junctions have been divided into three categories, three junctions in each of the high and low risk categories and the remaining four junctions in the medium risk category.
Within each junction the exemplars were divided into two categories, the three with the highest mean risk ratings in one category and the three with the lowest mean risk ratings in the other.
The mean number of hits and false alarms in Table 4.6 are out of a maximum possible number of nine.
The results for high risk junctions illustrate roughly the pattern of findings that would have been consistent with Study 1.
The number of hits is higher for risky exemplars than non-risky ones and the number of false alarms is lower.
This is reflected in the overall recognition sensitivity score, P(A), being higher for risky exemplars.
For the low risk junctions, however, this result appears to be completely reversed, the high risk exemplars have a slightly lower number of hits than the less risky ones and considerably more false alarms, this corresponds to a higher P(A) for the least risky exemplars.
For all three junction types the mean value of B is lower than the 3.5 expected for unbiased responding despite the fact that overall subjects gave more ‘No’ responses than ‘Yes’ones.
This reflects the type of confidence ratings given, which were generally higher for ‘Yes’ responses than ‘No’ones.
For each junction type the value of B is lowest for the most risky exemplars.
This suggests that subjects were generally more likely to respond ‘Yes’ to risky exemplars than to less risky ones.
One other important aspect of Table 4.6 is the fact that the exemplars of a junction differ in accident estimates.
Although the accident estimate could logically be independent of the actual exemplar of the junction that a subject was shown it is clear that it is in fact strongly related to the risk rating given to particular exemplars.
Given that not all subjects knew the junctions well previously this is not very surprising.
If the subject does not know the junction and is attempting to decide how risky it is likely to be in other circumstances it would make sense to extrapolate from the information in the film to decide for example how busy the junction generally is, or to simply generalize from their current feelings of risk.
Discussion of Recognition Results
Unlike Study 1 there was no overall tendency for subjective risk to be associated with better memory performance in Study 2.
There are clearly a large number of factors which could account for this difference.
One interpretation for the lack of overall relationship might be that the laboratory simulation was not actually successful in producing levels of subjective risk of the same magnitude as those experienced by drivers in the first study.
Subjects may instead simply have given good estimates of the risk which they would have felt had they been actually present in the situations.
Alternatively, they may have experienced some risk, but only the lower levels which characterize the flat lower part of the relationship shown in Figure 3.3.
These interpretations, however, are based on the assumption that there were no effects of subjective risk in Study 2.
In fact this does not appear to be the case, substantial recognition differences were observed between exemplars of individual junctions.
Clearly Study 2 differs from Study 1 in many more ways than the fact that subjects were not actually driving — the range of situations used was dramatically different, individual junctions were repeated, there was no obvious navigational context, and so on.
However, the most important difference may be the type of memory test used.
The theoretical differences between recall and recognition are complex and have been the subject of considerable debate (e.g. Kintsch, 1970; Mandler, 1980; Tulving, 1976, 1983).
However, there are clear practical differences between the measures in their normal use, particularly in the fact that recall is normally enhanced by providing additional retrieval cues.
It was suggested in discussing the results from the first study that subjects may have been deliberately attempting to recall just the risky situations.
Even if they were not consciously doing so, feelings of risk may have acted as an important retrieval cue in the context.
The other crucial difference between the types of memory test is that in a recognition test there is generally a relatively well defined set of distractor items.
In the context of the current study the relevant distractor items are likely to have been the other exemplars of a particular junction.
The most interesting results of the study were the relationships observed between risk ratings and P(A) within these sets of items.
It appeared that for exemplars of the generally risky junctions risk ratings were positively correlated with P(A).
However, for exemplars of the less risky junctions a negative correlation was observed.
This pattern of results was not expected and does not seem to be an obvious prediction to make from any of the theories about arousal and memory which were considered in Chapter 2.
One way in which the pattern of results might be described is that in each case the exemplars which accorded most closely to the subjects’ expectations were recognized best.
Thus at dangerous junctions risky events are easily recognized, but a safer junctions non-risky events are best recognized.
This suggests that subjects expectations based on their previous may be important in understanding the relationship between risk and recognition performance.
This idea will be examined more closely in the following chapter.
When attempting to interpret these results it must be remembered that the correlations of interest all rely on relatively small numbers of responses.
Moreover, these correlations only achieved overall significance when the junctions were grouped in a way which may make sense, but was clearly post hoc.
Thus, rather than discussing the results further now, a new study will be described which was designed as an attempt to extend and replicate the results from Study 2.
Chapter 5
Exploring the Recognition Results I
The previous study used a recognition paradigm to test memory for driving films viewed in a driving simulator.
One of the reasons for using a recognition task was that it seemed less likely than the first study which used a recall test to be biased by the fact that subjects were aware that the study was concerned with risk.
Although the use of a recognition test may have minimized the use of strategies based on risk-related information at testing, subjects nonetheless still made risk judgments when they initially watched the films.
In addition to alerting subjects to the fact that the experiment was concerned with subjective risk, this may have caused them to attend to the stimuli in ways which unnaturally stressed risk-related aspects of the situations.
A major advantage of using simulated driving is that the previous study has now provided estimates of the subjective risk subjects are likely to experience when viewing the films.
This means that it is possible to realistically estimate the subjective risk likely to be experienced by further subjects watching the films without actually having them give new estimates.
The aim of the study reported in this chapter is thus to see whether the results of the previous study are still obtained when subjects are not actually aware that the experiment is concerned with subjective risk.
The opportunity was also taken to explore the suggestion made in discussing the previous study that recognition results were related to subjects’ previous knowledge about driving situations and expectations about them.
The theories in psychology which appear to bear most directly on this possibility are those which suggest that memory is based on schemas.
Schema Theories
Bartlett (1932) stressed idea that memories are stored, not as isolated traces but as part of pre-existing knowledge structures representing our expectations about the world, he termed these structures schemata.
Bartlett's ideas on schemata became popular when the development of computers meant that theories of this type could be programmed (e.g. Minsky, 1975; Rumelhart, 1975; Schank, 1976).
The attraction of schema theories for memory researchers is that they predict that memory for stimuli will depend on the degree to which such stimuli are similar to pre-existing schemata.
The problem with them, however, is that it is not always clear what predictions they make for particular paradigms (Alba & Hasher, 1983; Brewer & Nakamura, 1984).
In fact, results showing enhanced recall and recognition of schema-consistent information (e.g. Brewer & Treyens, 1981) and impaired recall and recognition of such information (e.g. Pezdek, Whetstone, Reynolds, Askari & Dougherty, 1989) have both been interpreted as support for schema theories.
The reason that the overall effects of schemata are difficult to specify is that they are thought to have separate effects on different processes.
For example, attention is often thought to be directed particularly to information which is inconsistent with the currently active schema (e.g. G.R.Loftus & Mackworth, 1978).
However, schema-consistent information is assumed to be more easy to integrate into existing memory structures and more likely to be subsequently recalled since active schema guide and cue the retrieval process (Brewer & Treyens, 1981).
This may account for the fact that while recall is almost uniformly greater for schema-consistent information, recognition results have been markedly more mixed (Brewer & Nakamura, 1984).
Locksley et al.(1984) suggest that the mixed results obtained in recognition experiments can often be explained by the fact that researchers have concentrated on the effects of schemas on numbers of hits and false alarms in different conditions.
They argue strongly that the appropriate way to explore schema effects on recognition is through the use of signal detection theory.
They suggest that schemas are likely to have separate effects on recognition sensitivity and response criterion bias and that these effects are confounded when researchers simply report hits and false alarms.
Study 3
Recognition with New Judgment Tasks.
One of the possible reasons suggested for the relationship between risk and recall in Study 1 was that performing risk-related judgment tasks while driving had made that information particularly memorable.
Although the relationships between risk and recognition performance found in Study 2 were rather more complex it is still possible that all or part of the relationship was caused by the explicit focus on risk during the judgment phase.
The purpose of Study 3 was to see whether similar recognition results would be produced when subjects were not making risk judgments.
Since the subjects in Study 2 did not expect a recognition phase it was clearly not sufficient to simply repeat the study without subjects making any judgments, instead judgment tasks had to be found that were not related to risk and were still sufficiently engaging for subjects not to suspect a memory test afterwards.
A subset of 24 films from the 60 used in Study 2 were used for 12 different judgment tasks in a study on risk perception (Groeger & Chapman, 1992, in preparation a).
There were 64 subjects in this experiment, since 16 of these were newly qualified drivers who are not representative of the population taking part in the recognition experiments, only the data from 48 of the 64 subjects is considered here.
The correlation between risk ratings, accident estimates and the other 10 scales were calculated in each case.
Using the method recommended by Dunlap, Jones and Bittner (1983) correlations were calculated for each subject individually across the 24 films used in this study, correlations were then averaged for the 48 subjects using Fisher's z transformation (Silver & Dunlap 1987).
Two of the judgment tasks were then selected which showed only small correlations with risk ratings or accident estimates for the 24 stimuli used.
The questions selected were ‘How fast did you feel the driver was going in the film?’, which gave judgments with an average correlation with risk ratings of 0.09 (d.f.
=1056, p<0.01) and with accident estimates of 0.09 (d.f.
=1056, p<0.01) and ‘How well does this film show what normally happens at the junction?’, which gave a mean correlation with risk ratings of 0.11 (d.f.
=1056, p<0.01) and a correlation with accident estimates of -0.01 (d.f.
=1056, p=0.79).
The speed judgment task was included simply to give subjects a task comparable to that used in Study 2.
The normality judgment task has an additional purpose.
It was suggested that the recognition results from the previous study might represent recognition being superior for films which were consistent with the subjects’ expectations.
However, no measure was actually available of what subjects’ expectations actually were, nor of which films were in fact consistent with them.
In order to see whether the recognition results can be interpreted in terms of schema theories of memory it is first necessary to have some measure of the schema consistency of particular films.
The normality judgment task was included to provide such a measure.
A second measure was also taken in this study which may provide information relevant to subjects’ expectations, this was a measure of how well each subject previously knew the each of junctions in the films.
In this and subsequent studies seven point scales replace the previous 20 point scale.
Although the previous scale had the advantage of corresponding to actual measured accident statistics it proved relatively awkward for subjects to use and is clearly subject to what Poulton (1989) terms logarithmic response bias.
The main dependent variables in this study (i.e. those of memory performance) are nonetheless identical to those used in the previous study, thus direct comparisons can still be made between the two studies.
Method
Subjects:
The subjects were 36 drivers taken from the Applied Psychology Unit's subject panel, 18 male, 18 female.
None of these subjects had taken part in either of the previous studies.
Mean age of participants was 43 years, mean ‘years licensed, mean annual mileage 9,295.
All subjects were paid for their participation.
Stimuli/Apparatus:
The stimuli and apparatus used in this study were identical to those used in Study 2.
Procedure:
The procedure in this study was the same as that employed in Study 2 with the exception of the judgment phase, here two new verbal rating tasks were performed in place of the risk rating and accident estimate tasks:
Speed Rating: ‘How fast do you feel the driver is going in the situation?
Use a seven point scale where 1 would indicate that the driver is going much too slowly and 7 would indicate that the driver is going much too fast.
A rating of 4 would mean that the driver is going at the correct speed for the conditions.’
This rating was given immediately the subject heard the bleep in the centre of the junction.
Normality Rating: ‘How well does the film show the kind of things that normally happen at the junction?
Use a seven point scale where 1 would indicate that the situation shown was extremely unusual and 7 would indicate that the events were not surprising in any way’.
This rating was given after the speed rating and subjects were asked to think carefully about it before answering.
After the recognition phase in this study subjects were given a map showing the location in Cambridge of the ten junctions shown in the films.
Subjects were then asked to give a written rating to each of the junctions of how well they previously knew it.
Familiarity Rating: ‘How well did you previously know the junction?
Use a seven point scale where 1 would indicate that you have never previously driven through the junction and 7 would indicate that you drive through the junction nearly every day’.
Judgment Results:
The overall mean speed rating was 4.26 and mean normality rating was 6.38.
The mean speed and normality ratings for all 60 films are shown in Table 5.3 with the recognition results.
Means for the 10 junctions are shown in Figures 5.1 and 5.2.
Analysis of variance was used to compare the ten junctions for each judgment task averaging each subject's responses for the three exemplars of each junction.
Both judgment tasks show significant main effects of junction, F(9,315)=5.56, p<0.01, for speed ratings and F(9,315)=13.83, p<0.01 for normality.
In the Groeger and Chapman experiment it was observed that, for a subset of 24 of the 60 films, risk ratings and accident estimates were not substantially correlated with either speed or normality ratings.
The data from Study 2 for the 60 films was compared with the new ratings to see whether this holds for the full set of 60 films.
Because subjects differ between the experiments the correlations calculated here are simply correlations over the 60 films of the mean ratings.
These and equivalent correlations from the Groeger and Chapman study are given in Table 5.1.
For purposes of comparison these figures are also given as correlated averages rather than the average correlations which were reported previously.
Note that although some of the correlations calculated for this study appear to be markedly different to those observed in the Groeger and Chapman study, the difference between correlations only reaches significance in the case of the correlation between risk and normality (z=2.64, p<0.01).
Discussion of Judgment Results:
Clearly the tasks as performed in this study were not, as intended, completely unrelated to risk ratings.
To understand why this is the case the ratings from Study 3 were compared with the results from the Groeger and Chapman study, see Table 5.2.
Data from the Groeger and Chapman study is presented as average ratings from 48 subjects, 24 male and 24 female.
Means from the current study are calculated from the data from 18 subjects for each point.
The characteristics of the 24 stimuli that were chosen for this experiment are described in greater detail in Chapter 7.
One possible explanation for the lack of correlation between risk and either normality or speed in the Groeger and Chapman study could be that the subset of 24 stimuli used were not characteristic of the whole 60.
In fact, for these 24 stimuli alone the correlation between risk rating from Study 2 and normality from Study 3 is still significant r(22)=-0.42, p<0.05, although the correlation between risk and speed is not r(22)=0.16.
Although it is still possible that subjects’ perceptions of the tasks could have been altered by the different exemplars of a junction that were viewed in the different experiments, it does not appear that the subset of 24 were unrepresentative of the full 60.
The other likely source for the differences in ratings is that subjects interpreted the normality task differently in the two situations.
The two sets of speed ratings given in Table 5.2 are highly correlated, r(22)=0.83, p<0.01, and similar in magnitude.
However, the two sets of normality ratings are not significantly correlated r(22)=-0.06, and the ratings given in Study 3 are much higher than those given in the Groeger and Chapman study.
Thus it seems that although the speed rating task was performed roughly as expected, subjects on the normality rating task in fact performed a very different task to the one used in Groeger and Chapman study.
The most likely explanation for the difference is the context in which the judgments were made, clearly the normality of any individual film will depend on the types of situation that are seen with it.
Another aspect of the context of a judgment is the other tasks that were performed at the same time.
In the Groeger and Chapman experiment the normality and speed rating scales were presented along with 10 other judgment tasks including both risk ratings and accident estimates.
The fact that subjects answered all questions for each stimulus may have caused them to restrict their interpretation of individual tasks such that there was no overlap between tasks.
Subjects may thus have deliberately excluded any risk component from their speed and normality ratings since they were reporting risk separately.
There were also a number of other differences between the studies.
In the Groeger and Chapman study responses were made on a seven point response keypad with the question repeated each time a rating was required.
The actual question appeared each time on the screen in front of them with a seven point scale with labels at the end points — 7=VERY WELL and 1=NOT VERY WELL.
Although the initial explanation of the scale was identical to that used in the present study, it is possible that the labelling of the end points may have encouraged subjects to use numbers nearer to the middle of the scale.
The important finding which appears in Study 3 but which did not in Groeger and Chapman study is the tendency for subjects to rate the risky situations as significantly lower on normality but higher on speed.
Both these relationships are of course what might have been predicted a priori, in fact it is more surprising that they did not appear in the Groeger and Chapman study than that they do in this one.
Thus although the rating tasks performed in this study are not uncorrelated with the risk and accident estimates previously obtained for the stimuli from Study 2 there is no reason to assume that subjects were unnaturally concentrating on risks in the way they may have been for Studies 1 and 2.
Recognition Results:
None of the subjects reported having expected a memory test.
The mean number of hits was 9.3 and false alarms 3.1.
The data for hits and false alarms for all 60 stimuli are shown in Table 5.3.
As was found for Study 2 there were no significant differences between the 10 junctions in overall hit rate, F(9,50)=0.77, Figure 5.3 shows the mean number of hits and false alarms for the 10 different junctions.
However, the overall hit rate was significantly higher than that observed in Study 2, 6.2 compared to 4.8, F(1,50)=6.65, p<0.05.
This difference does not interact with junction, F(9,50)=1.01, suggesting that it is largely a general improvement rather than one related to aspects of individual junctions.
The correlations between the recognition measures from this study and those calculated from the previous study were compared.
These correlations were significantly greater than zero in each case — for the number of hits r(58)=0.32, p<0.05, for the number of false alarms r(58)=0.58, p<0.01, and for hit rate r(58)=0.45, p<0.01.
The data was again analysed using signal detection theory, the distribution of responses across the 14 possible ones is shown in Table 5.4.
Since this distribution is similar to that obtained in Study 2 these 14 categories were divided into the same six categories that were used in that study.
For the 60 films the mean P(A) was 0.75 (range 0.44 to 1.00) and the mean B was 3.49 (range 1.83 to 5.10).
The pattern of recognition results was compared to that from Study 2.
Over the 60 films there is a correlation of 0.51 (d.f.
=58, p<0.01) in values of P(A) and a correlations of 0.31 (d.f.
=58, p<0.01) in values of B. Treating the 120 values of P(A) as independent the values were compared in an analysis of variance with two factors, junction and study.
For P(A), although the mean value was 0.05 higher in Study 3, this difference was only marginally significant (F(1,100)=3.62, p=0.06).
There was no significant interaction between junction and study (F(9,100)=0.24).
A similar comparison was made for values of B, here mean values were 0.28 higher in Study 3 and this difference was significant (F(1,100)=5.87, p<0.05).
Again there was no significant interaction between study and junction (F(9,100)=1.28).
Considering just the data from Study 3, there were no significant differences between the 10 junction in P(A), F(9,50)=0.99 or in B, F(9,50)=0.71.
The correlations with P(A) were not significant for either normality r(58)=-0.20 or speed r(58)=-0.23, however, there were significant correlations across the 60 films between mean B and both normality rating, r(58)=-0.32, p<0.05 and speed rating r(58)=-0.27, p<0.05.
Thus high values of B seem to be associated with unusual situations and drivers going relatively slowly (i.e. in these cases subjects are more likely to say ‘No’ than ‘Yes’when they are in fact unsure whether they saw the film previously).
There was no significant correlation between P(A) and risk ratings taken from Study 2, though there was a significant correlation between P(A) and accident estimates from that study, r(58)=0.32, p<0.05.
Within the six exemplars of each junction correlations of P(A) with the risk ratings from the previous study were calculated.
Only one correlation was significant, r(4)=0.86, p<0.05 for Junction 7.
Nonetheless, the pattern of correlations over the ten junctions is extremely similar to that obtained in the previous study, see Figure 5.4.
Once again the relationship between risk and P(A) for exemplars of a particular junction depends on the overall mean risk rating given to the junction, r(8)=0.66 p<0.05.
They show the same tendency that was observed in Study 2 for some junctions to have a negative correlation and others to show a positive correlation.
For risky junctions the risky exemplars show best recognition, while for the least risky junctions the result reverses.
The mean correlation between risk and P(A) for the three most risky exemplars is 0.66, d.f.
=12, p<0.01, while for the three least risky junctions the mean correlation is -0.48, d.f.
=12, p=0.08.
Although these correlations are lower than those from Study 2 they are present despite the fact that a different set of subjects from those who gave the risk ratings are giving the recognition measures.
It is particularly interesting that the relationship with risk remains despite the fact that the actual recognition results from Study 3 are not identical to those from Study 2.
A summary of results from Study 3 is given in Table 5.5.
Films were categorized according to risk for both junction and exemplar using the same categories as described for Study 2, these are shown in Table 5.5.
To decide whether previous familiarity with a junction is related to recognition performance it is necessary to calculate new measures of recognition.
There are two aspects to the question.
It could be that subjects who know the route well perform differently to those who do not know the route.
Alternatively it could be that all subjects perform differently on junctions they previously knew well compared to those they did not know well.
To test the first possibility P(A) was calculated using the same procedure as before but this time for individual subjects rather than stimuli.
The overall P(A) for a subject ranged from 0.45 to 0.97, mean 0.78.
There was no significant correlation between a subject's mean familiarity rating and their P(A) — across the 36 subjects r(34)=-0.24.
This is evidence that subjects who knew the route well performed no differently in the recognition task from those subjects who knew the route less well.
To see whether individual subjects performed differently on those junctions which they personally knew well a recognition measure for each subject on each junction was calculated.
Each subject sees three exemplars of each junction in the recognition phase, either two targets and one distractor or one distractor and two targets depending on the junction.
To create an overall recognition measure from these three stimuli the total confidence ratings for incorrect responses, misses or false alarms, were subtracted from the total confidence ratings for correct responses, hits or correct rejections.
This gives a score that can lie between 21 for perfect performance and -21 for the worst possible performance.
Chance performance would be zero.
For each subject the correlation between this score and their familiarity ratings for the 10 junctions was calculated.
The 36 correlations were averaged using Fisher's z transformation to give a mean correlation of 0.04, d.f.
=288.
It thus appears that previous knowledge of a junction had almost no overall effect on recognition sensitivity in this task.
Discussion of Recognition Results:
The recognition performance in Study 3 was generally better than that in Study 2, subjects showed marginally greater recognition sensitivity and significantly less response criterion bias.
It is possible that this is a result of the different judgment tasks that were used, certainly subjects reported finding the normality judgment a more difficult task to understand than either of the tasks from Study 2, it is possible that it also required more attention to the films generally.
An alternative explanation for the general enhancement of performance is simply that the subject populations differ between the studies.
Subjects in Study 3 were members of the Unit's subject panel, thus most had participated in previous experiments at the unit, for a variety of reasons they may be generally better at this type of task than those recruited through a newspaper advertisement appealing specifically to drivers.
Despite the difference in overall level of performance the relationship between risk and recognition performance in the two studies was remarkably similar.
Once again there is no hint of an overall inverted-U relationship or indeed any overall relationship between subjective risk and recognition sensitivity.
To demonstrate this the mean risk rating for each film (from Study 2) is plotted against the value of P(A) for that film (from Study 3), this relationship is shown in Figure 5.6.
In fact there is no sign of any overall relationship between risk ratings and P(A).
Even when the results of Studies 2 and 3 are combined the best fitting quadratic function accounts for only 0.096 percent of the total variance across these 60 points, scarcely an improvement on the 0.043 percent obtained from the simple linear correlation coefficient.
Nonetheless, in both experiments there was a clear tendency for risky exemplars of risky junctions to be recognized well but for risky exemplars of less risky junctions to be recognized badly.
Because there is no overall relationship between risk ratings and recognition performance it is necessary to consider the effects that may operate within individual junctions.
Schema Theory:
A framework for interpreting memory results for complex stimuli was discussed in the introduction, this was the idea that memory results depend on the type of schema subjects previously held for a situation.
It was hoped that the normality rating task would assist in deciding which stimuli were inconsistent with the schema previously held.
Unfortunately, the very low variability in ratings on this scale makes it possible that the task was not successful in measuring this.
Moreover the lack of correlation between this task from Study 3 and from Groeger and Chapman (1992, in preparation a) raises serious questions about exactly how the task was interpreted in each case.
Thus although there was no significant relationship between normality and P(A) from Study 3 it seems advisable to see whether this is also the case using normality ratings taken from the Groeger and Chapman study.
Normality ratings are those given in Table 5.2 from 48 of the subjects in the study.
These ratings do not correlate significantly with P(A) from either Study 2, r(22)=-0.04 or Study 3, r(22)=-0.13.
It remains possible that schemata play a general role in the recognition part of these studies.
It was previously suggested that one could describe the pattern of results from Study 2 as recognition being best for situations which accorded to subjects’ expectations, e.g. risky exemplars of risky junctions or safe exemplars of safe junctions.
However, as discussed in the introduction, one could also predict that in a recognition test situations inconsistent with the schema might be remembered best since schema-inconsistent information would be more likely to have been noticed when initially viewing the stimuli.
Another problem with using schema theory in this context is the assumption that subjects held schemata for individual junctions.
One might alternatively suggest that a single standard driving schema exists and deviations from this are the appropriate measure rather than deviations from junction specific expectations.
Although the measure of schema-consistency from these studies is not compelling, it seems unlikely that schema theory could provide an adequate explanation of the sensitivity results that were obtained.
Response criterion bias as assessed by the nonparametric measure B, however, did appear to be related to normality ratings.
Higher normality ratings were correlated significantly with a bias in favour of‘Yes’ responses.
This is exactly the prediction which is made by Locksley et al., ‘the response criterion for schema related items may be more biased in the direction of OLD decisions (or, alternatively less biased in the direction of NEW decisions) than the response criterion for schema-unrelated items’(1984, p.425).
This bias appears to be an effect which arises at time of retrieval and is independent of recognition sensitivity, Locksley et al.suggest that with appropriate feedback the effect could be eliminated.
Easterbrook's Hypothesis:
One possible process operating at the time of encoding which may influence the relationship between risk and recognition sensitivity is the idea of attention focusing as predicted by Easterbrook's hypothesis as discussed in Chapter 2.
In the standard experiments the effect of arousal is to change the range of cues attended to by the subject, high arousal conditions thus show best memory for central information while in low arousal conditions subjects remember peripheral information best.
An advantage of this approach is that it does not necessarily mean that there should be any general factors which directly impair or enhance memory.
Instead memory performance will depend on how it is tested, in a recognition paradigm the important aspect will be nature of the distractors competing with each target.
To apply the framework of attention focusing to the data from these studies it is necessary to make some assumptions about the information that is central and peripheral in the stimuli.
In Chapter 2 it was suggested that task-related information should be regarded as central.
In risky situations it would thus be predicted that attention would be focused on information which was important to controlling risk, and information peripheral to this task would be neglected.
If this were the case then within an individual junction we would expect risk related information to be best remembered for risky exemplars and peripheral information to be best remembered for the less risky exemplars.
To decide what effects such focusing would have on overall recognition sensitivity it is necessary to make assumptions about the information present in the different stimuli:
i) Films of risky junctions tend to contain a great deal of information related to risk.
The exact information present will vary greatly from one film to the next.
ii) Films of non-risky junctions tend to contain relatively little information related to risk.
Where risks are present they will tend to be single and are likely to be shared by other stimuli (e.g. the driver going too fast).
Thus for risky junctions knowledge of the precise risk-related information seen in the judgment phase will provide a useful way of distinguishing targets from distractors in the recognition phase.
Therefore risk experienced at risky junctions may improve recognition sensitivity.
Knowledge of risk-related information from non-risky junctions will thus also allow films seen in the judgment phase to be identified in the recognition phase, however, it will also tend to cause false alarms because the information may be shared by distractors.
The overall effect on sensitivity may actually be negative because the focusing of attention on redundant information may be at the cost of attention to peripheral information which might have otherwise been useful.
Thus at non-risky junctions feelings of risk may actually impair recognition sensitivity by increasing the number of false alarms made.
The above explanation of the results makes specific predictions about differences between the relative roles of hits and false alarms in the observed results.
These can be tested from the data in Tables 4.6 and 5.5.
The pattern of hits and false alarms in the two studies is relatively similar, thus Table 5.6 shows the data grouped from the two studies to increase the number of observations in each cell.
For risky junctions there is a significant difference in the number of hits for risky exemplars compared to the number for less risky exemplars (t(34)=2.64, p<0.01) though no significant difference for false alarms (t(34)=0.85).
For less risky junctions there is a significant difference in false alarms (t(34)=3.57, p<0.01) but not for hits (t(34)=0.33).
This seems to suggest that the enhancement in performance for the risky junctions as demonstrated by the P(A) scores is because of an increased number of hits for risky exemplars, whereas for the less risky junctions the decrement in performance is attributable to an increase in false alarms for the risky exemplars rather than an increase in hits for the less risky ones.
This effect can also be observed in the overall values of B which are around the 3.5 which corresponds to unbiased responding in all cases except for risky exemplars of low-risk junctions.
In this case B is significantly lower than the other conditions (t(58)=2.58, p<0.01), corresponding to a tendency to give too many ‘Yes’ responses.
This pattern of results seems to provide support for interpreting these results in terms of attention focusing.
General Discussion:
In Study 3 subjects performed judgment tasks that were chosen to be unrelated to risk rating.
Despite this the recognition results were extremely similar to those observed in Study 2, at risky junctions risk improved recognition because of a large number of hits while at less risky junctions risk impaired recognition because of a large number of false alarms.
The fact that the tasks as used in Study 3 turned out not to be completely unrelated to risk does not necessarily compromise this result, it may simply reflect the fact that thinking about risk is an extremely natural thing to do in this type of situation.
Although the judgment of how well a film shows what normally happens at a junction was used differently in Study 3 and in Groeger and Chapman (1992, in preparation a) there was no evidence in either case that this was related to recognition sensitivity.
Moreover, it is not clear that schema theory would actually predict the reversal in results for different types of junction.
Nonetheless it is possible that the general relationship between response criterion bias and normality ratings reflects the operation of some form of schema at retrieval.
One alternative explanation was put forward in terms of attention focusing which might explain both effects in terms of feelings of risk.
This explanation seemed to explain the general recognition results as measured by P(A) and had the additional advantage of predicting the differences in hits and false alarms.
The attention focusing explanation, however, relies on certain untested assumptions about the nature of the information contained in different films, Study 5 was designed to explore some of these assumptions.
Before this is reported, however, Study 4 will be described.
Study 4 was an attempt to see whether the effects observed in Studies 2 and 3 were specific to the particular stimuli which were used or whether they can also be observed with a wider range of stimuli and a larger number of responses contributing to the ROC curves to improve the reliability of the recognition measures.
Chapter 6
Exploring the Recognition Results II
The relationships observed between subjective risk and recognition performance in Studies 2 and 3 are potentially of considerable interest.
However, there are a number of qualifications that need to be made about the results.
One problem is simply that the most interesting recognition measures in these studies were based on ROC curves calculated from only 18 points.
An additional problem is that the stimuli over which the relationships were observed were just six exemplars each of only ten junctions.
Although an attempt was made to be representative in the choice of these films it is clear that if the effects observed are of any practical significance it should be possible to observe them on a more varied stimulus set.
The following study attempts to avoid the first problem by increasing the data available for the calculation of ROC curves and to address the second problem by using a much more varied selection of stimuli.
While memory for real situations may require people to discriminate between memories for the same situation experienced in different circumstances (e.g. the different exemplars of each junction) it is also likely that discriminating between completely different situations (e.g. different junctions) relies on similar mechanisms.
This is particularly important given that one of the explanations advanced for the recognition results was based on attention to central rather than peripheral information in a film.
Although a definition of central information was attempted, no clear description of the types of peripheral information available was previously offered.
It was argued in Chapter 2 that central information is that which is necessary to the driving task, it is likely that much of the information specific to an individual location (e.g. buildings, signposts, or trees) would thus fall into the peripheral category.
Because multiple exemplars of each junction have been used in the previous studies this information would have been nearly identical in all six exemplars of each junction.
The role it plays in normal memory may therefore have been underestimated.
Study 4 thus increases the potential usefulness of peripheral information in the recognition task by allowing both events (variable information) and junctions (fixed information) to differ between all stimuli.
Because of this potential interest in the difference between fixed and variable information in films, it was desirable to have some measures of the amount of such information in the stimuli being used.
When a subsequent judgment study (Groeger & Chapman, in preparation b) was designed which used the same films as Study 4, the opportunity was taken to include questions about the amount of fixed and variable information in the stimuli.
The data from this separate study will be discussed with the results of Study 4 where they appear to provide useful additional information about the tasks and stimuli used.
Study 4
This study was an attempt to explore the generality of the results from the previous recognition studies.
The important changes in design were firstly to increase the number of judgments in the recognition phase in order to obtain better recognition data than was available for the previous studies, secondly, to use a much more varied selection of driving situations, and thirdly to show each location only once during the judgment phase of the experiment.
The major concern in designing an experiment to meet the criteria given above was to avoid obtaining ceiling effects.
The possibility of making the recognition task too easy for subjects is especially difficult to guard against in this type of study since a major expenditure of time and effort is required to collect films and create stimulus tapes, this makes extensive piloting unrealistic.
Although it was desired to have as wide a selection of situations as possible in the stimulus set, caution dictated against simply selecting a random set of situations differing along multiple dimensions.
This might make the recognition task too easy for subjects.
It was decided instead to select a few films from each of a number of categories (i.e. types of driving situation) and thus ensure that within each category there was enough similarity to create sufficient potential distractors for each target.
Although the previous studies have not demonstrated any simple relationship between previous knowledge of junctions and memory performance, this may have been because multiple exemplars of each junction were presented in the recognition studies.
Even if there is no consistent relationship present it does seem likely that previous knowledge of some of the junctions will at least add noise to the data.
Since a large number of locations were needed for this study it was decided to use locations which none of the subjects were likely to know rather than stimuli filmed in the Cambridge area which would differ in the degree of previous familiarity subjects had with them.
To create an experiment which yielded the maximum information without becoming boring for the subjects the design is slightly altered from that used in Studies 2 and 3.
For Study 4 the total number of films watched in the judgment phase was slightly reduced as was the mean length of a film in order to allow the full stimulus set to appear in the recognition phase, this effectively doubles the amount of information each subject gives in the recognition phase, fortunately this was a part of the experiment which previous subjects had generally found agreeably challenging and intrinsically motivating.
Method
Subjects:
The subjects were 40 drivers, 14 male, 26 female, all members of the Applied Psychology Unit's subject panel, none of whom had taken part in any of the previous experiments from this series.
All subjects were paid for their participation.
Stimuli:
The stimuli in this study were 48 videos each showing an unobstructed driver's view ahead whilst driving through a junction.
They were recorded using a Panasonic WV-CD1E miniature video camera fixed to the bonnet of the car directly in line with the driver and approximately 10cm in front of the bottom of the windscreen.
Video recording in each case began sufficiently before the junction to allow signs for the junction to be seen and lasted until the car was approximately 100 yards past the junction.
Films were recorded while either the experimenter or an assistant was driving the Vauxhall Astra used in Study 1.
The films were recorded in locations unlikely to be identified by the members of the research panel.
Of the 48 films 33 were recorded in South London in and around Beckenham, seven in Wallasey near Liverpool, four in Walsall and four on the M11 just North of London.
All films showed bright dry weather conditions and moderate to light levels of traffic.
Any particular location only appeared once in the 48 stimuli, however, stimuli consisted of 24 pairs where the two films in any pair showed an identical manoeuvre in similar traffic conditions although not at the same location.
The 48 films were made up of four films showing motorway driving, eight showing bends in a road and four exemplars each of left turns, right turns and driving straight ahead in each of three situations: signalized crossroads, four arm roundabouts, and unsignalized T-junctions.
Films ranged from 14 to 41 seconds in length.
Table 6.1 shows details about the 48 stimuli used, two sets of 24 films with the odd numbered films comprising one set and the even numbered ones comprising the second set.
Individual films were separated by a three second featureless blue field and were recorded in blocks of four for the purposes of randomization.
Films had no sound track but those shown in the judgment phase had a 1.5 second tone recorded in the middle of the manoeuvre.
Three different tapes were made, two for the judgment phase and one for the recognition phase, each judgment tape contained 24 films, one of each pair, the recognition tape contained the full 48 films.
Each tape was made up in a random order with the constraint that no two junctions of the same type should appear in consecutive positions within any block.
Apparatus:
Films were shown in the Applied Psychology Unit's driving simulator as described for Study 2.
Procedure:
Subjects were tested individually in the driving simulator.
The experiment consisted of two phases in which subjects watched films, first a judgment phase and second a recognition phase, the first phase lasted approximately 20 minutes, the second phase approximately 40 minutes.
Between the two phases subjects performed a short filler task answering two brief questionnaires similar to those used for Studies 2 and 3.
Judgment phase:
Subjects watched 24 films.
When the subjects heard the tone in the centre of each junction they performed two rating tasks similar to those used in Studies 1 and 2, first a risk rating, then an estimate for the actual accident statistics for the junction.
For this experiment, however, each rating was given on a seven point scale.
Risk rating: ‘Give a rating on a scale from 1 to 7 to indicate the risk you would feel in if you were the driver in that situation.
A rating of 1 would mean that you feel there is no possible way in which an accident could occur in the situation, a rating of 7 would mean that you feel that you could be involved in an accident at any moment.’
Accident estimate: ‘I want you to estimate the number of accidents that you think actually occur at this junction.
Use a scale from 1 to 7 where 1 would mean that you think virtually no accidents occur at the junction and 7 would indicate that you think a large number of accidents occur at the junction.’
Recognition Phase:
Subjects watched a further 48 films, 24 of the films, the targets, were exactly the same pieces of film that had been shown in the judgment phase.
The other 24 films were distractors, the film from each pair that had not been seen by the subject before.
After each film was seen subjects had to decide whether they had seen that precise film section before or not, making the response either ‘Yes’ or ‘No’.
They also gave a confidence rating in their decision on a seven point scale.
The instructions and scale used were identical to those used for Studies 2 and 3.
Partial randomization of presentation order was achieved using the video controller.
On each tape the stimuli were blocked into groups of four films and the presentation order of these groups was randomized for each subject.
Any individual film was rated by 20 subjects in the judgment phase and by all 40 in the recognition phase, appearing to 20 of the subjects as a distractor and to the other 20 as a target.
Results
The results section is again divided into judgment and recognition results.
The later recognition analyses are unlike those used in the previous two studies where relationships between risk and recognition sensitivity were explored within individual junctions.
In this study junctions are divided broadly into two categories depending on the accident estimates that were given to them.
Subsequently some more exploratory analyses are reported.
Firstly, stimuli are divided into two groups depending on the direction of turn shown in the film.
Secondly, new ratings of the stimuli, obtained from a separate study, are used to explore the results further.
Judgment Results:
The actual mean risk ratings and accident estimates for the 48 different films (ratings from 20 subjects contribute to each mean) are given in Table 6.4 with the recognition results.
The overall mean risk rating was 2.15 (s.d. =1.22) and the mean accident estimate was 2.39 (s.d. =1.29).
These numbers are surprisingly low, no junction had a mean accident or risk rating above the midpoint of the scale.
This may reflect a general expectation on the part of the subjects that an experiment concerned with risk would involve more obviously dangerous situations, thus they have left themselves ‘headroom’ on the response scale.
Alternatively or additionally subjects may genuinely feel that there is greater subjective difference within the few films they have given high ratings to than within the many they have given lower ratings to and have been at least partially successful in avoiding what Poulton (1989) terms equal frequency biases.
Since a separate group of subjects gave judgments on each set of films the stimulus judgments are analysed for odd and even numbered films separately.
For both sets of stimuli there were significant differences between junctions both on risk ratings, F(23,437)=3.95, p<0.01 (odd numbered junctions), F(23,437)=5.67, p<0.01 (even numbered junctions), and accident estimates, F(23,437)=4.74, p<0.01 (odd numbered junctions), F(23,437)=4.02, p<0.01 (even numbered junctions).
Data on these stimuli are also available from a subsequent study using a series of rating scales (Groeger & Chapman, in preparation b).
Since data from that study will be used to clarify both the judgment and recognition results, the important points about that study will be briefly described.
In the Groeger and Chapman study the films were each viewed by 48 subjects who had just completed a drive around Cambridge with a local driving instructor.
The subjects were broadly similar to those used in this study in terms of age and driving experience.
Each subject saw one set of 24 films and rated each on eight different seven-point scales presented by computer, thus each film was rated by 24 subjects.
The eight scales used in this study were as follows.
1) How much risk would you have felt in that situation?
The mean risk rating given in the Groeger and Chapman study was in fact considerably higher than that given by subjects in this experiment (mean=3.66, s.d. =0.74 as opposed to mean=2.15, s.d. =0.50).
This difference is significant for both odd, F(1,42)=70.92, p<0.01 and even numbered junctions, F(1,42)=59.17, p<0.01.
This may simply be because subjects assumed that the current study was essentially about risk and expected to encounter some particularly dangerous situations.
Most of the stimuli presented actually showed very normal driving situations and these would thus be rated as relatively low on risk.
When subjects were performing a variety of other judgment tasks they may have no longer expected to see particularly risky situations and consequently would have been better centred on the scale for risk ratings.
The difference between experiments also interacts with the film seen for both odd, F(23,966)=2.35, p<0.01 and even numbered junctions, F(23,966)=2.13, p<0.01.
Despite these interactions, when correlations are calculated across the 48 films it is clear that the risk ratings in each case are strongly related to one another, r(46)=0.742, p<0.01, see Table 6.2.
Table 6.2 shows the correlations between the ratings given in this experiment and the eight ratings given in the Groeger and Chapman study.
In this case all values from each experiment were first averaged for each stimulus and correlations between the measures were calculated across the 48 films.
The correlation between the two sets of risk ratings is of comparable magnitude to the correlations when a subset of the data from Studies 2 and 3 was compared with data from a similar rating scales study (Groeger & Chapman 1992, in preparation a), r(22)=0.66 for risk ratings, r(22)=0.71 for accident estimates and r(22)=0.83 for speed ratings (though risk and accident estimates are on a 20 point scale in one case and a 7 point scale in the other).
Although there are again differences in the use of scales in different contexts, there is generally a relatively high level of agreement between the two sets of risk ratings.
This contrasts with the normality ratings obtained from Study 3 which were clearly used differently in the new context.
The correlations with the various scales give some indication of what types of situation subjects think of as risky, particularly those which require high levels of concentration, feel stressful and make them feel they are not in control.
The factor structure underlying these scales is considered in detail in Groeger and Chapman (in preparation b) and will not be discussed further here.
However, the last two scales concerning the amount of moving and fixed objects were included in that study specifically to aid interpretation of the recognition results from this study and will be considered below.
Note that the moving objects rating is significantly correlated with risk rating, r(46)=0.47, p<0.01 while that for fixed objects is not, r(46)=0.15.
Recognition Results
The mean number of hits for a stimulus was 13.94 and the mean number of false alarms was 5.25, each measured out of a possible maximum of 20.
Over the 48 stimuli there was no overall correlation of hit rate (hits — false alarms) with either risk ratings r(46)=0.27 or accident estimates r(46)=0.18.
The larger number of subjects in the recognition phase for each stimulus increases the reliability of signal detection measures calculated for individual stimuli so these measures were calculated immediately rather than using hit rate for further analyses.
Using the same techniques as were used for Studies 2 and 3 measures of recognition sensitivity, P(A) and bias, B, were calculated.
The data were again aggregated into six categories before these measures were calculated, the number of response in each of the categories is shown in Table 6.3.
Once again it proved possible to aggregate the responses into the same six categories, a comparison with Tables 4.5 and 5.4 shows that the use of response categories by subjects has remained remarkably constant throughout the three recognition experiments.
For the 48 films the mean P(A) is 0.77 (range 0.52 to 0.94) and the mean B is 3.07 (range 1.6 to 4.38), see Table 6.4.
These mean values of P(A) and B are very similar to those from Studies 2 and 3, P(A)=0.68, B=3.21 and P(A)=0.75, B=3.49 respectively.
This reflects success in avoiding ceiling effects for these stimuli although it is not immediately clear exactly which factors if any have interacted to produce a recognition test of comparable difficulty to those used previously.
There is no significant correlation across the 48 junctions between mean risk ratings and either P(A), r(46)=0.24, or B, r(46)=0.12, or between accident estimate and either measure r(46)=0.16 and r(46)=0.09.
The actual length of the film, however, is significantly correlated with P(A), r(46)=0.44, p<0.01, though not with B, r(46)=0.06.
Relationships Within Different Types of Junction:
The results thus far parallel those of Studies 2 and 3 in showing no overall relationship between risk and recognition performance.
In both those studies it was possible to split the films into those showing different junctions and look at relationships between measures within each junction.
When this was done opposite effects emerged for generally risky and generally non-risky junctions.
Here each film shows a different junction so it is necessary to use a new method of dividing the data.
The mean accident estimate was thus used to split the data into the ‘junctions with the highest accident estimates and the 23 with the lowest (3 junctions with the median score of 2.3 were not included in this analysis).
Table 6.5 shows the data split this way.
In this case the positive correlation between risk and P(A) for the ‘junctions rated highest for accidents is significant, r(20)=0.43, p<0.05.
The negative correlation for those rated lowest is not significant, r(21)=-0.11.
It is, nonetheless, significantly different from that for the high rated films, z=1.75, p<0.05.
This suggests that, as expected, for the generally more dangerous junctions feelings of risk are associated with improved subsequent recognition, whilst for the less dangerous ones this is not the case.
In this analysis, however, there is no evidence for an actual reversal of the effect.
Whereas in the previous studies subjects have had prior knowledge of a junction and multiple exposures to it, in this study subjects only see a junction once, in just one set of traffic conditions and at the same time as making a risk assessment.
It is thus not clear that these accident estimates are particularly stable assessments of the objective danger at the junction; they are likely to be strongly determined by risk ratings.
The high correlation between accident estimate and risk rating observed, r(46)=0.75, p<0.01, may reflect the objective correlation that should exist between these measures or it may simply be that subjects were not completely successful in dissociating the two scales.
Certainly in Study 2 there was a significant relationship between risk ratings and accident estimates, even within exemplars of individual junctions.
The accident estimates from Study 2 as shown in Table 4.6 make it clear that subjects do rely on the precise conditions in the film viewed when making accident estimates for a junction, even though most subjects previously knew the junctions concerned.
Nonetheless, it is clear that accident estimates still provide additional information.
If the films are divided simply on the actual risk rating given there is no evidence of differences in relationships for the two types of film — for high risk films the correlation between P(A) and risk, r(22)=0.265, and for low risk films r(22)=0.166.
Neither of these correlations is significant nor is the difference between them, z=0.33.
Clearly accident estimates are measuring an important aspect of the stimuli which risk ratings alone do not.
The fact that dividing the stimuli up by risk ratings produces no dissociation is consistent with the results of Studies 2 and 3 which showed that there was no simple U-shaped or J-shaped relationship between risk ratings and P(A).
This also appears to be true for this study, see Figure 6.1, here values of P(A) for the 48 films are simply plotted against the mean risk rating in each case.
The best fitting second order polynomial accounts for only 0.056 percent of the variance in this case, no improvement on the fit given by a straight line (r(46)=0.24).
Differences between Right and Left Turns:
Since no objective accident data were available for the areas shown in the films used in this study, it is not possible to define certain films as exemplars of risky junctions a priori.
As discussed previously, the accident estimates given by subjects are only a crude measure of objective risk which is clearly related to subjective risk even in situations where this is inappropriate (e.g. multiple estimates of objective risk for the same junction).
One objective distinction which can be made between films is the manoeuvre being performed by the driver.
One would, for example, assume right turns to be objectively more dangerous than left turns.
Data from Hall (1986) confirms that this is true for the objective risk of accidents at traffic lights.
In the Hall study accidents at 177 signalized crossroads were analysed over a period of four years, over this period accidents involving a vehicle turning right outnumbered those to vehicles turning left by a ratio of 6.6:1 (accidents involving one vehicle turning in each direction were excluded from the analysis).
This method of examining the data has not been employed in the previous studies because no attempt had been made in those studies to be representative in the sampling of direction of turn at each junction (see Table 4.2).
In this case, however, the sampling is better balanced, there are equal numbers of each type of turn at three different types of junction in comparable traffic conditions.
On this basis then the 24 films which showed turns were analysed separately.
The films were split into the 12 showing right turns and the 12 showing left turns.
A summary of the data split this way is shown in Table 6.6.
The difference in accident estimates between right and left turns, t(22)=1.89, p<0.05, suggests that subjects may indeed have used feelings of risk inappropriately when giving their accident estimates (alternatively, it is of course possible that the right turns used in this study actually did come from objectively more risky junctions than the left turns).
Although neither the correlation for right nor left turns is significant in its own right (10 degrees of freedom) they are both in the direction predicted, moreover, the difference between these two correlations is significant, z=1.85, p<0.05.
This seems to support the previously observed dissociation between generally dangerous and generally safe situations in the relationship between risk and recognition performance.
Fixed and Variable Information
Of the additional data collected about these stimuli in Groeger and Chapman (in preparation b) the first six scales were chosen to be directly concerned with aspects of risk.
However, the last two scales, concerning the amount of moving and fixed information in the film were added to aid the interpretation of the current study.
They were designed to allow some comparison of the films in terms of the type and amount of information actually present.
It was previously suggested that fixed information will tend to be peripheral to the driving task and variable information is more likely to be central, it is thus possible that the amount of these types of information will constrain any effects of attention focusing.
The division of the stimuli into right and left turns demonstrated separate positive and negative relationships between risk and recognition sensitivity.
This was done for just 24 of the stimuli, all showing junctions.
The division of the stimuli by accident estimates used almost the entire set of 48 stimuli.
Films with high or low accident estimates thus additionally included instances of passing a vehicle on a motorway and driving ahead along a curving road.
These situations were unlike the others in the study in that they were filmed in rural areas while the films showing junctions were generally in urban areas.
This may have meant that these stimuli contained relatively little peripheral information.
If films have little peripheral information in them then it may be that memory for such information is largely irrelevant.
It was previously suggested that one reason attention focusing might actually impair recognition of non-risky junctions is that it would prevent subjects from attending to useful peripheral information.
If there is little peripheral information in the non-risky exemplars, attention focusing would have no general effect on recognition sensitivity.
It may be that a prerequisite for obtaining reversals in the effects of risk on recognition is that there is a reasonable amount of peripheral information available in the situation.
To see whether the junction films actually did have more fixed information in them than the others, a comparison was made of the ratings from Groeger and Chapman (in press b).
This shows that one of the major factors that distinguishes the films of motorways and bends in roads from those of junctions is that they were rated as having less to see in them.
There was a small difference, though not a significant one, in terms of ratings for moving objects (mean rating 3.91 vs. 4.37, t(46)=1.28) but a much larger one for fixed objects (3.31 vs. 4.87,(46) =6.03, p<0.01).
Across the 48 stimuli there is a significant correlation between the rating for moving objects and P(A), r(46)=0.43, p<0.01, though not for fixed objects and P(A), r(46)=0.03.
There is a significant correlation between B and the rating for fixed objects, r(46)=0.40, p<0.01, though not between B and moving objects, r(46)=0.14.
The first result, that situations with many moving objects feel more risky, is what would be expected.
The second correlation requires deeper consideration.
B relates to the collapsed category scale in Table 6.3.
High values of B represent a tendency to call films distractors.
The positive correlation between B and the ratings of fixed objects thus means that subjects tended to mistakenly categorise films containing many fixed objects as distractors.
Since the ratings for the number of fixed objects in a film are not related to actual recognition sensitivity it seems likely that this information is not assisting subjects in the recognition phase.
One possible reason for this would be that fixed information may simply not be attended in the judgment phase, after all, we have already seen that the amount of such information present does not appear to be related to risk ratings (r(46)=0.15 between studies, r(48)=0.13 within the ratings scales study alone) or accident estimates (r(46)=0.23 between studies).
If such information was not attended to in the judgment phase then it is possible that when it is seen in the recognition phase it will be noticed for the first time.
Because of the unfamiliarity of this fixed information subjects may regard the film as a whole to be unfamiliar, and the more fixed information is present, the more unfamiliar the film will appear.
This may have caused the general tendency for films with a large amount of fixed information to be judged as distractors and hence the overall correlation with values of B.
This relationship may depend on the amount of variable information in the scene.
To test this possibility the data were split according to the mean ratings for the amount of moving objects in the film.
For generally busy scenes there was no correlation between B and the amount of fixed objects, r(20)=-0.053, while for the generally empty ones there was a significant correlation, r(21)=0.612, p<0.01.
The difference between these correlations is significant, z=2.38, p<0.01.
This dissociation also appears if the data are split on the basis of mean risk ratings (which were of course strongly related to ratings for number of moving objects — r(46)=0.47, p<0.01 across studies and r(46)=0.65, p<0.01 within the rating scales study).
There is once again a significant difference between the correlations, z=2.18, p<0.05, for the riskier films r(22)=0.211, while for the less risky films r(22)=0.711, p<0.01.
The relationship between B and ratings for the amount of fixed information, however, appears to be unaffected by splitting the data according to accident estimates, r(20)=0.39 across films given high accident estimates, and r(21)=0.39 for those with low accident estimates.
This seems to suggest that for films with many moving objects or with high levels of subjective risk subjects ignored the fixed information in the recognition phase and were thus not biased by it.
It would thus be only for those films with generally low levels of subjective risk or few moving objects that subjects actually looked at the fixed information even in the recognition phase and were thus able to be biased by it.
The general implications of this would be that fixed information is very seldom attended to in the judgment phase (and possibly in normal driving) and on those occasions in recognition tests when it is attended to, rather than aiding recognition sensitivity, its unfamiliarity simply biases subjects towards calling all stimuli distractors.
The small role of fixed information appears consistent with the general finding that previous knowledge of a junction does not affect recognition performance.
This finding is strengthened by the fact that the general results from this study in which all films showed unfamiliar junctions are broadly similar to those from the previous two studies in which most of the junctions were previously known by the subjects.
General Discussion
The results from Study 4 seem to be generally in accord with those from Studies 2 and 3.
In this case it was not possible to explore the effects of different levels of risk on recognition of different exemplars of the same junction.
However, it was once again observed that risk only enhances recognition performance in certain situations.
These situations may be characterised not by the actual risk felt in the situation but by the potential for risky situations to occur at the junction.
Thus situations which were given high accident estimates tended to show an improvement in memory when risk was experienced.
Similarly for right turns at junctions.
In Studies 2 and 3 there was evidence that this effect actually reversed for generally non-risky junctions and subjective risk in the judgment phase actually reduced subsequent recognition sensitivity.
There was no evidence in this study of a general reversal of this type for situations with low accident estimates, however, there did appear to be a reversal for left turns.
The lack of reversal when splitting data by accident estimates may have been caused by a number of films with very little peripheral information in them, or it may simply have been an effect of the high correlation between risk and accident estimates.
In discussing the rating tasks from Groeger and Chapman (in preparation, b), there has been a tendency to assume that the distinction between variable and fixed information corresponds to the distinction between central and peripheral information.
While this often may be true, there are also frequent exceptions.
Some fixed information is clearly central to the driving task (e.g. the actual layout of the junction) while much variable information is likely to normally be peripheral to it (e.g. the colour of other vehicles).
It would thus be preferable to have more specific information about the details of stimuli which subjects are actually attending to.
To decide what precise details in a situation are important it is necessary to use a methodology which either systematically manipulates those details present or else one which provides information about the details of the stimuli which were in fact remembered.
Clearly the amount of potential information in any film is sufficiently large that systematic manipulation would be extremely difficult.
However, it may be possible to get some idea about the information that was likely to have been used in the recognition studies by simply asking people to describe the films.
This approach is used in Chapter 7 to attempt to understand the basis for the recognition results.
The obvious alternative method of determining which aspects of a stimulus are remembered is to use a modified recall paradigm and this approach is adopted in Chapter 8.
Chapter 7
Exploring the Recognition Results III
All four studies reported in this thesis so far have demonstrated some form of relationship between subjective risk and memory.
Study 1 demonstrated that drivers were substantially more likely to recall those situations in which they had experienced risk.
Three subsequent laboratory studies, however, have failed to show any overall improvement in recognition sensitivity for films which were given high risk ratings.
These laboratory studies have nonetheless provided some evidence of relationships between risk and sensitivity.
Specifically, those situations in which drivers might normally expect to experience risk (e.g. generally dangerous junctions or right turns) showed the expected effect, recognition sensitivity was better for risky exemplars than less risky ones.
However, for the situations which would not normally be associated with risk (e.g. generally safe junctions or left turns) recognition sensitivity was highest for the least risky exemplars.
Two possible interpretations of this effect were advanced in Chapter 5.
One interpretation was based on the fact that in each case memory appeared to be best for situations which accorded with the subjects’ expectations about the junction, an attempt to test this was made by considering subjects’ratings for how normal the situation was.
Normality ratings did not clearly support this position.
Moreover, it is not clear that this pattern of results is what would be predicted on the assumption that subjects had schemas for situations previously available.
An alternative interpretation of the data was given using the idea of attention focusing.
This interpretation was based on assumptions about the types of information available in different stimuli.
The study in this chapter was designed to allow some assessment of the information which was in fact present in the stimuli used in order to explore these assumptions.
The result of attention focusing is assumed to be that memory for situations in which a driver experienced risk will be concentrated on central information.
It has been argued that an appropriate definition of central in this context would be information related to risks and potential risks in a situation.
On this basis the specific assumptions that were made for giving an attention focusing interpretation of the recognition results were that the types of risk present at generally dangerous junctions are of a different order to those at generally safe junctions.
The attention focusing interpretation of Studies 2 and 3 assumed that risks at dangerous junctions provide better recognition cues than those at safer junction.
This could be because risks at dangerous junctions tend to be multiple and often specific to individual films while risks at safer junctions are often single and common to many exemplars.
The argument was that knowledge of multiple specific risks enhances recognition while knowledge of a few general risks does not, in fact attending to these risks will cause subjects to make false alarms in a recognition test when similar risks appear in films which had not been previously viewed, hence impairing recognition sensitivity.
Studies using recognition measures have advantages over those using recall.
It is much easier to score the data and, having scored it, it is possible to calculate precise measures of performance and accurately assess any response bias.
However, one problem with using recognition as a method of assessing memory is that although it gives good overall measures of performance it does not make it clear exactly which details of a stimulus were remembered.
This is particularly important given that the explanation of the data given in Chapter 4 in terms of attention focusing relied on assumptions about memory being enhanced for some aspects of the stimuli and impaired for other aspects.
In standard laboratory research it is usually possible to create stimuli which systematically manipulate the details of interest.
Systematic manipulation of information in films of the type used in Studies 2, 3 and 4, however, is not possible, firstly because of the difficulty in setting up appropriate driving situations for filming and secondly because it is not yet clear exactly which details are the important ones.
Study 5 was thus conducted to allow some quantification of the actual information contained in the stimuli that were used in Studies 2 and 3.
This was done by having drivers themselves indicate what the important details of the stimuli previously used in fact were.
This was intended both to inform future research and to allow the reinterpretation of the results of Studies 2 and 3 to see whether the assumptions made about the distribution of information concerning risk were in fact correct.
A paper by Hughes and Cole (1986) describes two studies which use a methodology similar to the one which will be used in the study described in this chapter.
Hughes and Cole had drivers report objects that ‘attracted their attention’ while actually driving a car and while watching a film of the same route.
They found that there was relatively good agreement between reports given on the road and in the laboratory, the main difference was that the total level of report was 21% higher in the laboratory.
Subjects in their laboratory study gave approximately nine verbal reports per kilometre.
They chose to divide verbal reports into eight different categories, however, they subsequently divided reports into two general types which are of particular interest in this context.
These were reports of information which was related to driving, and information which was not.
The former category included information about road layout, traffic control devices, vehicles, and people.
The latter category included information about the immediate road surrounds (litter bins, post boxes etc.), general road surrounds (houses, shops etc.), vegetation, and advertising.
Hughes and Cole make no reference to differing levels of risk, nor do they report information specifically for junctions.
Their particular interest was the relatively high levels of report for advertising contrasting with relatively low levels of report for traffic control devices.
However, their division of information into driving-related and driving-unrelated is of considerable interest in the context of the previous discussion of attention focusing.
The amount of report in each category was highly dependent on the type of roads (which they divide into residential, arterial and shopping).
The overall level of driving-unrelated report remained approximately constant between these three road types (although there were substantial differences in the actual categories used).
Driving-related report, however, was highest in shopping areas, then arterial roads, and lowest in residential areas.
Importantly, the relative proportions of different types of information in different road types were largely the same for subjects who were actual driving and those who were watching films of driving.
The levels of report in the Hughes and Cole study were all calculated per kilometre travelled.
This was clearly necessary for their analysis since it allowed them to aggregate data over different drivers.
However, the actual time taken to cover a kilometre will almost certainly have varied substantially between road types, thus it is possible that their subjects did not actually have more to report in the shopping areas.
They may simply have spent longer in such areas and by giving reports at an approximately constant rate have produced the effects observed.
Note that a difficulty in the interpretation of such a study is that it is not clear what the objective frequencies of the various information types would actually have been.
Thus it is not possible to say that drivers attend to information differently for different road types.
It is almost certain that the distribution of information varied significantly between the road types and differences in report may simply have reflected these objective changes.
Study 5
Descriptions and Potential Risks
Study 5 used a methodology relatively similar to that of the Hughes and Cole (1986) laboratory study to describe the information which was available in some of the films which were used in Studies 2 and 3.
There were, however, two important differences in the aims of this study compared to those of Hughes and Cole.
Firstly, in addition to looking for a general description of the information available in the films, this study was concerned particularly with information which is related to risks and potential risks in the scenes.
Secondly, this study aimed to discover as much as possible of the information which is potentially available to drivers, not just the occasional item of particular interest.
These differences in aim required a number of differences in methodology.
Study 5 had two conditions, one set of drivers described fully all the salient information in a film, a second set of drivers described specifically the types of risks that were present in the film.
This was done to allow a comparison of risk-related information to other information in order to test the assumption that the recognition results relied on attention focusing causing specific memory enhancements for risk-related information.
Collecting further data on the stimuli may also allow other possibilities to be tested, there may be simple aspects of the stimuli relating to the recognition results which were not previously appreciated.
In a pilot experiment subjects attempted to describe films as they watched them in the way described by Hughes and Cole.
The films used in this study were, however, relatively short and it was clear that subjects were not describing anything like the total amount of information that was available.
Typically subjects either described at length one feature of interest ignoring all others, or else they gave several brief cryptic comments which could not unambiguously assigned to particular objects in the film.
As an alternative subjects were instructed to wait until the end of a film before giving any description.
Using this procedure subjects gave more intelligible descriptions.
There is, however, a substantial memory component to such a task, particularly for longer films.
Since the study was intended to provide an objective description of the films in order to understand memory performance it was clearly desirable to have as small a component of memory in the description task as possible.
The films were thus split into sections of five seconds each, this interval appeared to be long enough to give subjects a feeling for what was going on while still allowing them to give fairly comprehensive descriptions of the objects and events contained within each film section.
An additional advantage of this method of presentation is that it made the situation less realistic for subjects.
If subjects actually experienced risk while watching the films then it is possible that attention focusing might have taken place and systematically biased the information subsequently described by subjects.
As the aim of the study was to obtain objective descriptions of the films with which to interpret memory performance it is clearly desirable to minimize any such feelings of risk, pausing the film every five seconds appeared to be an effective way of doing this.
The method of coding the data in this study was rather different from that used by Hughes and Cole.
In order to retain as much information as possible, each type of object reported was initially coded separately.
Because this study was designed to facilitate the interpretation of recognition results a fundamental distinction was made between information which would be shared by all exemplars of a particular junction (fixed information) and that which could potentially differ between exemplars (variable information), the assumption was that the fixed information would be relatively unimportant to recognition performance.
A secondary purpose of the study was to explore the possibility that the act of describing a film or specifically describing potential risks in a situation will alter drivers’ subsequent assessments of risk.
This was intended as an extension to the debiasing work reported in Groeger and Chapman (1990).
To explore this possibility subjects gave risk ratings for the stimuli after completing the main experiment.
The data from this part of the experiment will not be described in this thesis.
Method
Subjects:
The subjects were 20 of the drivers who had previously participated in Study 2.
They were chosen to represent a range of ages (mean 44 years, min 21, max 62) and degrees of driving experience (Driving licence held for mean ‘years, min 4, max 40, mean annual mileage 7,450, min 1,000, max 25,000).
There were 8 men and 12 women in the sample.
Stimuli:
In order to allow the experiment to be completed by subjects in one hour only a subset of the original films from Studies 2 and 3 were used.
24 films were selected from the 60 originally used, these showed three exemplars from each of eight junctions.
Four of the junctions were chosen as low risk and four as high risk on the basis of the mean ratings given to that junction in Study 2 (the mean subjective risk rating averaged over all six exemplars of the junction).
From the six potential exemplars three films were chosen of each junction, one low risk, one medium risk and one high risk, the three levels of exemplar risk are assigned relative to the junction mean again using the mean risk rating from Study 2.
In the description phase the films were divided into sections lasting five seconds separated by a blue field lasting two seconds, different films were separated by a blue field lasting five seconds.
For the subsequent judgment task the films were presented in their entirety with an audible tone recorded at the moment the car passed through the centre of the junction.
Different films were again separated by a blue field lasting five seconds.
The films chosen show right turns at a roundabout, a crossroads and a T-junction, left turns at a roundabout and a crossroads, and going straight ahead either at a roundabout or past a minor road on the left or right hand sides.
Some details of the 24 stimuli used in this experiment are given in Table 7.1.
For further details about the films see Tables 4.2 from Study 2 and Table A2.1 in Appendix 2.
Apparatus:
Films were shown in the driving simulator as described for Study 2.
Procedure:
There were two phases to the experiment, a description phase and then a judgment phase.
In the description phase subjects viewed each film split into five second sections, after five seconds had been viewed the experimenter paused the video recording showing the subject a blank blue field, the subject then had unlimited time to describe the situation they had viewed and the events that had taken place.
Subjects did not start their description until the film section had finished, at which point they spoke into a microphone and their description was recorded.
When they had described all that they could the film was started again and they watched the next five second section, and so on until an entire film had been described.
There were two conditions, ten subjects took part in each.
One condition was a straight description of the objects and events in the film, the instructions in this case were as follows.
Full Description Condition:
‘You are going to see a number of films of a car negotiating a junction.
In each case I will stop the film every five seconds.
Once the film has stopped I want you to describe everything that you saw during the previous five seconds of film.
I want you to think of yourself as the driver of the car and to concentrate on the kinds of things you are normally aware of when you are driving.
You should describe both the features of the roads/junctions and the other road users.
You will see individual junctions more than once, please attempt to describe the road layout completely each time it appears on a film even though you may have described the junction previously’.
Potential Risks Condition:
In the other condition subjects viewed the same films in the same manner but described only the risks and potential risks in each section of film.
The instructions in this case were as follows.
‘You are going to see a number of films of a car negotiating a junction.
In each case I will stop the film every five seconds.
Once the film has stopped I want you to think of things which could occur to make the situation dangerous to you as the driver of the car.
You should describe where the potential risk lies and how it could develop.
You do not have to think of something every time that the film stops, but please try to describe as many possible scenarios as possible.
You can repeat scenarios which you have previously described but please make sure that in each case you describe things strictly in the context of the preceding five seconds of film’.
Both groups performed the same task in the judgment phase, this involved watching the same films in their entirety.
When the tone in the middle of the film sounded subjects gave a risk rating on a 20 point scale.
The instructions for the risk rating and the scale used were the same as those used for Study 2.
Partial randomization of presentation order was achieved in a similar way to that described for Study 2.
The films in both phases were divided into six blocks of four junctions each and the order of presentation of blocks was randomized for each subject.
Subjects performed one practice trial using a junction not shown in the experimental stimuli before starting the description phase of the experiment.
All subjects viewed all 24 films in both phases of the experiment.
Results
The analyses of the protocols reported in this chapter are essentially exploratory.
The analyses are used to look for patterns in the types of information available from stimuli which may account for the previous risk and recognition results and the relationships between risk and recognition.
Initially stimuli are compared in terms of the total numbers of descriptions and potential risks in the protocols.
Next the actual types of information are categorised and relationships between particular coding categories and both risk and P(A) are assessed.
This also provides a method of categorising new driving protocols as central or peripheral with respect to risk.
This categorisation will be used in Study 6.
Finally coding categories are aggregated into larger groups to contrast, for example, the differences between fixed and variable information in the protocols.
Coding the Data:
The transcripts for the 20 subjects were grouped according to the film section to which they referred.
A single full description and a full set of potential risks for each section was thus produced with a note of which subjects gave which information.
Appendix 3.1 gives an example of the full data for one of the 24 films.
The transcripts were then coded according to the detail of the scene to which individual comments referred.
In order to do this a coding system was developed.
The coding system was based loosely on the categories used in the police STATS 19 accident recording form.
This is the form which police officers use at the scene of an accident to describe the location and manoeuvres of vehicles.
Starting with the categories of information used in this form individual comments from both the description and potential risks condition were assigned to categories.
Where frequent comments could not be assigned to a pre-existing category a new category was created.
Those categories initially included on the form which were used least often were discarded until 50 categories remained.
Precisely the same coding system was used for both general descriptions and descriptions of potential risks.
The coding system allows two main types of information to be coded, fixed features — those that will be the same every time a junction is seen, and variable features — those which could potentially change every time a junction is passed through.
Within each of these main types there is a division into whether the object or event referred to is actually on the road or not.
Within these broad categorisations there are also a number of subcategories.
Tables 7.2 and 7.3 show the full coding system.
A general descriptor means a word such as‘traffic’ or ‘vehicle’.
Large can refer to any large vehicle — lorry, coach, van etc.
Changing road position is used for changing lanes and sometimes overtaking.
Total Information Given:
The coding system allowed a total of 6,467 comments to be encoded, 4,587 from the description condition and 1,880 from the potential risks condition.
This corresponds to each subject giving a mean of 19.1 descriptive comments or 7.8 comments relating to potential risks for each full film.
A small number of comments were not coded, this was generally the case when a comment did not refer to any potential or actual driving event, for example‘Have to remain vigilant’ or ‘Maintaining a steady speed’.
Such comments were relatively rare, accounting for less that five percent of the sentences transcribed.
Figures 7.1 and 7.2 show the mean amounts of information coded for different films in the description and potential risks conditions respectively.
Here the amount of information coded is calculated by simply summing the number of times each category from the coding system was used.
To see how the total information reported is related to the previous risk ratings given to stimuli the films were divided according to the categories in Table 7.1 with two separate factors relating to risk, junction risk and exemplar risk.
There are two levels of the first factor (high and low) and three of the second factor (high, medium and low).
Considering the descriptions condition first, analysis of variance with two within-subjects factors, junction risk and exemplar risk, shows that there is a significant main effect of junction risk, F(1,9)=195.21, p<0.01.
There is also a main effect of exemplar risk, F(2,18)=16.66, p<0.01 and an interaction between junction and exemplar, F(2,18)=18.98, p<0.01.
Post hoc multiple comparisons using the Newman-Keuls procedure (from Winer 1971, p.442) show that the difference between high and low risk junctions is significant, p<0.01, at all three levels of exemplar risk.
The fact that risky junctions contain generally more information than less risky ones is consistent with earlier findings.
Study 1 demonstrated that risk ratings were positively correlated with the time spent at a junction and the number of vehicles visible at a junction.
This interaction in Figure 7.1 is particularly interesting, the multiple comparisons show that for high risk junctions both high and medium risk exemplars are given significantly more descriptions than low risk exemplars, p<0.01.
For low risk junctions, however, a quite different effect emerges, high risk exemplars are given significantly fewer descriptions than both medium and low risk exemplars, p<0.05.
For the potential risks condition, analysis of variance with two within-subjects factors shows that there is once again a significant main effect of junction risk, F(1,9)=43.01, p<0.01, as would be expected the high risk junctions tended to have more potential risks.
There is, however, no main effect of exemplar risk, F(2,18)=0.95, and the interaction between junction and exemplar is only marginally significant, F(2,18)=3.04, p=0.07.
The pattern of differences shown in Figure 7.2 is nonetheless very similar to that in Figure 7.1 for descriptions.
Removing Elaboration from the Potential Risks:
One important aspect of the methodology used is that subjects were encouraged to describe potential dangerous events in addition to the information already visible in the film.
Some of the elaboration given was not directly related to objects and events in the five seconds of film just viewed.
To assess the degree to which this occurred comments in the potential risks condition from each five second section were compared with those from the description condition over the same five seconds.
When this was done it was found that 799 comments from the potential risks condition were given codes which were not used by any subject in the description of that five second section.
An example of a potential risk in this category is ‘There might be pedestrians concealed’.
Since the pedestrians were not actually visible they will not appear in the description phase.
799 out of 1,880 comments is a large enough amount to seriously compromise any conclusions about the number of potential risks visible in any stimulus.
Although this type of information did not differ significantly between high and low risk junctions, F(1,9)=4.43, there was a significant main effect of exemplar risk, F(2,18)=3.975, p<0.05.
Post hoc comparisons showed that both high and low risk exemplars received significantly more of this type of risk information than the medium risk exemplars (p<0.05).
To remove any effects of the risk information not corresponding to descriptions the original data was recoded.
This time potential risks were only coded if at least one subject from the other condition described the same information from the five second section of film.
Figure 7.3 shows the distribution of the recoded potential risk comments with junction and exemplar risk.
Once again there is a significant main effect of junction risk, F(1,9)=16.25, p<0.01, high risk junctions having significantly more potential risk information than low risk ones.
This time, however, there is also a significant main effect of exemplar risk, F(2,18)=7.80, p<0.01 and no interaction F(2,18)=2.05.
Post hoc comparisons reveal that low risk exemplars have significantly less potential risk information than either high risk exemplars, p<0.05, or medium risk exemplars, p<0.01.
There is no significant difference between high and medium risk exemplars.
Although the analysis of variance for the recoded risk information is slightly different from that for the all the potential risks it is clear from Figure 7.3 that with the exception of the medium risk exemplars the general pattern of results is very similar to that shown in Figure 7.2.
Although the interaction is again not significant the differences between exemplars are more marked for the high risk junctions than the low risk ones.
Information Not Related to Risk:
The same technique can be used to identify those descriptions which were never matched by comments in the potential risks condition, these might be regarded as peripheral details in the stimuli in the sense that they do not appear to be related to risks.
Figure 7.4 shows the distribution of such information.
Once again there is a substantial main effect of junction risk, F(1,9)=92.56, p<0.01, an effect of exemplar risk F(2,18)=5.16, p<0.05 and an interaction between the two, F(2,18)=25.90, p<0.01.
Post hoc comparisons reveal that all means are significantly different from one another, p<0.01, with the exception of the low risk junction medium risk exemplar which is not significantly different from either of the other low risk junction exemplar types, and the difference between high and low risk exemplars of low risk junctions where the difference is only significant at p<0.05.
The task was designed to minimize feelings of risk and thus prevent attention focusing, however, it is possible that actually feeling risk is not necessary for drivers to concentrate exclusively on the risky aspects of the stimuli.
The alternative is that because risky details are more important in a driving task they will always be the aspects which are described, other aspects may be noticed but are simply not regarded as important.
Since this explanation does not actually require subjects to feel risk it would predict that subjects in this task would describe risks at the expense of other information, thus if many risky aspects of the film were described few non-risky ones would be.
It is clear from Figure 7.4 that there is no evidence of this actually taking place in the description task.
The most risky situations, high risk exemplars of high risk junctions are given significantly more descriptions that are clearly not related to risk than any other type of situation.
Discussion of Total Information Given
A primary purpose of this study was to explore the distribution of risk-related information at both high and low risk junctions.
From Figures 7.2 and 7.3 it is clear that there is indeed more risk-related information at the high risk junctions and this is more marked for the high risk exemplars than the low risk ones.
For the low risk junctions it does not appear that high risk exemplars actually contain more risk related information than other exemplars of the same junction.
This is in accord with the assumptions that were made for the attention focusing explanation given for the different relationship between risk and P(A) in the two cases.
Although the potential risk information is in accord with the attention focusing explanation it is possible that there are more parsimonious explanations for the risk-recognition relationships.
The information from the general descriptions condition in Figure 7.1 shows an interaction between the two types of risk.
For high risk junctions increasing exemplar risk is associated with an increase in the amount of information described.
For the low risk junctions, however, the opposite is the case, high risk exemplars actually have significantly less information described.
If recognition sensitivity were directly proportional to the amount of information in a stimulus this would give the obtained results, risky exemplars being associated with good recognition at high risk junctions but with bad recognition at low risk junctions.
If this were the case there would be no need to propose that risk has any effect on memory or attention at all in these situations.
At first sight this appears a much simpler explanation of the observed effects than the attention focusing approach, however, there are difficulties with this explanation.
The significant main effect of junction type for both descriptions and potential risks is difficult to accommodate within this framework.
There is substantially more information both general and related to risks at the risky junctions than at the less risky ones.
Despite this both Study 2 and Study 3 failed to show any significant differences between the ten junctions in recognition performance.
Clearly the total amount of information in a stimulus plays an important role in recognition, however, it is not likely to be the sole determinant of P(A).
A second point to be considered is that although there appear to be differences between the exemplars of low risk junctions in the amount of information in the films such differences are small compared to the differences in P(A) that were observed.
Figure 7.5 shows the differences in P(A) for the films that were used in this study, a comparison of this figure with Figure 7.1 suggests that although the total amount of information in a stimulus does play an important role in memory it is clearly not sufficient to explain the recognition results.
The next question to be answered is exactly what details subjects were describing in the different conditions and whether certain specific types of information are related to risk, memory, or both.
Types of Information Coded:
To give an overview of the way in which the 50 coding categories were used in each condition Tables 7.4 and 7.5 show the total number of times each category was used in the description and potential risks conditions respectively.
In the potential risks condition the number given in brackets after the total is the number of those potential risks which were matched by at least one description in the same five second section.
This results in a particularly dramatic decrease for categories 38, 39 and 44, these correspond to the most common potential scenario statements: ‘If the car ahead braked suddenly…’,
‘If he pulled away suddenly…’ and ‘If there were pedestrians concealed…’.
Central versus Peripheral Information:
It has been suggested that information related to risk is central to driving, whereas other information is peripheral.
It is thus possible to describe the types of information which are most clearly central and peripheral with respect to this definition.
This can be done by comparing the relative frequency of use of different coding categories in the potential risks and description conditions.