

THE CIVIL WAR (1936–39)
The garrisons of Spanish Morocco rose on 17 July 1936, a day earlier than planned.
In the early hours of 18 July, Franco sent a telegram from Las Palmas to the eight regional headquarters of the army in mainland Spain and to thirty-one other garrisons.
 "Glory to the Army of Africa" , it began.
It went on
Spain above all.
Receive the enthusiastic greeting of these garrisons which join with you and the rest of our companions in the Peninsula in these historic moments.
Blind faith in victory.
Long live Spain with honour.
General Franco.
As in his letter of 23 June to Santiago Casares Quiroga, there was a certain ambiguity in this message, such that, had the rising failed, Franco might have argued that it was a gesture of solidarity towards the defenders of the Republic.
Similarly, a manifesto issued by Franco and broadcast later that day by the local radio in Las Palmas left some room for manoeuvre, should it prove useful.
Certainly, it justified the rebellion as a military duty, necessary to save the Fatherland from anarchy; but it did not say that the objective was the overthrow of the Republic.
Meanwhile, the local radio station in the capital of Spain, Unión Radio, gave out news of the insurrection in Spanish Morocco, confirming what everyone except the government had deemed imminent for months.
The rising was not confined to North Africa, however.
All over Spain, rebel officers put into action the plan they had been  elaborating since December of the previous year.
In Andalusia, General Gonzalo Queipo de Llano occupied Seville on 18 July, while General Enrique Varela took the port of Cadiz and a long stretch of coast eastwards as far as Algeciras, close to Gibraltar.
That same day, General Miguel Cabanellas rose in Zaragoza, from where he controlled a large area of territory stretching from the Pyrenees to the town of Teruel, in the east.
In Castile, the heartlands of Catholic conservatism and the fascist Right, the rebellion triumphed with little difficulty, placing the principal towns of Burgos, Valladolid, León, Soria, Salamanca and Segovia in anti-Republican hands.
In the north-west, too, in Galicia, the rebels quickly triumphed, thanks to the assistance they received from the Civil Guard in overcoming the resistance of loyal troops and civilians.
The coup's "Director" , General Mola, rose in Pamplona, the capital of Navarre, on 19 July.
His action triggered such a massive response from the Carlist movement that Mola had to ask its leaders not to send any more volunteers for the time being, because the Pamplona garrison had run out of rations.
Undaunted, the Carlist militias — the Requetés — formed into columns and set out for Madrid, some 500 kilometres to the south, in buses, in trucks and on foot.
The original plan had been for a rapid take-over of military and political control in Madrid, accompanied by risings in the other main cities and the convergence on the capital of detachments from the provinces to consolidate the coup and force the transfer of power.
In the event, this plan was only partially successful, for the rebels failed to achieve their objectives in Madrid; in the important commercial and industrial cities of Barcelona and Valencia; and in the mining and manufacturing provinces of Asturias and the Basque Country.
The two main frontier posts with France — Irun-Hendaye at the western end of the Pyrenees, and Port Bou at the eastern extreme — remained in government hands, thus ensuring the Republic's surface communications with its European neighbours.
The rebellion had failed to gain control of the Navy.
The lack of a contingency plan for this eventuality left the all-important Army of Africa, together with its commanders, General Franco and Colonel Yagüe (who, under Franco's orders, had been in charge of the Legion during the repression of  the Asturian revolutionary movement in 1934), stranded on the far side of the Straits of Gibraltar.
Finally, the bulk of the Airforce had remained loyal to the government, as had the frontier police and the Civil Guard in Madrid, Barcelona and Valencia.
Given that so many crucial factors militated against the success of the rebellion, the government should have been able to overcome it.
Instead of taking decisive action, however, the cabinet's reaction was at best ineffective and at worst irresponsible.
Certainly, the Navy was ordered to blockade the Straits of Gibraltar but, otherwise, merely bureaucratic measures were used to try to bring the rebels to heel.
Thus, decrees were issued ordering the dissolution of the rebel units, exempting troops from any duty to obey rebel officers, abolishing the state of martial law proclaimed where the insurgents had triumphed and dismissing rebel generals.
Inevitably, such paper tigers had no effect on men who had embarked on so desperate a venture, especially when they had never paid more than lip-service to the authority of the Republican politicians.
In addition to virtually dissolving the Army — a measure described by contemporary witnesses as "completely crazy" — the Prime Minister, Casares Quiroga, refused to distribute arms to the political and trade union organizations of the Left, evidently more afraid of the Republic's supporters than of its enemies.
In response, the anarchist CNT called a nationwide general strike and started to form volunteer militias, as did the PSOE and the PCE.
Overwhelmed by the situation, Casares Quiroga resigned on 18 July and was succeeded by Diego Martínez Barrio, who had led a caretaker government in the autumn of 1933.
Following an unsuccessful attempt to reach a peaceful agreement with the rebels, he, too, resigned after less than twenty-four hours in the job, to be replaced by José Giral, who, like Casares, was a member of Manuel Azaña's Republican Left party.
Giral agreed to the distribution of arms to civilians, under the responsibility of the political and labour organizations.
Thanks to this initiative, the attempted rising was put down in Madrid and Barcelona, though not without excesses and vandalism which did considerable harm to the Republican cause.
While the Republican politicians dithered and the more  violent partisans of the Popular Front vented their anger and frustration on people they considered to be right-wing, ecclesiastical properties and captured rebels, the insurgents entrenched themselves in the positions they had managed to take.
There, with the assistance of volunteers from the Rightist political organizations, particularly the Falange, they undertook a brutal campaign of repression designed to rid "their" territory of the last vestige of Republican support.
Hundreds of people were arrested and imprisoned, or summarily executed, because their ideas or sympathies were considered "wrong" by those who happened to be in local control.
With roughly half the country under the control of each side, a situation of stalemate had been reached.
The key to its resolution lay in the Army of Africa.
Without it and its leader, General Franco, the moral and military debilitation of the rebels might allow the government to gain the upper hand.
With both in the Peninsula, however, the insurgents would have a major advantage.
Franco landed in Tetuán on 19 July to a rapturous welcome from rebel officers.
Despite his minimal role in the preparation of the rising, he immediately began to take executive action, raising the Legionnaires' wages by one peseta per day and broadcasting speeches over the radio.
Most importantly, he set about resolving the problem of transporting his troops to the mainland.
Although the rebels had begun an air ferry with six planes they had at their disposal, it was clear that the rate of transfer thus achieved was much too slow and that the only hope of improving it was to obtain more planes from outside Spain.
Franco had spotted this possibility at an early stage: on arrival in Tetuán, he had authorized Luis Bolín (who had travelled with him from Casablanca) to purchase aircraft and armaments in Italy, Germany or Britain.
Bolín set off for Rome on 19 July.
Meanwhile, Franco himself approached the Italian government and General Mola organized a delegation of monarchists, who saw the Italian Foreign Minister, Galeazzo Ciano, on 25 July.
Initially, the Italian government declined to become involved, but Mussolini relented when he heard that his principal rivals in the Mediterranean, the French, were going to aid the Republic.
Accordingly, twelve  Savoia-Marchetti bombers were promised on 28 July.
Nine arrived in Morocco two days later.
At the same time, Franco made a similar request (this time, for transport planes and crews) to the German government; and, initially, received a similarly negative response.
While waiting for a reply, Franco decided to make a direct appeal to Hitler on the Nazi Party network, through certain members of the German business community in Morocco.
Hitler agreed on 25 July to send twenty transport planes.
He also sent six fighters, nearly one hundred pilots and a supply of machine guns.
Thanks to the German and Italian aid, Franco was able substantially to increase the number of troops being transported daily from Morocco to Spain, while the Republic remained apparently unable to stop him.
As in the 1920s, Morocco provided the scenario in which Franco appeared to be endowed with a special mix of luck and divine protection — baraka as his Moroccan soldiers called it.
Franco's success in obtaining German and Italian equipment greatly increased his political stock among the rebels.
In barely two weeks (12–25 July), he had gone from being very reluctant to participate in the rising to being one of its main protagonists, and a vital interlocutor with Hitler and Mussolini.
It was an enormous leap, which he was able to make by virtue of the professional competence and political significance he had built up over the preceding twenty years.
His prestige was shortly increased still further.
On 20 July he had discussed with General Yagüe the possibility of putting together a naval convoy to transport the Army of Africa across the Straits.
With Italian and German bombers providing air cover, the convoy set out on 5 August, carrying some 3,000 men.
On that day, a dense fog appeared in the Straits, through which, according to Francoist mythology, the Virgin Mary appeared to guide the rebel ships.
In fact, the fog obliged the convoy to turn back at first, but it set out again later in the day and reached the Spanish mainland with little difficulty.
Thus, by the end of the first week of August, between 8,000 and 9,000 soldiers had been transferred from North Africa to Seville, and the way was open for more to follow throughout the summer.
This not only altered the strategic military balance in favour of the  rebels, it also gave them an important psychological boost.
With specific regard to Franco, he was now seen as militarily and personally indispensable to a rebel victory.
By August 1936 it was no longer appropriate to talk of a coup.
The failure of the insurgents to secure the country's political and economic nerve-centres, the provision of German and Italian military aid and the resistance put up by the defenders of Republican legality had turned the insurrection into a war whose duration or outcome no one could foretell.
It is important to understand that it was essentially a political war.
It was, of course, a conflict fired by material interests; but it was, above all, a conflict about the ideas and opinions to which those interests gave rise.
It was not, in essence, a struggle for territory; nor for religious supremacy; nor for independence; nor against external aggression; nor about the rights of minorities.
These questions were, to a greater or lesser degree, part and parcel of the armed confrontation, in so far as each side had opposing views on them, but they were merely strands in the overall picture, not the underlying design.
The salient features of that design could be summarized as follows.
For three years, between July 1936 and April 1939, two opposing forces attempted to settle by military means a dispute which had been going on since 1931 over what form the state should take in Spain.
That is to say, whether it should or should not be a republic.
Yet it was not a straightforward choice between republic or monarchy, but between a state whose political basis was liberal democratic parliamentarism, and some other kind of system whose legitimacy did not derive from the theory and practice of one person, one vote.
In addition, there were a number of other conflicting relationships within this central (and here, much simplified) question, which affected and were affected by the course of the war as a military exercise.
The Spanish Civil War was the result of the collapse of political and social coexistence among Spaniards; and, in turn, fashioned subsequent political developments, inside each of the opposing war zones which emerged in the summer of 1936, between them, and between them and the outside world.
That last factor — the outside world — was crucially  important.
The Spanish Civil War took place at a time of growing tension in Europe, on account of the increasingly belligerent attitude of Hitler's Germany and the less bellicose, but also expansionist, intentions of fascist Italy.
Since the political division of Spain corresponded closely to that of contemporary Europe, each of the Spanish camps looked to its European counterparts for assistance, which turned the Spanish war into an international, as well as a national, conflict.
Indeed, the Spanish Civil War came to be viewed by some as the preface to the Second World War.
Whilst it could only be considered such with the wisdom of hindsight, it was nevertheless seen at the time as a geographically limited episode of a much wider-ranging struggle.
Recent research strongly suggests that an important factor in the inhibition of the western democracies towards the Spanish conflict was their concern not to provoke Hitler or Mussolini.
For the Republicans and their partisans, the broader struggle was between democracy and fascism.
For the insurgents and their supporters, it was between conservatism and communism.
For both, it was a conflict between two incompatible sets of ideological and political concepts.
Once the process was set in motion, there could be no going back and no possibility of negotiation.
It was a fight to the death; a fight for power, couched in stark terms of "winner takes all" .
As the initiators of the final, armed, phase of the dispute, the rebels were, perhaps, more acutely, or more immediately, aware of the risks involved.
The Republic had legality on its side and, at the beginning, it seemed inconceivable that the will of the majority, as expressed in the February 1936 elections, could succumb to the self-centred truculence of the minority.
The rebels, by contrast, had no objective legitimacy to support their action.
Moreover, they had revealed their game irrevocably this time and could expect no clemency if they lost.
Consequently, they simply could not afford to lose.
They had to achieve a total military victory in order also to impose the total political victory which would at once provide ex post legitimation for the rising and enable them to ensure that there would be no return to pre-July 1936 conditions.
It was not any supposed inherently violent trait in the  Spanish character, but this element of desperation which made the Spanish Civil War the brutally barbaric conflict it was.
Death and destruction were meted out by both sides, but there can be little doubt that the rebels carried a greater burden of responsibility than the Republicans, for their repressive actions took a higher human toll and they, not the Republicans, had acted against legality.
For the rebels, the war was a military enterprise with political motives; for the Republicans, it was a political question, whose resolution necessitated, but did not rest entirely upon, military intervention.
This difference of criterion as to the character of the conflict was reflected in the way power was handled on each side.
In the Republican zone, power remained in civilian hands and democratic forms were maintained until the end.
In the areas controlled by the insurgents, by contrast, martial law was immediately declared and power was, from beginning to end, vested in military men.
Thus, on 23 July the rebels created a Committee for National Defence, composed of seven generals, whose role was that of an embryonic and, of course, illegal government.
The following day, the Committee issued a manifesto expounding its justification for the rising, and appointed General Franco — who, it will be remembered, had been dismissed by the legitimate government of the nation — as chief of the Armies of Morocco and southern Spain.
On 7 August Franco set up his headquarters in Seville, in a large house offered to him by a local aristocrat, the marchioness of Yanduri.
This was the first of many palatial properties occupied by Franco over the next forty years — a tendency which is difficult to reconcile with his hagiographers' insistence that he was a man of austere tastes and habits.
By mid-August the rebel advance on Madrid from the south was well under way, spearheaded by two columns of Legionnaires and native Moroccan Regulares.
As he had done in Asturias in 1934, Franco did not participate in the advance but coordinated its progress from a safe distance, ensconced in his headquarters in Seville.
Despite the fact that he had not committed himself to the rising until the last moment, he was quickly consolidating the initiative he had taken in Morocco and was emerging as its sole leader.
Thanks to a series of events which he had done nothing  to bring about, other prominent figures in the anti-Republican camp had been permanently or temporarily removed.
As we have seen, the prestigious ultra-Rightist politician, José Calvo Sotelo, had been assassinated on 13 July.
The CEDA leader, José María Gil Robles, had been politically discredited by his electoral defeat of February 1936 and was now stranded in Biarritz, where he had been on holiday when the rising occurred.
The Falangist chief, José Antonio Primo de Rivera, had been imprisoned in March and by August was under close guard in a Republican jail in Alicante.
As for Franco's military colleagues, Goded and Fanjul were under arrest in the Republican zone.
None of the other conspirators, such as Queipo, Yagüe, Varela, or Cabanellas, had Franco's prestige.
Sanjurjo had been killed in an air accident on 20 July, on his way to Pamplona to assume the leadership of the rising.
General Mola was inferior in rank and had less prestige among the military, but he did have two factors in his favour: he was the director of the conspiracy and he was in command of all the rebel troops in the northern half of the country, thus "mirroring" Franco's command in the south.
Moreover, although Franco had the political and military support of Hitler, Mussolini, the Falangists and the CEDists, Mola had that of the Carlists and the exiled King Alfonso and his supporters.
Thus, at the height of the summer of 1936, General Mola was the only person who might be considered Franco's rival.
As the chief of the Army of the South, Franco's plan was to occupy the western provinces of Badajoz and Cáceres; link up with Mola's troops, which were driving south-westwards from Navarre; and advance eastwards on Madrid, following the natural line of penetration provided by the valley of the River Tagus.
In principle, it might have been quicker to take the direct northward road through Andalusia and southern Castile.
But this would have left a great swath of territory to the west in Republican control.
Franco therefore preferred to employ the tactics learned in Africa, securing every inch of territory as he progressed by thoroughly "cleansing" it of possible pockets of resistance.
His approach to Madrid, via Extremadura, indicated that, while he wanted to take the capital as quickly as possible, he would not sacrifice thoroughness to speed.
By mid-August Franco's troops were poised to initiate the drive for Madrid.
They were under the direct command of Lieutenant-Colonel Yagüe who, as an africanista, could be relied upon to conduct the campaign in the manner of the frontier war Franco himself believed it to be.
Franco knew that Yagüe would show the enemy no mercy; that was why he had deployed Yagüe with the Legion in Asturias, in 1934, and that was why he repeated the tactic in 1936.
Yagüe did not disappoint Franco's expectations.
In the conquest of the town of Badajoz, on 13 and 14 August, Yagüe repeated and surpassed the repressive brutality which in 1934 had earned him the name of "Hyena of Asturias" .
For decades afterwards, Francoist supporters denied the carnage which took place in Badajoz, in spite of the overwhelming evidence of contemporary eye-witnesses, who saw hundreds of Republicans rounded up in the municipal bullring, heard the machine guns, and smelled the reek of bodies being burned in the cemetery.
It was — as it was undoubtedly intended to be — a terrifying example of Franco's determination, to crush physically and morally, all opposition.
It was (as I have written elsewhere) "ironic that the war of which this slaughter was part had been initiated, allegedly, to save Spain from the"  "barbarity"  "of the"  "atheistic hordes"  "which were supposedly about to invade Spain from eastern Europe" .
By using Yagüe as his intermediary, however, Franco effectively distanced himself from the horror.
In the second half of August, the Army of Africa pressed towards Madrid, with the Republican forces falling back all the way.
The latter, composed mainly of volunteer militias, lacked the arms, the training and the organization of the rebels, who, as part of their patriotic façade, had adopted the term "Nationalists" to refer to themselves.
In addition, although the Republicans knew that they were defending legality, they did not have the moral stimulus of winning battles which the insurgents had, and which (as we have noted earlier), derived in large measure from the desperate fanaticism of their enterprise.
Also in contrast to the Nationalists, the internal differences which had so damaged the Republican camp prior to 1936 persisted even now, causing deep divisions between the Republican rank and file and their government, and between the political  and trade union organizations of the Left.
Finally, the Republicans did not receive the same level of external aid as their adversaries enjoyed.
On 1 August France proposed a policy of non-intervention in Spain's internal affairs.
By the end of the month, the resulting non-intervention pact had been signed by Britain, Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Germany, Holland, Poland and the Soviet Union, with the United States supporting the policy.
The signature of the Soviet Union did not, in fact, prevent the despatch of Soviet diplomats and military advisers, nor the sale of Russian arms, to the Republic.
However, this was more than counterbalanced by the amount of matériel and troops shipped to the Nationalists by Germany, Italy and Portugal; by the British and French prohibition on the sale of arms to the Republic; and by the fact that many of the Soviet arms purchases never reached the Republic because they were destroyed in transit by enemy action or were retained in France.
By the end of August, the territorial situation was of equilibrium.
The Nationalists occupied most of the western half of the country, and the government most of the eastern half, plus the city of Madrid.
The rebels held the ports of Andalusia and Galicia, but the Mediterranean and Pyrenean communication routes were still under Republican control.
Finally, the insurgents were in possession of the principal agricultural areas (especially the vital cereal-producing lands of Extremadura and Castile), while the Republic retained the main industrial and political centres, plus the fertile horticultural areas of the south-east.
The Republic, however, was on the defensive everywhere, and the relentless enemy onslaught on Madrid was draining its human, material and spiritual resources, as well as taking a heavy toll in political terms.
In early August the Minister of War, General Castelló, had had to be relieved of his post, suffering from psychological exhaustion.
Then, at the beginning of September, Prime Minister Giral was forced to resign by intense pressure from the Socialist and Communist Parties, whose leaders bitterly criticized what they saw as the Left Republicans' incompetent handling of the Republican war effort, accusing them of having lost control of the situation.
When the socialist Francisco Largo Caballero became Prime Minister and Minister for War on  4 September 1936, the Army of Africa was less than 100 kilometres away from Madrid, advancing rapidly from the south-west.
Perhaps because they were suddenly aware that Madrid could fall to the rebels at any moment, or perhaps because they felt more confident with a government which now included representatives of all the Popular Front forces and the anarchists, the Republican troops rallied at that point and managed to slow down the Army of Africa's advance on the capital.
With Mola still pushing towards the city on its northern flank, Franco realized that he might not be the first Nationalist general to enter Madrid.
If Mola got there first, not only would he snatch that honour from him, but it might also mean the end of the war and his return to the relative anonymity of normal army routine.
Finally, although the fall of Madrid at this stage might produce the capitulation of the Republican forces, it would not entail their annihilation.
Badajoz had demonstrated that Franco wanted the latter.
Thus Franco had powerful personal, professional and political reasons for wanting to avoid the immediate capture of Madrid at the beginning of September 1936.
It was perhaps partly for this reason that on 21 September he ordered General Enrique Varela (who had taken over from Yagüe when the latter became ill) to make a detour to Toledo, to relieve what remained of nearly 2,000 Nationalists who had been besieged in the giant fortress — the alcazar — since the end of July.
Toledo was of no military value to the Nationalist advance, but it had considerable religious, historic and emotional significance, for it was the seat of the head of the Catholic Church in Spain and had once been the hub of the Spanish empire.
Moreover, it was the location of the Infantry Academy where Franco himself and many of his fellow-rebels had been cadets.
The resistance of the defenders of the alcazar was, for the anti-Republicans, symbolic of the whole Nationalist cause, with a minority of "true" Spaniards taking up arms to defend the Fatherland and Christian values against the onslaught of the hordes of anti-Christ and anti-Spain.
Franco was well aware that the deliverance from evil of so powerful a symbol would greatly enhance his standing among the Nationalist partisans.
General Varela occupied Toledo at the head of Yagüe's  three columns of Legionnaires and Regulares on 27 September 1936.
The alcazar itself was relieved on the following day.
In what was becoming his familiar style, Franco appeared on the scene on 29 September, when success had already been achieved.
In spite of the fact that he had not set foot in Toledo throughout the entire operation, he was acclaimed as the saviour of the alcazar and received with smiles and gestures of obvious satisfaction the near-delirious attentions of the survivors of the siege.
As we shall see, what had been a relatively minor military operation enormously enhanced Franco's position in the Nationalist power stakes and proved to be an important milestone along his road to power.
Meanwhile, in the north, part of General Mola's forces had taken control of the Hispano-French frontier at Irún, on the Basque coast.
On 13 September they entered the one-time royal holiday resort of San Sebastian and, by the end of the month, were no more than 60 kilometres from Spain's largest centre of heavy industry and shipbuilding, Bilbao.
By then, extensive areas of territory were under rebel control and the problems of financing the war, procuring arms and other supplies, and administering the civilian population, were in danger of overwhelming the limited resources and authority of the seven-man Committee for National Defence set up in July.
In addition, the complexity of the purely military aspects of the conflict advised the appointment of someone to take overall command of the Armed Forces.
While as professional soldiers immersed in a war the Committee members were primarily concerned with the military considerations, the fact that a general state of martial law was in force meant that whoever was appointed would effectively also exercise supreme authority over both the civilian and the military populace.
Franco was well aware of the practical need for a single commander-in-chief who would supervise the coordination of all the different aspects of the rebel war effort.
He had discussed the matter in mid-August with General Mola, who (naïvely, in the view of his closest aides) was happy to allow Franco to take sole responsibility for arms procurement.
Franco's position of superior strength was consolidated further when, around 23 August, Germany and Italy decided to send all future aid to him, or to the places specified by him, and nowhere else.
When they also indicated that they would prefer to have one central point of communication for their dealings with the Nationalist camp, it was clear that the question of leadership must be resolved at once.
On 21 September, at Franco's request, a meeting of the Defence Committee was called in Salamanca to discuss the military and political conduct of the war.
On that same day, Franco ordered Varela to detour to Toledo.
This may have been coincidence or, as we noted earlier, a deliberate ploy to enhance his own standing.
Whatever the case, the fact remains that the Defence Committee voted almost unanimously to appoint Franco Commander-in-Chief of the Nationalist forces.
Perhaps because some generals (particularly Cabanellas and Queipo de Llano) were unhappy with this outcome, the Defence Committee did not immediately announce it publicly.
On 28 September — the day of the relief of the alcazar — the meeting was reconvened for further discussion.
This time, the chief of the Nationalist Airforce, General Kindelán, put forward the proposal that, for the duration of hostilities, the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces should also have responsibility for "all national activities: political, economic, social, cultural, etc." 
Kindelán's proposal was accepted by the Defence Committee, but when the appointment was published in the Committee's Official Bulletin, the reference to its temporary nature had disappeared.
Franco had evidently crossed it out, thus making himself supreme chief (Generalísimo) of the Nationalist Armed Forces and "head of the Government of the Spanish state" .
Franco believed that one of General Primo de Rivera's mistakes had been to establish the provisional nature of his regime at the outset.
By removing any temporal limitation on his own mandate, Franco showed that he did not intend to suffer the same fate as Primo.
In addition to his growing aura of having a special providence, which was conveniently (or deliberately) fostered by the timely relief of Toledo, Franco's designation was secured by two factors.
In the first place, his military pre-eminence was undisputed.
But because military and political factors were inextricably mingled in this war, the  appointment of a military leader was, at the same time, the choice of a political leader.
Here was the source of the Committee members' indecision and the second of the factors which decided the matter in Franco's favour.
On 18 July 1936 there had been no consensus on this question among those who joined the rebellion, beyond their unanimous desire to see the legitimate, democratically elected government removed from power.
Two months later, the designation of a single leader was a means to that end, not an end in itself.
In that context, Franco was the unifying common denominator, in that he was the only person acceptable to all the shades of political opinion present on the Committee, to the external powers whose political and material support were vital to the Nationalists, and to the Catholic Church, which had given its blessing to the rising as the defence of Christianity against communism.
By placing Franco in overall command, the Nationalists made a quantum leap forward in their efforts to secure victory.
No one was more aware of this than Francisco Franco.
That he knew his position to be unassailable was reflected in the fact that he immediately began to refer to himself not as Head of Government, but as Head of State.
The two positions were to remain merged in him until 1973.
For Francisco Franco, the war now had a new meaning.
Or, perhaps, it had the meaning he had wanted it to have from the beginning: the meaning that had kept him out of coups led by others.
It was not only the struggle to reverse the result of the 1936 election, nor even to stamp out Marxism in Spain.
It was also a fight to consolidate his position within the insurgent camp.
The achievement of all three aims would depend, to a large extent, on his ability to maintain the reputation for winning battles which had secured his appointment as military and political supremo.
To that end he now turned his attention back to the military progress of the war.
Shortly after his election as Generalísimo, Franco relinquished direct command of the Army of Africa, which was incorporated into the Army of the North, whose overall chief was General Mola.
With Queipo de Llano in direct command of the Army of the South, Franco retained supreme control over the Nationalist forces, but was not  directly in charge of how operations were handled on the ground.
In other words, he chose to conduct the war by remote control, distancing himself, as ever, from the brutality and the risks (including that of defeat), but preserving his stake in a successful outcome.
The focus of the war now returned to Madrid.
The seizure of power in the capital had been the rebels' primary objective since 18 July.
On 7 October they began an all-out offensive on the western flank of the city, with the columns of the erstwhile Army of Africa attacking from the Toledo direction, to the south-west, and further units of Mola's forces advancing from the north-west.
While the fighting took place in open country, the Legionnaires and Regulares were in their element.
Republican counter-offensives, launched by numerically, militarily and materially inferior Republican militias, were able to delay, but could not halt, the enemy advance.
By 17 October Mola's troops were only 30 kilometres from Madrid, causing President Azaña to remove himself to the safety of Barcelona.
By the end of the month that distance had been halved; and when, in the first week of November, Nationalist troops managed to cross the River Manzanares, which marked the city's western boundary, the rest of the Republican government decided that Madrid could not be defended.
The cabinet left on 6 November for Valencia, on the Mediterranean coast, ostensibly to direct from there the continuation of the struggle after the expected fall of Madrid.
But Madrid did not fall.
There were a number of interacting reasons for this, not the least important of which was that the rebel leadership — including Franco — made a serious error of military judgement.
The Nationalist offensive against Madrid deployed the same tactics that its africanista commanders were accustomed to using against tribesmen in the Moroccan Rif: a series of columns attacking simultaneously at different points along an extensive front.
To be successful, this required surprise, speed and weak enemy defences.
Clearly, there could be no element of surprise, and although the rebel advance had been rapid until then, it had effectively been halted at the gates of Madrid.
There remained the question of the strength of Republican defences.
In principle, they were by no means impregnable, but the Republican Field Commander, Colonel Vicente Rojo, had concentrated as many as possible of his human and material resources on the city's western flank, and his troops had the advantage of a commanding position overlooking the river valley and familiarity with the urban terrain.
The Republican militias were assisted in their efforts to defend Madrid by the discovery of a copy of the Nationalist plan of attack on the body of an Italian soldier; a substantial delivery of Soviet arms, munitions and aircraft; the arrival of the first contingent of International Brigade volunteers; and the tenacity of the civilian population.
By 23 November Franco was forced to recognize that the head-on approach to the conquest of Madrid had failed.
He did not admit defeat or withdraw.
He simply had his forces retrench while a new strategy was considered.
Some of his advisers favoured a large-scale attempt at encirclement from the north of the capital.
Franco, however, instinctively rejected the risks involved in an audacious operation and opted instead for the less ambitious objective of driving a wedge between the city and its northern line of defence, in the Guadarrama mountains, by severing the road and rail communications north-westwards out of the city, towards La Coruña.
The first attempt did not succeed; mainly, in the view of military historian Gabriel Cardona, because Franco failed to realize that the conquest of a large city like Madrid required massive and concentrated artillery attack, with coordinated and sustained support from the air, not African-style cavalry charges followed by rapid, but unsupported, infantry attack.
A second attempt, made on 14 December, was also unsuccessful.
When the Nationalists launched their third attack, on 3 January 1937, their forces had been reinforced considerably, especially by Italian and German aircraft, including the German "Condor Legion" , despatched to Spain at the beginning of November and allowed by Franco to use the Spanish war as a practice ground for devastating new techniques of destruction and terror.
The fact that more than 70,000 men were now concentrated on the western flank of Madrid (compared to 14,000 deployed in October) bore witness to Nationalist determination to take the capital.
The main Madrid-La Coruña road was finally cut on 13 January, but other roads to the Guadarrama  mountains remained in Republican hands.
Even though 30,000 lives had been lost and massive amounts of matériel consumed on both sides, Madrid did not fall to the Nationalists.
For once, Franco was not victorious.
Had the war ended with the collapse of Madrid in November 1936, the Nationalists would have had considerable difficulty in improvising the governmental and administrative apparatus necessary to sustain a new regime.
The Nationalist high command had disrupted the normal functioning of the country's political, economic, cultural and social life, but had given no thought to the construction of alternative infrastructures and super-structures on their own organizational patterns.
Without adequate groundwork, there was no guarantee that any regime installed at the end of the war would not collapse very quickly.
In the autumn of 1936 Franco set about preparing the political foundations of his "New State" , in anticipation of what he thought was his imminent entry to Madrid.
Perhaps recalling General Primo de Rivera's ill-starred attempt to rule, initially, through an all-military committee, one of Franco's first steps was to replace the exclusively military Committee for National Defence with a mixed, civilian and military, Technical Committee.
While this organ could and did assume the executive functions of a provisional government, its creation did not resolve two crucial problems: what roles were the existing political parties and the mass of the population to play in the New State.
Notwithstanding the two occasions on which he had been tempted to abandon the Army for politics, and the cordial relations he had maintained with the CEDA, Franco was disdainful and suspicious of politicians.
In this, he was typical of the Spanish officer class of his day, which harboured a deep-seated resentment against what it considered the neglect of its legitimate claims to attention by inept and uncomprehending civilian governments.
It was for this reason that no civilians had been formally involved in the spring 1936 conspiracy, and that the Committee for National Defence had issued a decree on 25 September 1936 which prohibited "all political activity" for the duration of hostilities.
It was for this same reason that  José Antonio Primo de Rivera, while supporting the military rising, had harboured serious doubts as to what might be the fate of his party in the event of a triumph by the military.
There were a number of factors which made it ill-advised, and indeed impossible, to ignore completely the presence of political organizations in the Nationalist rearguard.
In the first place, they had lent vital paramilitary support to the rising and continued to be a crucial source of committed volunteers on the battle fronts.
Secondly, they assisted the Army and Civil Guard in tasks of rearguard control and repression.
Thirdly, they were a source of ideological arguments which would legitimate what, otherwise, would appear to be simply another military rising organized by discontented soldiers.
Finally, when the war was over, the political groupings which had given the Nationalists their moral and material support would not only not disappear, but would expect to be duly recompensed and might even expect to take over the legislative and executive control of the New State.
The question, therefore, was how to satisfy the aspirations of the political groupings, without allowing them to gain the upper hand; how to make use of their mobilizing capacities, without these being used to ends other than those approved by the Commander-in-Chief, Generalísimo Franco.
In a radio broadcast on 1 October 1936, the day he was officially invested as Head of State, Franco hinted at how he envisaged the organization of the as yet non-existent state of whose equally non-existent government he had just been made leader.
 "Spain" , he said, would be organized "within a wide-ranging totalitarian concept of unity and continuity" .
This was a shrewd declaration.
All four of the major political forces supporting the Nationalist military effort subscribed to some form of totalitarianism, while references to "unity" and "continuity" suggested that a return to the status quo prior to 1931 was envisaged.
Thus the partisans of the Falange, the CEDA, Renovación Española and the Comunión Tradicionalista could each imagine that Franco specifically meant them.
In this way, Franco could secure their cooperation for as long as the war might last.
However, this still left the question of how the  "totalitarian concept" would be implemented.
There were two possible answers.
The first was that Franco intended to create a party for himself.
This, in fact, was the option favoured by his secretary-brother, Nicolás.
The Generalísimo, however, was not convinced that this was the ideal solution.
In the first place, far from eliminating the kind of inter-party competition he believed to be the fatally debilitating flaw of liberal democracy, it would add another participant to the contest.
Secondly, it might arouse the hostility of some of his comrades in arms, on the grounds that he was using the war to further his own political ends.
Thirdly, this solution was too reminiscent for his liking of the unsuccessful Unión Patriótica (Patriotic Union), an artificial creation which had failed to provide Primo de Rivera's dictatorship with the spontaneous popular support it had needed to survive.
The second option was to make one single party out of the existing political organizations.
In this way, inter-party friction would be eliminated, while, at the same time, the new organization would still be able to draw on the mobilizing capacity of the old parties.
Moreover, far from excluding anyone, this would be a way of including the existing membership of the individual groupings.
Finally, such an all-embracing solution could be presented as based on national, rather than personal, interests, for it appeared to represent everyone, not just certain social or economic sectors.
It was this second scheme that Franco was inclined to favour and whose realization he began to turn over in his mind in the autumn of 1936.
While one part of his armies laid siege to Madrid and another pressed westward along the north coast towards Bilbao, Franco studied the idea of uniting the Falange and the Carlist Comunión Tradicionalista.
He reached the conclusion that such a move would be relatively simple, on the grounds that the two organizations had much in common.
It was true that both were rabidly anti-Marxist, anti-separatist, nationalist and, above all, intent upon the destruction of the Second Republic.
The Falangists, however, were not monarchists and their rhetoric, if not their ideology, was revolutionary, whereas the very raison d'être of the Carlists was monarchism and they were totally opposed to all revolutionary notions.
Any attempt to unite  them would, therefore, have to be carefully planned if it were to win the acquiescence of the parties involved.
Alternatively, if their agreement could not be achieved, it would have to be effected by force.
Franco began to prepare the ground, starting with the Falange.
In the absence of its national chief, José Antonio Primo de Rivera, the party had become divided into a number of factions whose mutual animosity was only kept in check by their common interest in a Nationalist victory in the war.
A provisional executive committee had been set up, whose chairman Manuel Hedilla Larrey, was a former member of Acción Española.
Hedilla believed that he was head of the party, but other members of the committee and their respective coteries considered that Hedilla was no more than "first among equals" and that, in any case, his authority was only provisional.
The parallel between Hedilla's situation and Franco's is striking.
Each was temporarily leader of his respective peer-group and power-base, but each had less than unanimous backing, especially in the long term.
Consequently, each could be strengthened by the support of the other.
Cooperation between them was possible and necessary, but it was implicit that each would use the other to further his own ends.
Until then, Franco had never shown any interest in the Falange, and the party had made no attempt to recruit him.
In the autumn of 1936, however, they needed each other and accordingly made an effort to conceal their mutual distrust.
Following Franco's example, Hedilla had transferred his headquarters from Burgos to Salamanca in October, and was thus able to see Franco quite frequently.
Their relations were always cordial and, in his memoirs, Hedilla recounts how they often talked of politics.
Their discussions included the merger of the Falange and the Traditionalist movement and they went so far as to commission a draft document outlining the project.
Although Franco seemed well on the way to having Hedilla in his pocket in late October, Falangist support for merging with the Traditionalists was not yet guaranteed.
Primo de Rivera was still alive and there could be little doubt that he would be opposed to the idea, for, even before the rising, he had warned against the danger of becoming the puppets of the military.
The Falangists had  made a number of attempts to rescue Primo de Rivera from prison, all of which had failed.
In fact, unbeknown to them, Franco had played a crucial role in the failure of what turned out to be the last of these, in September 1936, shortly before his elevation to the position of Head of State.
Clearly, Franco would stop at nothing to retain his hegemonic position.
Some two months later, on 20 November 1936, Primo de Rivera was executed in Alicante prison, leaving the Falange under the disputed leadership of the malleable Hedilla.
As with Calvo Sotelo and Sanjurjo, the intervention of "fate" had removed another of Franco's possible rivals.
The Traditionalists were less easy to tackle.
Their opposition to the idea of fusion with the Falangists was foreseeable, as we have noted, on account of their immovable monarchical and counter-revolutionary ideals.
Certainly, the Comunión, too, was split into two main factions, but, in contrast to the Falange, its organizational structure was intact and its top men were in the Nationalist zone.
Moreover, the movement's supreme leader, the Pretender Don Francisco Javier de Borbón, was alive and well and living in Biarritz.
The Nationalist cause needed the Carlists' paramilitary support, and the Carlists wanted a Nationalist victory, but Franco was not their only possible military champion.
It was widely believed, at the time of the rising, that General Sanjurjo had intended to assume the leadership of the Traditionalist Communion as well as of the military rising.
As a sign of this, a statue of Sanjurjo in Pamplona was adorned with one of the red berets which were part of the Carlist uniform.
With Sanjurjo dead, General Mola was the Carlists' immediate interlocutor, for it was with him that the Carlist leadership had negotiated the Traditionalists' active support for the rising.
Since the Carlists were unlikely to accept any kind of power-sharing arrangement, it was less a question of making a political pact with them than of imposing the desired situation on them and limiting as far as possible their capacity to reject it.
The first practical step towards reducing the potential threat of the autonomous power of the political organizations was, in fact, military in nature.
In December 1936 a decree was issued which made all volunteer forces subject to military jurisdiction.
Up to that point, the  Falangist, Carlist, monarchist and CEDA militias had been covered by civilian law and ultimately responsible to their political leaders.
The December decree annulled that situation, placing the party militias fully under military control.
Furthermore, any attempt on the part of the political organizations to use their militias independently of what military GHQ disposed would be tantamount to a crime against the state and would merit the severest of penalties.
Franco made no mention of the creation of a single party after November 1936.
By then, not only had the Nationalist seventh Division failed to enter Madrid, it had also failed in its first attempt to isolate the city from its northern defences in the Sierra de Guadarrama.
There was no longer, therefore, any urgent need to prepare the political as well as the military take-over of the seat of national power.
Nevertheless, the issue was discussed publicly in the winter of 1936–37, when Carlist and Falangist newspapers published articles about it in December 1936 and January 1937.
According to Hedilla, "the idea began to take shape that the Generalísimo would decide to unify the Falange and the Requeté" .
In view of this possibility, both the Carlists and the Falangists decided to forestall an imposed unification by negotiating their own, spontaneous merger.
A tense power-struggle now began to unfold, for, in both parties, there emerged two different concepts of what such fusion would mean.
For one group of Carlists and one of the Falangist factions, the new party would be the political organ of a regime headed by Francisco Franco — a party whose leader would be appointed by the Generalísimo.
For a second group of Carlists and the Falangists closest to Hedilla, the new party would elect its own leader and would have a status and role independent of the regime, whilst sharing power with the government.
During the first two months of 1937, Carlists and Falangists tried, unsuccessfully to reach an agreement on a coalition while, internally, the gap widened between the different factions.
In March Hedilla had talks not only with members of the Comunión Tradicionalista, but also with some of the supporters of the Alphonsine dynasty, whose political future also depended on the outcome of what was becoming a bitter, subterranean confrontation within the main conflict against the Republic.
By then, the war had again reached stalemate.
Yet another unsuccessful attempt to isolate Madrid, this time by severing its road link with Valencia, was made in February 1937.
The battle of the Jarama valley occasioned appalling casualties on both sides.
Some 16,000 men lost their lives in three weeks of intense fighting.
When the battle ended, on 23 February, both sides were exhausted and neither could claim victory.
Madrid and the road to Valencia remained in Republican hands, but the Nationalists had pushed the front line forward a few kilometres and were dangerously close to the Madrid-Valencia road.
Barely two weeks after the Jarama carnage, Franco launched what was to be the last Nationalist attempt to take Madrid, with an attack to the north-east of the city, in the province of Guadalajara.
In this battle, the key element was the leading role given to a contingent of Italian infantry, which formed part of the volunteer forces sent by Mussolini in increasing numbers in the winter of 1936–37.
Franco had been grateful to receive Italian planes in July and August, but he was not happy with the massive despatch of foot-soldiers, partly because Mussolini had the temerity to send more than had been agreed, and partly because the Duce insisted that they were not deployed as part of the Spanish Army, but formed an independent corps, with their own officers.
The Italians had brought with them a battalion of tanks, a company of armoured cars and another of motorized machine guns, all designed for the kind of fast-moving warfare that Mussolini wanted to see in Spain and which was inimical to Franco's preferred modus operandi.
The Corpo di Truppe Volontarie (CTV) had taken part in the occupation of Malaga, on the south coast, in the first half of February, but Franco had refused to allow them to continue their advance eastwards, towards Valencia.
He was instinctively sceptical of the Italian guerra celere; wary of finding himself politically beholden to Italy in return for military aid; opposed to the occupation of Valencia — the seat of the Republican government — by anyone other than Spaniards; and desirous of prolonging the war.
As he explained on 13 February to the Italian Chief of the General Staff, Colonel Emilio Faldella, he wanted the slow occupation and thorough "cleansing" of the territory, not just quick military  victories.
Nonetheless, Franco agreed that the Italians could spearhead the attack on Madrid from Guadalajara, as part of an ambitious Italian plan to tighten the circle round the capital by advancing in a south westerly direction towards Alcalá de Henares, where they would meet up with Spanish troops marching north-eastwards from the Jarama, across the Madrid–Valencia road.
The attack began on 8 March and went well for the Italians at first.
But their troops were badly trained and inexperienced and rain and fog turned the ground into a quagmire, which prevented the use of their aircraft and impeded the advance of their lorries and tanks.
By mid-March the operation was literally bogged down in mud and confusion, allowing the Republicans to mount a counter-offensive.
Despite the agreed battle-plan, Franco did not move any of his forces up from the Jarama front and twice refused the request of the Italian Commander-in-Chief that his troops be relieved by Spaniards.
The battle ended in defeat for the Italians on 22 March.
Franco's failure to assist them undoubtedly contributed to that result and had been calculated in political rather than exclusively military terms.
Strategically, the Guadalajara débâcle made little difference to either side.
Politically, however, it meant that Franco had asserted his authority vis-à-vis Italy, for both Italian and Nationalist consumption.
He evidently considered that gain to be worth the negative propaganda value of a militarily minor defeat, especially as it was portrayed as a defeat for the Italians, not for the Nationalists.
The failure of the Guadalajara offensive marked the end of a period of change discernible in Franco's military tactics.
Until November 1936, the leitmotiv of his campaign had been speed, with the rapid conquest of Madrid as the prime objective.
During the winter of 1936–37, the impossibility of isolating Madrid began to impose a change of tactic, and the slow, relentless erosion of the Republican defences became a necessity which was presented by Franco (for example, in his conversation with Faldella in mid- February 1937) as a deliberate choice.
By the end of March this had been "refined" further: from then onwards, Franco's war of attrition was both a military inevitability and a punishment for the Republic's resistance.
At the same time, having failed to take Madrid, Franco  needed a victory elsewhere to revitalize and reassert the military prowess which had led to his election as supreme military and political leader.
The most obvious targets were the remaining northern provinces of Vizcaya, Santander, Gijón and Oviedo, cut off from the rest of the Republic in three directions by Nationalist troops and on the fourth side by the sea.
Franco had decided to launch his next offensive in the north even before the battle of Guadalajara had concluded, and gave orders to that end on 23 March 1937.
On 29 March, the Italian ambassador in Salamanca, Roberto Cantalupo, reported to Rome that Franco had told him how, in the wake of Guadalajara, he was aware of"the urgent need to satisfy his Spain and to humiliate the reds.
Hence the idea of making a sudden attack in the direction of Bilbao."
The commanding officer of the Army of the North, General Mola, had some 40,000 men at his disposal for the campaign, including a mixed Hispano-Italian unit, the Black Arrows, created after the battle of Guadalajara.
In addition, ground troops were to be supported by Italian aircraft and, most importantly, by the German Condor Legion.
This was to be the first time in history that aircraft were used for ground attack, as an integral part of an operation carried out by ground and air forces.
Mola had estimated that it should take about three weeks to conquer the coastal area as far west as Santander.
Even so, Mussolini was becoming impatient.
Cantalupo was pessimistic about the likelihood of a rapid Nationalist victory and even thought that the Republican defence of the north might not collapse, as the Nationalists expected.
He believed that it was possible to "foresee this war of positions between the two Spains lasting a long time" , unless there occurred "the intervention of internal political factors (revolution in one of the two Spains) or external political factors (mediation or a more active form of intervention by the Powers)" .
In order to avoid what Cantalupo termed a situation of "paralysis" in Spain, Italian diplomacy sought to arrive at a political solution in the Basque Country.
Towards the end of March, the Italian Consul in San Sebastian, the Marquis of Cavaletti, contacted the President of the autonomous Basque government, José Antonio Aguirre, and proposed that Italy should act as the mediator  between Franco and the Basque government, in order to achieve a negotiated end to the war in the north.
Aguirre was favourable to the idea, provided that Italy would guarantee the conditions once agreed.
When told of Cavaletti's initiative by the Italian embassy in Salamanca, Franco reacted favourably at first, but later began to raise objections.
The northern offensive began on 31 March 1937.
Despite the failure of similar tactics on the Madrid front, it had been planned as another Moroccan-type, head-on attack along the first line of Republican defences, with the aim of breaking through at two points, advancing as far as the second line of defence and laying siege to Bilbao from there.
In this way, the Nationalists hoped to force the Basques to surrender.
After four days of unrelenting attack, including aerial bombardment of civilian targets, the Nationalists had managed to break through the Basque lines but were unable to push on as they had planned.
The Nationalist leadership had underestimated the strength of Basque resistance, as they had miscalculated that of the madrileños (inhabitants of Madrid) four months earlier.
Realizing this, Franco stepped up his arguments in favour of a slow campaign, justifying it as a political necessity.
Thus, when he explained his view of the campaign, and of the war as whole, to Cantalupo on 4 April, he claimed that he was waging war slowly, in order to avoid unnecessary destruction and to consolidate the "liberation" (which, he said, was not the same as the mere "conquest" ) of one area before going on to the next.
He had no intention of hurrying; that, he implied, with as much hypocrisy as lack of tact, was what foreigners wanted, not good Spaniards like himself.
Franco's thinly veiled reference to a difference of opinion with his Italian and German collaborators was an understatement of the truth.
In particular, the Commander of German forces in Spain, General Sperrle, and the Chief of Staff of the Condor Legion, Lieutenant Colonel von Richthofen, were becoming increasingly perplexed and irritated by Franco's reluctance to intensify the northern offensive.
On 11 April General Sperrle asked Franco to send reinforcements to the northern theatre.
Franco not only did not do so but, on the following day, requested  Sperrle to send any spare aircraft he might have to the Madrid front.
In view of this, Paul Preston questions how fully Franco understood the German strategy.
In this writer's view, Franco's response showed that he understood it well enough, but behaved as though he did not in order to avoid direct confrontation with the Germans and, at the same time, to slow the war down.
As a strategist, Franco wanted the local victory in the Basque Country which would help him to win total victory in the whole of Spain.
As a believer in the centralized, indivisible unity of Spain, he wanted to crush separatists such as the Basques.
As a Catholic, he wanted revenge for the Catholic Basques' "betrayal" of the Nationalist cause.
As a committed and intransigent military man, he wanted an unequivocal victory, with no conditions.
Finally, as an incipient autocrat, he would not tolerate any interference, or "mediation" , wherever it came from, but especially if it came from foreigners.
The week of 12–19 April provided decisive proof of the last of these considerations.
On 12 April (the day that Franco made his disconcerting request for aircraft to Sperrle), the Italian government formally approved Cavaletti's mediation project, which offered the possibility of raising Italy's profile internationally and, especially, of improving relations with Britain, whose many and lucrative economic interests in the Basque Country were eyed longingly by Italy.
That same day, San Sebastian was the trysting place of a series of people whose principal concern, apart from winning the war, was the achievement of a political union "which would have the appearance of spontaneity" .
The Falangist leader, Hedilla, met with a group of Alphonsine monarchists which included José María de Areilza, erstwhile right-wing parliamentary candidate for Bilbao, clandestine messenger between some of the military conspirators and nephew of the man who had propitiated the contact between Consul Cavaletti and the Basque president, Aguirre.
Later that same day, and still in San Sebastian, Hedilla met with two Falangist comrades, who worked in the party's press and propaganda office there.
The central theme of all these conversations was the same: "the advisability of uniting the Falange and the Requeté and of constituting a single party" .
Given that San Sebastian was then a hive of intrigue and rumour; that there were multiple connections between the parties involved; and that they had a common interest in retaining political initiative in their own, civilian hands, it seems not impossible that the Falangists and Carlists were aware of the negotiations between Cavaletti and Aguirre.
Perhaps the discussions of the Falangists, Carlists and Alphonsines envisaged Italian mediation not just to end the war in the north, but to end it everywhere, and to install a new regime under Italian tutelage.
The urgency which imbued the comings and goings of the party men and, particularly, the rapidity with which Franco acted in the week following the San Sebastian meetings, certainly suggest that there existed a serious potential threat to the latter's military and political plans, emanating from the political sectors of his own camp.
On 12 April, while Cavaletti prepared to arrange negotiations between Aguirre and Franco, and Hedilla discussed the spontaneous creation of a single party with Alphonsine monarchists and Falangists, Franco was taking steps to impose his full control on all political activity in the Nationalist camp.
That day, he received three members of the moderate Carlist faction in Salamanca, and informed them of his intention of fusing together Falange and the Traditionalist Communion.
Although it is not clear whether the Falange leader was notified at the same time, the indications are that he was aware of Franco's decision, for he called an extraordinary session of the party's National Council, in order to elect a permanent party leader.
Before the meeting could take place, an incident occurred between two rival factions of Falangists, in which two Falangists were killed.
On 18 April, in an atmosphere of great tension, Hedilla was elected as the national chief of Falange Española, but, the same evening, Franco made a radio broadcast in which he announced the immediate fusion of the Falange and the Communión Tradicionalista.
Moreover, he intended to take on himself the national leadership of the party thus created, which would be called Falange Española Tradicionalista y de las Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional Sindicalista (FET y de las JONS).
Decree number 255, published in the 20 April edition of the state gazette, gave the form and force of law to what Franco had said in  his speech.
In addition to the merger of the two main parties, the other Rightist parties (such as Renovación Española and the CEDA) were to dissolve themselves and their members automatically be absorbed by FET y de las JONS.
Franco had effected a master-stroke which rendered irrelevant plots to achieve spontaneous unity and internecine struggles to occupy the position of national leader.
As far as the negotiations between Italy, the Basque government and the Nationalists were concerned, Franco's coup de main had eliminated all but himself as valid interlocutor in the anti-Republican camp.
By resisting Sperrle's request for aircraft on 11 April, Franco had caused a temporary hiatus in the progress of the northern campaign while he focused his full attention on its internal political aspect.
As soon as the political problem was resolved, he released military operations from their state of suspended animation.
On 18 April — the day of the unification — Franco ordered Sperrle to continue and, on the day that the decree of unification was published (20 April) the second phase of the Basque campaign began.
In the space of ten days, Franco had demonstrated unequivocally that he was in complete control, militarily and politically.
The point was hammered home by the arrest of Hedilla, when he refused to accept a position on the Party Political Committee (appointed on 22 April); by the conditions for negotiation communicated by the Nationalists to the Basque government via Cavaletti, which made it abundantly clear that Franco did not want a "separate peace" but total surrender; and, finally, by the blitzkrieg bombardment of the Basque market town of Guernica, historic cradle of Basque nationalism, on 26 April 1937.
This appalling act of terror and destruction was carried out "by aircraft of the Condor Legion and the Italian Aviazione Legionaria under the overall command of Richthofen" who, in turn, was in regular contact with General Mola, and ultimately responsible to Franco.
There can be little doubt, therefore, that "the bombing was undertaken at the request of the Nationalist high command in order to destroy Basque morale and preclude the defence of Bilbao" .
In all three instances — Hedilla, the Basque government, Guernica — Franco was politically responsible, but employed his by now familiar  "long-handled spoon" tactic, keeping his own hands clean by using others to impose his will.
In the ensuing weeks, the Basque and Santander fronts collapsed under the weight of the Nationalist offensive.
Neighbouring Asturias fell in October.
By early autumn 1937 the war in the north had ended, with a victory for the Nationalists, which was to say, for Franco.
He was all the more able to claim the triumph for himself in view of the fact that General Mola, leader of the Army of the North and "Director" of the 1936 conspiracy, was killed in an air crash on 3 June 1937.
Yet again, Destiny had stepped in, removing the last of Franco's potential rivals.
While Franco's energies were focused on the military progress of the war, he devoted little attention to its political aspects.
Consequently, once the northern campaign was resumed, on 20 April, the task of political reorganization came to a temporary halt.
The party Statutes of FET y de las JONS were published on 4 August, but the principal consultative organism, the National Council, was not created until October of that year and did not hold its first meeting until December.
The unification of parties had served its immediate purpose of cutting short independent political initiatives in the Nationalist rearguard.
Once this had been achieved and the victory in the north assured, nothing mattered to Franco so much as the final victory.
This was, in fact, still many months of fighting away, but with the loss of the northern territories, the die was all but cast for the Second Republic.
In part, this was due to the military superiority of the Nationalists in both matériel and organization, assisted as they were by massive support from Germany and Italy.
This in itself gave them also the advantage of a better fighting morale than the Republicans, whose desperate defensive efforts were unable to stop the implacable advance of their adversaries.
In part, too, the Republicans' weakness was political in origin.
Whilst the crisis which led to the unification was brewing in the Nationalist zone, a similar struggle for internal control was under way within the Republican ranks.
The Nationalist denouement came in the third week of April, and the Republican at the beginning of May, in a week of violent confrontation between communists and anarchists in  Barcelona.
But whereas General Franco's rapid and decisive action resolved at a stroke the problem of order and the underlying political question, the use of force to suppress anarchists and revolutionary communists in Barcelona only exacerbated the Republic's political difficulties and thereby seriously undermined its capacity to offer united resistance to its attackers.
The spring of 1937 was a political watershed on both sides of the lines, which the Nationalists navigated successfully and the Republicans did not.
To a large extent, from the summer of 1937 onwards, the war was the military confirmation of that fact.
For the Republicans, it was a defensive struggle for democracy, against increasingly unfavourable odds.
For the Nationalists, it was an offensive war of attrition to eradicate every last vestige of liberal democracy, in which they were winning all the way.
There were, of course, exceptions.
In July 1937, when the war was one year old, the Republicans briefly seemed to gain the upper hand in an offensive they launched on the Madrid front, at a village called Brunete; but the Nationalists rallied and the Republicans were unable to chalk up even a partial victory.
A year later, in the summer of 1938, the Republicans again launched a desperate attack, this time in eastern Spain, in Aragón.
In this campaign too — the battle of the River Ebro — the government forces had the initial advantage of surprise, but their much depleted physical and military strength made them unable to turn it to their permanent advantage and they were eventually pushed back to their original positions.
Both engagements illustrate Franco's obsession with retaking lost territory, even where this was strategically unnecessary, regardless of the cost in terms of matériel, time and human suffering.
By then, the Republicans were deeply divided on the utility of continuing the fight.
Some, including the President, Azaña, believed that it was useless to do so.
Others, such as the Prime Minister, Juan Negrín, advocated struggling on, in the hope that the situation in Europe would degenerate into an open conflict with Hitler and Mussolini, and that this, in turn, would oblige the western democracies to come to the defence of the Spanish Republic.
What they did not seem to perceive was that non-intervention in the Spanish conflict was part of the  policy of appeasement then being followed by the western powers, or that, even if a European war began before the Spanish conflict were settled, the European democracies would be reluctant to take on extended commitments, especially if this meant running the risk — as they saw it — of assisting communism on Europe's southern flank.
In truth, as testimonies from both sides bear witness, the combatants felt that the outcome of the conflict was irreversibly decided in favour of the Nationalists in the winter of 1937–38, when Franco's forces gained control of the town of Teruel, in southern Aragón, and were thus poised to launch an offensive on Catalonia and Valencia.
In preparation for the final victory which he believed would be his, Franco nominated his first cabinet in January 1938.
It contained representatives of the three Armed Forces and of all the political currents supporting the Nationalist cause.
The formation of a coalition government is normal political practice in a situation of war but, in the case of this first Francoist government, there were two reasons behind this choice.
In the first place, a cabinet which represented no one current in particular and all sectors in general reflected and reinforced the idea of a political system in which distinct and different options had been eliminated and replaced by one single channel for political activity.
This, in turn, strengthened the image which Franco wished to convey of the rising, the war and his nascent regime, as representing not individual interests, but the national interest.
There was also a parallel with Franco's theories of military organization.
During the Spanish Civil War, he had introduced the concept of the "mixed battalion" into his Army.
This meant that, instead of being composed entirely of separate infantry, cavalry, motorized, engineering, supplies and medical units, it also contained battalions each of which had its own infantry, cavalry, motorized, etc. sections.
Such battalions had the flexibility and versatility of self-sufficiency, whilst the Army as a whole lost no cohesion.
On the contrary, it was more cohesive because the mixed battalion system overcame the divisive effects of the strong corporatist sense developed by units composed only of one kind of soldier.
This same levelling principle had been behind the creation of the Zaragoza Military Academy and  was now applied to politics.
By taking representatives from various political sectors, his cabinet had the diversity which would allow his political line to adapt to different internal and external circumstances and, at the same time, he assured himself of the allegiance of all the forces present in his camp.
His was not simply a negative strategy of "divide and rule" .
His purpose was not only to prevent his own partisans from uniting to oust him, but also to use the fact that there were differences between them to strengthen his own position.
The government appointed in January 1938 remained in office for the rest of the war.
Its principal task was to lay the foundations for the governmental structures of post-war Spain, so that, when the end of the war should finally come, the political transition from the Republican to the Francoist state could be effected without any hiatus.
The "New State" was to be the continuation, in peace-time, of a system set up, illegally, during and thanks to a war.
There was to be no pause for reflection, nor — much less — for a changeover from military to civilian rule.
Thus, the war was not a no-man's-land between, and distinct from, two different regimes.
It was the preparatory phase of the "New State" and, as such, should be seen as an integral part of it.
It was the bridge between democracy and dictatorship; the road along which Franco walked, in the rearguard of his armies, to attain total power.
The fighting dragged on for another year, during which time the Nationalist armies occupied Catalonia and the ever-precarious unity of the Republican political forces collapsed.
When Barcelona fell to General Yagüe's troops on 26 January 1939, it was clear that the Republic could not turn the tide in its favour.
By the end of February, France and Britain had recognized Franco and his cabinet as the legitimate government of Spain, and President Azaña had resigned.
In spite of the hopelessness of the Republic's situation, the Prime Minister, Negrín, and the communists argued that resistance was still possible.
In the first week of March, in what was effectively a coup against Negrín, a National Defence Council was created in Madrid, with the aim of negotiating an end to hostilities.
Franco, however, had already shown clearly that he wanted total victory and now indicated that he would contemplate  nothing short of unconditional surrender.
Talks between Republican and Nationalist representatives were initiated on 23 March but were abruptly curtailed by Franco two days later.
On 26 March he announced that his armies would begin their final advance and Republican forces should show the white flag on all fronts.
In Madrid, the rebels' objective since July 1936, the end came on 27 March, when the chief of the Republican Army of the Centre surrendered to the leader of the Nationalist forces on the Madrid front, General Espinosa de los Monteros.
In the last week of March, the remaining areas of Republican territory in the south and east of the country were taken over by the Nationalists.
With Republican resistance decimated, General Franco unilaterally declared the war to be at an end.
On 1 April 1939 he wrote and signed the final war bulletin: "On this day, with the red army captive and disarmed, the Nationalist troops have attained their final military objectives.
The war has ended."
It was significant that this terse declaration spoke only of the military aspects of what had been above all a social and political conflict.
It was true that Franco had achieved his "final military objectives" , but, as far as his social and political objectives were concerned, the military victory was simply the beginning.
In those areas, as we shall see, the war was far from ended.
 "FRANCO'S PEACE" 
While in some ways the Civil War of 1936–39 was a parenthesis in the course of Spanish history, it undoubtedly marked a watershed; "before" and "after" were clearly distinguished from each other, in people's minds and in reality.
Throughout the war, Generalísimo Franco's insistence that he would be satisfied only with total victory and the ruthlessness with which he pursued that objective had made it clear that, if the Nationalists won, there would be no forgiving or forgetting.
Three years of bloodshed and misery could not be justified if the outcome were a return to the pre-Republican status quo.
Besides, although Franco later blamed Sanjurjo and others for the advent of the Republic, he himself had made no attempt to save the monarchy.
It would hardly have been consistent to bring it back now.
Finally, Franco simply did not want to relinquish his position.
He had reached the pinnacle of his military career and held supreme political power.
Someone with greater political vision might have seen the end of hostilities as the right moment to substitute civilian for military leadership.
Franco, however, would not delegate because he saw himself as the only person capable of carrying out the mission of maintaining a united Spain.
In his terms, this meant a country in which plurality and diversity were replaced in every sphere, especially the political, by uniformity and conformity.
The imposition of this Procrustean model necessitated preventing the resurgence of the liberal democratic ideas and values which had informed the Republic and, at the same time, managing the diverse forces which composed the  Nationalist camp.
Both were essential to ensure the stability of the regime.
They were also closely linked, for provoking or allowing the return of Republican "chaos" and, therefore, the disintegration of the nation, was the ultimate, awful responsibility to be pondered by putative dissenters in the Francoist camp.
Such was the message put across by Francoist propaganda in the months following the end of hostilities.
In reality, it was virtually impossible for the supporters of democracy to rally.
Thousands had died on the battlefields, in rearguard bombing raids and in repressive purges.
Many thousands more, including the Republican government and most of the leading political figures, had fled Spain for exile in Europe, the Americas and the Soviet Union.
Of those who remained, thousands were rounded up and imprisoned.
Those who had been in the Republican Armed Forces during the war were automatically placed under arrest at the time of the Republican surrender in April 1936, while police, Civil Guards and Falangist agents hounded those they suspected of pro-Republican sympathies.
They were often assisted by ordinary Spaniards who, having fought on the winning side, now took the law into their own hands to wreak vengeance on their fellow- citizens.
A sixty-year-old woman who was made to sweep the streets of her village with a placard reading "I am a red" pinned to her back, because her son had been an active communist prior to 1939, was a typical example of how Spaniards continued to be bitterly divided.
Such acts of individual retribution, however brutal, were easily surpassed by the collective cruelty of the dictatorship's official repressive machinery.
In a very real sense, post-war repression was the continuation of the war.
Indeed, Franco envisaged the war largely as a matter of internal order, in which the Armed Forces played the role of policeman: "The defence of internal peace and order constitutes the sacred mission of a nation's Armed Forces and this is the mission we have carried out." 
Consequently, he saw the social and political organization of post-war Spain mainly as a question of the imposition of authority.
In his view, as the victors, the Nationalists had acquired the right to exercise that authority, whilst the Republicans, as the vanquished, had lost all rights and must simply obey.
It  was the wholesale application to civilian society of the one-way chain of command learned from the military milieu into which Franco was born.
It was no coincidence that Franco always referred to the exercise of political power as "el mando" — "command" .
Totally consistent with this view of the Army's responsibility for maintaining law and order was the notion that justice should be administered by soldiers in military tribunals.
In November 1939, with prisons and camps brimming with political detainees, military courts were created "to try all civilians and all Republican Army personnel charged with any crime of a military or other nature" .
These courts continued to function until 1943 and sentenced thousands of Spaniards to execution or imprisonment.
It is impossible to say how many participated in this operation simply because they were following orders, as obedient soldiers, and how many because they shared Franco's belief that their role was that of the "saviours" of Spain.
None was ever brought to trial for war crimes.
It must also be said that they were not alone in their efforts to secure the Francoist state against those it branded as "anti-Spain" .
The official party, FET y de las JONS, set up its own intelligence brigade, which acted in parallel with the secret police run from the Ministry of the Interior.
The Party's tentacles reached into every nook and cranny of people's lives, leaving them little room for manoeuvre and none whatsoever for criticism of the regime.
In the rural areas, every village had someone who acted as the Party boss and who, in collaboration with the Civil Guard, kept the local populace under observation.
In the towns and cities, every block of flats had a Party representative, who reported to an area controller, who, in turn, was responsible to a district officer.
In this way, everyone spied on everyone else, in a vast network of internal surveillance.
In effect, it was the mass application of a tactic Franco was frequently to apply in the political arena: divide and rule.
The military courts, the police forces and the intelligence services were assisted in their grim work by the foresight of the regime itself.
In the first year of the Civil War, whenever the Nationalists had entered a town or a village in Republican territory, they had simply ransacked  official buildings and premises used by left wing-parties and trade unions.
By 1937, however, with Franco in possession of supreme military and political power, they had realized that the "New State" could make use of documentary evidence of Republican sympathies to incriminate its adversaries.
Consequently, after that date, the Nationalist forces began to seize party and union records found in newly occupied territory.
So thorough was this exercise in data-collection that even children who had participated in union-organized picnics and outings were listed.
The documents obtained in this way were stored in an archive in Salamanca (where they remain to this day) and, after the end of the war, were constantly referred to by the military courts trying suspected Republicans.
The Franco regime was able to condemn thousands of people on the strength of the Salamanca files.
Franco himself admitted in the mid-1940s that there were some 26,000 political prisoners in Spain — a figure he clearly considered normal and accep- table.
What dismayed him was the "infamous" allegation that there were more.
Even Himmler was shocked by the scale of the repression he saw when he visited Spain in 1940.
There were other ways, too, in which ordinary people were made to conform with the regime's desire for order and control.
In order to obtain such vital things as a ration card or a job, it was necessary to be able to provide evidence of loyalty to the regime, by means of an official certificate or a letter signed by a person who was, in turn, accredited as "approved" by the regime.
In a system like this, in which people's fate did not depend on merit nor on the fulfillment of objectively defined conditions, but on the arbitrary decision of a Party official, a neighbour, a local priest or some other "authorized" citizen, bribery and corruption were soon rife.
Their inevitable companion was fear: of discovery, of failure to satisfy the demands of those in positions of authority, of hunger, of death.
For the destitute, the impoverished, the sick, the hunted and the bereft, life was intolerably precarious.
For the regime, the fact that it presided over a cowed, debilitated populace enhanced its ability to remain in power.
Although, as an exercise against Republican democracy, the military rising of 18 July 1936 had had the backing of  all who had sympathized with the Nationalist cause, there were many who felt that the result of the war — a military dictatorship — was not what they had intended.
Some of those who had supported the 1936 rising had done so in the belief that the objective was the overthrow of the Popular Front, but not of the Republic itself.
Others were specifically anti-Republican, and had sided with the conspiracy in the hope that the outcome would be the return of monarchy.
None had foreseen the assumption of absolute power by one of their own number.
Indeed, when Franco was made head of government in September 1936, it was as much because all the other candidates had important flaws as in recognition of his merits.
Acceptable to all shades of political and military opinion, as well as to the Catholic Church, fascist Italy and Nazi Germany, yet not identified exclusively with any one of them, Franco was the common denominator on which they could all agree, for as long as the war demanded that particular interests be subordinated to the overall objective of defeating the common enemy.
Once the war was over, however, the diversity of the Nationalist camp resurfaced, as each group sought to promote its own cause.
Paradoxically, what was potentially a threatening situation for Franco in fact strengthened his position.
First, internecine rivalries ensured that his opponents would never join forces to oust him; for that reason alone, they would be allowed to continue, though never to reach a point at which they might get out of hand and overwhelm him.
In addition, those rivalries enabled him in peacetime to go on playing his wartime role of common denominator; the arbiter who remained detached from conflicts of particular interests; the provider of unity.
Thus, by allowing the divisions within his camp to exist and, at the same time, constantly insinuating that, without him, pre-war "chaos" would return, Franco succeeded in creating the belief that he was not just indispensable to political stability, he was consubstantial with it.
His survival in power for over three decades was due in no small measure to the endurance of that fiction.
But that, in turn, owed as much to the readiness of the Spanish conservative classes to believe it as it did to Franco's skill in propagating it.
Indeed, it could be said that the secret of his success lay  not so much in his ability to use to his advantage the divisions within his own forces as in his perception of conservative Spain's deep-seated desire for a leader who would restore and conserve the country's identity as a great world power.
As we have seen, the seed of the idea of Franco as the providential saviour and guardian of the "true" Spain had been planted in his and his admirers' minds during his time as the Director of the Military Academy in Zaragoza.
Nurtured by his part in the suppression of the October revolution in Asturias, in 1934, it took root definitively when his troops crossed the Straits of Gibraltar from Africa in August 1936, thereby saving the day for the anti-Republican insurgents.
The ensuing war saw the myth consolidated militarily and politically.
By the end of the conflict, Franco was seen as having triumphed, single- handed, but for occasional instances of divine intervention, over evil.
The pomp, ceremony and popular jubilation accompanying his arrival in Madrid at the end of the war were, naturally, what befitted a conquering hero.
Franco was assisted in the orchestration of this propaganda exercise by a convenient coincidence of the calendar.
Although the final war bulletin had been signed on 1 April 1939, Franco did not enter the capital until 18 May, which was Ascension Day that year.
Mounted on a white horse, he rode into the city which had for so long defied and denied him.
It was, as Preston observes, as though he were a crusading warrior, El Cid or Don John of Austria.
Hundreds of cheering people lined the route to catch a glimpse of the man who, like those champions of "true" , Christian Spain, had put the infidel to flight.
On the following day, Franco took the salute at a victory parade which took five hours to pass the towering dais on which he stood, flanked by military officers, Party officials, Church dignitaries and government ministers.
Before the parade started, General Varela pinned on the Generalísimo's chest Spain's highest military award for bravery, the Saint Ferdinand Cross with Laurels.
Twenty one years earlier, Franco had been denied this decoration.
Now, as head of the Armed Forces, he had approved its award to himself.
The climax of these celebrations was reached on 20 May, when Franco attended a Te Deum celebrated by the Primate of all Spain, Cardinal Gomá, at which Franco offered the Nationalist victory to God.
Again, the dual imagery of the victorious general and the holy saviour appeared: virtually everyone wore full military or party uniform, and the steps up to the basilica of Saint Barbara were lined with people carrying the palms they had bought for Palm Sunday, six weeks earlier.
The tall fronds seemed to form a guard of honour for His Excellency as he entered the church.
Although Franco's position seemed unassailable in May 1939, the state of the Spanish economy constituted a potentially disastrous hole in the dyke.
When the war ended, the most pressing need was to provide food and fuel.
At that time, Spain was predominantly agricultural and the interruption of normal activity during the war had resulted in serious shortages of foodstuffs.
Spanish agriculture was incapable of producing any surplus; indeed, production had sunk to nineteenth-century levels.
Moreover, the bankruptcy of the Spanish Treasury precluded the import of foodstuffs from abroad.
The Francoist government responded with a measure appropriate to a wartime economy, issuing ration-cards for all basic necessities, such as bread, potatoes, eggs, meat and milk.
Coal and petrol were also rationed.
In the rural areas, people could scrape by, thanks to what they grew themselves, but, in the towns, the queues for food and fuel were endless and often unrewarded.
The quality and nutritional value of what little food was available was very low, but there were few alternatives.
Some of the working- and lower-middle-class people who made up the bulk of the urban populace had relatives in the villages, but transport to and from the countryside was erratic and there was always the danger that food-parcels sent in from the villages would be intercepted and confiscated.
Almost immediately, a flourishing black-market in foodstuffs sprang up which allowed those with money, influence or access to scarce goods to have a slightly better standard of living at the expense of those with none of these commodities.
Corruption among the Party officials who ran the system of supply and distribution of goods became one of the major sources of conflict between the senior generals and the  Party.
The first decade of the Franco regime was appropriately known by people on both sides of the political divide as "the hungry years" ( "los años del hambre" ).
The regime's spokesmen and its official propaganda machine blamed the war for the inadequacies of the economy and laid responsibility for both at the door of the Republic.
Franco's own approach to the problem of starvation was ludicrously naïve.
According to his brother in law, Serrano Suñer, Franco appointed José Luis Arrese as Minister Secretary-General of the Party in 1940 because Arrese had come up with the idea of "relieving the hunger problem with dolphin sandwiches" .
There is nothing in Serrano's testimony to suggest that Franco did not take Arrese's idea seriously.
The war had, of course, done considerable damage to Spain's productive capacity, but it had not occasioned total collapse.
That the economy did not show signs of recovery once hostilities had ceased had more to do with the political choices made by the Franco regime than with the economic structures themselves.
Franco made clear what those choices were in a "National Programme for Resurgence" which he personally drew up and passed to his ministers for action in October 1939.
His "Basis and directives for a Plan for economic recovery, in harmony with our national reconstruction" viewed the fundamental problem as the Spanish trade deficit, which he proposed to eliminate by massive state intervention to stimulate exports and reduce imports.
This was very reminiscent of General Primo de Rivera's economic policies of the period 1923–30, with the same basis in political nationalism.
In 1939, as in the 1920s, any imports that could conceivably be replaced by nationally produced goods had to be reduced to a minimum or stopped altogether, even if the result were a reduction in quality.
Imported cod, for example, could be replaced by corbina, from the Spanish Saharan fishing grounds.
It was, admitted Franco, "of poorer quality" , but it was "usable and an excellent food for the lower classes" .
We may reasonably assume from Franco's portly appearance throughout the "hungry years" that dolphin sandwiches and low-quality fish did not constitute his staple diet.
It was not only food imports that were to be substituted in Franco's plan.
Scrap metal was to be used more efficiently to eke out imported  steel and scrap, and the shortage of fuel oils would be resolved by resorting to bituminous slate and lignites which, according to Franco, existed "in fabulous quantities" in Spain.
In addition, exports were to be stimulated and "the reconstruction of Spain" would require a programme of public works, defence spending, social and cultural projects, industrial expansion and agricultural investment.
Ministers were to work out what the plan would need in their respective areas of responsibility and the Ministry of Industry would subsequently devise the necessary "practical solutions" .
The plan contained no hint of tax revenues to pay for all this and made only passing reference to budgetary requirements and credit policy.
Franco's "Plan for economic recovery" recognized that, in order to feed the population, what was most urgently needed was "to increase the amount of land under cultivation" through "the creation of large areas of irrigated land and the improvement of those already in existence" .
As we saw in Chapter 3, the attempts made by reforming governments during the Second Republic to carry out such reform were one of the principal causes of right-wing hostility to the Republic.
In 1936 the property-owning classes had given their moral and financial support to a military rising which they hoped would halt the reforming process.
Consequently, the Franco regime could not institute a programme of land reform without arousing the hostility of the landowners.
To do so would have threatened the stability of Franco's position and was, therefore, out of the question.
On the contrary, even before the war ended, the property-owners began to reap their reward.
Not only was the Republican programme of land reform halted, it was reversed.
Sanctioned by the Falangist Minister of Agriculture, Fernández Cuesta, and, ultimately, by Franco, thousands of hectares expropriated during the Republic were returned to their former owners.
They, by contrast, did not have to return the money they had received in compensation from the Republic.
In this way, Franco bought the continued support of the property- owning élite at the expense of his own blue-print for economic recovery.
More significantly, he put his own continuation in power before the needs of a starving populace.
There was a second political reason for favouring the regime's agrarian interests.
Their geographical location tended to coincide with those areas in which the 1936 rising had been successful.
Spanish industry, by contrast, was situated almost entirely in areas which had remained loyal to the Republic.
The policy of withholding funds for investment in the reconstruction of the Basque Country, Catalonia and Asturias was a deliberate, punitive gesture, as well as a precautionary measure, lest too rapid or too successful economic recovery should lead to agitation for the political autonomy to which they had aspired — and, in the case of the Basque Country and Catalonia, enjoyed — under the Republic.
For the "national unity" which Franco considered it his mission to create could not brook anything but centralized government.
In his view, the devolution of power to regional governments was tantamount to the dismemberment of Spain.
It was an aberration permitted under the rule of "anti-Spain" which would not, could not, be tolerated by a "truly" Spanish regime.
The statutes of self-government granted to the Basque Country and Catalonia had been rescinded during the war.
Now, to political and economic repression in these areas was added cultural suppression.
All manifestations of their indigenous cultures were outlawed.
The Catalan and Basque languages were compulsorily replaced by Castilian Spanish for all public purposes (including speech outside the home, teaching, the press, literature and drama) and the music, dancing and folk songs traditional in those regions were proscribed.
It was even illegal to baptize children with names other than those which appeared in the Castilian version of the Catholic calendar of saints.
This kind of repression was especially harsh in the Basque Country, for this was traditionally a strongly Catholic region and its support of the Republic had surprised many.
With his deeply ingrained Catholic convictions and his belief in his role as God's warrior, Franco could not tolerate what he considered to have been a religious and moral, as well as a political, betrayal.
In a sense, repressing all that was deemed to be inimical to the regime was the "easy" part of the task of consolidating the result of the Civil War.
All it required was the moral and political will, and control of the physical  means.
Franco had all three.
Controlling his own forces required more subtle tactics, for they could not be dismissed as "anti-Spain" and their part in his victory and elevation gave them a claim on his gratitude and on how post-war Spain would be shaped.
Because of his debt to his followers, Franco knew that a certain free play had to be allowed within the regime, but he was determined that he alone would control its limits and what was permissible within them.
During the war, he had laid the foundations of his unipersonal command.
In the summer of 1939 he consolidated the edifice further.
On 8 August Franco signed a law vesting in himself total power over the administration of the state.
This meant that, if he chose to, he could make and unmake laws without the ratifying sanction of any legislative or judicial body.
On the following day, a cabinet reshuffle was announced.
The new Council of Ministers included some of Franco's closest wartime collaborators, such as Generals Yagüe, Varela and Muñoz Grandes, and his brother-in-law, Ramón Serrano Suñer, on whom Franco had come to rely very heavily for his political knowledge and skill.
At the same time, mindful of the need to reward his partisans while controlling the distribution of influence, he allotted at least one ministerial position to each of the socio-political groupings in his camp.
Thus, military men were appointed to five of the fourteen posts; the Falangists received three portfolios; the Carlists one; and assorted Catholic conservatives the remaining five.
The differences of opinion which characterized the regime's political "families" were not limited to domestic issues.
While all could be said to be right-wing, their sympathies were not identical where other countries were concerned.
Broadly speaking, they fell into two groups: those who identified with countries where right-wing totalitarianism was in power, such as Germany, Italy or Portugal; and those who revered the kind of conservatism they most readily associated with the United Kingdom.
The Falangists fell mostly into the first category, while Great Britain was the model society for those for whom monarchy was the ultimate political goal.
When Franco composed his first post-war cabinet, in August 1939, he was aware that confrontation was imminent in Europe, so his choices also  reflected a desire to balance these conflicts of external sympathies.
Eight of the new ministers were admirers of fascist Italy and/or Nazi Germany; seven were not.
Franco's concern with internal equilibrium was also reflected in the occupants of what were arguably the two most important cabinet posts.
It was logical enough that the Minister for the Army should be a soldier, General Varela; but the choice of another military man, Colonel Juan Beigbeder y Atienza, rather than a diplomat, as Foreign Minister gives a revealing insight into how Franco thought foreign policy should be conducted.
Finally, the mix of pro-fascist and pro-democratic elements was an indication that, in international as in domestic affairs, Franco's preferred tactic was to keep all his options open until it became clear which side was going to win.
Franco's concern not to risk backing the wrong side in a European war was also reflected in Spain's official position with regard to the conflict when it finally erupted in the autumn of 1939.
On 4 September, three days after Germany invaded Poland, and the day after France and Britain declared war on Germany, Spain declared itself neutral.
This did not reflect a desire to be impartial, but recognition that Spain's objective economic and military weakness precluded any other option at this stage.
Moreover, neutrality favoured the internal political stability which, as we noted earlier, was of prime concern to Franco.
There had already been some friction with the head of the Catholic Church in Spain, Cardinal Gomá, and with General Queipo de Llano; the monarchists disliked the Falange, as did many military men; and some Falangists harboured resentment over the 1937 unification of parties.
Not wishing to risk increasing instability, Franco adopted a familiar tactic: he did nothing until the panorama became clearer.
In so doing, he avoided committing himself too early externally and, at the same time, remained above the fray at home.
For the first months of the war, therefore, Franco proceeded with caution as he sought ways of using the conflict to Spain's and his own advantage.
On the one hand, Germany was provided with vital supplies of minerals it needed for its war industries, such as wolfram and lead, and with facilities for repairing and refuelling its  submarines.
At the same time, the Spanish press, rigorously controlled through the Ministry of the Interior, printed lengthy and enthusiastic reports of the prowess of the Axis armies.
Indeed, successive British ambassadors Sir Maurice Peterson and Sir Samuel Hoare were convinced that German agents in Madrid virtually wrote the Spanish newspapers directly.
On the other hand, while Franco was selling strategic minerals to Hitler, he was also selling them to the Allies, precisely because he did not want Spain to become the economic satellite of Germany.
Similarly, in the spring of 1940, he assured the French Head of State, Marshal Pétain, that Spain would remain neutral, while he also assured Ciano that although Spain was materially unable to participate in the war, he was not indifferent to it and believed in the victory of the Axis.
To back up the latter statement, Franco deployed reinforcements to the Pyrenees, the Campo de Gibraltar, the Balearic Islands and Spanish Morocco in April 1940.
He had a second reason for doing this, which was that he hoped thereby to put pressure on France and Germany to hand over to Spain part of French Morocco.
This was, in fact, the key to Franco's foreign policy throughout the Second World War: he viewed it primarily in terms of an opportunity to realize his own expansionist aims in Morocco.
As Paul Preston's authoritative biography of Franco demonstrates, there is no real evidence to support the notion, amply diffused by Francoist propaganda after 1945, that Franco skilfully kept Spain out of the conflict.
It is true that Spain's only military contribution to the fighting was the despatch of volunteers (the "Blue Division" ) who fought on the Russian front as part of the German Army, and that Spain did not declare war on any country.
However, this was not due to any genuine belief in pacifism; Franco, after all, believed that war was the normal human condition.
Nor was it in order to spare Spaniards more suffering.
The adoption of nationalist policies which subordinated economic need to ideological and political dictates deprived Spaniards of many basic necessities which would otherwise have been imported.
Franco wanted to take part in the war and repeatedly assured Hitler and Mussolini of his desire.
The question was not "whether" but "when" .
Yet, in a sense, it was also "whether" , for Spain's ability to  play the part of a European military power was necessarily conditioned by the parlous state of the Spanish Armed Forces and economy.
Consequently, it was also dependent upon the willingness of Germany and Italy to strengthen both sufficiently to make Spanish participation worthwhile for the Axis.
The Allied powers realized early on that if the strategically crucial Rock of Gibraltar were to remain accessible to them, Spain would have to be persuaded to remain neutral; and that her economic needs could be a useful bargaining chip to achieve this.
For the duration of the war, British and American diplomats performed a nerve-racking balancing act, providing just enough credit and material aid (especially grain and petroleum) to prevent Franco from going over completely to the Axis, but not so much as to enable him to become strong enough to dispense with maintaining relations with them.
Franco knew well what the Allied game was, but, in view of Axis reluctance to give generously, he had little alternative but to play it.
For him, this meant giving master classes in duplicity in order to keep both Axis and Allies in play for as long as he needed to achieve his economic, military and, above all, territorial objectives.
By way of indication of the direction he intended to take, on 14 June 1940 Spain invaded and occupied the internationally administered Moroccan city of Tangier.
On the previous day, it had been announced that Spain's status would, henceforth, be "non-belligerent" rather than neutral.
The Tangier initiative demonstrated that Spain would not interpret this as a passive state.
It was followed, on 18 June, by a letter from Franco to Hitler, in which the Caudillo indicated that he was prepared to enter the war on the Axis' side, once the latter had recognized Spain's right to a portion of territory in North Africa and had provided sufficient economic and military aid to enable the Spanish Army to be placed on a war footing.
Hitler must have found it difficult to believe what he was reading.
He, then the most powerful and feared man in western Europe, was being pressured by someone who was the less-than-firmly-established leader of one of the poorest, weakest states in Europe; who considered Nationalist Spain had done the Axis a great favour in beating communism in the Civil War; who appeared to have forgotten the extent of  German aid in achieving that victory; who offered to contribute next to nothing to the German war effort; and who, to crown everything, expected to receive military supplies and territory in return, at best, for vague promises.
By any standards, it was a tall order.
There is, however, no reason to think that Franco was anything other than sincere when he stated his terms in this way.
As his biographer Suárez Fernández admits, "Franco never cultivated the art of paradox." 
The Generalísimo was thoroughly imbued with the idea that Spain had a right to territory in North Africa.
His entire professional career had been based on that premise.
The fall of France, in June 1940, appeared to him to present the ideal opportunity for the redistribution of her overseas possessions.
On the second point, Franco had been reliably informed by his senior generals that without an extensive programme of externally-provided rearmament, the Spanish Armed Forces would not be capable of fighting a war.
What Franco failed to take into account, however, was, first, that Germany had its own designs on French Morocco; second, that Hitler did not want to provoke Free French/Allied resistance in North Africa which would oblige him to open a new military front far away from what was then his principal concern, namely the invasion of the British Isles; and, third, that Hitler was not convinced of the need or utility of Spanish military help.
At most, he wanted access to Gibraltar, but not at any price.
A month after he had written to Hitler, in a speech made on the fourth anniversary of the 1936 rising, Franco demanded that Gibraltar be returned to Spanish sovereignty.
Hitler, however, was unmoved for he was then fully occupied with his plans to invade the British Isles.
Failing to get from Hitler the assistance he needed, Franco signed a commercial agreement with the United Kingdom and Portugal on 24 July 1940.
This might have seemed odd, coming as it did less than a week after Franco's bellicose public references to Gibraltar.
Such was the concern of the Allies to prevent Spain from gravitating further towards the Axis that they were prepared to swallow Franco's blatant duplicity to achieve that aim.
In a manner reminiscent of his seemingly indecisive attitude first towards the Republic and later towards the anti-Republican  conspiracy, Franco courted both sides throughout the summer of 1940.
Thus, the radically Falangist General Yagüe was sacked as Air Minister, but Franco appointed an enthusiastically pro-Axis ambassador to Berlin; and at the same time as he accepted Allied economic aid, he wrote letters of warm support to Hitler and Mussolini, and granted Germany and Italy access to military facilities in Spain.
Allied misgivings as to what might be the real meaning of Spanish "non-belligerence" were deepened by the way Spain appeared to be moving closer to the Axis in the autumn of 1940.
Judging the moment of British surrender to be very close and believing that this would bring the war to a close, Franco sent his confidant and Minister of the Interior, Serrano Suñer, to Berlin with a letter for Hitler, in which he repeated Spanish support for the Axis cause.
In fact, on the very day the letter was delivered, 17 September, Hitler postponed sine die the invasion of Britain.
Undaunted by this or by Hitler's discouraging response, Franco wrote again on 22 September, reiterating Spanish solidarity, but also Spanish demands, as outlined in June.
Again the Spanish proposals were turned down.
It might seem odd that the Minister for the Interior, rather than the Foreign Minister, Beigbeder, should be entrusted with the mission of parleying with Hitler.
However, by then, Beigbeder was known to be against Spanish entry into the war and Serrano's Axis sympathies were more appropriate to dealing with Hitler and more in tune with Franco's own preferences than the anglophile leanings Beigbeder had developed.
Serrano's new role as Franco's personal representative to Hitler was, at once, an indication of the direction in which Franco wanted the regime to appear to be moving, of the importance he attached to relations with the Axis, and of the confidence he placed in Serrano.
This was confirmed on 17 October 1940, when Serrano replaced Beigbeder as Foreign Minister and the Falangist Demetrio Carceller took over from the anglophile Luis Alarcón de la Lastra at the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.
At Serrano's suggestion, Franco assumed the Interior portfolio himself, although the Ministry was effectively run by Serrano's close collaborator, José Lorente Sanz.
A further indication of  the growing strength of Hispano-Axis relations came on 20 October, when the German police chief, Heinrich Himmler, arrived in Madrid for talks on police collaboration between Spain and Germany.
Important though this visit was as a political signpost, a far more decisive meeting was to follow.
On 23 October 1940, with France effectively under German control and Mussolini's troops about to invade Greece, Franco and Hitler met on the Hispano-French border, at the railway station in Hendaye.
Franco is said to have arrived an hour late for his appointment with the Führer.
According to some versions, this was a deliberate indication of Spain's refusal to jump to attention at Hitler's least whim.
For others, the delay was due to the appalling state of Spanish railways.
Serrano Suñer, who accompanied Franco on the trip, denies that there was any delay: "Good God, no!" he said, in an interview given in 1988.
That's a ridiculous story.
At that time, when Hitler was master of Europe, such discourtesy would have been more than enough to irritate him.
Imagine Hitler waiting an hour!
He wouldn't have waited an instant.
He'd have ordered the division he had with him to advance and enter Spain via Hendaye or Vitoria, just like Napoleon did.
Certainly, this seems more plausible than the story of Franco's late arrival, which was almost certainly invented later as part of the propaganda campaign to present him as the powerful statesman for whom even Adolf Hitler would wait.
At Hendaye, Franco stated personally what had already been said in his letters and through his ministers and officials: Spain was committed to helping the Axis, but could only do so when she was materially equipped for war and assured of her "rightful" territorial claims in North Africa.
Hitler could barely contain his irritation at the audacity of Franco's claims and the pomposity of his discourse, but did not lose his temper.
A few days earlier, Mussolini had told him that, in his view, Spanish non-belligerency was preferable to Spanish intervention.
Hitler had come to Hendaye to weigh this up for himself, not to conclude a specific agreement with Franco.
Consequently, the Hispano-German "summit" resulted in no  more than a secret protocol which confirmed the Spanish intention to enter the war on the Axis' side, but allowed Franco to decide when the right moment had arrived to do so.
Perhaps to impress upon Hitler that Spanish claims on Morocco were in earnest, Tangier was incorporated as part of metropolitan Spain on 3 November 1940.
In fact, this was probably counter-productive.
Hitler was in no doubt as to the seriousness of Franco's aspirations in Africa, but he was increasingly disinclined to sacrifice French collaboration there and in Europe, or Germany's own expansionist plans, on the altar of Franco's imperialist ambitions.
Franco appears to have failed to grasp the broader picture of Hitler's strategy, either because of lack of vision, or of hispanocentric insularity, or both.
This raises serious doubts about his qualities as a statesman.
On 3 November he wrote to Hitler an effusive letter in which he heaped praise on the Axis' conduct of the war and reiterated his conviction that victory would be theirs, but insisted yet again that Spain would be able to contribute only when fully rearmed and assured of its rewards.
Essentially the same arguments were presented by Serrano Suñer when he met Hitler and Ribbentrop at Berchtesgaden on 19 November; by Serrano to the German ambassador, Stohrer, on 29 November 1940 and 27 January 1941; by Franco in December 1940 and January 1941, in response to German suggestions that Germany fix the date for Spanish entry, in his meeting with Mussolini at Bordighera in February 1941 and in a further letter to Hitler, also in February 1941.
Each time, the Spaniards harped on the need to resolve their economic difficulties as the only obstacle to backing verbal expressions of support for the Axis with military action.
By the end of February 1941, however, Axis interest in the Spanish offer had subsided considerably: Hitler's attention was focused on the Soviet Union; Ribbentrop had instructed Stohrer to desist from his attempts to secure active Spanish participation; and Mussolini had reached the conclusion that there was nothing to be gained by pressing Spain further.
What was later presented by Francoist propaganda as a demonstration of immense political skill on Franco's part was, in fact, essentially a non-meeting of minds.
Franco, together with some of his generals and ministers and the Falange, wanted to join in the war, but only in return for the prior supply of the items on a substantial shopping list.
Hitler and Mussolini wanted Spanish participation, but not at any price and certainly not on the terms Franco was offering.
Nor was it the case that Franco made deliberately excessive demands, in the knowledge that the Axis would be unwilling to meet them.
He genuinely believed that this was the least the belligerents could do in return for the "sacrifices" made by Spain during the Civil War.
Moreover, the problems affecting Spain's Armed Forces, industries, agriculture, services and people could only be remedied with outside help.
Franco was well aware of this, in spite of the imposition of autarchic principles for ideological reasons.
His crab-like approach towards relations with the Axis and, in particular, towards intervention in the war, was partly dictated by internal political considerations.
To hold the regime together, and maintain himself at its head, he manoeuvred not only to maximize his chances of material and territorial satisfaction, but also to avoid alienating from himself any of the factions within his regime, while, at the same time, bolstering his own hegemony by ensuring the persistence of competition between them.
As early as December 1939, angered by Franco's decision to declare Spanish neutrality in the European war, a group of radical Falangists had plotted to oust him.
They had tried to involve one of Franco's comrades in arms, General Yagüe, for he was known to have strong Falangist sympathies.
Informed of the conspiracy, Franco's reaction was, at first sight, surprising, but entirely in keeping with the behaviour of a man whose responses were always based on strategy, never on emotion.
He summoned Yagüe to his presence and, in a well-calculated blow below Yagüe's military belt, appealed to his esprit de corps as a soldier and a veteran of the Moroccan campaigns.
Yagüe caved in, confessing his knowledge of the Falangist conspiracy.
His acceptance of Franco's "absolution" was given in the knowledge that if he engaged in further subversive activities, it could be at the risk of his career.
His political inclinations got him into trouble again in 1940, however.
He was sacked from his ministerial post in June for criticizing what he saw as Franco's lack of commitment to  the Axis cause.
Franco reacted in this way not because Yagüe's attitude posed any real threat to his position, but because it represented indiscipline.
Astonishing though it may seem, it was during this period of external and internal tension that Franco found the time and tranquillity necessary to write a novel, which was later converted into a film script.
Raza ( "Race" ) portrayed the history of Spain from the Cuban "disaster" , in 1898, to the end of the Civil War, in 1939, as experienced by a provincial, middle-class, Spanish family.
The "Churruca" family was fictitious, but bore a strong resemblance to Franco's own.
It was composed of a dignified and long-suffering mother, a seafaring father (who, however, did not possess the errant ways of Franco's father) and their four children, who were clearly identifiable as Francisco Franco and his siblings.
At the same time, the characters embodied Franco's personal and ideological values.
 "Pedro Churruca" — wayward child, self-seeking politician, defender of the Republic and bringer of pain to his mother — represented a mixture of Ramón Franco and Francisco's detestation of politicians and of the democratic ideals which inspired the Second Republic.
 "Jaime" and "Isabelita Churruca" were, like Nicolás and Pilar Franco, characters who remained in the background but, nonetheless, were exemplary Spaniards and Catholics.
 "José Churruca" was the boy in whom his father saw "either a great soldier or a saint" and the man who, as an army officer, fought heroically for the Nationalists (at the head of a unit of Legionnaires) in order to save the Fatherland from chaos and destruction.
The parallel with Francisco Franco scarcely needs pointing out.
Raza was an idealized dramatization of how Franco viewed his own life and his role in history: as hero and martyr, warrior and defender of the faith.
By writing this story virtually as a film script and having it turned into a film very soon afterwards, Franco made it clear that Raza also represented what he wanted to be the popular, mass vision of him.
It was an extraordinary piece of self-propaganda, dressed up as culture and presented under the pseudonym of "Jaime de Andrade" (a name taken from Franco's mother's family).
That he should write it at all was a measure of his egocentrism.
That he wrote it in the  winter of 1940–41 gave an indication of the insecurity which underlay his apparent aloofness.
Raza was a reminder to Falangists, monarchists and others of why they had fought the Civil War and what they owed to Francisco Franco.
By the beginning of 1941 it was the monarchist lobby which seemed most in need of this reminder.
They were feverishly engaged in anti-Francoist conspiring, partly because many monarchists were opposed to Franco's gestures of support for Hitler and Mussolini, and partly because they resented the national and international prominence given to Serrano and the Falangists Serrano had chosen as his closest personal and professional associates.
Monarchist feeling flared in January 1941, when the exiled King Alphonso XIII abdicated in favour of his eldest son, Juan.
The former king's death, a month later, removed any cause for divided loyalties among Bourbon supporters, thereby strengthening the monarchical cause.
Moreover, Don Juan's sympathies lay with the Allies, which contributed to making his followers in Spain believe that they could look to the Western democracies in general, and to Great Britain in particular , for support.
The British Ambassador in Madrid, Sir Samuel Hoare, rapidly appreciated the potential value, for pursuing the Allied objective of Spanish neutrality, of the monarchists' increasing opposition to the Falange, Serrano Suñer and the pro-Axis policies they supported.
However, there was no question of assisting them to attempt to overthrow Franco, for the Allies had no interest in destabilizing Spain politically, thereby running the risk either of German invasion or the return of a left-wing Republican regime.
When the most active of the monarchist conspirators, General Aranda, claimed that he could muster a small force capable of effecting a coup against Franco, he drew no response from Britain.
Franco was fully aware of the monarchists' discontent.
His comrades in arms had made their views known to him quite openly and, in any case, he could not have remained ignorant in a country so full of informers, police and intelligence services as Spain then was.
He also knew that these tensions could be turned to his advantage, for their existence provided an internal "threat" which fully justified  his permanence as guarantor of the nation's stability and integrity.
For Franco, the key to survival lay in keeping the pot simmering, but never allowing it to boil over.
When the critical point was reached in mid-1941, he acted quickly to turn down the heat.
Franco had relied heavily on Serrano Suñer for political advice and ideas since the arrival of the latter in the Nationalist zone during the Civil War.
Serrano was widely regarded as the architect of the unification of political parties in 1937 which gave the Franco regime its political and ideological framework, and Franco regularly sought and accepted Serrano's judgement when making high-level political appointments.
He was virtually the only cabinet member who really had Franco's ear and, until October 1940, had been responsible, as Minister of the Interior, for such nationwide networks of social and political control as the police forces, the press, censorship, propaganda, cinema and radio.
Serrano had not been a member of the Falange prior to 1937, but he had been a close personal friend of José Antonio Primo de Rivera and, after the war, became a fervent advocate of his ideas.
This made Franco uneasy.
So, too, did the fact that Serrano had acquired a following of radical Falangists who, though few, were strategically situated in sectors such as the press and the trade union organization.
Part of their mission was to mobilize popular support for Franco, but who was to say that Falangist purists might not mobilize it against him?
Franco interpreted as threatening anything that escaped his personal control, and by May 1941 he had begun to feel that Serrano and his collaborators were doing just that.
On 5 May 1941 the appointment was announced of General Valentín Galarza Morente as Minister of the Interior.
Franco had nominally held this post himself since October 1940, but, for all practical purposes, the Ministry had been run by José Lorente Sanz, one of Serrano's trusted protégés.
The appointment of the monarchist Galarza was clearly designed to quell the criticism emanating from that sector of the regime by reducing the area of influence of the pro-Falangist Serrano.
A second appointment confirmed Franco's concern to retain the support of the military: Captain Luis Carrero Blanco became Undersecretary to the Presidency of the Government.
Since Franco himself was head of government, this effectively made Carrero his Private Secretary.
The assumption by Franco of the chairmanship of the Party Political Committee, occupied until then by Serrano, further reduced the latter's ability to influence domestic affairs.
A full cabinet reshuffle two weeks later seemed, at first sight, to be designed to appease the Falangist sector, for it included the creation of a separate Ministry of Labour (it had been covered by the Ministry of Agriculture thereto) and placed a hard-line Falangist, José Antonio Girón de Velasco, at its head.
On closer examination, however, it was immediately clear that Franco did not trust the Falangists in the areas most closely related to the exercise of real power (i.e. to the control of the force of arms): all three defence Ministries were in the hands of military men well known for anti-Falangist political sympathies.
Only the Foreign Ministry, still occupied by Serrano Suñer, retained its position as a pro-Falangist stronghold, for the continued dominance of the Axis in the European war advised maintaining a pro-Axis stance in external affairs.
The course followed by Franco in foreign and domestic policies in the second half of 1941 was a classic example of his use of apparently contradictory tactics to disconcert friends and foes and, thus, stay ahead of the game.
Having made significant political concessions to the pro-Allied monarchist and military "families" in the first half of the year, while repeatedly stalling on entry to the war on the side of the Axis, from June to December 1941 he showed open and sometimes vehement support for the Axis, ignoring the criticism of his senior generals and their suggestions that the time had come to consider restoring the monarchy.
For Franco knew that if the pro-Allied military men had been unable to secure active Allied support for an anti-Francoist coup when negotiations with the Axis for Spanish entry were at their height, their chances of success dwindled even further after June, when Hitler invaded the Soviet Union and the focus of the war moved away from Europe's southern flank.
Moreover, Franco had seen in this development an aspect he could exploit for the reinforcement of his image as deliverer of the nation from evil.
On 1 July 1941 it was announced that  Spain's position was of "moral belligerence" .
Thereafter, Franco began to make a rhetorical distinction between the war against the United Kingdom and the United States, in which Spain took no part, and the war against the Soviet Union, which, in Franco's view, was a new crusade against communism, of which Nationalist Spain had already fought the first battle during her Civil War.
The internal divisions which seemingly threatened, but actually assisted, the political survival of General Franco continued into 1942.
Ever-present tension between the military and the Falange, and the military and Serrano, was accompanied, in March, by fresh rumours of a monarchist conspiracy against Franco (organized by Orgaz, Kindelán and the erstwhile ambassador to Berlin, Espinosa de los Monteros), and, later, by open talk in political circles of a possible restoration.
By June, relations between Franco and Serrano Suñer were very strained; as they also were between Serrano and the Minister Secretary-General of the Party, José Luis Arrese.
Even Serrano was beginning to toy with the idea of a monarchist restoration, albeit under Falangist tutelage.
Franco responded with characteristic duplicity, giving the advantage of his favour to all and, thus, to none.
In speeches delivered by him during a four-day visit to Catalonia in January, he called for unity and solidarity; yet, at the same time, he himself kept the in-fighting going by distancing himself from Serrano while cultivating Arrese.
Similarly, he assured the American ambassador, Carlton Hayes, that Spain wished to remain neutral, while allowing German submarine detector stations to be built on the south coast.
In the summer of 1942, however, Franco's ability to remain au dessus de la mêlée was put to its most serious test yet.
In August 1942 a violent clash occurred between a small group of armed Falangists and a crowd of Carlists attending a memorial mass for the latter's war-dead.
Several people were injured, of whom two later died.
The incident was not reported in the press and probably would have gone no further than the arrest and trial of the Falangist aggressors, had not protests from Generals Galarza and Varela (who was present at the mass) threatened to turn it into a major governmental crisis.
The prime target of their discontent was Serrano, for he had intervened with Franco  in an attempt to obtain clemency for the Falangists involved in what Galarza and Varela were presenting as an attack on the Army as an institution.
This time, Franco did not leave the warring factions to fight among themselves.
Like a ringmaster cracking his whip to bring squabbling lions to order, his intervention was rapid and decisive, demonstrating at once that he would not tolerate insubordination and that this applied to everyone.
Varela and Galarza were dismissed; the leader of the Falangist agitators was tried by court martial and shot; and Serrano Suñer was told that he would no longer occupy the post of Foreign Minister.
WEATHERING THE STORM (1943–49)
With the wisdom of hindsight, Franco's admirers later pointed to Serrano's ouster as proof of the Caudillo's keen political judgement.
It came, they said, because Franco could see that the Axis was going to lose the war, so he wanted to distance the Spanish regime from Germany and Italy.
There is little or no evidence to support this argument.
Personally, the new Foreign Minister, General Gómez Jordana, was less pro-Axis than his predecessor.
Professionally, however, he was a soldier, an africanista, and entirely subservient to Franco.
When Jordana informed Ambassador Hayes in November 1942 that an Allied landing in French North Africa would be considered an act of aggression against Spain, he was undoubtedly expressing Franco's, not his own, view.
After the Allied landings took place, that same month, Franco's controlled press continued to assure readers that the Axis still had the upper hand, and the Spanish Foreign Ministry drew up a plan entitled "Bases for Political Negotiations with Germany" .
Even when Hitler was forced to beat a retreat for the first time, on the Russian front at the end of December 1942, Spanish support did not waver.
In January 1943 Party Secretary Arrese discussed political organization in Berlin with his German counterpart.
The following month Spain and Germany signed a secret protocol in which Spain pledged to repel any Allied invasion.
These were hardly signs of a significant anti-Axis shift in Spanish foreign policy.
At the same time, the Spanish regime was not actively hostile to the Allies, for it needed to obtain from them vital  supplies of rubber, petroleum, cotton and wheat.
Yet German setbacks did not make Franco rush to embrace the Allied cause.
As he had so often done during the Civil War, he sat behind the battle lines, watching through his binoculars as the two sides fought it out.
Franco's immobility in 1942–43, his smiles first to one side, then to the other, were not the sign of an astute politician, but of the conservative strategist, determined not to risk anything by an impulsive action.
Unsure where to place his bet (or, indeed, whether he wished to bet), he held his hand; on the alert, but immobile.
Other observers of the international situation did not share Franco's preference for inaction.
For the anti-Nazi sectors of the Spanish political class, the defeat suffered by Hitler's forces at Stalingrad in February 1943 signalled the turning point in the war and, therefore, an opportune moment for the Spanish regime to change tack.
In the course of that year, they appealed to Franco on four occasions to restore the monarchy before the war ended in the defeat of the Axis.
In March the heir to the throne, Don Juan de Borbón, wrote to Franco suggesting that power be transferred to him.
This proposal was repeated in June, shortly before the Allied landings in Sicily, in a collective letter written to Franco by twenty-five members of the regime's socio-political élite.
In August Franco was pressed by Don Juan, Generals Orgaz and Aranda, a number of prominent Carlists and a group of lieutenant-generals.
A month later, after the Allied liberation of Italy, eight senior military men presented a petition inviting Franco to consider the opportunity of the moment for restoring the monarchy.
Franco politely but firmly rejected the suggestion made in Don Juan's March letter; however, he gave no direct response to the pressure brought to bear in August.
His reaction to the June letter was vintage Franco: a mixture of authoritarianism and blackmail.
First, he sacked those signatories who held official positions.
Then, on the anniversary of the July 1936 rising, he appealed to the Captains-General for unity in view of an international masonic plot which would destroy Spain.
The restoration of the monarchy, he said, would bring back the communism and anarchy which had threatened to take over the country  before the Civil War.
It was clever use of classic ploys: the evocation of a common external enemy and of a stark choice between Franco and the abyss.
Having thus fended off three challenges to his leadership, Franco felt sufficiently confident to deal summarily with the fourth, simply picking off the signatories of the September petition one by one.
The monarchists' proposals were doomed to failure a priori because they did not take into account a number of crucial factors relating to the Caudillo.
First, he saw himself as charged with a mission (that of maintaining peace and unity) which he could not simply renounce by an act of free will.
Second, he considered himself responsible only "before God and History" and, therefore, exonerated from accountability to mere mortals, especially when, as in this case, he considered them hierarchically inferior.
Third, when Franco dispensed with the services of the pro-Axis Serrano Suñer at the end of summer 1942, it was an indication that he felt very self-confident and that, consequently, he was unlikely to yield to pressure to withdraw.
Finally, he and his immediate circle, including his wife, were enjoying their privileged position; like many autocrats before and after him, Franco found the exercise of absolute power addictive.
As well as miscalculating Franco's personal ambitions in 1943, the exiled Pretender and his supporters in Spain also misjudged the international situation and its implications for Spain.
Encouraged by their contacts with the British government and by the latter's efforts, through Ambassador Hoare, to coax Franco away from the Axis, the monarchists believed that the Allies would actively support a change of regime in Spain.
They did not seem to realize that the Allies' prime concern was the neutrality of Spain, and that any interest they might have in the nature of its political regime existed as a function of that concern.
If enemy access to the western Mediterranean could be prevented with Franco as head of the Spanish state, then the Allies had no reason to want his demise.
On the contrary, his direct line to Hitler and Mussolini placed him in a better position than the monarchists to deal with Axis pressure.
Whereas Hitler might hesitate before invading a fellow-member of the Anti-Comintern Pact, he would be  unlikely to do so if liberalism returned to Spain, aided and abetted by his enemies.
Failure to take all these factors into account resulted in the monarchists' excessively optimistic view of the likelihood of an imminent restoration.
Although Franco exploited to the full his position at the head of a non-participant and strategically important European state, he knew that the war would not last for ever.
If, as seemed increasingly likely after liberated Italy had declared war on Hitler's Germany in October 1943, the Allied powers were to emerge victorious, then Spain's links with the defeated Axis would count more against it than its passive "defence" of the western approaches to the Mediterranean would count in its favour.
A slow process of rapprochement therefore began in the autumn of 1943.
Franco conducted it on his own terms, however, which meant that it was so gradual as to be barely perceptible at times, and designed to show him in the most favourable light possible.
On 3 October 1943 Spain had announced its return to "neutral" status but, in fact, continued to export wolfram to Germany and to allow German agents to operate in and from Spain.
When the Allies protested, Franco distanced himself from personal involvement and promised that something would be done.
But nothing was.
At the end of January 1944 the United States suspended its supplies of petroleum to Spain and advocated a full embargo on exports.
This was a serious threat to a country so dependent on outside supplies but, in the same way that the divisions between the Francoist "families" strengthened Franco's own position, the Caudillo was now assisted by a difference of opinion among the Allied powers.
Whereas the United States was in favour of taking a tough line, Britain argued that economic aid should not be stopped.
Franco was quick to exploit the lack of unity in Allied attitudes to Spain, accusing the United States of intransigence and ingratitude and stating defiantly that Spain would not curtail its aid to Germany under Allied duress.
The pressure of Spain's economic difficulties ultimately forced Franco to agree, on 2 May, to a reduction in wolfram exports, but he had weathered the storm.
The regime's press and propaganda machine presented the issue as a triumph for the Caudillo, who, according to the officially manufactured version, had preserved Spain's  freedom of action by agreeing to reduce exports to Germany, but not to stop them altogether, and had made two major powers negotiate with, rather than dictate to, him.
When, on 24 May, in a speech before the House of Commons, Churchill acknowledged the Allies' debt to Spain for keeping open the Straits of Gibraltar, Franco naturally interpreted this as endorsement of his regime and, therefore, another international victory.
In view of waning Axis fortunes in the summer of 1944 it seemed curious that when the Spanish Foreign Minister, Jordana, died in August he was replaced by Spain's ambassador to occupied France, José Felix Lequerica Erquiza, a man of known Axis sympathies.
By then, Soviet forces were advancing into central Europe and Hitler's forces were falling back all the way.
On the western flank, Allied troops had landed in northern France and were rapidly approaching Paris.
The writing was clearly on the wall for Hitler; indeed, Lequerica's appointment came barely two weeks after an assassination attempt on the Führer.
To place foreign affairs in the hands of a man whose sympathies lay with the losing side seemed both out of character for Franco and politically inept.
The explanation was two-fold.
First, Franco still held out hope of a late Axis victory, believing — astonishingly — that Hitler possessed and would soon deploy secret weapons and "cosmic rays" .
Secondly, Lequerica's ambivalent political make-up chimed perfectly with Franco's duplicitous strategies at home and abroad.
His pre-Civil War sympathies for the national-syndicalist JONS and his membership of Falange from 1936 onwards had made him a natural choice for the post of ambassador to Vichy.
As such, he had shown unflagging support for the Axis cause.
His appointment as Foreign Minister was not, therefore, likely to irritate Hitler.
But Lequerica was also a monarchist, and thus acceptable to the pro-restorationists in Spain.
At the same time, he was totally loyal to Franco and unlikely to seek Allied aid to bring back the monarchy.
Finally, and most significantly, he was not a military man, but a lawyer and former conservative politician.
His professional experience was thus appropriate to what even Franco must have realized would soon be post-war diplomacy.
The immediate task entrusted by Franco to Lequerica was to secure for the Spanish regime the approval of the western democracies without, as yet, severing its links with Nazi Germany.
The tactic employed was not simply, as in the past, to cultivate each side simultaneously, but actively to stress the compatibility of the Spanish and Allied regimes, without making any explicit condemnation of the Axis.
On the one hand, Franco reiterated his belief that the common enemy was communism while, on the other, he insisted that the system he had instituted in Spain was neither Nazi nor fascist, but a unique and original synthesis which transcended both fascism and anti-fascism.
Despite the fact that his previous attempts to draw the western democracies away from the Soviet Union had borne no fruit, Franco wrote to Churchill on 18 October 1944 to propose an anti-Bolshevik alliance and to state his belief that Spain should take part in any post-war peace conference.
That same month, a large group of anti-Francoist guerrillas entered Spain from France through the Val d'Aran, in the Pyrenees.
Although the "invasion" was rapidly repressed by the Army, it suited Franco's purposes perfectly, for he was able to use it to support his theory that communism was an ever-present threat.
Soon afterwards, and before he had received a reply from Churchill, Franco gave what was his first foreign press interview as Head of State.
 "Spain" , he told the United Press correspondent, "has never been fascist or Nazi, and is fully capable of participating in all the political decision-making processes of the present moment." 
It is difficult to decide whether this reflected cynical disregard for foreign public opinion or gross political naïveté.
Either way, Churchill's response to Franco's October missive made very clear that the British government would not swallow the Caudillo's attempt to rewrite history in his own favour.
Undaunted, Franco next approached President Roosevelt, only to receive a similar rebuff.
However, it was also evident from both Roosevelt's reply and from the absence of western democratic support for the Val d'Aran attempt that there would be no outside intervention in Spanish domestic politics.
Thus, even if Franco did not have the explicit or active alliance he sought with the Allies, he had their acquiescence.
Franco was, therefore, unperturbed by the manifesto issued by Don Juan in Lausanne on 19 March 1945.
He knew that the Pretender's words were not backed by solid political or social support from inside or outside Spain.
He also knew, however, that if, as now seemed inevitable, Germany were defeated, it would be even harder for Spain to survive economic isolation than it had been hereto.
As the Second World War entered what was to be its final phase, Franco therefore stepped up his efforts to court Allied favour.
In April 1945, as Allied forces closed in on Hitler and Italian resistance fighters prepared to capture Mussolini, it was announced that Spain no longer maintained diplomatic relations with Japan.
On 8 May (VE Day), diplomatic relations were broken off between Spain and Germany.
If Franco thought that these gestures would be sufficient to change the policies towards Spain of governments whose democratic principles he despised and violated, he was shortly disabused of the notion.
When the United Nations Organization was created in June 1945, Spain was debarred, thanks to a proposal made by the Mexican delegation to the effect that countries whose regimes had been assisted by anti-democratic states should be excluded from membership.
At the end of the Civil War, Mexico had taken in thousands of Republican exiles, some of whom had had a hand in the drafting of the proposal.
For Franco, its acceptance by acclamation was proof that the enemies of Spain were still active and it was therefore necessary to keep a constant vigil, lest their conspiracy to destroy Spain should succeed.
Yet again, he preyed upon the sensitivity of all Spaniards to the spectre of renewed civil war and upon the Right's deeply-rooted fear of democratic values, to make the idea of his own indispensibility prevail.
At the same time, he — or his more perspicacious advisers — knew that the critical state of the Spanish economy would not allow Spain indefinitely to deny or defy the predominance of democratic regimes in the western world.
Ideologically, he would not shift his ground; politically, however, he began to tack to the prevailing wind, giving his regime an appearance of popular, constitutional legitimacy, and gradually taking over and presenting as his own the idea of reinstating the monarchy.
The Fuero de los Españoles (Spaniards' Charter), drawn up in June 1945, nominally defined the rights of all Spaniards; but there were no juridical mechanisms to guarantee those rights and they were, of course, posited on acceptance of the regime.
Dissent was not a fundamental right of Spaniards, nor was freedom of expression.
Like the Cortes, opened in 1943, the Fuero de los Españoles was designed to give the appearance of a certain free-play but, in reality, always within the Procrustean confines of the Francoist system.
Not surprisingly, the publication of the Charter did not sway the western democracies.
The resolution adopted in June by the newly-founded United Nations was ratified by the Potsdam Conference in July.
The timing of this rejection was unfortunate for Franco, for nothing would have suited him better than to have been able to announce Spanish membership of the international winners' club on the morning of the ninth anniversary of the 18 July rising.
Instead, readers of the Spanish press had to make do with the news that Franco had reformed his Council of Ministers.
The keynote of the reshuffle was the dilution of the Falangist predominance visible until then.
Since there was no longer any need to make diplomatic gestures in the direction of right-wing totalitarianism, Lequerica was replaced at the Foreign Ministry by Alberto Martín Artajo y Alvárez, a man well known and much respected in Catholic circles at home and abroad.
The Party Secretariat ceased to have ministerial status, but, in reality, both it and the vast bureaucracy it controlled continued to function exactly as before.
The three most important ministries in terms of mass control — Interior, Justice and Labour — continued to have Falangist ministers, while the economic ministries — Treasury, Agriculture, Commerce and Industry — were to be run by men committed to state interventionism and national self-sufficiency.
Thus, it was clear from the composition of the new cabinet that, while foreign policy might follow a new direction, domestic policy would not change at all.
That much must also have been clear to contemporary foreign observers.
Yet the western demo- cracies held to their policy that there could be no intervention in Spanish internal affairs and that if the Spanish people wanted to be rid of Franco, they must  achieve this by their own efforts alone.
Even Churchill, who repeatedly acknowledged the Allies' "debt" to Franco for his "neutrality" during the Second World War, recognized the absurdity of this pious hope.
Franco, too, knew that as long as he kept the lid of repression screwed tightly down on the Left, his fiercest opponents would never be able to constitute a serious threat.
He was also aware that constant allusions to the awful consequences of not keeping the lid screwed down would bring to heel, like so many Pavlovian dogs, those within his own camp who hankered after some form of leadership other than his.
Year after year, for the next three decades, Franco harped in innumerable, interminable speeches to the National Council, to the Cortes, to the Armed Forces and to the nation, on the need for unity and solidarity around him, against the divisive forces of anti-Spain.
For as long as it seemed remotely relevant, the tactic never failed; and it was easy enough to make it seem relevant in the atmosphere of international hostility of 1945.
In a sense, Franco had the United Nations to thank for consolidating his regime at the end of the Second World War.
Non-intervention did as much to allow him to win the peace as it had done to assist him to victory during the Civil War.
Franco refused to adopt a conciliatory attitude towards the Allies in the summer of 1945.
In the first place, he despised parliamentary democracy as a system of political organization and distrusted liberalism as the root of his perennial bêtes noires: Freemasonry and Marxism.
Moreover, since his political authority was based partly on the myth of his personal infallibility, he could not eat humble pie before the Allies without causing people to question both.
That is to say, he could not admit he had made a mistake in siding with the Axis, without jeopardizing his continuation in power.
His response, echoing what he had so often done on the battlefield, was first to sit tight and then to try to turn an apparently negative situation to his advantage.
The first opportunity to do so was offered precisely by the Potsdam Communiqué.
On 5 August he made a statement in which he said that Spain "was not begging for a place in any international organization and would certainly not accept any such place unless it were  commensurate with her historical importance, size of population and her services to peace and culture" , including neutrality during the Second World War.
In the autumn of 1945, Franco was sitting fairly pretty.
The western democracies might have condemned his regime, but they were clearly not going to intervene to overthrow it.
This, in turn, weakened both the Republicans in exile (who, in any case, were bitterly divided among themselves) and those in Spain (who, moreover, could do little to avoid the repressive clutches of the regime).
Franco's own forces were similarly, if less virulently, shot through with internal rivalries and disagreements; but if confronted with a choice between the status quo and the risk of "the reds" returning, they would all opt for the former.
Finally, the three mainstays of Franco's power — the Catholic Church, the Armed Forces and the Party — were sufficiently loyal in the main to make the occasional critical voice as of one crying in the wilderness.
Thus, when in September 1945 Ramón Serrano Suñer suggested that a national government be formed and Falange Española allowed to recover its pre-1937 autonomy, Franco refused.
To have agreed would have meant addressing the question of a return to political pluralism, an idea which was anathema to the Caudillo.
He would allow the existence of different ideological currents, but they must be bound by the common rules of play imposed by him.
That Franco would tolerate political diversity only as long as it offered no real competition to his hegemony was revealed by an incident which occurred in February 1946.
In that month, Don Juan de Borbón moved from Lausanne to Estoril in Portugal.
Nearly 500 prominent Spanish monarchists sent him a collective letter of greeting and welcome, which was published on 13 February.
Franco was beside himself.
The Cortes had been opened in 1943 to ensure that "the contrast of opinions" remained within certain limits, but this was an action far exceeding those limits.
It was a demonstration of what would happen if Franco were not there to impose order.
But he was; and he did.
Just as he had made an example of earlier insubordinates, such as Hedilla, Varela, Galarza and Yagüe, now the monarchist Kindelán, who had been a stone in Franco's shoe since 1936, was arrested and exiled to the  Canary Islands.
When Don Juan declined an invitation — which was really a summons — to go and meet Franco, the Caudillo broke off relations with him.
Franco was also faced with challenges on other fronts.
Four days before the publication of the monarchists' letter to Don Juan, the United Nations issued a condemnation of the Franco regime, following the execution in Madrid of ten Leftists accused of anti-regime guerrilla activities.
as if in defiance of the United Nations and to confirm Franco's confidence in his regime's rectitude, Cristino García, a former Republican exile who had reached the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the French resistance movement, was executed in Barcelona on 21 February 1946.
In protest, France closed its southern border and proposed that the situation in Spain be discussed in the UN Security Council.
The proposal foundered on British and American fears that the Soviet Union wanted, for its own purposes, to provoke another civil war in Spain and that it would seek to manipulate any Security Council debate to that end.
As a compromise, on 4 March the British, French and United States governments issued a joint Note in which they expressed their rejection of the Franco regime and urged Spain to seek democratic government.
But the Note also made clear that the western democracies would not intervene to bring about the change of regime they advocated.
Franco was irritated by the Tripartite Note but, ultimately, it reassured him.
He could not expect the support of the Allies, but, more importantly, neither would he face active hostility.
The guaranteed absence of external intervention left the regime a free hand to continue its repressive domestic policies.
One by one, European doors began to close on Franco's Spain, as the closure of the French border in March was followed, in April, by the breaking of diplomatic relations with Romania, Yugoslavia and Bulgaria.
Franco remained unperturbed, even satisfied.
For Churchill had made his famous "Iron Curtain" speech on 5 March, and these were countries which lay beyond that barrier.
That they should sever contact with Spain strengthened its anti-communist credentials and supported Franco's theory that his regime was compatible with the western democracies.
And for domestic consumption, nothing could be better than such external "provocation" .
It allowed Franco to play the nationalist card more blatantly than ever, using his public appearances to recall the horrors of the Civil War and to present himself as both martyr on the altar of Spain's liberation from communism and guarantor of the continued existence of Spain as a coherent socio-political entity.
 "I am the sentry who is never relieved" , he said at the opening of new rooms at the Military Museum in Madrid on 7 March 1946, conveniently overlooking the fact that several unavailing attempts had been made to relieve him since 1939.
In a speech to the Cortes, two months later, he referred to his regime as "providing the authority to keep in check the Spanish tendency to 'egotism and anarchy'" .
This was a cynical hint that, if Spain had an authoritarian regime, it was because the Spanish people were ungovernable otherwise.
This line of argument was often and successfully used by the dictatorship; its absorption by many Spaniards contributed in no small measure to the duration of the regime.
So, too, did international reluctance.
At the end of May 1946 a UN Subcommittee report opined that the Franco regime was "a potential threat to international peace and security" but advised against interference from outside.
The report did recommend that members be called upon to break off relations with Spain, but there were serious divisions among them about the efficacy of such measures.
Thus, as Franco was strengthened by the internal divisions of his followers at home, he was assisted by the disagreements of his opponents abroad.
He reacted with a mixture of self-righteous indignation and complacency, safe in the knowledge that his detractors were impotent to dislodge him and that he commanded the loyalty and obedience of large numbers of his countrymen and women.
The Party could always be relied upon to orchestrate the massive demonstrations whose purpose was to cow those who doubted Franco's strength and silence allegations that the regime was not legitimated by popular support.
Thus, even when, on 12 December 1946, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution which excluded Spain from all UN bodies and recommended members to withdraw their ambassadors from Madrid, the Generalísimo  showed no sign of being ruffled.
The next day, a huge crowd gathered on the esplanade in front of the Royal Palace in Madrid, carrying placards rejecting the UN announcement.
Franco appeared on the balcony to receive the acclaim of his supporters.
This exercise, organized and stage-managed by the Party, was presented by the official press and propaganda machine as a spontaneous demonstration of popular backing for Franco and, by extension, as "proof" that the Spanish regime did not need validation from outside.
Besides, no economic sanctions were to be implemented; military intervention was not contemplated; and diplomatic relations were not to be totally broken off.
Franco was confident that alliances could be sought elsewhere.
In Argentina, for example, Juan Domingo Perón had been elected President in February, and neighbouring Portugal was still ruled by another Right-wing dictator, Antonio Oliveira de Salazar.
Thanks to these two countries and the absence of UN-imposed sanctions, Spain would survive economically, albeit at the cost of enormous hardship to the populace.
Moreover, there had been six votes against the resolution and thirteen abstentions.
Finally, the western democracies were soon to be preoccupied by new threats.
On 19 December 1946 the leader of the indigenous forces in Vietnam, Ho Chi Minh, initiated the rising against French colonial occupation, which was eventually to lead to the bloodiest and politically most crucial local war this century.
As Paul Preston writes, "the United Nations had given [Franco]a winning hand to play, allowing him to persuade the Spanish people that he was their heroic leader in yet another foreign attempt to destroy Spain" .
Why did this tactic work so successfully?
The persuasive power of the Francoist propaganda machine was great, particularly in the absence of alternative, uncontrolled sources of inform- ation with which to contrast official messages and put them into perspective.
In a country of massive illiteracy, the emotional impact of visual images and the spoken word could give them tremendous manipulative potential.
Franco was fully aware of this.
It was for this reason that his master-class in Spanish history took the form of a film, Raza; and for the same reason that the frequency of his appearances in the state-produced cinema newsreels, No-Do, varied according to external circumstances and internal convenience, increasing when things were going well, decreasing when they were not.
Even so, the propaganda which set out to promote the aggrandizement of the figure of Franco, almost to the point of beatification, could not have succeeded without fertile ground in which to plant its seeds.
It was possible to present Franco as a bulwark against foreign malice because, in the course of its history, Spain had been invaded or its fortunes adversely affected by foreigners on many occasions.
It was easy, therefore, to touch the sensitive nerve of nationalism.
Franco never took major steps when in doubt.
When he was unsure of his ground, or of the outcome of an action, he waited.
When he felt fully in command of the situation, he acted decisively.
So it was when, in the spring of 1947, he announced that he would shortly present to the Cortes the draft of a law which would regulate the question of who would succeed him as Head of State and, equally important, when this event would take place.
Significantly, the text of the Law of Succession was made public on 31 March, the eve of "Victory Day" , the anniversary of the end of the Civil War.
Spain was still deeply divided by the war and the choice of its commemorative dates (such as "Victory Day" , or 18 July) for the announcement of important political decisions was a tactic frequently used by Franco, reminding people that it was the outcome of the war that had given him the power to alter the country's course as he thought fit.
For Franco himself and his partisans, the deliberate coincidence of military and political milestones was a way of reaffirming their conviction of their right to control their country and its inhabitants.
To the regime's opponents, it was a signal that they had the power to do so.
For both, the message was unequivocal: the legitimacy of the Franco regime derived from superior military force.
The means of ensuring the imposition of law and order is necessary, but not sufficient, as a basis for the exercise of power in a democracy; whereas, in a dictatorship such as Franco's, it was not only necessary, but also sufficient.
It was this approach that Spaniards were reminded of on 31 March 1947, as they listened to Franco's reedy voice on the radio, telling them that the time had come to "confront  the ultimate definition of [their]State, inseparably linked to the statute of succession in its highest echelons" .
In spite of the collapse of King Alphonso XIII's monarchy in 1931, the millions of Spaniards whose sympathies were Republican and the horrors of the Civil War engendered by the inability of a group of soldiers to accept those two realities, General Franco had decided that the "ultimate definition" of the Spanish state over which he presided would thenceforth be "kingdom" .
After his speech came a reading of the text of the proposed law.
Although it enshrined the idea that Spain would one day be ruled by a prince of the blood, the key concept was "one day" , for no date was specified for this event.
What was specified was that Franco would be Head of State for as long as he lived, and that he would designate his own successor, as king or regent.
In addition, Franco would appoint the members of a Council of the Realm, to which his successor would eventually be responsible, and would also designate a Council of Regency, which would take his place until a successor was chosen, in the event that the Caudillo died without naming one.
In effect, Franco had extended his all-encompassing grip on the present to ensure control over the future as well.
Don Juan de Borbón reacted with a statement published on 7 April, in which he rejected Franco's proposals outright.
A week later, he gave an interview in the same vein to the Observer, which was reproduced by the BBC and by the New York Times.
The Falangists were also displeased, partly because they were opposed to the principle of monarchy, and partly because, in stating specifically that the ideological basis of the regime would be provided by an amalgam of political forces, the Law of Succession choked off their hopes of making Spain exclusively a Falangist state.
Their criticism, however, was half-hearted.
Former Minister Arrese presented to the Cortes some "Notes on the Law of Succession" , but they were simply by way of personal observations, not rejection of the Law.
As a Falangist critic commented years later, the Falange's attitude was "reticent and vacillating" .
The discontent of the monarchists and Falangists was as nothing by comparison with the rage felt by the regime's left-wing opponents.
For them, this new manifestation of Franco's megalomania was coupled with  the distress and humiliation of physical and political repression, degrading social, economic and working conditions, and disappointment with the policy of the western democracies.
On 1 May 1947 — traditionally Labour Day for the socialist, communist and anarchist movements — the industrialized provinces of Vizcaya and Guip´zcoa (in the north of Spain) were the scene of the first widespread strike since the end of the Civil War.
In spite of the difficulties of organizing and sustaining such an action in conditions of clandestinity, it continued for almost a week — an unprecedented event in the Franco regime.
The Generalísimo was unruffled by these indications that large sectors of the population disagreed with the way he had planned their future, for they posed no real threat to his power.
Don Juan was in exile and his supporters in Spain did not have the military or political support necessary to effect a successful coup.
The Falangists derived what power they had from their positions as the instruments of Francoism; they had no organizational capacity outside the framework of the regime and no international support at all.
As for the anti-Francoist labour movement, it was severely restricted by its illegal and, consequently, clandestine nature, and weakened by the internal wranglings of the exiled Leftist political parties to which it was linked.
In any case, the repressive methods employed by the Armed Police, the Civil Guard and the legal system itself were more than a match for unarmed industrial workers.
Moreover, strike action could be counterproductive.
As well as enabling the regime to identify and arrest leaders, it might be interpreted by some western governments as a sign of the communist subversion claimed by Franco, to which they were particularly sensitive in the light of their worsening relations with the Soviet Union.
In terms of domestic politics, there was no one to challenge Franco's decisions, however arbitrary they might be.
Franco was therefore in defiant mood in mid-1947.
The very survival of his regime "proved" that Spain did not need the western democracies, from whose European Recovery Programme (better known as the Marshall Plan) Spain was excluded when it was launched in June.
Spain had friends elsewhere: on 8 June 1947 the wife of the Argentinian  dictator, Eva Perón, began an official visit to Spain, during which she was displayed as a symbol of Argentinian solidarity to crowds of Spaniards anxious for a glimpse of "Evita" .
Carmen Polo threw steely sidelong glances as her husband (dressed always in military uniform) proudly escorted the glamorous Señora de Perón on her visit.
In fact, the Generalísimo's unprecedented attentions to the visitor were no more, but also no less, than a lavish propaganda exercise designed as a show of political strength to conceal or shore up the underlying economic weakness and isolation of the regime.
In self-confident mood, Franco pressed ahead with his plans for the Law of Succession.
The day before Eva Perón was due to arrive, on 7 June 1947, Franco read the draft to a packed Cortes.
Many of the members were there in Party uniform, despite the political unfashionability of such trappings.
As Franco read the introductory Preamble, followed by the text of the Law itself, they listened intently, dutifully, interrupting only to applaud.
There were no questions or interjections from the floor of the Chamber, as is customary in the British House of Commons, and as had been common debating practice during the Second Republic.
But, then, the Francoist idea of parliament precluded discussion and dissent, in the same way that these two concepts were excluded from every area of social and political life under Francoism.
At the end of Franco's presentation, the draft was unanimously accepted by the members and Franco left the Chamber to the accompaniment of a standing ovation.
The whole performance had been little more than a formality, to give an appearance of government by consensus.
The outcome was, however, a foregone conclusion; at no point did there exist the slightest possibility that the Law would not be approved.
Under the terms of the 1939 Law of the Administration of the State, Franco could have promulgated the Law of Succession without previously presenting it to the Cortes.
His purpose in doing so was to create the illusion that major political decisions were not taken by one man, but in a collegiate way, by the representatives of the people.
The attempt to disguise the fact that the decision itself was not made in or by the Cortes, was taken a step further with the  announcement that the Law of Succession would be submitted to popular consideration in a national referendum on 6 July 1947.
Throughout the intervening month, the Spanish public was subject to a relentless campaign of propaganda urging them to vote in favour of the Law.
Any other kind of propaganda — in favour of abstention, or rejection — was illegal, and an ordinance was even passed detailing the sanctions to be applied to those who did not vote on 7 July.
Not surprisingly, with their jobs and their rations at stake, 14,145,163 people placed their cross in the "Yes" box on the ballot papers, against 1,074,500 who voted against or returned spoiled ballot papers.
The Law of Succession came into force on 18 July in 1947, a deliberate "celebration" of the beginning of the Civil War.
The regime used the fact that it had been "approved" in a referendum to prove two apparently contradictory notions, both of which served, nevertheless, to legitimate Franco's rule.
First, that the referendum demonstrated that Spain was a democracy; and, second, that the result showed that the electorate wanted Franco, the champion of anti-democracy.
On the one hand, the referendum was acclaimed as "a magnificent act without equal in the…history of the most worthily-titled democracies" , because it had offered the people the opportunity to limit the power of "the National Government and its eminent leadership" .
On the other, "the whole of Spain ratifie[d] with its vote…the powers of Franco" .
Why, it might still be asked, did Franco go to so much trouble to give the impression that his regime had a basis other than sheer force, when that selfsame exercise made it clear that he did not need to?
Why hold a referendum, when no one could challenge the imposition of his will?
Partly in order to show the world (and, perhaps, reassure himself) that "his destiny and that of Spain [were]consubstantial and that God [had]placed him in the position which he [occupied]for great things" .
Partly because, in spite of his professed indifference to the outside world, it nevertheless rankled with Franco that his regime was excluded from all the most important international circles, and he knew that it would continue to  be blackballed for as long as it could be accused of denying the Spanish people free choice.
The solution, therefore, was to make it look as though they did have a choice, but to ensure that they chose Franco.
The 1947 referendum (and the law it had considered) were a further step in the strategy adopted in 1945 to improve the appearance of the regime without altering its underlying principles.
The ploy was at least partially successful, but more by luck than by tactical acumen.
In the second half of 1947 international attitudes towards Franco began to alter but this was less in response to the "changes" he had introduced than because Spain's strategic value was enhanced by the deterioration of east–west relations.
Thus, when in November 1947 a resolution was put to the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) Committee for Political and Security Questions, calling for a reaffirmation of the December 1946 resolution, it failed to secure the two-thirds majority required for adoption.
Most significantly, the United States voted against the resolution.
In January 1948 the US State Department began to consider posting an Ambassador to Madrid and supplies of petroleum and military and paramilitary matériel began to be sent through the Standard Oil Company.
In March only President Truman's veto prevented the inclusion of Spain in the list of recipients of Marshall Plan aid, after it had been approved by Congress.
That same year, France reopened the border and concluded a trading agreement with its southern neighbour.
Britain, too, signed a commercial agreement with Spain in May 1948.
Although these unequivocal signs of changing western attitudes were tempered by continuing British and French opposition to the re-establishment of full diplomatic and political relations, they were sufficient to give an enormous boost to Franco's confidence in himself and the rightness of his own actions.
Yet there was one cloud on the horizon: Don Juan.
It was not that he posed any real threat (although he was discussing collaboration with moderate socialist exiles).
What bothered Franco was that Don Juan was beyond his control.
Don Juan did not recognize Franco as having any authority over him and openly challenged the Generalísimo's public and self-image of omnipotence.
However, in January 1948 Don Juan had been advised by  American representatives to mend his fences with Franco, and in August he accepted an invitation to meet Franco on board the latter's yacht, the Azor.
Franco's main objective was to propose that Don Juan's son, Don Juan Carlos (then ten years old) be educated in Spain.
Don Juan refused, but later acquiesced when, in October, Franco presented him with a fait accompli by leaking news that Juan Carlos was to come to Spain to continue his schooling.
The young prince arrived in November.
That same month, Spain was invited to join the International Statistical Commission, which was a UN body.
It was a small but clear sign that the western democracies wished to extend an olive branch to Franco, made clearer by the fact that Britain and the United States had voted in favour.
By then, the Cold War was well under way and it was strategically expedient for the western powers to ensure the permanence of a stable anti-communist regime on Europe's southern flank.
It was indicative of Franco's childishly egocentric view of politics that he now chose to ignore Allied overtures.
In 1946, they had rejected his regime; now, when it could be of use to them, he was going to make sure that any cooperation was given on his terms and in his good time.
Thus, although Franco's own Minister of Industry and Commerce told him in early 1949 that, without more foreign aid, the Spanish economy could survive for six months at most, the Caudillo insisted that Spain had no need of the international community.
In the same way that, in 1941, he had been convinced that Hitler was in his debt for services rendered in the struggle against communism, Franco now believed the western powers owed it to him to recognize that he had been right all along.
That being the case, it was not appropriate to seek admission to the United Nations or to NATO (the latter created in 1949); it should be offered to him as of right.
When, in May 1949, a UN resolution recommending the re-establishment of full diplomatic relations with Spain fell only four votes short of achieving the requisite two-thirds majority, Franco interpreted this as vindicating his stance.
And when, at the beginning of 1950, US Secretary of State Acheson conceded that the United States would now vote in favour of the return of UN members' Ambassadors to Spain, Franco knew that the thaw had begun.
However, there was still a long way to go for Spain to be fully integrated into the world concert of nations; indeed, this was not possible while Franco lived.
But Spain would never again be as politically and economically isolated as it had been between 1945 and 1950.
This in itself was to be a major factor in Franco's permanence in power in the years to come.
Having survived the domestic and international challenges of the 1940s, Franco ended his first decade of post-Civil War power firmly established at what he liked to call the helm of the ship of state.
His mood of self-satisfaction was far from justified in terms of social and economic realities, but even these were to be turned into personal triumphs for Franco in the course of the next two decades.
It was ironic indeed (although, of course, no one mentioned it) that, having risen to power by lambasting the liberal democracies as "anti-Spain" , Franco's permanence from the 1950s onwards owed a great deal to the political and economic capital invested in Spain by those same nations.
THE "SENTRY OF THE WEST" (1950–60)
Franco seemed to be riding on the crest of the wave as he entered the second decade of his rule — his "magistracy" as he called it in his own grandiloquent language.
At home, he had quelled the murmurings of those who wanted a clear sign of what the regime's institutional future was to be, without committing himself to a date for the return of a monarch to the leadership of the state, and without specifying who his successor would be.
Abroad, gestures such as the dilution of the pre-1945 Falangist predominance and the 1947 referendum had achieved a certain relaxation in the hard line adopted by the members of the United Nations.
Looking back over the first decade of his regime, in a radio broadcast made to mark the tenth anniversary of the end of the Civil War, Franco crowed,
What other Regime would have resisted the very serious situations which the Nation has had to confront in these thirteen [sic]years?
Thanks to[the regime]we were victorious in our war, we escaped another, we resisted the most serious international conspiracy ever recorded and we have overcome with minimum destruction the economic difficulties of two wars, the unending neglect to which our predecessors subjected our economy, and a terrible drought which has put the production and the resilience of our Fatherland to the test in this period.
In fact, the material foundations of Franco's regime were far from secure.
By the end of the 1940s, Spain was on the verge of a major economic crisis, because the country's  infrastructure was incapable of sustaining the programme of self-sufficiency adopted for political reasons in 1939.
At the end of the Civil War, and during the Second World War, it was relatively easy to persuade people that shortages of food, clothing, fuel and manufactured goods were due, first, to the destruction wrought by the "reds" and, subsequently, to the difficulties resulting from international conflict.
When the situation scarcely improved after 1945, Franco resorted to his theory of the international "judeo- masonic-communist" conspiracy by way of explanation.
Franco's refusal to recognize that autarchy was economically and politically untenable was due partly to his belief that liberal democracy could not bring economic well-being, and partly to his lack of understanding of the complexities of economic policy-formulation.
For both reasons, he resisted attempts to reinsert Spain fully into the international capitalist system until forced to do so by the prospect of a return to wartime rationing.
His inability to grasp the intricacies of modern economics was due in large measure to limits of intellect and lack of appropriate training (although, as we have noted in Chapter 5, this did not prevent him from drafting, in 1939, his "National Programme for Resurgence" ).
His ignorance was com- pounded by the fact that, in theory and in practice, the subject was becoming objectively more complicated.
Indeed, the same was true of every sphere of human activity, including politics.
In the course of the 1950s, the first signs appeared that the tactics used by Franco since 1936 to stay in power — repression, appeals for unity, apocalyptic visions of Republican "chaos" , and himself as arbiter among fractious regime forces — were less effective than they had previously been.
True to his dislike of sudden change (or, indeed, of any change which implied modernization) Franco altered the direction of his economic and foreign policies only cautiously.
It was not until the second half of the 1950s that autarchy was definitively superseded by a firm commitment to international capitalism.
Nevertheless, change was imminent from the start of the decade, powered by the twin motors of Spanish economic need and the military interest of the United States.
There was no question of generalized armed conflict at this stage, but the rivalry  between the two "superpowers" meant that the struggle for domination did not cease.
In June 1950 communist North Korea invaded South Korea.
This war, the continuing conflict in Vietnam and successive wars in Africa, the Middle East and Central and South America were the flashpoints of the constant process of east–west confrontation which characterized international politics as the second half of the twentieth century opened.
It was in the context of this struggle for control that the western world, with the United States at its head, decided to readmit Francoist Spain to its circle.
From a military point of view, the strategic importance of the Iberian Peninsula was evident simply from looking at a map.
Situated between the Mediterranean and the Atlantic, and midway between the African and European continents, it was at the centre of a crucial communications crossroads.
During the Second World War, in order to maintain Allied access to the Mediterranean, it had been enough to ensure Spain's neutrality.
But the Soviet Union in the 1950s was an even more formidable adversary than Hitler's Germany had been.
It was therefore thought necessary to take steps not only to secure the defence of the Iberian Peninsula, but also to give it the ability to assume an offensive role if necessary.
From an ideological point of view, the anti-democratic nature of the Spanish regime became less significant once communism had replaced fascism as the perceived principal threat to world peace.
There was no need to convince the Spanish regime of the alleged danger of communist take-over: the Spanish Nationalists had fought a war on precisely that platform between 1936 and 1939.
Consequently, although Franco's offer of sending troops to fight in Korea, as part of a new "crusade" against communism, was not taken up, there were lobbies in the United States and in Britain which were in favour of re-establishing full relations with Spain.
At the same time, Portugal advocated the admission of Spain to NATO — a possibility to which Franco responded, in characteristically hispanocentric fashion, by deeming that the return of Gibraltar to Spanish sovereignty should be the quid pro quo of Spanish membership of NATO.
As he had done with the Axis in 1940 and the Allies in 1945, Franco considered that the foreign powers were in his debt and, therefore, that he, not they, should lay down the terms of Spanish cooperation.
His position seemed fully vindicated when, on 4 November 1950, the UN General Assembly voted by thirty-eight to ten (with twelve abstentions) effectively to withdraw the condemnation issued in 1946 by authorizing members to reinstate their Ambassadors to Madrid.
Franco interpreted this move, not as a gesture of diplomatic expediency, but as a demonstration of western approval.
Considering the moment propitious to pursue the Spanish claim to Gibraltar, he and Carrero Blanco mounted a press and radio campaign for the return of the Rock.
At the end of 1950, the co-author of a book advancing Spanish claims to various overseas territories, including Gibraltar, Fernando María Castiella, was appointed as Spanish Ambassador to London.
This, however, proved to be too provocative a move: Castiella was refused agrément and was therefore unable to take up the London posting.
In February 1951, a huge rally in support of Spanish sovereignty over Gibraltar was staged in Barcelona, and Franco declared 4 August "Gibraltar Day" .
The United States showed no sign of wishing to intervene in Spain's quarrel with Britain over Gibraltar, but was not deterred from seeking closer relations with Spain.
In November 1950 fact-finding missions from the Finance Committees of the US Senate and Congress travelled to Spain and a loan of $62.5 million was subsequently authorized.
Then, on 27 December, the appointment was announced of Stanton Griffis as US ambassador to Madrid.
For Franco, this was perfect timing for his end-of-year speech.
In a highly self-congratulatory address, he pointed to "the solemn international rectification of the United Nations agreement" and affirmed that "the world, disabused of its false delusions, turns its eyes to our Fatherland, in the conviction that, above all, right accompanied Spain" .
Nonetheless, he condemned that same deluded world for its previous exclusion of Spain from the European Recovery Programme, thereby exacerbating the effects of a long period of exceptionally low rainfall.
 "If we have been unable to give Spain greater well-being" , he said, "let it be very clear that this has been due to foreign incomprehension." 
Yet, against all odds, he continued, "we have  managed to take a gigantic step forward" , and proceeded to enumerate the regime's achievements in grandiose — and extremely vague — terms.
 "What Spanish regime" , he enquired rhetorically, "at any time, has been more productive in carrying out its tasks and has created for the Nation, in any respect, wealth comparable to that created up to now?" 
Not everyone agreed with Franco's triumphant assessment.
The spring of 1951 saw a boycott of public transport and a general strike in Barcelona, and a strike in the mining, ship-building and steel sectors of the Basque Country.
If the concern Franco had expressed for the living and working conditions of the Asturian miners in 1917 had been sincere, it was long forgotten by 1951.
Viewing the protests against low wages and high prices as the work of foreign communist agitators, he ordered heavy police repression.
Despite this indication that Franco had not changed the political principles on which his regime had been established in 1939, the US military establishment pressed ahead with its plans, on the one hand to secure bases in Spain and, on the other, to help Spain become militarily capable of joining NATO.
In July 1951 the US Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Sherman, began what would be protracted negotiations for the concession of air and naval facilities on the Spanish mainland.
Franco responded as he had done with Hitler, presenting a shopping list and saying that the provision of the items on it (which ranged from aircraft to foodstuffs) was a prerequisite for Spanish cooperation.
Unlike Hitler, however, the Americans were anxious for Franco's consent and found him a reasonable interlocutor.
Admiral Sherman promised that Congress would be asked to approve a line of credit for Spain and, that summer, had economic and military delegations sent to the Peninsula to study the details of what Franco required.
As had happened with the return of the Ambassadors, Franco had seemingly got what he wanted without altering his position.
Certainly, this was the way he needed to present it for domestic consumption, for this new alliance and the concession of territory for military use by a foreign power scarcely seemed consistent with the many hours and column inches he had devoted to  demonizing the western democracies and to denouncing the British "occupation" of Gibraltar.
A new cabinet, announced on 19 July 1951, indicated that modifications to domestic policies could be expected to parallel the shift already apparent in external affairs.
The economy was clearly at the centre of the Caudillo's attention, and the accent was more on the practical qualifications of appointees than on ideological affiliations.
It was the beginning of a move away from the belief that "faith is more important than competence" .
For the first time since the Civil War, Industry and Commerce were not lumped together, but each given a separate ministry.
The new Minister for Industry was José Planell Riera, then Vice-President of the state holding company, the National Institute for Industry.
Manuel Arburúa, appointed as Minister for Commerce, had, until then, been Under-Secretary at the combined Ministry for Commerce and Industry and was, by profession, an economist specializing in financial and monetary policy.
Agriculture, too, felt the wind of change, with an agronomist, Rafael Cavestany, taking the ministerial place of the Falangist Carlos Reín.
Curiously, the man appointed head of the Treasury, Francisco Gómez de Llano, came from a different mould, being a lawyer and one-time civil servant under the dictatorship of General Primo de Rivera.
This was perhaps a conservative precaution on Franco's part, and a reminder that, when it came to the nation's purse-strings, there would not yet be any hint of relaxation or liberalism.
Ever mindful of the utility of involving all the regime's political "families" in the business of government, Franco distributed amongst them the remaining posts in his 1951 cabinet.
In this way, he pre-empted possible rebellions on grounds of exclusion and fuelled the common interest of his diverse partisans in keeping the regime alive and himself in power.
Yet, without altering the basic components of the mix, it was possible to detect a shift in the nuances.
Old-style Falangists occupied the ministries associated with social and political control (Interior, Army, Labour and the Party Secretariat), but portfolios connected with the external image of the regime and the assurance of its future (such as Justice, Foreign Affairs, Education and Public Works) were assigned to men guided less by rigid  ideological concepts than by their awareness that the world had changed since 1945 and that Spain needed to adapt if it was to be counted among the leading nations in the post-war world.
What was to prove the most far-reaching of the changes introduced in the July 1951 cabinet was the elevation to ministerial rank of Admiral Carrero Blanco's position as director of the office of the head of government; and the one which best exemplified the combination of new and old, change and ossification, was the creation of a Ministry of Information and Tourism.
Had they been in vogue in 1951, the words perestroika and glasnost might have been used by observers.
The substitution of the term "information" for the old "press and propaganda" , and its promotion to ministerial level seemed to indicate a more wide-ranging approach to questions of what the general public might know and think of the regime; while the allocation of official attention to tourism suggested that, by contrast with the days of autarchy and isolationism, foreigners were henceforth to be encouraged to come to Spain.
At the same time, however, the man appointed as Minister, Gabriel Arias Salgado, was a rigid Catholic and well known for the fanatical campaigns against sin and temptation in literature, cinema and theatre that he had master-minded from the Department of Popular Education in the 1940s.
One of his more absurd measures had been to oblige chorus girls to appear on stage in knickerbockers which reached to their knees.
The choice of this unyielding, deeply religious man for this particular post was a sharp reminder that, when it came to how Spaniards viewed their own country and the outside world, and to how outsiders would see Spain, their opinions would still be shaped from above according to the scale of values which had informed the Franco regime from the start.
The simultaneous process of relaxing autarchy and rapprochement with the western democracies moved very slowly in the first half of the 1950s.
A more adventurous statesman, or one less determined to hang on to power, might have acted more quickly or taken more radical steps to achieve the same goal.
Franco, however, did not fit that mould.
He had not acted on impulse since his time as a young captain in Morocco, anxious to make his mark in an  institution which deliberately massified people and subjugated their individuality.
By 1936 he had consolidated his professional reputation; by 1939 he had established his political hegemony; and by 1949 he had survived ten years of internal and external difficulties.
Moreover, Franco disliked change.
It is not surprising, therefore, that not only did he consider that he alone would set the pace, but also that the pace he chose to set was that of a dilatory gastropod.
Franco's instinctive preference for slowness was strengthened by signs that movement towards abandoning the well-worn paths of hispanocentric tradition would meet with fierce opposition from certain quarters.
In February 1952 an attempt was made to burn down an Evangelical church in Seville, and Cardinal Segura published a virulently anti-Protestant pastoral letter, in which he effectively accused Franco of betraying the sacred identity of Spain as a Catholic nation.
It was a delicate moment for Franco, who had so closely linked the legitimacy of his power to his presentation of himself as the defender of the Catholic faith.
His immediate response was to stonewall.
Later, he used the opening of the Cortes, on 17 May 1952, and the International Eucharistic Congress, held in Barcelona in June, to indicate that nothing essential had changed.
The quasi-religious ceremonial which surrounded Franco's attendance at both events served both to sacralize power and to secularize religion, making the two indivisible in the person of Francisco Franco.
In purely pragmatic terms, such identification with Catholicism was a way of currying favour with the Vatican and with the influential Catholic lobby in the United States.
For, by mid-1952, Franco had decided that Spain's international standing and his own personal prestige would be enhanced by concluding a bilateral agreement with the United States and a concordat with the Vatican.
He secured both in 1953.
After months of negotiation, the agreement with the United States was signed on 26 September 1953.
Known as the Pacts of Madrid, the two-part treaty was essentially military in character, but also contained economic and cultural provisions.
Spain was to allow the United States to construct three Airforce bases (at Zaragoza, Torrejón de Ardoz, outside Madrid, and Morón de la Frontera, in  Andalusia) and a naval base (at Rota, near Cadiz).
In exchange, the United States would pay a certain sum annually in the form of development-aid grants and would provide the Spanish Armed Forces with matériel.
In addition, the two countries signed an agreement of mutual defence.
The significance of this event was threefold.
First, it meant that the Franco regime had the approval and protection of the most powerful nation in the world.
Secondly, the Spanish economy was to receive a much-needed shot in the arm (in the first instance, some 200 million dollars-worth of military and technological assistance).
Thirdly, the willingness of the United States to become militarily and economically involved in Spain gave North American and European financiers and businessmen the reassurance they needed to invest private capital there.
The fact that Spain was not a democracy had warranted a UN condemnation in 1946.
Now, less than ten years later, a blind eye was turned to this "circumstance" , for it was offset by the market potential of Spain, which offered plentiful labour at cheap prices and some thirty million consumers-in-the-making.
Moreover, strikes were illegal, wages were controlled by the state and people were anxious to improve their standard of living after so many years of rationing and privation.
To the owners of foreign capital, the Franco regime no longer seemed a political embarrassment, but the guarantor of the political and social stability which would enhance their chances of making profits in Spain.
The international campaign against communism had a natural ally in the Catholic Church.
Negotiations for a concordat had been going on between Spain and the Vatican for about the same length of time as those between Spain and the United States.
When Franco made his cabinet changes in July 1951, his first choice for Minister of Education had been the Falangist turned Christian Democrat, Fernando María Castiella.
However, he had refused the appointment.
Surprisingly, Franco did not make an example of him as he had done in previous such instances of "insubordination" , but appointed him as Ambassador to the Holy See.
As such, his principal task was to secure the concordat, which was signed at the end of August 1953.
In practical terms, the concordat was not so  important as the Hispano-US agreement.
However, as a sign of international approval, Franco probably viewed it as more significant, for it was more of a personal triumph, bolstering his image as God's emissary.
To the man who had declared himself "responsible before God" , but not before his fellow citizens, the conclusion of an agreement with God's earthly representative had an elevated significance.
From the standpoint of more worldly considerations, the signing of the concordat soothed the irritation of those Catholics who did not like the trend towards closer relations with what they saw as Protestant — that is, heretic — America (although they must also have recognized that the Catholic political and economic lobby in the United States was large, rich and influential).
Franco's propagandists spared no efforts to demonstrate that the international community had at last recognized the rightness of his principles, or to extol what they called the enormous political skill of the man who had foreseen the Cold War years before it became reality.
One of Franco's most fervent supporters, Luis Galinsoga, editor of the Barcelona daily, La Vanguardia, lauded the Generalísimo as the "sentry of the west" and the "guardian of the European spiritual fortress" — a description which undoubtedly fitted perfectly Franco's own image of himself and his role in Spanish and world politics.
The enthusiasm of official propaganda derived partly from the triumphalism inherent in a regime which had come into being by dint of a military victory, and partly from the need to conceal, or divert attention away from domestic problems.
As we noted earlier, one of the reasons why Franco ultimately revised his former anti-western attitudes was that the crisis of economic autarchy left him little choice.
The Spanish economy desperately needed external aid and, in order to get it, economic policy-makers had to accept the prescriptions of their benefactors as to how the economy should be organized.
In the first place, the Pentagon had partial control over how the funds granted under the terms of the Pacts of Madrid were to be spent.
Secondly, private investors had their own ideas about where they wanted to place their capital, which did not always or necessarily coincide with those of the Spanish regime.
Consequently, while the method chosen to resolve the economic crisis  brought political as well as economic benefits, it also involved the risk of setting up other political and economic tensions which might ultimately defeat the object of the exercise: the consolidation and continuation of the Franco regime.
It is difficult to decide whether the "loosening [of]the unity under siege of the period 1945–53" which followed the concordat and the Pacts of Madrid was a deliberate continuation by Franco of the controlled internal jockeying he had presided over since 1936, or a sign that he was being gradually overtaken by the speed of events.
The traditional political "families" still vied with each other in pursuance of their particular objectives; but the old clans of Catholics, monarchists and Falangists were now joined by a new breed of apolitical technocrat and a new kind of Falangist.
This is not to say that they were anti-Francoist.
On the contrary, their objective was not to overthrow the Franco regime but to adapt it to meet the demands of what promised to be a more international future.
This idea was expressed by an article published in one of the newspapers of the official students' union, the Sindicato Español Universitario (SEU) in 1952:
The Spanish regime born of the rising of 18 July 1936 has been consolidated, enjoys an indisputable prestige and has achieved, for the first time in centuries, an independent political line for the Spanish people…
The figure of Francisco Franco and his political talent, like his military talent before, have made possible a situation in which we may look to the future with optimism.
Precisely for that reason, it is urgently necessary to consolidate the present and make definitively sure of the future.
Nevertheless, the people who voiced such sentiments were "less bewitched by the magic of the Caudillo" than the previous generation of regime supporters.
They had no direct experience of the Second Republic or the Civil War and so were less fearful of the consequences of change.
Indeed, having grown up with the privations of autarchy, they could see the potential benefits of inclusion in the international capitalist system.
In the monarchist camp, too, new ideas were being developed.
In September 1953 a group of Don Juan's more  liberal partisans, of whom the most prominent was the intellectual and journalist, Rafael Calvo Serer, began to propound the idea of a "social monarchy" as an alternative to Franco, and themselves as a "third force" , in opposition both to the Falange and the Catholic conservatives.
The liberal ideas of this group, and the fact that several of its members were known or alleged to belong to the secretive Catholic brotherhood, Opus Dei, made them anathema to the "old shirt" Falangists and the Catholic integrists.
From the second half of the 1960s, the aims of these new sectors and the tensions between them and the Francoist old guard would contribute to the build-up of pressure for democracy which characterized the last decade of Franco's life.
At the beginning of the 1950s, they were merely emergent and posed no threat to Franco, who was concerned to defuse two more immediate potential sources of internal unrest.
The first was the ultra-nationalist core of his political support, which might react badly to the suggestion that the Fatherland was being "sold" to foreigners — and liberal democratic foreigners at that.
The second was the large and influential agrarian component in the regime's social, economic and political fabric, which was liable to feel unjustly treated if the regime abandoned it in favour of the programme of liberalization and industrialization recommended by the representatives of foreign capital.
The opposition to change of these two sectors, whose views, moreover, reflected Franco's own social and political sympathies, strengthened his instinctive disinclination to make substantive policy modifications.
To soothe the nationalists, Franco resorted yet again to the rituals of Falangism to remind everyone what were the constants of his power.
He authorized the organization of the first (and, tellingly, only) National Congress of FET y de las JONS in Madrid, on 29 October 1953, the twentieth anniversary of the foundation of Falange.
This gesture also served to indicate that he was still in charge, for the event was held in the face of opposition from other sectors of the regime, who considered it "madness to give this sensation of revitalization of the Falange" .
To retain the support of the landowners, the regime continued throughout the 1950s to channel state funds into the agricultural sector and to support it with  protectionist policies which merely sustained inefficiency and low productivity.
Landowners' profits were protected by keeping rural wages down and by paying artificial, guaranteed prices for crops.
Little was done to resolve the age-old problem of land-distribution.
The large, powerful estate owners in Castile and Andalusia continued to exercise the social and economic power they had enjoyed for centuries, based on their monopoly holding of the principal economic resources.
An attempt was made to improve the situation of those, especially in the Northern provinces, who were afflicted by the extreme smallness and dispersion of their holdings, but the administrative and social problems involved in applying the Law of Land Concentration proved insurmountable in many cases, particularly given the lack of political will to tackle them.
In his message to the nation of 31 December 1950, Franco admitted that "the rhythm of resettlement is still a long way below our ambitions" , but immediately excused this by saying that a sector so vital as agriculture would be damaged by "erroneous or precipitate reform" .
The overall result of proceeding with such respect for the status quo in the countryside was the decline of agricultural production, the progressive deterioration of the social conditions of small farmers and farm labourers, and the gradual depopulation of the rural areas.
The massive exodus of the rural populace to towns in Spain or abroad, which began in earnest towards the end of the 1950s, bore witness to the priority given, in the Francoist scale of values, to preserving the patrimony of the strong, rather than to caring for the welfare of the weak.
Part of Franco's concern, in assuring himself of the backing of his staunchest allies, stemmed from the resurgence in support for Don Juan visible in the 1950s.
In October 1954 the coming-out of Don Juan's eldest daughter, the Infanta Pilar, occasioned a massive wave of congratulatory messages to the royal family, from hundreds of Spaniards of all social conditions.
Alarmed by this sign of the strength of popular monarchist feeling, Franco's political adviser, Carrero Blanco, assured the Caudillo that it was all the work of Freemasons — an explanation Franco readily accepted.
Nonetheless, in order to accommodate the monarchist lobby, when the first local government  elections since the Civil War were held, in Madrid, in November 1954, Franco allowed a group of monarchists to stand as candidates alongside the official list.
The election was to choose one-third of the members of the city council.
The impression of democratization thus given was, in fact, dispelled by the restrictive nature of the suffrage, which was limited to heads of households and married women.
This was a telling comment on Francoism's concept of "normality" and, particularly, on its view of the intellectual and political capacity of women: men who were not the head of the household in which they lived and all unmarried women were disenfranchized, even if they had reached the age of majority.
This hit the potential female electorate particularly hard, since the Civil War had frustrated the possibility of marriage for many women.
As was to be expected, the official candidates won.
Franco and his henchmen had undoubtedly allowed the monarchists to stand in the hope that they would be discredited by defeat.
In fact, their campaign and the probably well-founded suspicion that the result had been rigged had the opposite effect.
In order to damp down monarchist hopes that it might now be possible to pressure him into resigning, Franco wrote to Don Juan on 2 December 1954, telling him that power would not be transferred in Franco's lifetime and that his successor would be bound by the guiding principles of the regime set up in 1939.
Four weeks later, the two men met on the country estate of the Conde de la Ruiseñada, Don Juan's representative in Spain.
Don Juan asserted confidently that he had the firm support of numerous followers.
Franco repeated the message of his 2 December letter when he said that he did not "see any advantage in change" and that if he were ever to delegate the leadership of the government, it would only be when he was no longer able to carry out the functions of that position as well as those of head of state.
From this it was clear that he would never renounce the latter post.
It was also a hint that, while he wanted to retain ultimate control for as long as he lived, he foresaw a time when it might be possible to relinquish his personal hold on the administration of the system without it collapsing.
This was not an admission of dispensability.
Rather, it was an expression of supreme confidence in the immutability of  his creation.
Not only did he see no advantage in change, he believed he could prevent it indefinitely.
He thus revealed that he was out of touch with contemporary reality and that the complex dynamics of civilian society were more than ever beyond the grasp of his mechanistic, military mind.
Spain was changing, however, in spite of Franco's reluctance to recognize the fact, for it was slowly being drawn back into the international mainstream.
By the second half of the 1950s, thanks to foreign loans, the economy was showing signs of recovery, and Spain had been admitted as a member of the United Nations, in December 1955.
Regular television broadcasting began in 1956 and was soon to prove an invaluable addition to the arsenal of the regime's propaganda channels.
In 1956, only 600 sets received the images produced by the state broadcasting company, Spanish Radio-Television (Radio Televisión Española, RTVE), but, by 1958, that figure had leapt to 40,000.
In 1956, too, a Spaniard, albeit an exiled Republican Spaniard, Juan Ramón Jiménez, won the Nobel prize for literature and Spain was the protagonist of another, undoubtedly more popular, cultural event: on 13 June 1956 the Real Madrid football team won the first European Cup championship.
Yet the picture presented by RTVE, the state-controlled press, and the official cinema newsreels was artificially rosy, for it was highly selective.
What the media did not show was the concern of Spanish economists and financiers over rising inflation and a mounting balance of payments deficit; the widening gap between conditions of life and work in town and country; emigration on a rapidly growing scale; or the conflict latent in Spanish universities between a desire for greater intellectual freedom and the constraints of an antiquated, paternalistic education system.
It was in the nature of the Franco regime, as it is to a greater or lesser degree in that of all authoritarian systems, not to provide the public with full information, for problems can be "resolved" more rapidly if those in power have a free hand simply to suppress them.
 "The custom of disguising reality so that it appeared to be perfect" had long been the tactic of the Franco regime.
It was relatively easy to do in the first years of the regime, with a  war- and hunger-cowed populace, a subsistence-level economy, and a country cut off from the outside world.
However, it became more difficult to achieve when those conditions no longer prevailed, as a result of the resumption of contact with North America and the rest of Western Europe.
As a time of transition from autarchy and isolation to developmentalist capitalism and international rapprochement, the 1950s in Spain were a time of ambiguity and uncertainty, in which the first signs of a limited degree of liberalism became visible at the same time as the use of the customary repression made it clear that nothing fundamental had changed.
This was thrown into sharp relief by a crisis which blew up in February 1956, as a result of a clash between rival groups of students in a central Madrid street.
Timid winds of change had been trying to blow in Spanish universities since 1951, when a relatively progressive Minister of Education, Joaquin Ruiz-Giménez, had initiated an attempt to revitalize and open up the torpid and reactionary Spanish education system.
In this, he had the support of many educationists, intellectuals and students, including the Rector of Madrid's Central University, Pedro Laín Entralgo, that of the University of Salamanca, Antonio Tovar, and the Falangists in the SEU who wanted to adapt Francoism to the new era.
However, they inevitably aroused the hostility of conservative Catholics and Falangist reactionaries, who saw in the liberalizing ideas of Ruiz-Giménez a threat to their respective preserves in the education system.
Matters were made worse by the fact that Ruiz-Giménez was himself a practising Catholic and had, on appointment, sworn allegiance to the principles of the Francoist Movement, while Laín and Tovar were both erstwhile Falangists.
The defenders of the "true" faith therefore felt that they must strengthen their guard against the "enemy within" .
Three initiatives in particular "confirmed" their fears: a seminar series held in 1954 and entitled "Encounters between Poetry and the University" , which were ostensibly purely cultural but always became highly politicized; a projected "Congress of Young University Writers" , planned for November 1955 by pro-democratic students and progressive Falangists, but banned by the Ministry of the Interior; and  the idea of a "National Congress of Students" , in preparation for which a manifesto calling for the abolition of the SEU monopoly of student representation was circulated in universities throughout Spain in early 1956.
Although the aims of these events were far from revolutionary, they gave the supporters of Francoist orthodoxy particular pause.
For many of the students who took part in them did not have the working-class back- ground traditionally associated with militant anti-Francoism, but came from prosperous, middle-class families which had benefited socially and economically from Francoism.
Predictably, Franco believed that these were essentially good, but impressionable, young people who had been led astray by the agents of "anti-Spain" .
On 9 February 1956 a large group of Falangist students had gathered in a street in the university quarter of Madrid to commemorate the anniversary of the death, in 1934, of one of the party's first martyrs, the student Matias Montero.
On the way back from this ritual, they came upon a crowd of anti-Falangist students.
In the ensuing mêlée, one of the Falangists, Miguel Alvarez, was wounded in the head by a bullet.
His comrades immediately claimed that he had been the victim of Leftist aggression and demanded retribution.
In fact, as an unpublished police report subsequently stated, the near-fatal shot had been fired by one of Alvarez's own comrades.
That finding could not be disclosed, for its publication would have revealed the regime's double dishonesty, in suppressing the truth and in using the incident to justify repressive measures against the liberalizers in the university and to rally the faithful around Franco.
Falangist hard-liners made a stockpile of weapons at the headquarters of an extremist group, the Guardia de Franco, and drew up a hit-list of individuals to be attacked should the wounded Falangist die.
The Falangist daily, Arriba, titled its 10 February edition "They've killed Matias Montero again" , even although Alvarez was still alive.
On 11 February the monarchist ABC weighed in with a leader entitled "Patriotic alert" , in which it claimed solidarity with "the Falangist faith" and issued dire warnings against the "hidden hand" which lay behind the 9 February disturbance, by which was meant socialism and communism.
An official newspaper, El Español, produced by  the Ministry of Information and Tourism, kept feelings running high by publishing on 24 February, an article entitled "The conspiracy has names" , in which a number of named students were attacked as "communist intriguers" , and the "Congress of Young University Writers" as Leftist agitprop organized with the connivance of some of the regime's own officials (a thinly veiled reference to Ruiz-Giménez, Laín Entralgo and the reformist group within the SEU).
ABC contributed to keeping the issue going by reproducing the El Español article in its edition of 4 March — almost a month after the Alvarez shooting had happened.
The press campaign and the Falangist demands for retribution were perfectly consonant with Franco's own view of the 9 February events.
Describing the liberal- minded students as "rowdies and trouble-makers" , he treated their concerns not as a social, political or even intellectual matter of significance, but as a short-term problem of public order.
The Central University was temporarily closed; the two clauses of the "Spaniards' Charter" which recognized freedom of movement and limited time of detention were suspended; and the leaders of the student movement in favour of democracy in the universities were rounded up and arrested.
On 14 February Ruiz-Giménez was dismissed, along with Laín Entralgo and the Technical Secretary General for Education, Manuel Fraga Iribarne, the Minister Secretary General of FET y de las JONS, Fernández Cuesta, and his Vice-Secretary, Tomás Romojaro.
Fernández Cuesta was replaced by veteran Francoist, José Luis Arrese, and Ruiz-Giménez by José Rubio Mina.
Both were unreformed Falangists.
In a report presented to the Political Committee of FET y de las JONS on 1 April, the dissident Falangist, Dionisio Ridruejo, stated his belief that the whole affair had been a fabrication, as an excuse for a crack-down in academic and intellectual circles.
By turning to the Falangist component of the regime forces in this way, Franco was resorting to an old tactic.
In view of the violent intentions of the Guardia de Franco, the military governor of Madrid, General Rodrigo Martínez, had placed the organization's premises under surveillance and had declared that he would mobilize troops if the  Falangist extremists attempted to take the law into their own hands.
In addition, he and Generals Muñoz Grandes and Martínez Campos asked Franco what he proposed to do to control the Falange.
Franco, however, was not a man to give way to this kind of pressure.
In maintaining the Falangist content of his cabinet, he was intent upon showing the military that he was still in control and would not be pushed by them.
In the event, the February 1956 crisis was the last time that Franco was able to apply old methods to new situations.
He was very soon to be forced to face the fact that things had moved on since 1939.
On reappointment as Minister Secretary-General of the official party, Arrese was commissioned by Franco to produce a series of legislative drafts whose purpose was twofold.
First, they were to give the regime the appearance of being based not on sheer superiority of armed force, but on objective political and juridical principles.
Second, they were to turn the regime into a permanent institution, capable of withstanding the vagaries of circumstantial change and of surviving Franco's own eventual demise.
Arrese got together a study-group of hard-line Falangists, whose mission was to draft four documents: a new version of the Party Statutes, which had last been revised seventeen years earlier, in August 1939; a law of the Fundamental Principles of the State, which was to encapsulate the basic tenets of Francoism; a law of the Movement, which was to give legal form to the distinction between "the Party" , FET y de las JONS, as a clearly delimited group of political activists, and "the Movement" , which encompassed all those who actively or passively subscribed to the values which inspired Francoism; and an Organizational Law of the Government, which was to lay down ground-rules for the legislative and executive powers of the government.
Arrese made the package public when, on 4 March, he addressed a gathering of Falangists in Valladolid.
This was a carefully calculated move, designed to underline the Falangist character of the project of which Arrese had been given exclusive charge, for Valladolid was the cradle of militant Falangism and 4 March was the anniversary of the fusion, in 1934, of Falange Española and the JONS.
As so often, the Franco regime was using a date of significance only to  itself to suggest that Spain had no history outside that which was officially approved.
Like Franco, Arrese was trying to hold back the march of history.
It might be possible physically to suppress the signs of its advance in the universities, but there were other indicators which could not so readily be ignored or concealed.
Two days before Arrese's Valladolid speech, France announced that it was to grant independence to its protectorate in Morocco.
Franco had allowed anti-French nationalism to flourish in Spanish Morocco in the first half of the 1950s, naïvely and carelessly confident that pressure for independence would not be a problem in the Spanish protectorate.
He was wrong.
The French decision sparked serious disturbances in Spanish Morocco and, on 15 March, Spain found itself obliged to concede that it, too, would relinquish control over its protectorate.
The agreement was signed on 7 April 1956.
Considering Franco's lifelong and obsessive involvement with Morocco and his equally characteristic reluctance to relinquish territorial gains, the speed with which independence was granted to Spanish Morocco was extraordinary.
It was all the more remarkable given Franco's condemnation, years earlier, of the loss of the last remnants of the Spanish empire, as he saw it, without a fight, and his disapproval of General Primo de Rivera's decision to withdraw from Morocco in the 1920s.
And, just as the conquest of Morocco had been undertaken at the turn of the century to counteract the divisive effects of "the Disaster" by giving Spaniards a new, common enterprise with which to identify, one might have expected that in 1956 Franco would resort to a military campaign to save Morocco to unite the regime forces around himself and divert attention away from domestic problems.
Looking back, we can now say that Franco's response to the Moroccan crisis gave a clear indication that 1956 marked a turning point in his political and personal life.
From that year onwards, he became progressively more absent from the conduct of daily political affairs, relying as much on the inertia of the system he had created as on his ministers to keep the country running, while he devoted increasing amounts of time to hunting, shooting and fishing.
One of Franco's most sympathetic biographers, Suárez Fernández, maintains that the Caudillo's penchant for such country pursuits reflected his "typical custom of reflection in the solitude of nature before taking decisions" .
Given that Franco was not alone on these occasions and that he was busy destroying nature, rather than reflecting upon it, it seems more likely that advancing age and the duration of his mandate had reduced his appetite for playing an active role in Spain's political life.
This did not, however, mean that he was ready to relinquish his all-powerful position.
Hard on the heels of the Moroccan crisis came a wave of strikes in Asturias, Navarre and the Basque Country, in protest against economic hardship.
Even Franco, whose automatic reaction to labour unrest was usually to dismiss it as the work of communist agitators, was obliged by the arguments of the Minister of Labour to authorize a 23 per cent general wage increase.
The depth of the crisis can be gauged from the fact that the minister (José Antonio Girón) was a hard-line Falangist not given to either reformist "weakness" or left-wing sympathies.
Soon afterwards, a group of monarchists began plotting to force Franco to step down, in order to thwart Arrese's plan to "structure the regime" in the Falangist mould.
Franco responded to these signs of internal opposition with what, effectively, was a show of force.
Between 27 April and 1 May, he toured Andalusia, to the ecstatic, Falangist-organized acclaim of thousands of spectators.
In his speeches to the multitudes, Franco's enthusiasm for the Falange put monarchists and military on notice that any attempt to push him into early retirement would have to contend with the mass opposition of his "popular support" .
In fact, of course, the "masses" as seen in Andalusia were no more than paid extras in a grandiose propaganda operation.
If Arrese chose Andalusia to stage it, it was because he could be sure that, in the rural south, the official party would not encounter the embarrassment of striking miners or protesting students.
There was, however, a potential pitfall for Franco in such ostentatious manifestations of admiration for the Falange, which was that, in siding so clearly with one of the regime's political "families" , he risked losing his position as arbiter between them all, and provoking the others into joining forces against him.
Franco himself may have realized this, for his erstwhile enthusiasm for Arrese and his project began to wane in the second half of 1956, as opposition to it became more widespread and vocal among the non-Falangist sectors of the regime.
Perhaps in a deliberate attempt to reassert his authority by disconcerting all the interested parties, or simply following his instinct to play for time, Franco resorted to his old tactic of duplicity.
On 17 July, at Arrese's suggestion, he addressed the National Council of FET y de las JONS.
This seemed like a Falangist revival, for it was the first session that had been held since 1945 and Franco asserted that it was "necessary that the National Council should recover the role which corresponds to it in the political tasks, because it is hierarchically the highest body in the Movement, whose duty it is to ensure the purity of the organization and the continuity of the doctrine" .18 But many of those present, including the Vice-Secretary of FET, Diego Salas Pombo, detected behind the smokescreen of verbiage a lack of genuine commitment to Arrese's plan for a Falange-dominated future.
In a private conversation with Salas Pombo after the National Council speech, Franco admitted that he thought the Falangist ideology outmoded.
The part of the project referring to the Party statutes was subsequently dropped.
Arrese and Salas Pombo made desperate efforts to convince military and Church leaders that the proposed laws were not a disguised attempt to make Spain a totalitarian state.
In addition to opposition from these two quarters, however, they were faced by a barrage of criticism from Luis Carrero Blanco, from the Traditionalist Minister of Justice, Antonio Iturmendi, and even from some fellow-members of Falange.
In contrast to Arrese's proposals, which left the form of the state and the succession issue very vague, Carrero's idea was for an authoritarian monarchy based on "the principles which inform the National Movement" , of which the "fundamental elements" would be "the Crown, the Council of the Realm, the National Council of the Movement, the Cortes and the government" .
When, in December, three of the four cardinals denounced Arrese's proposals to Franco, he decided that the project must be withdrawn.
Typically, he did not break the news to Arrese himself, but instructed  Carrero to do it.
Faced with opposition from his own forces, Franco was not guided by ideological principles nor personal loyalty, but purely and simply by whatever would keep him in power.
Never before had he capitulated.
That he was prepared to do so to retain his position was, in itself, a sign of changing times.
By the beginning of 1957 Franco found himself on the horns of a dilemma: both change and immobilism implied a high degree of risk for his continuation in power.
The basic problem was that the switch from autarchy to internationalism had not been fully effected: a free-market economy could not exist as long as its component parts — especially investment, supply of raw materials, and the purchasing power of the domestic market — were still closely controlled by the state.
The result was that the economy was in the grip of a crisis which could only be resolved by adopting measures to free it from the constraints of autarchy.
The difficulty this offered Franco was that, to his authoritarian mentality, loosening control was synonymous with losing it.
His response was to renew his ministerial team.
The composition of the new cabinet announced in February 1957 constituted Franco's attempt to resolve the dilemma he faced by being both immobile and innovative at the same time!
Half-a-dozen old retainers acted as anchor-men in the positions they had had in the previous cabinet.
In addition, whilst Falangists Arrese and Girón de Velasco were ousted respectively from the Party Secretariat and the Ministry of Labour, they were replaced by two men who were also Falangists but who, by contrast, were known to be more moderate and flexible in their views than their predecessors.
In case anyone should be tempted to see this as a sign of weakness, the ultra-authoritarian Blas Pérez González was replaced as Minister of the Interior by the even more hardline Camilo Alonso Vega, former head of the Civil Guard and one of Franco's oldest and closest friends from their days as soldiers in Africa.
The removal of Alberto Martín Artajo from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and his replacement by Fernando María Castiella, represented a change of incumbent, but not of political approach nor ideological commitment.
The same could not be said, however, for the men  appointed to the economic ministries.
The portfolios for Industry, Agriculture, Public Works, Commerce and Finance were entrusted to people whose loyalty to the regime was, of course, unimpeachable, but whose political utility lay in their possession of technical skills, not in their allegiance to any particular ideological current, nor in having good connections with the traditional oligarchy of large, wealthy landowners.
Their inclusion was a clear sign that what had been the order of the regime's stated priorities since the end of the Civil War must now be reversed.
In the 1940s the official press had stated that economic goals would be subordinate to political objectives.
The policies of autarchy represented the regime's attempt to implement that declaration of intent.
By the end of the 1950s, however, the failure of autarchy as an economic programme had made it necessary to seek other options, and these implied at least the modification of the existing political framework.
In effect, the political objective of Francoism — self-perpetuation — was now dependent upon the achievement of the economic aim of remaining solvent.
This promised to be a difficult task; hence the need for professional economists in the cabinet.
In the industrial areas of Spain, the investment of foreign capital, technology and managerial skills had stimulated immediate improvement, but not definitive recovery.
Growth was spectacular in the second half of the 1950s, both in absolute terms and by comparison with the levels of the preceding decade.
Spanish industry and finance seemed to have taken a new lease of life, and the official propaganda machine lost no opportunity to attribute this trend to the sagacity of the Caudillo.
Whereas his public appearances had been sporadic up to 1955, and largely prompted by political events, the second half of the decade saw a notable increase in his activities as the opener of factories, electricity generating stations, reservoirs and housing schemes.
Yet it was not the case in Spain that "if construction is going well, everything is going well" .
Despite the improving state of industry, the economy as a whole was lop-sided, unbalanced by the deteriorating situation of the agricultural sector.
The overall effect of coupling the Spanish wagon to the international economic train was to  destabilize the former, for its antiquated methods and structures could not readily assimilate and apply efficiently the benefits of the latter.
The imbalances and strains occasioned by the change of economic policy were not limited to the strictly economic areas, but also spilled over into the social and political spheres.
In the first place, the working classes naturally wanted to participate in the economic benefits they were helping to produce in the industrial and service sectors.
Secondly, it was in the interests of factory owners and investors that they should participate, for it was of little use to produce increasing quantities of goods if the mass of the population could not afford to buy them.
Wage rises were therefore granted not only as a response to disruptive strikes, but also to enable demand to absorb supply.
This had the effect of attracting people from the rural areas into the cities, in search of work and a better standard of living; which, in turn, placed unbearable strains on urban social and economic infrastructures.
Overcrowding, insanitary conditions and inadequate services (particularly medical, educational and cultural), together with the accompanying problems of health risks and rising crime rates, began to make their appearance in Spanish cities in the 1950s, just as they had already appeared in large connurbations elsewhere in the world.
In the spring of 1957 spiralling inflation stimulated a fresh wave of strikes in Asturias.
Franco could not believe that the miners wanted more than he had already given them and, as always, viewed their discontent as political subversion.
In a sense, he was right, for despite the Civil War, the ensuing repression and the stranglehold of the official trade unions, Leftist ideals had not been totally exterminated in the Spanish working classes.
The contrast between increased industrial output and deteriorating social and economic conditions sharpened their political consciousness and strengthened support for the clandestine labour movement, especially among the younger workers, who had not experienced the Civil War and did not have the "peace at any price" outlook of some of their parents' generation.
In the context of changing national and international social and economic conditions, the maintenance of an  inflexible, narrow political framework became increasingly untenable.
From the Presidency of the Government, Carrero Blanco worked to preserve the Catholic and conservative essence of the regime and, at the same time, to adapt its structures and administrative procedures.
In the same way that Franco had been heavily dependent on Serrano Suñer's political acumen when dealing with unfamiliar problems in the period 1937–42, he was now increasingly reliant on Carrero.
Thus, three days after the February 1957 cabinet changes, a law was passed which, by giving Carrero's department the power to "initiate, draft and programme legislation" , effectively transferred the onus of policy-making to the Presidency.
In addition, inter-ministerial committees were to be set up to settle administrative questions which, until then, had been discussed at ministerial level.
Finally, an Economic Coordination and Planning Office was created within the orbit of the Presidency, specifically to address the problems facing the economy.
These changes effectively distanced Franco both from policy-making and the administration of the regime.
Nevertheless, legislation still required his sanction, and he continued to preside over cabinet meetings.
He could and did play a decisive role.
In February 1959, despite Spain's increasing dependence on outside inputs and its deepening economic difficulties, Franco refused to countenance the provision of a Stabilization Plan by the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
It was only when the Finance Minister, Navarro Rubio, confronted Franco personally, impressed on him the absolute and urgent necessity of devaluing the peseta, and asked him how he would feel if ration cards had to be reintroduced, that Franco reluctantly gave in.
The IMF plan was adopted and the peseta devalued in early March 1959.
That Navarro Rubio should stand up to Franco in this way was indicative of how power relations within the regime had changed since the Civil War.
Twenty years earlier, those who had dared to dissent from Franco's view, or who had merely questioned it, had been dismissed, exiled, imprisoned, demoralized or professionally ruined.
In 1959 Navarro Rubio had not only not immediately fallen under suspicion of disloyalty, but had actually made Franco back  down.
In the same way that repression was less effective than twenty years earlier as an instrument of socio-political control against the anti-Francoist opposition, the spectres of the Republic and the Civil War were less useful as a means of holding the regime forces together.
This did not mean, however, that Franco was prepared to relinquish them.
On 1 April 1959 he presided over a lavish ceremony the purpose of which was the inauguration of an extraordinary church, built, in Franco's own words, "in memory of my victory over communism, which was trying to dominate Spain" .
That reconciliation was not Franco's guiding principle was clear from the decree he had issued on 1 April 1939 (the same day he had signed the final war bulletin), ordering that a monument be built "to perpetuate the memory of those who fell in the Crusade of Liberation" and to honour "those who gave their lives for God and the Fatherland" .
What this meant in ordinary language was that only those who subscribed to Francoist ideals would be remembered and honoured.
This would include "the Catholic fallen from both sides" , but not non-Catholic Republicans, who, in Francoism's terms were worthy of no memorial.
On transferring his official residence from Burgos to Madrid, in October, Franco "toured the Sierra de Guadarrama, looking for a place he had already seen during the war" in which he planned to locate his war memorial.
On 21 October he found the valley of Cuelgamuros.
Henceforth, it was to be known as "el Valle de los Caídos" — the Valley of the Fallen.
It seems rather more than fortuitous that Franco should have chosen this spot, for it was only 10 kilometres from the imposing palace, monastery and royal pantheon of El Escorial, built by Philip II in the sixteenth century.
Franco's project stopped short of a royal palace or royal tombs, but it attempted to emulate El Escorial in virtually everything else, including its monastery, its panoramic vista towards Madrid, across the plain at the foot of the Sierra de Guadarrama, the bellic nature of its origin24 and the massive scale of its construction.
Work began on 1 April 1940.
It took nineteen years to complete what was not only a remarkable feat of engineering but also an outstanding example of Francisco  Franco's single-minded pursuit of self-aggrandizement and immortality.
In order to excavate the site itself, a new road had been built and a viaduct constructed to carry it across the valley before it climbed through the wooded hillside to the rocky crag chosen for the location of the church which formed the heart of the project.
At the top of the road, two flights of ten steps each (symbolizing "the ten Commandments, or the ascent to moral perfection inspired by faith" ) led to 30,600 square metres of paved esplanade, in the shape of a cross, which, in turn, led to an arched doorway, flanked by an arched colonnade.
Above it towered a 150-metre high concrete and granite cross, the arms of which "were wide enough inside for two average-sized motor cars to pass each other" .
At ground-level, a huge bronze door, decorated with panels depicting in relief the fifteen mysteries of the rosary and other biblical scenes, opened on to the interior of the church.
This had been constructed underground, by tunnelling into the rock.
It was designed to impress and overawe by its sheer size: 262 metres long and 41 metres high at its highest point, over the transept.
Six side chapels were each dedicated to the Virgin Mary in relation to the Civil War: Our Lady of Africa; the Immaculate Conception, patroness of the Army; Our Lady of Carmen, patroness of the Navy; Our Lady of Loretto, patroness of the Air Force; Our Lady of the Pillar, patroness of Zaragoza and declared Captain-General of the Army during the war; and Our Lady of Mercy, patroness of Prisoners.
The last of these was ironic, not to say cynical, for much of the manpower used in the building of the Valle de los Caídos had been provided by political prisoners, who were allowed to redeem part of their sentences in what was, effectively, a labour camp.
Conditions were extremely arduous and the work exhausting but at least, as one former prisoner testified years later, unlike conventional prisons all over Spain, there was neither the obligation to sing the Falangist hymn, nor the nightly selection (saca) of prisoners to be shot next day.
Franco personally monitored progress on the project from its inception, frequently appearing on site without prior warning, and often accompanied by doña Carmen.
In 1956, with the interior of the church nearing completion, the architect, Diego Méndez, constructed a lead-lined tomb under the floor in the transept, behind the high altar.
This was, in fact, for Franco, although its existence did not become public knowledge until almost thirty years later.
A second tomb, situated directly opposite that destined for Franco, in front of the high altar, was not kept secret, for it was very soon to receive its occupant.
On 30 March 1959 the remains of José Antonio Primo de Rivera were transported from the basilica of El Escorial, where they had been buried in 1939, for reinterment in the Church of the Holy Cross of the Valley of the Fallen.
The following day, Franco's "private pyramid" 29 was formally inaugurated.
The choice of "Victory Day" for the occasion was the Caudillo's way of restating his belief in the legitimacy of his regime and of reminding its members of their shared responsibility in its creation and their common interest in its continuation.
By 1959, some of the regime forces were beginning to organize politically outside the limits of FET y de las JONS.
Liberal supporters of Don Juan had formed Unión Española and two former CEDA members, Manuel Gimenez Fernandez and José María Gil Robles, were the instigators, respectively, of Izquierda Democrática Cristiana and Democracia Social Cristiana.
Although these groups were very small and certainly not revolutionary in character, the return of the words "Left" and "democracy" to the political vocabulary of people not proscribed by the regime undoubtedly gave Franco pause.
In his end-of-year speech for 1959, he condemned what he called "inorganic" (i.e. liberal) democracy.
He continued, too, to denounce strikes and clandestine labour and political activity as evidence of an international "judeo-masonic-communist" conspiracy to destroy Spain.
He did not seem to appreciate the contradiction between his virulent denunciations of parliamentary democracy and the increasingly close economic ties being woven between Spain and the western democracies; nor between his belief that economic nationalism was best and the fact that unless Spain liberalized its economic policies, it would remain isolated from the growth then beginning to be enjoyed by the rest of Europe.
When the US President, Eisenhower, visited Madrid on 21 December 1959, Franco persisted in  interpreting it as a sign of recognition of his rightness, not as an indication that times were changing and he would have to move with them or be left behind.
To a large extent, the cabinet reshuffle of 1957 marked the point at which the Franco regime adopted the style which was to become its hallmark in the 1960s and 1970s.
From then until Franco's death in 1975, it was no longer simply the victory in the Civil War that was invoked as the basis for Franco's right to rule, but his role as the provider of material wealth and prosperity.
As the leader of the Nationalist armies, he had been hailed in 1939 as the restorer of peace and order to a country allegedly on the verge of ruin thanks to Republican bad faith and malpractice.
By the end of the 1950s that argument was becoming less effective as time blurred the collective memory of the Republic and an increasingly large sector of the population had no direct experience of either the Republic or the Civil War.
If people were no longer so easily frightened into docility, new ways would have to be found to make them ductile.
The answer was to present Franco as the guarantor of the peace and stability which enabled Spain to flourish economically and individuals to enjoy an improved standard of living.
It was still implied that, without him, there was a danger that the political disorder of the past might return, but the emphasis would, henceforth, be much more on what people stood to lose in material terms if the system which provided those benefits were substantially changed.
It was an unsubtle and false logic, but one which was effective when presented without alternatives to a populace which had endured great hardship for a prolonged period.
The creation of a capitalist, consumer society and the rapid expansion of the urban middle classes which characterized Spain in the 1960s took place without making any fundamental modification to the political premises on which the regime was posited.
The tensions generated by this contradiction deepened and broadened with the passage of time.
Franco's mere presence prevented radical change, but his role as guarantor and arbiter became increasingly irrelevant as different strands of regime and anti-regime opinion converged in agreement on the need for the return of democracy.