

Labour in Manufacturing and Mining
WORKING CONDITIONS AND WAGES
Over such a wide range of forms of mining and manufacturing, the experience of labour was inevitably varied.
Even within industries this was so, as for example between the "free" miners of Cornwall and the Forest of Dean and the bonded pitmen of the north-east, or between the working small master clothier of the West Riding and cottage-based out-working weaver in the West Country.
The expansion of putting out, the great increase in coal and metal mining and in iron making, the rise of a permanent journeyman class in some sectors of craft manufacture and the emergence of new industries like paper making, commercial brewing and distilling — all emphasised a separation of labour from capital long before the advent of the factory system.
By 1776 Adam Smith was able to assert:
In every part of Europe, twenty workmen serve under a master for one that is independent; and the wages of labour are everywhere understood to be, what they usually are, when the labourer is one person and the person who employs him another.
For Europe generally this is something of an exaggeration, but it is not so for England.
The forces creating a waged proletariat were not only stronger there in mining and in manufacturing, but after the mid eighteenth century a distinctive agrarian proletariat had come to characterise the southern and Midland counties.
Relations between masters and men were obviously affected by this development.
The recognition of a separate interest is, as Adam Smith fully acknowledged, the starting point for conflict.
The wide gulf between the merchant-capitalist clothiers of the West Country woollen district and the out-working weavers they employed  was frequently contrasted with the bridgeable one in the West Riding between the working clothiers and their journeymen.
The former was said to bring industrial conflict, the latter harmony.
The very words "domestic system" implied human relationships and firm rather than oppressive control.
In a dialect poem of 1730 on the West Riding the master clothier and his wife appear breakfasting at a common table with their family, a few journeymen, servants and apprentices before setting down to weave together from "five at morn till eight at neet" .
After the working day they sit down to supper and the master sets the tasks for the morrow: Quoth Maister — Lads, work hard I pray, Cloth mun be peark'd next market-day, And Tom mun go tomorn to t'spinners, And Will mun seek about for t'swingers; And Jack tomorn, by time be rising, And go t'sizing mill for sizing, And get your web and warping done That ye may get it into loom.
Mary — there's wool, -tak thee and dye it…
But Mary, the mistress, has something to say about this.
So thou's setting me my work, I think I'd more need mend thy sark, 'Prithie who mun sit at bobbin weel?
And ne'er a cake at top o "th" creel!
And we to bake; and swing and blend, And milk, and bairns to school to send, And yeast to seek, and syk as that!
And washing up, morn, noon and neet, And bowls to scald, and milk to fleet, And bairns to fetch again at neet!
Her husband knows all this, but she and the servant lass must get up "soon and stir about and get all done" .
For all things mun aside be laid—When we want help about our trade.
Master and dame then went off to pass time with a neighbour, while the young people sit and talk happily around a good coal fire: "More free from care than knight or squire" .
Of course, it is an idealisation; an engaging picture of a system of  manufacture which at the beginning of the next century was still being described as "highly favourable to the paternal, filial, and fraternal happiness — and to the cultivation of good moral and civil habits — the sources of public tranquillity" .
The contrast with another poem, this time describing relations in the putting-out system of the West Country, is striking.
This poem is entitled The Clothiers' Delight and subtitled "The Rich Men's Joy and the Poor Men's Sorrow" .
The first verse concludes: We live at our pleasure, and take our delight; We heapeth up riches and treasures great store, Which we get by griping the poor.
And this is a way for to fill up our purse Although we do get it with many a curse And the poem ends: Then hay for the Clothing Trade, it goes on brave; We scorn for to toyl and moyl, nor yet to starve.
Our workmen do work hard, but we live at ease; We go when we will, and come when we please; We hoard up our bags of silver and gold; But conscience and charity with us are cold.
The poems dramatise the differences between the two systems of manufacturing.
But relations between masters and men could be friendly and mutually regarding even under the putting-out system.
Samuel Bamford's account of early days in cotton manufacture contrasts the caring attitudes of an older generation of putting-out cotton masters with the harsher circumstances some years later.
Nevertheless, the capitalist relations of the putting-out system provided a wide arena for disputes.
The emergence of trade unions was only one manifestation.
An embittered West Country clothier complained in 1739 that the only persons who supported the poor were those who did not know of "the insolence, idleness, debauchery, frauds and dishonesty" of the weavers.
He typifies a rhetoric of conflict inherent in the putting-out system.
Employers complained of such traits as often and as vehemently as they complained of "riotous and unlawful combination" .
On their part the workers protested over "oppressions" in the shape of late wage payment, truck, "stoppages" from pay  for allegedly deficient workmanship, of effecting wage cuts by increasing the measure of work expected for a "price" , and of deducting excessive charges for rent of equipment and the supply of essential items, as often as they did of employers' combinations to lower wages.
Accusations that out-workers embezzled materials have to be considered in several contexts: perquisites and wages in kind, the circulation of raw materials to unsupervised manufacturing households and the long delays which often occurred between completing work and receiving payment.
The expectation of an exclusively cash wage was developing rather than established, particular rather than general in the eighteenth century.
Dr Linebaugh has suggested that much so-called criminal activity on the part of working people was identified in the process of transformation of the wage from a form in which money constituted a substantial part of the wage to one based wholly on it.
Bugging to the hatter, cabbage to the tailor, blue-pigeon flying to the plumbers and glaziers, chippings to shipwrights, sweepings to porters, red sail docking to navy yard workers, flints and thrums to weavers, vails to servants, privileges to west country clothiers, bontages to Scottish agricultural workers, scrapings and naxers to coopers, wastages to framework knitters, in all these the eighteenth-century labourer appropriated a part of his product or a part of the material of his labour.
Such bits and pieces considered as perquisites could either be disposed of directly or worked up into articles to be sold.
The "vulgar tongue" abounded with colloquialisms suggesting that a particular term conferred a legitimacy which would have been made questionable by a more generalised synonym for stealing.
Linebaugh's list is not confined to the putting-out trades, but these did allow a special facility.
Invasion of property in the form of the appropriation of put-out materials attracted regular attention as this method of organising manufacture spread.
Out-working shoe makers were said to have "constant opportunities" for defrauding their masters because "they seldom work in their master's shop" .
Clock and watch makers, too, distressed their employers by pawning valuable materials.
Sheffield nail makers purloined wire, while in the Black Country iron, lead and brass were easy to dispose of among the thousands of small forges.
Employer petitioning secured the passing of a number  of statutes.
The swopping of cheap for expensive leathers by shoe makers was dealt with by 9 George I c. 27 in 1722, while 13 George II c. 8 in 1739 dealt with several putting-out trades including iron working, textiles and leather.
The hatters were constrained in 1749 by 22 George II c. 27, and the watch makers in 1754 by 27 George II c. 7.
The better-known Worsted Acts of 1777 (17 George III c. 11 and c. 56), which set up an inspectorate to work with a prosecuting committee of employers, were described by the Hammonds as a piece of "class legislation" because they allowed conviction on the oath of the employer who owned the yarn in question and because they empowered extensive searching of weavers' homes.
These acts, however, in presuming guilt rather than innocence, were not such a startling departure as the Hammonds thought.
The Hatters' Act of 1749, for example, made failure to return surplus material within twenty-one days an automatic instance of guilt.
Spinners could hide appropriated yarn by "false reeling" .
At the next stage weavers or knitters could put some yarn aside and conceal the lightness of the resulting cloth in various ways.
A Gloucestershire clothier in 1774 detailed the various forms of theft and deception he had to guard against.
His pickers embezzled one pound in twenty and disguised the weight loss by throwing the wool on to wet stones.
Scribblers added oil for this purpose, while spinners held wool over a steaming kettle and could conceal the removal of half a pound in every six this way.
Weavers got away with five or six pounds from a sixty-pound piece.
A search carried out at Frome in 1786 produced several hundredweight of embezzled wool.9 More interesting was the prolonged and bitter dispute which broke out in Essex in 1757.
Colchester clothiers had indicated their intention of prosecuting weavers who did not return the "thrums" , the web ends left in the loom after the cloth had been removed.
Retaining these had long been an unquestioned perquisite and trouble began when the clothiers carried out their threat to prosecute and two persons were whipped for theft for failing to return thrums.
Clothiers in Baintree and Barking followed suit and demanded the return of thrums from their weavers.
In the face of great hostility the clothiers then agreed to pay compensation of threepence a thrum, which suggests some degree of recognition on  their part that thrums were part of the "customary wage" , whatever the legal position.
The weavers valued them more highly, however, and responded with a fourteen-week strike during which they inserted a notice in the Ipswich Journal.
They made a demand of our waste, without offering any allowance for the same; and by degrees did we tamely submit, we should be brought under a yoke, which would have some affinity to that of the Egyptian Bondage.
Though we would not presume to deny, but that afterwards through the negociation of the Right Hon.
Robert Nugent Esq.
they offered us 3d per bay in lieu thereof.
The waste is a small perquisite that hath been granted us for several hundred years past, which we are able to prove by our ancient Books of Record, which have been no less than 14 or 15 times ratified and confirmed at the General Quarter Sessions.
The sense of right here goes well beyond the simple assertion of customary practice and is strengthened by the involvement of the local Member of Parliament and the approval of the justices at sessions.
More than 500 weavers went on strike in defence of this "ancient custom" , staying out through the winter from November to February before they were reduced to acceptance of the threepence compensation.
Thrums were also an expected perquisite in the West Country.
A Gloucestershire clothier stated in 1802 that although they "belonged" without question to the clothiers, their return had never been insisted on.
Contests over perquisites were not confined to textile manufacture.
The Earl of Uxbridge attempted to end the coal allowance of his Staffordshire colliers in 1757.
His argument was that miners were abusing their personal fuel allowance by removing large amounts to sell.
Anything from a half to a third of colliers' earnings was accounted for by an allowance of two draughts of coal a week, and when other Staffordshire coal owners tried to follow the Earl's example, they found their miners demanding threepence a day in compensation.
An even longer running battle was fought in the royal dockyards.
The Admiralty was sorely agitated by the shipwrights' custom of taking "chips" .
In origin these were scraps of waste wood for fuel, and by the mid seventeenth century they had  grown into a form of wage supplementation.
The government became concerned over a growing loss of timber.
Workmen were said to be removing loads of so-called chips three times a day, and even to be building huts from waste timber in which to store chips they were unable to carry out at once.
In 1753 a rule was introduced that no more could be removed than could be carried unbound under an arm.
This does not seem to have succeeded any more than had an earlier regulation that only waste from timber cut with axe or adze was "lawful" , not sawn timber.
Clearly these regulations were meant to confine carried-out timber to that fit only for firewood, but in 1792 complaints were still being made of enormous losses of timber through yard workers, who even finished work early to allow themselves time to saw up useful lengths, which they sold at a shilling each.
Chips were eventually replaced by a cash allowance in 1805.
Whatever the Admiralty's feelings on the matter, the determination of the shipwrights to cling to their perquisite must be viewed in the context of the long delay in paying wages.
Royal dock-yard workers considered themselves lucky if their pay was only a year in arrears.
Recourse to local money-lenders or the "selling" of future wages was necessary for survival.
The value of "chips" , which could be converted into ready cash, is clear.
The workers countered accusations of dishonesty and slipshod working with claims of "oppression" .
The Clothiers' Delight is a compendium of them.
In former ages we us'd to give, So that our work-folk like farmers did live; But the times are altered, we will make them know All we can for to bring them under our bow; We will make them work hard for sixpence a day, Though a shilling they deserve if they had their just pay.
And first for the Combers, we will bring them down From eight groats a score unto half a crown, If at all they murmur, and say tis too small, We bid them choose whether they will work at all; We'll make them believe that trading is bad; We care not a pin, though they are ne'er so sad.
We'll make the poor Weavers work at a low rate; We'll find fault where there's no fault, and so we will bate; If trading goes dead, we will presently show it; But if it grows bad, they shall never know it; We'll tell them that cloth beyond sea will not go, We care not whether we keep clothing or no.
Then next for the Spinner we shall ensue, We'll make them spin three pound instead of two; When they bring home their work unto us, they complain, And say that their wages will not them maintain; But if that an ounce of weight they do lack, Then for to bate threepence we will not be slack.
But if it holds weight, then their wages they crave, We have got no money, and what's that you'd have?
We have bread and bacon and butter that's good, With oatmeal and salt that is wholesome for food; We have soap and candles whereby to give light That you may work by them so long as you have light.
But if to an alehouse they customers be, Then presently with the ale wife we agree; When we come to a reckoning, then we do crave Twopence on a shilling, and that we will have, By such cunning ways we our treasure do get, For it is all fish that doth come to our net.
Several forms of exploitation are indicated in these verses: forcing wages down under false pretences — for example by claiming that the market was weak — fining or "bating" for work wrongly declared underweight, and forcing workers to accept truck instead of due money wages.
The persistence of such complaints, which from time to time were endorsed by local persons not connected with the woollen trade, suggests that these "oppressions" were widespread and long-lasting.
Where piece-rate systems were in use, employers tended to cut wages by increasing the quantum rather than changing the price.
This avoided the appearance of lowering rates which had often been at a "customary" level for a generation or more.
Gloucestershire clothiers in 1756 "laid the chain four or five yards longer on the bar" and stopped altogether an allowance of two shillings the price which they had been paying for "stopping" (repairing) the cloth.
In 1758 Essex clothiers similarly added to both the length and width of the expected piece.
The Sheffield cutlery trades supply an even more glaring example in 1787, when Jonathan Watkinson provoked a strike by insisting on thirteen knives in the dozen.
That offspring of tyranny, baseness and pride Our rights hath invaded and almost destroyed May that man be banished who villainy screens, Or sides with big W—n and his thirteens.
And may the odd knife his great carcass dissect; Lay open his vitals for all to inspect A heart full as black as the infernal gulf In that greedy, blood-sucking, bone scraping wolf.
Complaints about payment in kind or in truck were persistent in many parts of the country.
Somerset's weavers complained in 1726 of their masters "paying their wages in goods, and setting extravagant prices on such goods" .
In 1739 they complained of being forced to take remnants of cloth as payment.
Devonshire weavers were angered in 1743 at their masters "forcing them to take corn, bread, bacon, cheese, butter and other necessaries of life, in truck as it is called, for their labour" .
Around Sheffield this was known as the "stuffing system" and prices were said to be overvalued three-fold.
The cutlers rioted against the system in 1756.
Watch makers were forced at one time to accept either bread tickets or else take payment in cheap watches which they could sell only at a loss.
Of all workers' complaints, the justice of those over truck seem to have been most widely acknowledged.
Even employers who steadfastly denied that they would ever use such a method usually indicated that they knew of those who did.
An independent source in the West Country in 1739 thought it "rare" to find a clothier who paid ready cash unless he also obliged his workers to lay it out again with himself or his friends.
As for complaints that employers falsely claimed bad workmanship or embezzlement of materials to deduct fines from wages, even William Temple, an ardent polemicist for the clothiers in a dispute with the West Country weavers in 1727, admitted knowing one clothier who stopped wages "in a most base and flagrant manner" , despite which he became a JP.
Temple rejected, though, the weavers' complaint that clothiers in general "load them with intolerable weights and starve them by stoppages" .
Another local "gentleman" considered, however, that clothiers imposed impossible standards for the closeness of the weave and then extracted arbitrary penalties from the weavers for failing to meet them.
Under an act of George I weavers could take their complaints  to magistrates, but Temple himself admitted that such recourse would mark a man and reduce his prospects of obtaining work.
It is worth noting that when James Wolfe was sent as a young officer to restore order in the troubled clothing districts of the West Country, his sympathies rapidly shifted to the side of the weavers.
The West Country woollen districts seem unusually well documented on these matters, but there is evidence from other trades.
London's hatters complained in 1777 that masters stopped "hundreds of pounds" for alleged faults, "when trade has been slack" .
On the northern coalfield the rejection of badly filled corves on the grounds that they had been deliberately underfilled — "they will sometimes be so roguish as to set these big coals hollow at the Corfe bottom, and cover them with some small coals at the top of the Corves, and make it look like a full Corfe" — was a long-running grievance which led to a strike at one mine in 1751.
In hosiery manufacture, abatements for alleged negligent or fraudulent work were similarly a frequent cause of friction.
Hosiers were accused of making too little allowance for normal waste, so that they could fine knitters whose returned work was lighter than the yarn which had been given out.
Some, it was said, even put out silk weighed damp so that when the finished stockings were weighed dry they could claim a deficiency.
The hosiery industry was notorious for the range of deductions employers made from wages.
Knitters were pressed to rent the stocking frames and those who owned their own found it hard to get work when times were less busy.
The frame rents were not related to their value or to the expected income from their use.
They actually rose when second-hand prices were low and wages in decline.
The hosier frame owners enjoyed a certain profit from the rent whether or not the knitter was in full work, for it was deducted before wages were paid.
Nor was it the only deduction: there were charges for seaming the stockings, for use of a corner of the master knitter's workshop, for needles, candles, oil, coals and for the expenses involved in collecting in work.
A wage statement from 1811 shows a total deduction of 4s (20p) from a nominal wage of 13s 3¼d (66p).
The coal heavers who unloaded London's seaborne coal were obliged to hire their shovels and other supplies from the undertakers who contracted with the coal vessels and were their direct hirers.
Pryce noted that Cornish miners were forced to buy  their candles from the mine, and although he did not, in 1778, suggest overcharging, nineteenth-century account books reveal substantial profits being taken.
In 1721 a statute fixed the hours of London's journeymen tailors and divided their day into two half-pay periods.
These were not equal, the afternoon session being an hour the longer.
The employers took advantage of this and exploited their journeymen by "letting them play in the morning" and calling them from their "houses of call" in the afternoon.
This not only gave the masters an extra hour's work but saved them having to pay the breakfast allowance of 1½d (0.6p).
Time is an aspect of work on which historians have begun to provide an extensive body of literature.
They have been especially concerned with the transformation of irregular pre-industrial work rhythms into the more ordered day of modern industrial society.
Two aspects need consideration: the tendency of workers to lessen their weekly amount of work at times when higher money wages or lower food prices allowed them to meet their customary expectation of comfort from fewer hours of labour, and secondly, the ability of home-based out-workers to control their own pace of work, compensating, if they so chose, for a slack early week with a bout of late-week intensity.
Recently historians have linked these problems to the so-called "proto-industrial" stage of manufacturing development which spread industrial employment widely into rural districts.
The household unit of production, though headed by male weaver or other out-worker, was not governed by the object of accumulating a monetary surplus: "It could not maximise what it could not measure." 
Instead it sought an equilibrium, a labour—consumption balance between its economic, social and cultural necessities on the one side and the output of labour by the family on the other.
If the returns fell it increased labour output; if they rose it felt no need to do so and opted instead for increased leisure.
To make the poor "sober, industrious and obedient" , asserted William Temple in 1739, the means of idleness had to be removed, and that was high wages.
The best goods were made when subsistence  was most difficult and workers were "obliged to work more and debauch less" .
Forty years later William Hutton, who had once himself been a framework knitter, wrote that manufactures tended to decay when "plenty preponderates" , for a man who could support his family on three days' labour would not work six.
It benefited a manufacturing country to keep provisions at a level which, while within reach of the poor, would still require them to make a full labour commitment.
Arthur Young shared his view.
The master manufacturers of Manchester wish that prices might always be high enough to enforce a general industry; to keep the hands employed six days for a week's work; as they find that even one idle day, in the chance of it being a drunken one, damages all the other five, or rather the work of them.
The great propagandist for agricultural capitalism naturally fav-oured high cereal prices, but in 1771 he also made the link with high wages, insisting that "great earnings" caused many workers to offer only four or five days' labour.
This was "a fact so well-known in every manufacturing town, that it would be idle to think of proving it" .
In 1794 wool combers were accused of working only half their time for a wage of 10s (50p) when 25s (£1.25p) was within their reach.
Professor Mathias has raised the question of whether such complaints should be viewed as valid description or as opinion indicative of employer attitudes.24 In fact it has both dimensions.
As normative reporting it justified the "utility of poverty" theory of low wages which was associated with a mercantile concern with low export prices.
But it can also be found in the writings of Defoe, who favoured high wages as a stimulant for home demand.
The clothier who wrote in 1760 that high wages made his workfolk "scarce, saucy and bad" was seeking to impress no one, for he entered it in his private diary.
Similarly it was in a private letter that a Cornish mine agent wrote in 1793: The common tinners continue to be very refractory and insolent: many of them refuse to work, and have not gone underground for three weeks past — They have no cause for it for their wages have been rather  too high lately than otherwise; the consequence has been too much brandy drinking and other bad practices.
There is a problem in interpreting this.
If workers were spending their time in this way, they were not only exercising a leisure preference but were consuming a non-essential.
There is a conflict bet-ween the complaints of a leisure preference coming into play as soon as wages moved above that necessary to support customary living standards and the accompanying complaints of the "luxury" expectations of the poor, which were equally used to justify a harsh attitude to wages.
Tea, tobacco, dress styles which aped their betters, as well as excessive spirit drinking were all roundly condemned by those who insisted that the poor lived above their station.
In fact, as Mathias has pointed out, employers did not reduce wages when they wanted an increase in labour.
High earning possibilities could have a compensating effect, for if they increased the "idleness" of those already employed, they also drew in new hands.
When this happened, as it did in the golden age of cotton hand-loom weaving for instance, it could lead to an eventual oversupply of labour and restore the advantage to the hirer.
It seems reasonable to conclude that the situation described by economists as a "backward-sloping supply curve for labour" , meaning that contrary to expectations a higher price produces a decrease in labour offered, was less generally true in the mid eighteenth century than it had been earlier.
When we turn from labour supply to labour intensity, the contrast made by historians is usually that between pre-industrial work rhythms and those of the factory economy.
Edward Thompson has written of the "deep-rooted folk memory" resting on "nostalgia for the pattern of work and leisure which obtained before the outer and inner discipline of industrialism settled upon the working man" .
In a seminal article he described the "characteristic irregularity of labour patterns before the coming of large-scale machine- powered industry" .
This pattern was one of "alternate bouts of intense labour and of idleness wherever men were in control of their own working lives" .
That the cottage out-worker could control his own pace seems evident, but the pattern was also to be found in workshop trades.
Hatters were said to have long hours — "a man goes early and stays late" — but no fixed hours.
Birmingham has  been described as a "matrix of small workshops" forming a "conducive environment for the survival of immemorial work rhythms" .
From Sheffield, with its similar structure of small metal-working forges, comes a revealing song, The Jovial Cutlers, written in 1793 and encapsulating the irregularity of artisan labour.
Brother workmen cease your labour, Lay your files and hammers by, Listen while a brother neighbour Sings a cutlers destiny; How upon a good Saint Monday, Sitting by the smithy fire Telling what's been done o' t'Sunday And in cheerful mirth conspire The cutler's wife enters and indicates, by reference to her ragged attire, that she at least would welcome a little less leisure preference and a little more consumer response to monetary incentive.
As she nags, her husband complains of her tongue moving faster than his "boring stick at a Friday's pace" .
Here is the rhythm of his week: Monday a holiday, but Friday needing a furious rate to complete the weekly stint of knives.
Obviously such a pattern was affected by price levels and piece rates.
Adverse movement in either would lessen the number of hours which could be taken as play, but still would not dictate precisely which hours had to be worked.
The response could accompany normal wage times as well as those of high wages.
 "Saint Monday" was honoured across the spectrum of trades and in the mines.
The year as well as the week was punctuated with holidays.
Josiah Wedgwood may have boasted his intent of "making such machines of men as cannot err" but he could not nail his potters to the floor and was left to fume when they absented themselves for the local "wakes" .
A writer on the Cornish miners in the early eighteenth century complained that because of their "numerous holidays, holiday eves, feasts, account days (once a month), Yeuwhiddens or one way or another they invent to loiter away their time, they do not work one half of their month for the owners and employers" .
Attempts by "several gentlemen" to end these customs had been of little avail for a complaint of a very similar kind was still being made a century later.
Northern coal miners observed a  long Christmas break and from time to time proclaimed "gaudy days" on such occasions as hearing the first cuckoo.
Every trade took a holiday on the day of its patron saint.
Adam Smith took a more considered view than most commentators.
He suggested that a day or so of drunken dissipation was the result of a previous period of intense labour.
Francis Place, remembering his days as a journeyman tailor, endorsed this view.
He recalled the desire for leisure which even the most serious and industrious of workers experienced after a period of constant application, impelling them to "indulge in idleness" .
This was a familiar enough phenomenon, but it is distinct from the normally irregular working rhythm of many artisans and out-workers.
The author of The Jovial Cutlers, Joseph Mather, was himself a working cutler and he wrote for an audience of his fellows.
There was, however, for some of those who worked on their employer's premises, a firmer notion of the working day.
The statute of 1721 fixed the hours of London's tailors as from 6 a.m. to 8 p.m. with an hour for dinner.
Was this typical?
In 1752 the tailors were claiming that it was not and that the norm in most "handicraft trades" was from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m.
However, Campell's authoritative London Tradesman of 1747 suggests fourteen hours for breeches makers, carpet weavers, harness makers, coopers, engravers, saddlers, stocking knitters, wool combers and shoe makers.
Book binders, broom makers, buckle makers, calico printers, glovers, knife grinders and pin makers all worked an extra hour to 9 p.m.
Where daylight was essential, a twelve-hour day was usual except in the winter months.
In 1768 the statutory day for the tailors was cut to thirteen hours.
Wool sorters at Exeter worked "from the time of being able to discern the wool until the evening" , which amounted to about eight and a half hours in winter and twelve in summer.
In the royal dockyards the basic day was twelve hours but it was necessarily shorter in winter, and in summer overtime shifts known as "tides" were often worked.
In paper mills the base for wage calculation was a measure of output judged to occupy eight hours, but paper makers generally worked another four hours' overtime.
Evidence of this kind has led Dr Harrison to challenge the linking  of modern work disciplines to the arrival of the factory system.
From a close study of Bristol, not to any great extent a factory town, he argues that regularity was already a feature of urban labour by 1750.
In the towns there was by then "a recognisable working day and working week" .
He is insistent on this: "it is safe to observe, indeed to stress, the following: between 1750 and 1850 almost all employed people, particularly in towns, were to be found at work between the hours of 6 a.m. and 6 p.m., Tuesday to Saturday" .
In some ways that is a statement of astonishing banality, for who supposes otherwise?
Yet it contains some surprising assumptions.
It seems to accept Saint Monday to the extent of being not only general but a "fixed arrangement" which, added to Sunday, made up a "weekend" .
If Saint Monday was as normal as the modern Saturday, then why was so much fuss made about it?
Further, if it is true that later eighteenth-century urban workers had a "standard" five-day week, albeit of sixty hours, then the factory was to make a very significant difference by insisting on six.
As Professor Landes has pointed out, the tolerance of non-factory employers depended on the fact that they did not have to take the running or fixed costs of machinery into account.
There are other problems, apart from the fact that Harrison's evidence dates from 1790 and if there was a regular working pattern in Bristol it may have been of more recent origin than he suggests.
His typical working week would be short indeed if he did not consider Saturday as a normal working day — but was it?
In many trades it was close to a half-day as well as being pay day.
That hours of work were stated for many trades does not mean that they were always worked to the full.
Harrison agrees that they were sometimes overworked, but they were as often underworked.
The hours of London tailors were fixed by statute, but the journeymen could still complain that the masters called upon them for only half a day, leaving them in their public houses all morning.
Campbell in 1747 gave nominal hours of work for hatters, for example, but the men in their evidence in 1777 stated that they measured their day by output, not time.
Even if there were regular hours, this says nothing about the intensity of labour.
Evidence from a variety of trades, printing, coopering and shipbuilding among them, points to a degree of casualness quite foreign to the machine-dictated rhythms of  factory production.
In the latter, fines for simply chatting with workmates contrast vividly with the drinking customs so often described in the artisan trades.
An old potter regretted that machinery did not transform his trade as early as it did that of cotton.
It would have been better for employers and workpeople if they had been in the disciplinary grip of machinery…
A machine worked so many hours in the week would produce so much length of yarn or cloth.
Minutes were felt to be factors in these results, whereas in the Potteries hours, or even days at times, were hardly felt to be such factors.
So far as mining is concerned, the long colliery shifts of the nineteenth century do not seem to have been usual in the eighteenth.
Miners in general worked fewer hours than other workers.
Young commented that the lead miners of the Dales had finished their underground work by noon or one o'clock.
Yorkshire pitmen seem usually to have worked eight hours and sometimes only six.
In the lead mines of the northern Pennines shaft sinking and level driving was done on a shift system with each gang working five eight-hour days, or in the Yorkshire lead mines a six-day week of six-hour shifts.
Pitmen in Northumberland and Durham were working six or seven hours in 1765 but seem to have been working at least eight by the end of the century, as Whitehaven's colliers had already been doing in 1765.
In Derbyshire in 1776 eight hours was usual, save for exceptionally difficult ground when six were worked.
Around Leeds in 1787 an eight-hour day was the norm, with no sign yet of the twelve- hour one which had become common by 1842.
In the Cornish mines the tutworkers who opened up the ground usually worked eight-hour shifts, with three shifts over twenty-four hours known by the mid eighteenth century.
Tributers, who raised the actual ore, came and went with more freedom.
Carew, writing at the beginning of the seventeenth century, had then thought four hours underground was as much as a tin miner could endure, but six- or eight-hour shifts overwhelmingly predominated by the eighteenth century.
According to Pryce in 1778, longer shifts had been experimented with but had been found less productive.
they were nothing but an excuse for idleness; twelve hours being too many for a man to work underground without intermission.
Accordingly when a pare of men went underground formerly, they made it a rule, to sleep out a candle, before they set about their work; that is if their place of work was dry, they would lay themselves down and sleep, as long as a whole candle would continue burning; and then rise up and work for two or three hours pretty briskly; after that have a touch pipe, that is rest themselves for half an hour to smoke a pipe of tobacco, and so play and sleep away half their working time: but mining being more expensive than it formerly was, those idle customs are superseded by more labour and industry.
In tin and copper mining, as in coal mining, the demands of an industry becoming increasingly more capitalistic, as mines went deeper and draining technologies became more costly, meant a greater commitment from labour.
Pryce, for example, assumed that miners relieved each other in place, but in fact this was in itself an increased burden on labour which was still being contested in some mines twenty years later.
A bad custom has prevailed lately in our mines in general which is that the men work only six hours whereas they used to work eight hours…we entered into a resolution to insist on the men working eight hours in future, instead of six and relieve in place.
This was in 1785 and by then the major mines were so deep that a ladder climb to the surface could take an hour.
Whether shifts changed in place or at the surface was thus a matter of some importance.
Perhaps employers and miners met part way, for by 1801 the same writer seems to have considered six-hour shifts general.
Early in the nineteenth century, eight hours came to predominate, although a six-hour shift was even then still worked in exceptionally hot and difficult mines.
It could be argued that the whole idea of "normal" hours is inappropriate when applied to out-workers, for it was not so much in the length of the factory day but in its regularity that there was a real contrast with the weaver's cottage.
When, for example, some weaving households were at an adverse point in their family cycles, they might welcome the chance to work longer hours than the typical factory shift.
One complained in 1802: "In the factory we can never work the hours we can at home, nor make the best of our time.
We cannot work above 7½ hours in winter and about 12 in summer."
With candlelight the day could be stretched from 5 a.m to 7 p.m. in winter, and in summer daylight permitted working from 5 a.m. to 9 p.m.
Asked how such hours could be kept up, the weaver replied: "As long as God Almighty gives me strength.
I have done it for years.
I hardly know anybody but what does; the greatest part of the  inhabitants do."
A Huddersfield clothier concurred.
He preferred outwork: "In a factory you confine them to the hours the master pleases, in the cottage they work very often 15 or 16 hours." 
Earlier in the century two broadcloth weavers in 1757 testified that fourteen, fifteen or sixteen hours was the input required to make good wages.
Many framework knitters were said in 1778 to work from 5 a.m to 10 p.m. in summer, but this was considered a departure from the more usual start at 6 a.m and finishing at dusk in the winter.
It would seem highly unlikely, except at the times when falling piece rates forced them to, that domestic workers averaged such hours through the week, although they must have worked them on some days, if only to make up for slacker work early in the week.
At any particular moment not all weavers had the same choice.
Some had large dependent families, while others had teenage children able to make a substantial contribution.
During the decline of hand-loom weaving, more and more families were brought under the necessity of working longer hours.
In cotton weaving rates in 1808 had fallen so low that weavers were reported to be working upwards of fifteen hours, even to twenty, but as an employer remarked it was an impossible situation to sustain and a man would not choose to work eighteen hours if he could live from the labour of twelve.
Twelve hours as an average in normal times seems a fair measure.
It was what the shearmen in the woollen manufacture, who did not work at home, regarded as usual.
At times of high wages or low food prices, out-workers could opt for more leisure, but in times of slack trade they might well find themselves unable to get enough work to compensate for falling rates.
Workers standing by were not always enjoying a leisure preference; they were sometimes enduring an enforced and hungry idleness.
The hours worked in the early cotton mills varied.
Mantoux, on the basis of the enquiry of 1816, instances fourteen, sixteen, or even eighteen hours with a dinner break of forty minutes for the largely female and juvenile labour force.
Around Manchester fourteen hours or a shift system with sixteen hours on and eight off, relieving in thirds, was common.
Samuel Oldknow was generally regarded as a humane employer, but even he expected his apprentices to work for thirteen hours.
But it was not in the number of hours that the factory system brought a new dimension.
The first recorded clocking-in system was introduced by Wedgwood at Etruria, backed by a stiff fine of 2s (10p) for any worker coming late.
But even in Etruria, although different processes had to be synchronised, the rhythm of labour was still determined by hand work.
With power-driven machinery a different pace is dictated by the unvaried and untiring momentum.
Dickens likened the piston of the steam engine to "the head of an elephant in a state of melancholy madness" , but even by 1815 it was only a minority of the working population who had as yet been cast in the mould of his 1845 Coketowners who, "all went in and out at the same hours, with the same sound upon the same pavements, to do the same work, and to whom every day was the same as yesterday and to-morrow" .
But it was here, not only in the visual intrusion into a rural landscape, that William Wordsworth saw "unnaturalness" in reacting to a water-powered spinning mill in 1814.
An "unnatural light" allowed "never-resting labour" to work at night; labour which had been called to "unceasing toil" by a bell "of harsher import than the curfew-knoll /That spake the Norman Conqueror's stern behest" .
Among those thus summoned it was not men who predominated but "maidens, youths /Mothers and little children, boys and girls" .
It has been noted of a pioneer like Arkwright that he had "to train his workpeople to a precision and assiduity altogether unknown before, against which their listless and restless habits rose in continued rebellion" .
Child labour recommended themselves to the early factory masters not only because it was cheap but also because it avoided dependence on adult labour whose traditional work habits were too deeply ingrained.
The "elite" of skilled male mule spinners which was retained seems to have continued to display an artisan-like attitude.
The greater suitability of children for the new tasks was lauded in terms of their "quickness" and their "nimble" fingers.
The period from the building of the first cotton mills up to a restrictive parliamentary act of 1816 was the era of the factory apprentices — pauper children brought from workhouses all over the country to be indentured to misery.
This era of child labour in the factories was the most manifestly exploitative.
In the following era, "free" child workers had been placed there by their families, and not  uncommonly worked with them.
In this era discipline could be enforced by fines or dismissal.
Apprentices could be sanctioned by neither, and in the general sense it is hardly surprising that resort to corporal punishment was so common.
While the polemics of factory reform tended to publicise the most harrowing cases, it is clear that pauper children uprooted from distant institutions, lodged in dormitories and fed parsimoniously were perhaps the least protected group in eighteenth-century society.
Robert Blincoe, born in 1792, was sent at the age of seven with eighty other children from St Pancras workhouse to a Notting-hamshire cotton mill.
His later published account describes bad food, hard work over a fourteen-hour day, beatings and injury from unguarded machinery.
He once ran away and was flogged on recapture.
Compared with the Derbyshire mill of Elias Needham to which he was moved in 1803, this was a good mill.
Food was so scarce in Derbyshire that the apprentices had to raid dustbins.
The shift was an unbroken sixteen hours and the children were clothed in rags.
Easily hidden from the not-too-enquiring eyes of the local magistrates who were supposed to inspect the mill, frightening cruelties were inflicted by overseers whose sadism went unchecked.
In Blincoe's view the factory owners were not only aware of this brutality but to a degree participated in it.
Of course, such con- ditions did not disgrace every mill, nor were they wholly absent outside the factory system.
Blincoe thought that in centres like Manchester inspection was more thorough; he also felt that by the 1830s cruelties were rare.
Nevertheless, his Memoir stands as an indictment of the apprentice era.
In a measured reconsideration of Blincoe's account, after a modern historian seeking to defend the early cotton masters sought to discredit it, Professor Musson concluded: There is no doubt whatever that many children were exploited and ill treated in the early textile mills, that they were used as cheap factory labour, that their hours of work were far too long, that accident, ill-health and deformities were common, and that cruel punishments were often inflicted.
There is no doubt that, as the Memoir asserts, the owner of Litton Mill [Needham], "although perhaps the worse of his tribe, did not stand alone" .
Even in his defence of Needham, Dr Chapman admits that at one  mill more than a third of the apprentices died, absconded or had to be returned and only two out of 780 apprentices recruited were later employed as adult workers.
As for Needham, he "borrowed" the idea of the "cage" , a basket in which "serious" offenders were suspended from the ceiling, from the punishment code of the Lancastrian school system.
As with his other borrowing, the "log" — a four- to six-pound weight hung around the child's neck — he was trying "to copy this progressive idea of the age" .
Perhaps the practice of suspending children by their arms over machinery was a refinement of his own.
How extensive was that other form of child labour which shocked Victorian England, that in the mines?
The vivid illustrations in the Blue Books of the 1840s could as well have come from the mines of Shropshire in 1770.
A contemporary account des-cribes children "with their hands and feet on the black, dusty ground and a chain about their body, creep and drag along like four footed beasts, heavy loads of the dirty mineral through ways almost impassable to the curious observer" .
Boys as young as seven or eight were being employed underground around Newcastle by 1800.
For several years their task was to open and close the trap doors which were essential for controlling the circulation of air, then at about the age of twelve they moved on to pushing the underground wagons.
For the most part they worked underground with their fathers or other relatives, and, in contrast with the lot of the pauper apprentice, child labour underground for all its burdens and dangers was a first step on the way to the ranks of the hewers.
Girls seem to have worked mainly at the surface picking out stones from the coal.
Both women and girls appear to have worked underground in some of the Lancashire pits in the eighteenth century but had ceased to do so by 1815.
It seems likely that child labour underground increased after 1815 as the greater use of wheeled wagons on rail tracks brought the drawing of coal within their physical capabilities.
For this reason, as Ashton and Sykes pointed out, extensive use of child labour in a high ratio to adult male labour underground was a function of technical progress and most marked in the more advanced fields.
Boys, usually related to one or more of the working group, seem to have played their part underground in Cornish mines  throughout the eighteenth century, employed chiefly in wheeling barrows of ore.
They were far fewer in overall number and in ratio to adult miners than on the northern coalfields, because in metal mining a much smaller volume of excavated material has to be moved.
Boys usually went underground at around twelve years of age, having previously worked on sorting and preparing the raised ores at the surface.
More were needed for this task than were ever recruited to work underground, and many Cornish youths who worked at the tin "stamps" as "buddle boys" never became adult miners.
Samuel Drew, who began at the age of eight in 1773 for 1½d (0.6p) a day, was later apprenticed to a shoe maker, while Harry Carter, born in 1749, left the mines at the age of sixteen for the more exciting career of smuggling.
Female labour was never used underground in Cornwall and it does not seem to have been much used at the surface either, until the growth of copper mining which rapidly overhauled tin in importance after about 1740.
Copper ores needed a considerable labour force to break and sort the ores, and by the 1780s the ratio of female and juvenile labour to adult males had reached 2: 5.
In the lead mines of the northern Pennines the use of young boys underground seems to have decreased after 1750 when mining practice came to favour longer levels, putting the drawing of ores beyond the strength of children.
As in Cornwall, however, children and women were employed sorting and dressing ores.
Pauper apprenticeship, like child labour in general, was not a particular novelty of the factory system, although its use in coal mining seems to have developed only in the nineteenth century and to have been largely localised to the Black Country.
Under the Poor Law many children found themselves bound to either masters or mistresses who exploited them and at times treated them with great cruelty, while our own age has learned with shame of the extent of ill-treatment even within the family.
In free as well as in pauper apprenticeship corporal punishment was allowed within reason, and the treatment of the "chimney boys" was as notorious as that of the factory children, for in both cases youngsters were being consigned to labour in conditions in which few parents would willingly have placed them.
Of the chimney boys, Campbell wrote in 1747: the younger they are the better fit to climb up the chimneys; I would not recommend my friend to breed his son to this trade,"tho I know some masters who live comfortably.
I think this branch is chiefly occupied by unhappy Parish children, and may for ought I know, be the greatest nursery for Tyburn of any trade in England.
For living-in apprentices food and comfort could be in scant supply.
One, apprenticed to a shoe maker, recalled not a cruel master but a mistress who turned him into a household drudge.
William Hutton, apprenticed as a framework knitter, remembered great hunger, and in his case the mistress was his aunt.
Any trawl through the columns of local papers of the time catches a number of cases of cruelty to apprentices which to our age, shocked by revelations of child abuse, suggests the tip of an iceberg.
In a period of ten months in 1764–5 the Exeter Mercury reported the case of a man, wife, son and daughter-in-law jointly indicted for the murder of a girl apprentice by "beating and barbarously using her" ; the ill-treatment of a thirteen-year-old girl by a master and mistress who branded her on her buttocks, chained her for six hours to an apple tree and then beat her severely before making her work; and a third case, which shows up the vulnerability to sexual abuse of children bound out by the parish, in which a man was sentenced for castrating two eight-year-old boys.
In the classified columns of the same newspapers advertisements for the return of runaway apprentices testify as much to harsh treatment as they do to the restlessness of youth, resentful at the constraining nature of apprenticeship.
When, however, contemporaries celebrated the existence of child labour in the pre-factory economy, they hardly ever had the unfortunate pauper children in mind.
Their model was the employment of children within the family economy of the domestic system.
Indeed, it was one of the great merits of manufacturing to the early eighteenth-century observer Daniel Defoe that it brought increased employment and greater prosperity to a district compared with those which remained wholly dependent on agriculture.
In the manufacturing counties you see the wheel going almost at every door, the wool and the yarn hanging up at every window, the looms, the winders, the combers, the carders, the dyers, the dressers, all busy; and the very children as well as the women constantly employed.
It was because he saw them as offering more regular and more worthwhile employment for children than could be found in the agricultural districts, with only seasonal and low-paid needs, that Defoe praised the woollen areas.
On Norfolk he remarked that there was not "any hand unemployed, if they would work; and that the very children after four or five years of age, could everyone earn their own bread" .
In the West Riding there was "hardly anything above a few years old, but its hands are sufficient to itself" .
He made similar comments on Taunton and in Essex.
When the spreading cotton manufacture extended similar opportunities, Arthur Young wrote of Manchester: "large families in this place are no incumbrance; all are set to work" .
When the West Country clothiers' advocate William Temple wanted in 1739 to point to the advantages of the weavers, he stressed that it was their family earnings which lifted them above the condition of the farm worker.
That child labour not only existed in the pre-factory economy but was strongly approved of does not of itself make blinkered sentimentalists of those who reacted so strongly to the "dark, satanic mills" .
Child labour was bound to take on a different quality when removed from the home and, in the case of the pauper factory apprentices, from the locality of upbringing.
It has been claimed that the role of parental supervision continued into the early mills.
In a limited sense and for a fortunate few who were related to the adult mule spinners with whom they worked, this may have been true.
But even in the era of "free" child labour it can have mollified the condition of only a minority.
When it came to removing southern pauper children in large numbers to northern or Midland factories, it can hardly be denied that this, albeit short-lived, stage of the evolution of the factory labour force not only systematised but bruta-lised child labour.
Child labour in the cottage need not be romanticised.
Samuel Bamford remembered winding cotton on to bobbins for his weaver uncle as "work of cramping, confining and boring nature" .
Exasperation often led him into acts of mischief for which he was quickly rapped by his rod-bearing aunt, but the atmosphere in which  punishment was given and taken was a relaxed one, with his uncle able to laugh at some of his pranks.
William Hutton was one of the few who worked in both factory and cottage as a child, for he was first employed in a silk mill in Derby before becoming apprenticed to his framework knitter uncle.
He most certainly had few fond memories of the latter employment, but it was the former which caused him to curse his luck at having been born in Derby.
From the age of eight he began at 5 a.m. despite being so small that special pattens had to be made to enable him to reach the machinery, and he bore the scars of the corporal punishment inflicted on him there for the rest of his life.
The employers of child workers in the factories were not partic-ular about gender, but what of the employment of adult women in manufacturing and mining?
We have already suggested that along with the use of child labour there was little uniformity either chronologically or geographically about the employment of women in coal mines.
So far, however, as working underground is concerned, it seems safe to generalise that adult female labour was never widespread and was in decline in the later eighteenth century.
The use of girls above ground increased after 1815, but the truth is that we really know very little of the actual numbers of women working in mines.
As Dr John has pointed out, women in the smaller coalfields worked as part of a family concern,"male members utilising the help of their female relatives wherever possible.
Since the hiring and payment would be the responsibility of the male collier, women were not usually recorded in colliery accounts."
Their prime task was drawing but, as we have noted, the use of iron tracks about 1770 brought this chore within the capability of even cheaper child labour.
On the great northern coalfield they did not work underground after 1780, although to some extent they continued to do so at some pits in Yorkshire, Lancashire and Cumberland.
Dr John pointedly contrasts the coal mine with the factory, for in the former technical advances displaced women.
The women who were employed as surface workers at Cornish copper mines were predominantly young and unmarried — that is, unless things had changed very drastically by the mid nineteenth century, for by the time of the 1851 census very few women seem to have continued after their early twenties.
Washing lead ores in Derbyshire was undertaken by women throughout the eighteenth century.
Defoe met a female lead washer in about 1720, but as the  century progressed they seem to have been steadily replaced by boys so that they disappear from the employment records by 1800.
Few women worked in heavy industry.
We might note the surprise of William Hutton in 1741 on coming across the women nailers of the Black Country at their small forges.
In some of these shops I observed one or more females, stript of their upper garment, and not overcharged with the latter, wielding the hammer with all the grace of the sex…struck with this novelty, I enquired, "whether the ladies of this locality shod horses?" but was answered, with a smile, "they are nailers" .
Hutton was no tourist from the sheltered gentry.
He had by this time been child factory worker, apprentice framework knitter and short-term seaman, so his reaction is significant.
Nailing was an exception, but women and children were widely employed in the light metal wares of Birmingham.
Their nimble dexterity even made them preferred in the manufacture of buttons and in lacquering and japanning, although it did not bring them the wages of skilled male artisans.
In textile manufacture women were first and foremost the spinners.
Before the advent of machine spinning it took around six spinners to supply a weaver with yarn, and the putting-out reach of clothiers seeking yarn extended well beyond the perimeter of weaving.
Wool from the Devonshire serge makers was sent down to Cornwall for spinning; Norwich wove yarn spun in Cambridgeshire, Bedfordshire and Huntingdonshire.
Accordingly in many households women spun, even though the household as a whole was not primarily engaged in textile production.
The wives of farmers and farm labourers, of general labourers and of miners are all to be found among their ranks.
As it was spinning which was the first textile process to be mechanised, it was women's work which was the first to be taken away by machinery, threatened by the water frame in 1769 and by Hargreaves' spinning jenny in 1770, even before Crompton's mule came into use in the 1780s.
All these were pioneered in cotton, but the jenny soon spread to the older fibre.
In the West Country woollen region it has been noted that from the 1780s the number of women per cloth fell by 1802 to only 18 per cent of its former level.
Protest was immediate and desperate from  the wives of farm workers and miners.
Jennies were smashed across Lancashire in 1769 and so strongly resisted in the West Country that their penetration in Wiltshire and Gloucestershire was limited before the early 1790s.
In Somerset magistrates had to cope in 1790 with"a lawless Banditi of colliers and their wives, for the wives had lost their work to spinning engines…which they suppose, if generally adopted, will lessen the demand for manual labour.
The women became clamorous…
"
Eden in his survey of the nation's poor described how badly hit the agricultural parishes were in the 1790s.
In the textile districts the position was less clear.
The first jennies were hand worked and small enough to be operated in the cottages; as Maxine Berg has put it: "It was part of the domestic system, the machine of the poor." 
These jennies were either collected in small workshops or placed out in cottages and seem to have brought increased earnings to many women in the cloth-working families, albeit for a short period until the machines got larger and, more importantly, the largely male-worked spinning mule began to replace the jenny.
So far as the throwing of silk into yarn was concerned, whether in water-powered mills or by hand, this was carried out by women and children.
Hand-loom weaving has always been considered a male artisan activity, with the concession that wives from time to time might assist their husbands at the cottage loom.
The true picture is more complicated.
In both the West Riding and the West Country women seem to have worked more often as weavers than has been assumed, especially towards the end of the century.
At times, such as during the long wars with France from 1793 to 1815, they seem to have done so especially to fill the labour gap created by absent men.
At times of employment crisis, male weavers organised to exclude them, and in strongly incorporated centres like Exeter they seem to have gained hardly any entry.
In cotton country women weavers made coarser cloths, quality pieces remaining a male preserve.
Accordingly, when power-looms worked by women began to appear early in the nineteenth century it "set women against women, especially young women working in the shops or mills against older married women working at home" .
In silk weaving the ratio of women  to men weavers was probably significantly higher than in wool or cotton.
None of this has taken account of the overall part played by women in the cloth-making households headed by male weavers or knitters.
This work is hidden, as is that of children, for it was not separately waged.
Yet, as the historians of "proto-industrialisation" have stressed, it is the family production unit which is the key to understanding the economics of rural manufacturing.
There are a few clues which enable us to put a "value" on some of this labour.
For example, if the seaming of stocking was not done at home by the wife, in 1811 a deduction of around 1s (5p) was made from earnings of 13s (65p).
Even in craft trades the cost of substituting for a wife could be high: one hatter in 1824 reckoned that if his wife had not picked the coarse hairs out of his material he would have lost from 6s to 9s 4d (30p to 47p) from wages of £2 to £3.
Few of the apprentice-entered trades were specifically female.
Campbell's survey of London trades in 1747 describes two: milliners and mantua makers (makers of petticoats, nightgowns, etc.).
In both cases the wages of journeywomen were so low that he associates them with prostitution: "Take a survey of all the common women of the town, who take their walks between Charing Cross and Fleet Ditch, and I am persuaded more than half of them have been bred milliners." 
He mentions a third trade — child's coat making — but provides no information other than that women could make "a good living from it" .
More prophetic of the place women were to fill in the sewing trades was his description of those who sewed stays and bodices.
The stay-maker proper who cut and shaped the whalebone and canvas was a man, who needed other qualities as well as skill: "He ought to be a very polite tradesman, as he approaches the ladies so nearly." 
He also had to keep secrets, for he knew the real shape of things: "I am surprised the ladies have not found out a way to employ women stay-makers rather than trust our sex with what should be kept as inviolably as Free-Masonry." 
Instead it was the work of stitching which was put out to poorly paid women.
Similar work was undertaken by women in shoe-making.
Campbell does not mention women being employed in glove making but they certainly were in the main provincial centres of Oxfordshire, Somerset and Worcestershire, especially from the late  eighteenth century when this manufacture along with lace making and straw plaiting expanded rapidly on the basis of cheap female hand labour.
Indeed, as Maxine Berg has well explained, a feature of those same closing decades which saw the first cotton mills was the spread of such manufactures.
Calico printing provides an interesting example.
For most of the eighteenth century the trade had been dominated by an elite group of well-organised journeymen.
Their ability to demand high wages was by 1790 causing some employers to dislodge their hold by introducing machinery: "we are determined to destroy all sorts of Masheens for printing in the Kingdom" , runs one of the milder sentences in an anonymous letter from the journeymen received by one employer.
However, other manufacturers, including the largest, Sir Robert Peel, found an alternative to both men and machinery by relocating their firms where cheap female labour was available to hand paint the cloth or else to print with wooden blocks studded with thousands of pins instead of the engraved blocks cut by the journeymen.
The increasing division of labour in potting pioneered by Wedgwood also used female labour for patterning and decorating.
As Dr Berg has noted, even the best paid of such women performing tasks of great delicacy with dexterity were not considered "skilled" in the full sense, for "skill" was a male property.
The extent to which women were employed in craft trades is unknowable.
Dr Snell has recently suggested that on the evidence of apprenticeship indentures women and girls were bound to a range of occupations in the early and middle years of the eighteenth century from which they were later progressively excluded as capitalistic developments took more work from the home and as population growth accelerated to flood the labour market.
In all he found fifty-one trades which received girls as apprentices, many of which paid premiums comparable to those for boys, suggesting that they were to learn the craft.
However, it would be dangerous indeed to assume that all these entrants were intended to acquire a full competence in the trade.58 Work on Essex shows that the skill and training content of female apprenticeships was generally modest, and that they tended to have a different meaning.
Historians may have drawn gender lines too sharply, but the view that apprenticeship  as serious industrial training towards mastery of a craft was overwhelmingly a path for males is essentially correct.
Many widows, however, did carry on their husbands' trade, even in occupations usually considered male.
Such women may have been rather running businesses than producing goods in so far as they relied on journeymen.
Widows of shipwrights in the royal dockyards had the right to enter apprentices, but could not themselves enter.
However, to manage an artisan workshop at very least implies a possession of the knowledge side of a craft if not of the actual making.
Adult males accounted for only 17.7 per cent of employees in cotton mills in Lancashire in 1816 and 18.4 per cent in Notting-hamshire.
Even allowing for a slight predominance of boys over girls among children, this still suggests that around two-thirds of the first generation of mill workers were female.
This pattern carried on one which already characterised the silk mills that had been set up following the success of the Derby mill.
Arthur Young noted of one in Sheffield in 1771 that its employees were chiefly women and children, with the former earning 5-6s (25-30p) a week, five times the earnings of the latter.60
WORK AND HEALTH
Crabbe's scorn for pastoral muses who ignored the reality of work on the land — "alternate suns and showers engage; /And hoard up aches and anguish for their age" — is withering.
One can share it and yet recognise that there is justification for contemporary views that work in mines and manufacture had a yet greater effect on health and longevity.
To Adam Smith each trade had its "peculiar infirmity" , and the economist was familiar with the widely selling translation of the classic work by Bernard Ramazzini, De Morbis Artificum Diatriba, which added to the diagnostic list the question: "what occupation does he follow?…
This should be particularly kept in mind when the patient to be treated belongs to the common people."
Manufacturing, declared one pamphleteer, was the equal  of war in producing "a mournful procession of the blind and lame, and of enfeebled, decrepit, asthmatic, consumptive wretches, crawling half alive upon the surface of the earth" .
That was written in 1782, twenty-three years before Charles Hall indicted the "new" manufacturing towns for producing "rickety, squalid, dwarfed, distorted objects" .
The occupational pathology of the eighteenth century is strikingly revealed in a litany which gives us grinder's asthma, grinder's rot, mason's disease, miner's phthisis, stone worker's lung and potter's rot, among others, for dust-caused lung diseases, as well as occupational bursitis in such varying forms as bricklayer's elbow, weaver's bottom, housemaid's knee, hod carrier's shoulder and tailor's ankle.
The madness of the hatter was paranoia, one of the several symptoms of poisoning from the mercury used in the trade.
Of course, environment, diet and indulgence contributed to the ill-health of many workers, and hours of labour were a major aggravation.
Sedentary occupations over the modern working day are a different matter from the twelve or more hours in ill-ventilated workshops which made tailors and shoe makers proverbially consumptive.
So, too, was the age at which work began.
Charles Turner Thackrah, England's first real specialist in the field, was convinced that shortening hours was the most urgent of improvements.
Work could produce ill-health or early death from a number of circumstances.
It could be the result of using or working on certain materials, e.g. lead; of labour in a harmful environment, e.g. damp, ill ventilated, fume or dust filled; of harmful working postures; or of the repetitive use of particular muscles or organs.
On top of all these was the risk of accidental injury or death.
Ramazzini described the symptoms of poisoning from the lead which was regularly used by house painters, plumbers, glaziers and potters as well as by the extremely short-lived wretches actually employed in lead works: "First their hands become palsied, then they become paralytic, spenetic, lethargic, cachectic and toothless, so that one rarely sees a potter whose face is not cadaverous and the colour of lead." 
Other  metals and chemicals had their effects: mercury gave hatters the "shakes" as well as paranoia; arsenic fumes shortened the lives of workers in copper refining; dyes poisoned calico printers; and soot imparted a particular cancer to chimney boys.
The white faces of miners reflected years of working in poor air and extreme temperatures, while their lungs, like those of Sheffield's grinders, were wrecked by dust.
Dust took a toll also among coal heavers, masons, quarrymen, bricklayers and even bakers and hairdressers.
Intense heat and charcoal fumes from their stoves ensured that few wool combers reached the age of fifty.
Cramped working positions were a fact of life for miners in the narrow seams, but other trades too complained of cramps and "craft palsies" including saddlers, sawyers and nail makers.
Eyestrain from working at close stitching in artificial light was endemic in the "needle" trades.
Long hours of standing over benches by the lock makers got part of the Black Country known as "Humpshire" .
Long hours of sedentary work were linked to the consumption which made the poor tailor the "wretched emblem of death" .
Physical injury was frequent, not only in notoriously dangerous places like mines, where gas explosions added to the threat of rock falls, gun powder mishaps and shaft falls, but in grinding where the huge wheels sometimes shattered into flying slivers.
Health risks were matters of acceptance for the most part by employers and workers alike.
Wedgwood insisted on hygiene practices to limit the danger from lead used in pot glazing, and some Sheffield masters chained a protective guard over their wheels, but these were exceptional.
Nor was there any real notion of wage compensation.
There was no need.
Workers did not choose these employments.
Miners became miners because they lived in Cornwall; grinders became grinders because they lived in Sheffield.
The comfortable classes could take it for granted that such conditions were the lot of the working classes: sad but normal.
Such extraordinary conditions as prevailed, for example, in the lead works at Whitechapel amounted to a virtual death sentence.
Only the truly needy or desperate would undertake them.
Those at the bottom of the pile could expect little better; workers in the "dishonourable" trades were stigmatised by degeneracy and evident inferiority.
They had no real chance of attention, let alone remedy or compensation.
In this environment it is perhaps surprising that the early factories should have received such hostile criticism.
However, they concentrated labour, largely that of women and children, in a more visibly exploitative mode.
It would not be easy to see how a case could be made that factory employment was an especially health-destroying occupation for adult males.
Conditions in cottage industry were hardly rosy; work space competed with living space in dark and damp habitations.
Nevertheless, there was immediate access to fresher air and open skies, while the less intense and stressful rhythms of manual production gave some opportunity for recreation.
There were significant differences, for the factory system not only took child labour outside of the home, it placed it in an inferior overall environment.
Long, regimented hours, more formal discipline and danger from unguarded machinery all imply differences in form and intensity which were not hidden from medical men who were familiar with the early factories.
The Manchester doctor Thomas Percival reported on a "confinement" which "either cut them off early in life" or rendered them sick and feeble.
A report on Manchester mills in 1784 condemned their low ceilings and floors overcrowded with machinery as well as noting the effects of cotton dust and friction-heated oil.
At night great numbers of candles added their heat and smoke.
John Aiken, who wrote in 1797, was also a doctor and he described apprentices brought in batches from distant workhouses to toil in "injurious" air by day and night.
Temperatures were extreme and epidemics rife.
The evidence produced by the major enquiries which took place between 1816 and the 1840s has been variously treated by historians, but what little evidence there is for the earlier mills seems uniformly bleak.
Although conceding that manufactures were in many respects deserving of the "high encomiums" bestowed upon them, a pamphleteer of 1782 went on to remark: Scarcely are we fed, lodged, clothed, warmed, without sending multitudes to their grave.
The collier, the clothier, the painter, the gilder, the miner, the maker of glass, the workers in iron, tin, lead, copper, while they administer to our necessities, or please our tastes and fancies, are impairing their health and shortening their days.
At a time when we are exhorted to esteem the "entrepreneurs" , we should not overlook those who bore the burden as well as those who took the "risks" .
Roadways and Waterways
Having walked all day at a great pace…we descried towards evening, to our inexpressible joy, the waggon about a quarter of a mile before us…
With only a slight quickening of their pace, Roderick Random, the eponymous hero of Smollett's 1739 novel, and his companion caught up with the carrier wagon and for a shilling were taken to the next inn on their journey from Newcastle to London.
Only the better-off could afford to travel at more than a walking pace in eighteenth-century England — unless, that is, they had access to a riding horse.
True, the number of stage coaches increased significantly as the century progressed and became even more numerous and faster in the early years of the nineteenth century, but their number hardly kept pace with a rising population.
For the vast majority rapid travel was unavailable before the railway age.
Even money could not buy a quick passage through some of the conditions met with on the unimproved roads of the early eighteenth century.
Around 1720 Daniel Defoe witnessed a splendid triumph of determined old age over adversity near Lewes.
I saw an ancient lady, and a lady of very good quality, I assure you, drawn to church in her coach with six oxen; nor was it done in frolic or humour, but mere necessity, the way being so stiff and deep [with mud], that no horses could go in it.
The invention of the wheel may be one of the landmarks of the forward march of humankind, but there were still parts of eighteenth-century England where it was of scant practical value.
Passengers had perforce to ride, and goods were carried on the backs of packhorses or mules.
Trains of animals, each carrying 5 or 6  hundredweight, crossed the wilder stretches of the country or plodded along the narrow paved causeways that were to be found on both sides of the Pennines and as far south as Derbyshire.
Sheffield, for example, had a weekly link of this kind with London.
The expanding copper and tin mines of west Cornwall depended on mule trains until the second quarter of the nineteenth century.
An advertisement from 1813 reads: To be let by tender…all the copper ore raised from Crinnis Mine, near St Austell…
The number of mules necessary to carry the said ores is supposed to be from 25 to 30.
Until the 1790s the ore was carried in single sacks of 3 hundredweight, but so many carriers were injured in lifting these across the backs of the mules that the load was then divided between two sacks.
Except for the hilliest areas and the West Country more generally, pack animals had dwindled by 1800 with road improvements bringing even relatively remote places into the expanding network of timetabled stage-wagon services.
Roderick Random need not have elected to travel from Newcastle to London by road.
In fact he had been advised to take cheap and expeditious transit on one of the small four-crewed colliers that sailed from Tyne to Thames, which journey, depending on wind and tide, took less time.
But so far as the economy was concerned, lack of reach was a much bigger problem than lack of speed.
Only in the most favourable circumstances could towns away from the coast or navigable rivers grow to much of a size, a condition emphasised by Adam Smith.
by means of water carriage a more extensive market is opened to every sort of industry than what land carriage alone can afford it, so it is upon the sea coast and along the banks of navigable rivers that industry of every kind naturally begins to subdivide and improve itself.
A twenty-strong animal pack-train could carry only around 3 tons and even a wagon, hauled at walking pace by six or eight horses, was restricted to 3 tons up to 1765 and 6 thereafter.
Wagons could carry most things, but their slowness was hardly offset by cheapness.
The cost in horses and men was heavy, and the feeding of the former a significant outlay, especially when corn prices were high: "Robert Russell, proprietor of the daily fly wagons which set out  from London…to Falmouth, feels much pleasure in being able, owing to the blessings derived from the late harvest, to reduce the advances he lately made on carriage." 
Even a cursory glance at the operating economy of the early eighteenth century suggests that the supply and efficiency of transport services were the most widespread and basic limitations on its growth, for it is on that sector that both the supply of raw materials and the size of the market depend.
Professor Mathias has stressed that rising output and improving productivity will lower the average costs of a commodity"only if the goods can be cleared to a widening market…
Improvements in both water carriage and roads were an important pre-condition for the evolution of the home market in its manifold aspects."
Final commodity prices will fall to an even greater extent than the actual saving in carrying costs if improved transport also breaks down local monopolies.
Overseas markets too are affected, for only if they can reach ports at reasonable cost and efficiency can goods be readily exported.
Adam Smith's view of the great significance of transport developments in increasing the wealth of the nation has been much quoted.
Good roads, canals and navigable rivers, by diminishing the expense of carriage, put the remote parts of the country more nearly upon a level with those in the neighbourhood of the town.
They are upon that account the greatest of all improvements.
Writing this in 1776, he was pleased enough with what was happening; had he been able to look back from 1815 he would have seen his optimism largely vindicated.
In the judgement of two recent historians of British transport, the increased supply and quality of road and waterway transport over the eighteenth century are "perhaps the most important part of the build-up of the general facilities of the economy — what economists call its infrastructure — and are therefore to be regarded as a preparation for general economic advance" .
It is to the details of transport developments before 1815 that we must now turn.
ROADS
Defoe, who travelled more of the roads of the country than most of his contemporaries, was inclined to see himself in the foothills of a better transport age — the equal of the fabled Roman achievement.
The instrument of resurrection was to be the turnpike. this custom prevailing, 'tis more than probable, that our posterity may see the roads all over England restored in their time to such a perfection, that travelling and carriage of goods will be much more easy both to man and horse than ever it was since the Romans lost this island.
He wrote as someone perceiving a breakthrough.
turnpikes or toll-bars have been set up on the several great roads of England, beginning at London, and proceeding thro' almost all those dirty deep roads, in the midland counties especially; at which turnpikes all carriages, droves of cattle, and travellers on horseback are obliged to pay an easy toll…in no place is it thought a burthen…the benefit of a good road abundantly making amends.
The economic advantage gained would be significant.
as for trade, it will be encouraged by it every way; for carriage of all kind of heavy goods will be much easier, the waggoners will either perform in less time, or draw heavier loads, or the same load with fewer horses; the pack-horses will carry heavier burthens, or travel further in a day…all which will tend to lessen the rate of carriage, and so bring goods cheaper to market.
From the Middle Ages the responsibility for road repair had rested on the parish and the provision of statutory labour.
From the end of the seventeenth century, turnpike trusts set up under private acts of parliament began to appear.
After fifty years there were 143 of them, responsible for the upkeep of 3,400 miles of roadway from the tolls parliament allowed them to levy.
Individually the trusts were small, usually maintaining only about 20 miles of road, but as they were formed and linked, the basis for a coherent road network was being established.
During this first period (up to 1750) of relatively slow and uneven growth, trusts were set up at a rate of only eight a year and were concentrated largely around London, radiating especially to the north and west and into the Midlands.
Away from the capital, however, turnpikes had crossed the Pennines, and indeed linked in an almost continuous line along the Great North  Road to the border.
Their second phase from 1750 to 1772, when the annual rate of formation exceeded forty a year, was one of rapid spread over most parts of the country, at the end of which more than 500 trusts repaired more than 1,500 miles of the roads of England and Wales.
The success of turnpiked stretches had inspired extension and cross linking.
After 1772 the "turnpike mania" settled down in a long steady progress to an eventual 22,000-mile peak in 1836, accelerated only in the widespread speculative investment booms of the early 1790s, 1809–12 and the mid 1820s.
Averaging around thirty miles a trust in the mid eighteenth century, the turnpike trusts were an outstanding example of the major role played by the parliamentary enablement of local economic initiatives.
They were promoted by local landowners and farmers or industrial and commercial interests and even by the clergy, and their active promoters in groups of around a dozen ran their affairs at monthly meetings, employed the paid surveyors and labourers and contracted for repairs.
The few in existence up to 1706 had their administrative authority vested, as in the continuing case of the public parish roads, in the justices of the peace at quarter sessions, but from that date, beginning with acts relating to two stretches of the road to Holyhead, in Bedfordshire and in Worcestershire, independent trustees took over the administration of the tolls and the responsibility for road maintenance.
After 1720 the form had become so well established that new turnpikes were set up under the clauses of a general public act, rather than by individual private acts.
Their original term was to be twenty-one years, though extension was usual, and few restrictions were imposed on the trusts' powers of raising capital on the security of the tolls, on their use of it, or on the appointment of toll gatherers, nor on the freedom to contract out the tolls at auction.
There was opportunity for maladministration in terms of both efficiency and peculation.
Forty years after Defoe's enthusiastic welcome, another great traveller, Arthur Young, made some strident criticisms of several toll roads.
The "infernal road" joining Preston and Wigan, he knew not "in the whole of language, terms sufficiently expressive to describe" , as he negociated its four-foot-deep ruts.
The "execrable" turnpike from Altrincham was even worse.
His powers of description were yet again exceeded by that from Dunholm to Knutsbridge, but of all "the cursed roads that ever disgraced this kingdom" the nadir was the turnpike from Billericay to Tilbury.
It is for nearly 12 miles so narrow, that a mouse cannot pass by any carriage…
The ruts are of an incredible depth.
The trees everywhere over-grow the road, so that it is totally impervious to the sun, except at a few places.
And to add to all the infamous circumstances which concur to plague a traveller, I must not forget the eternally meeting with chalk-waggons; themselves frequently stuck fast, till a collection of them are in the same situation, and twenty or thirty horses may be tacked to each, to draw them out one by one.
He did travel some good roads.
The turnpike from Salisbury towards Romsey was the best and earned high praise for the trustees, whose management he judged responsible, for he had met with other roads whose materials were as fine but "never with any that were so firmly united, and kept so totally free from loose stones, ruts and water" .
It was broad enough for three carriages.
After this he ranked the great road north to Barnet, then that to Kent and those to Chelmsford and Uxbridge.
Turnpikes were not always better kept than parish roads.
A traveller in 1798 found the latter in Middlesex to be "hard and clean in every sort of weather; so much so, that gentlemen may ride along them, even directly after rain, and scarcely receive a splash" .
On the other hand, despite an annual county aggregate of £30,000 in tolls, the turnpikes were "generally very bad" .
Instead of scraping them, a heavy expenditure was incurred on pumps, carts and hired labour to keep down dust levels by watering: "the mud indeed is so very deep all the winter and so fluid after rain, as to render it unsafe to meet horses, owing to their feet throwing the mud not only over an horseman's clothes but also into his eyes" .
The "uncommon" road from Salisbury to Romsey had the advan-tage of running through flint-laden chalk.
It was on the heavy clays around London and in the Midlands that the most serious problems occurred as the burden of traffic increased.
The turnpike out  through Tyburn to Uxbridge bore more broad-wheeled wagons than any other, and in the winter of 1797–8 was reduced to a single six-foot-wide muddy track.
In such conditions, with clays deep and clinging enough to bog down a regiment of horses, the real issue was not one of scraping versus watering but of radical improvement in methods of building and repair.
The significance of the turnpike system was that, eventually, in the hands of concerned trustees, it could provide the financial means of employing the talents of a generation of road builders who pioneered techniques which remained the basis of road making into the twentieth century.
 "Blind Jack" Metcalfe (1717–1810) emphasised the importance of a firm foundation under a smooth convex surface, running off the water into side ditches below road level.
His road-contracting business employed up to 400 men.
John McAdam (1756–1836) concerned himself less with the bed of the road and more with drainage.
He stressed consistency and proper and regular supervision.
His basic method became a generic term in the English language, and his special contribution was to develop an economical way of bringing and keeping existing roads up to scratch.
Thomas Telford (1757–1834) was renowned as a bridge-builder, but he produced roads of great solidity through the intermeshing of small, angular stones.
Only the wealthier trusts could afford his standards, but if they did so they purchased a road good for more than a century.
In assessing the advantages of the turnpikes, a balance has to be struck between contrasting contemporary opinions, and account taken of real possibility and unlikely occurrence.
Arthur Young's noisy criticisms have been more noted than his frequent, but quieter, content.
The latter reaction was clearly predominant in the writings of the men who toured the country writing reports for the Board of Agriculture in the last decade of the eighteenth century.
Perhaps, as Dyos and Aldcroft have suggested, Englishmen's expectations were rising, for foreign vistors were usually impressed.
Adam Smith did not deny that there were bad examples within the "system of repairing the highroads by tolls" , but in 1776 thought this was because the system was not then of long standing.
Experience and the "wisdom of parliament" could be expected soon to prevent the appointment of those "mean and improper persons" who were too frequently appointed trustees and to develop a proper system of checking accounts and controlling toll levels.
While he did not  dispute that in many cases money had been levied that was twice what was necessary for satisfactory repair, and even then that the work carried out had been slovenly or even not done at all, the great laissez-faire economist had been convinced by the turnpikes that so far as public works "for facilitating commerce in general " were concerned, "the greater part may easily be so managed as to afford a particular revenue sufficient for defraying their own expense, without bringing any burden upon the general revenue of society" .
This was only fit and proper.
When high roads, bridges, canals etc, are in this manner made and supported by the commerce which is carried on by means of them, they can be made only where that commerce requires them, and consequently where it is proper to make them.
Their expense too, their grandeur and magnificence, must be suited to what that commerce can afford to pay.
They must be made consequently as it is proper to make them.
The historian with the gift of hindsight might wish to counter-assert the greater benefits brought by well-planned public infrastructural investment.
That was not an alternative in eighteenth-century England.
The contribution of the turnpikes must be measured not against the prescriptions of later ages but against the possibilities of their own.
Enabled by the willingness of parliament to facilitate local economic improvement, the turnpike trusts succeeded in injecting resources into the improvement of a road network which might otherwise have remained much worse.
The contribution of the turnpikes as a transport service
The turnpikes can be reasonably considered the leading edge of road improvement, although at no time did ordinary roads not outnumber them by five to one.
In assessing their contribution it should be borne in mind that many parish roads were improved while many turnpikes were neglected.
Above all the turnpike era saw a marked expansion in the volume, speed and reliability of wheeled traffic.
By 1800 wagon services were numerous enough in most parts of the country to be timetabled.
Long-distance wagons journeyed in stages.
Canvas covered and drawn by up to eight horses, most of them moved along at walking pace, but some lighter vans or "fly wagons" with more regular change of horses were faster.
Historians have tended to overlook the possibilities of more rapid  transit where the cargo concerned was profitable enough to merit it.
Even fresh sea fish, the most perishable of commodities, could be rushed to markets, although only the prime varieties, turbot and sole, justified the cost.
By the 1780s Bath and Bristol as well as London were the receivers, via Exeter, of the 500 vanloads a year which were sent from Brixham in Devon.
At times when the winds obliged, Torbay smacks sailed their catches to Portsmouth for a shorter van-haul to the capital.
Even more inventive was the route by which early-season mackerel reached London, for the price dropped rapidly once the shoals began their seasonal movement up the English Channel.
They were caught off Scilly by the Mounts Bay luggers, effective fish catchers but not rigged for speed.
Accordingly the fast-sailing Brixham smacks arrived to purchase the fish and race them to Portsmouth.
The journey of a normal wagon from London to Manchester took around four days carrying an astonishing range of commodities and the odd passenger.
The freight rate was around a shilling (5p) per ton-mile.
National carriers like Pickfords, with their own warehouses and regular clientele, soon emerged and contributed to an aggregate load which was prodigious, though unmeasurable.
By 1700 stage wagons were a common sight in southern England and were usual through the Midlands by 1750.
Leicester, for example, had weekly services to London, Leeds, and Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol and beyond by 1770.
Over the next twenty years its hosiery products and other goods were utilising around twenty wagon services to Bristol, Birmingham, Northampton, Stamford and Cambridge as well as more than 200 serving surrounding districts.
Even in the north the turnpike enabled the wheeled wagon to push the pack-train to the fringes.
Chester by 1780 had only one packhorse service, to North Wales, while it had wagon and coach services to a large number of English towns.
Towns all over the north of England and into Scotland were served by wagon from Newcastle, sometimes weekly or even two or three times a week.
Parliament regulated the weight wagons might carry, the width of their wheels and the number of horses.
The General Highway Act  of 1767, for example, restricted wagons with six-inch wheels to a six-horse team but allowed those with nine-inch wheels to add a further horse.
The act was a considerable relaxation of earlier limitations and indeed, the progressive relaxation over the period seems to be as much a testimony to the improved load-bearing of the roads as an accommodation of the expanding volume of goods traffic.
One estimate, derived from directory listings of carrier services to and from London, is that there was a ten-fold increase in their number between 1715 and 1840 and, given increases in capacity and speed, a thirty-four-fold increase in terms of ton-miles.
However, there is a great risk in counting from directories because a route might allow the listing of several destinations as though they were separate journeys, and the increase, although undoubtedly substantial, may have been much smaller than it appears.
Goods traffic is more fundamental to a developing economy than is that in passengers or mail, but these are also important.
The improvement in the speed and comfort of coach travel over the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries was very striking, although overshadowed by the even more dramatic later impact of the railways.
By 1705 London already had 180 departing coach services; by 1836 it was to have 342.
In the provinces, because the starting point was much lower, the rate of increase was even faster.
Early in the century the state of the roads meant that many coach services had to be suspended in winter, but by 1770 improved conditions allowed exact year-round timetabling of faster, safer journeys.
The journey from London to Bath took forty hours in 1720 but only half as long in 1770.
By 1815 it could be done in fifteen hours.
The equivalent figures for the trip to Manchester were eighty, forty-five and less than thirty hours.
The single daily coach from London to Birmingham in 1740 had become thirty by 1783.
Leicester in the 1760s had a daily crossing of coaches on runs from Manchester or Leeds to London; by 1815 more than thirty left the town each day for London and other major population centres in the Midlands and north.
By the time of Waterloo, for those few who could afford the coaches, passenger travel was perhaps four times as fast as it had been in 1750 between major centres and twice as fast elsewhere.
Inside fares by 1800 were from 4d to 6d (1.5p to 2.5p) a  mile.
Even those prepared to sacrifice comfort for hair-raising economy still had to find 2d or 3d (1p or 1.25p) a mile.
Persons to whom it is not convenient to pay a full price, instead of the inside, sit on the top of the coach, without any seats or even a rail.
By what means passengers thus fasten themselves securely on the roof of these vehicles, I know not; but you constantly see numbers seated there, apparently at their ease, and in perfect safety.
This traveller's account from 1783 considered that outside, "the company is generally low" , but with fares equal to a fortnight's wages for even a skilled craftsman, that must be considered a relative judgement on status.
The increased seating capacity which would be provided by even an extra fifty coaches leaving a town over ten to twenty years, at a time of rapid urban population increase, points to how tiny a fraction of the population ever travelled by stage coach.
Of wider significance was the effect on postal communication.
The system of posting-horses introduced by Ralph Allan in 1720 held on until his death in 1762, but by then passenger stage coaches were travelling faster on most major roads.
The mail coaches which were introduced in 1783 went at around 8 miles an hour, 2 miles faster than the riding horses.
Economic intelligence is a vital ingredient in a progressing economy and its rapid spread was aided not only by the post, but also by the increasing reach of the provincial press, with its purveying of market information and its advertising of investment opportunities.
Twenty-eight weekly newspapers based in English towns in 1758 seems a sparse enough provision, but their circulation could be extensive.
Pawson has shown that the Newcastle Journal in 1739 was distributed to agents as far south-west as Preston, south-east as Ripon, north as Eyemouth and west as Whitehaven.24 At the other end of the country, by the 1770s the Sherborne Mercury was read from Salisbury to Penzance.
my father was chiefly employed in what was called "riding Sherborne" .
There was at that time, scarcely a bookseller in Cornwall; and the only newspaper known among the common people, was the Sherborne Mercury…
The papers were not sent by post, but by private messengers, who were termed Sherborne men…
Between Plymouth and Penzance were two stages on the main road, each about forty miles…
My father's stage was from St Austell to Plymouth.
He  always set off on his journey early on Monday morning, and returned on Wednesday.
Such links were part of a transformation which Eric Pawson has summed up: "many townspeople who at the start of the century had never, or rarely, seen a wheeled vehicle, were setting their time pieces by the arrival of the daily coach at its end" .
SEA CARRIAGE
The growth in value and volume of overseas trade will be discussed in the next chapter, but it is appropriate to consider here the provision of shipping and of port facilities.
Increases in the volume of shipping are usually accommodated for some time by existing docks and harbours before the pressure on them leads to a heavy capital investment in fresh and usually lengthy building.
Improvements in the slower-growing economy before 1780 were not insignificant.
Harbour commissions, like so many other improving economic institutions of the time enabled by act of parliament, undertook a steady upgrading and extension.
The first purposely constructed wet-dock was completed at Rotherhithe in 1700 and was followed at Liverpool (1709) and Bristol (1717).
Improvements had already been made at Bridlington and Whitby, important as refuges as well as fishing stations, by the time the coal ports of Sunderland, Whitehaven and Maryport were improved.
On the south coast Newhaven and Littlehampton in the 1730s and Shoreham in the 1760s provided new harbours, while Ramsgate, designated as a port of refuge in 1749, consumed £600,000 between then and 1816, during which period almost 40,000 vessels took shelter there.
As Gordon Jackson has pointed out, it was only after the great growth period in foreign trade began from 1783 that the real improvement in receiving and handling facilities gave birth to the modern port.
Harbour improvements continued alongside the thriving coastal trade, but the biggest investment necessarily came in those few ports which dominated overseas trade.
Ships in this  sector were larger, needed deeper water and took longer to turn around.
Further, because raw material imports rose through the eighteenth century while those of manufactured goods fell, there was an even more marked increase in volume than in value.
With almost as much of an increase in the volume of exports and an even greater one in that of re-exports, ports engaged in foreign trade were, as a group, handling four times as much cargo in 1800 as they had been in 1700, and perhaps two and a half times as much as in 1750.
The impact fell heavily on a small number of ports.
Of seventy-four listed ports in 1772, 59 had less than 500 registered tons active in foreign trade, while the seven who exceeded 10,000 tons accounted for 81.7 per cent of the total.
Nor did this distribution change much as the level of trade accelerated.
In 1785 nine ports exceeded 10,000 tons and now accounted for 86.5 per cent.
Thus it was at London, Bristol, Liverpool, Hull and Glasgow in the last years of the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth century that a "lagged response" to the great increase in trade was concentrated.
The most fundamental need was to increase the area of water by the provision and enlargement of wet-docks and basins, the total acreage of which doubled over the last quarter of the eighteenth century as a prelude to a much greater expansion between 1800 and 1830.
There was no dramatic increase in the total volume of shipping using British ports over the first half of the eighteenth century, but there was a relative shift away from London to provincial ports.
Bristol, linked via the Severn valley to an exceptionally productive hinterland, was second in 1700, but with an inconvenient 7-mile approach up the Avon and with congestion making for a slow turnaround, limits to its expansion were already becoming visible.
Its problems began to be solved only with the digging of a new 2-mile course in 1802.
The rising northern port of Liverpool was much more dynamic.
Its commerce was increasing perhaps four times as fast as the rest of the country between 1716 and 1800.
A new tidal basin was opened in 1743, a second wet-dock (Salthouse) in 1753, and three more between 1771 and 1796.
The largest, the Prince's Dock, was begun in 1811 and on its completion in 1821 the total dock acreage had reached 37 (though this is put into perspective by a seven-fold increase over the next sixty years).
Liverpool was in  "everyway exceptional in the eighteenth century" , but Hull too was enlarging with 10 acres of wet-dock built in 1775–8.
As for London, a three-fold increase in tonnage cleared did not lead very quickly to a solution to the severe congestion of the Pool, on which was concentrated a cargo handling facility employing 120,000 men.
Things were made to stir in 1793 when the Committee of West Indies Merchants precipitated what has been described as the "first dock boom" by threatening a remove.
Eventual development was to follow the vision of William Vaughan which roamed beyond the Pool to embrace Wapping, the Isle of Dogs and Rotherhithe.
A parliamentary select committee managed to delay things somewhat, but the new era was inaugurated with the West India Dock Act of 1799.
That dock was completed in 1806, by which time so were the London Docks.
What permitted the concentration of foreign trade in a few ports was the complementing of overseas trade by coastal trade.
Bristol no more needed a direct link with Hamburg than Hull needed one with Ireland, while London could, as Jackson has put it, "perform for Britain the entrepot functions which Britain was later to perform for Europe" .
The large increase in coastal shipping after 1760 was built on a transport facility which had already proved itself over a long period among the most valuable of the country's natural assets.
Inevitably London, the greatest centre of mass and conspicuous consumption, dominated with its tremendous appetite.
Between 1670 and 1750 the capital's intake of seaborne coal from the north-east averaged an annual half a million tons.
Although the number of vessels engaged in the trade shrank somewhat, the sailing colliers which had been around 100 tons in the seventeenth century were averaging 312 by 1730.
After fuel came food and drink.
Corn imports were already exceeding 1.5 million quarters by 1700, while Faversham sent 353 ships in 1728 loaded with the hops and malting barley to be brewed with Newcastle coal.
Wines and spirits were usually received trans-shipped from Southampton or Bristol.
Outwards from London went colonial imports like tea and sugar, as well as an astonishing range of manufactured goods.
Without ever approaching that with the metropolis in magnitude, coastal trade between provincial ports probably increased at a faster rate.
The greatest traffic flow was along the east coast.
Just  over half of the 97,000 tons of English coastal shipping in 1709 belonged to the ports of Scarborough, Whitby, Newcastle, Yarmouth and King's Lynn — fishing, coal and corn.
The more hazardous nature of voyages along the west coast, especially from south to west, was a deterring factor.
Seventy per cent of coal shipped from Newcastle was London-bound, but half of the residue went to the two East Anglian ports of Yarmouth and King's Lynn, from which corn formed the return cargo.
Tonnage engaged in English and Welsh coastal shipping increased from 101,475 tons in 1760 to 160,931 tons in 1780, an increase of 58.6 per cent in just twenty years.
The continued domination of the east coast ports is shown in Table 7.1.
Of southern and western ports, Weymouth was ranked tenth in 1765 and ninth in 1770 but was not ranked in 1775; St Ives was eighth in 1765, fourth in 1770 and tenth in 1775; Gloucester was ninth in 1765.
Western ports did play a part in shipping corn to London, in some years at least, the capital's swallow reaching as far as Exeter and beyond to Cornwall.
Bristol, too, took in a whole  range of seaborne food supplies.
Some of the more interesting links along the west coast were those involving manufacturing inter-relationships.
An advertisement for a china-clay pit in 1817 stressed that it was only 3 miles from the purpose-built clay port of Charlestown.
Those 3 miles were the only ones the clay would have to travel by road on its journey via Liverpool and the Trent and Mersey canal to Wedgwood's canalside Etruria.
(The flints the potteries needed came from the south, along the east coast via Hull.)
Coal for the pumping engines on the Cornish mines came from Swansea, and the copper ore went back to be smelted in South Wales.
Such a convenient exchange of heavy cargoes was ideal for the coastal trade, but in general spare capacity on return sailings explains some very cheap transit costs.
From London to Newcastle the rate was only 3s (15p) a ton.
Among industries whose early growth depended upon the coastal trade were iron, tin, copper and lead processing, the leather trades, brick making and building, especially for timber and for specialist materials like Portland stone (via Weymouth).
Coal, however, between 1779 and 1784 absorbed around 40 per cent of total carrying capacity, the 1.5 million tons carried on coasting vessels in 1779 having trebled by 1814.
Grain continued to be next in importance and exhibited a very different pattern in linking very many small despatching ports to a handful of receiving ones like Liverpool, Bristol, Hull, Newcastle and, of course, London.
Livestock was also carried, but especially from Ireland, so that it could be considered a true food import rather than a coastal one.
Bulk cargoes were not the whole story.
Files from Warrington, for example, were sent to Glasgow for only a sixth of the cost by road.
Passengers were also carried, though only those who were not over-particular about their time of arrival.35 Greater regularity was, however, in sight by the last years of the century, with a glimpse into a future of more rapid transport.
In 1815 the inhabitants of the west Cornwall port of Hayle crowded to see the arrival there of a "vessel worked by steam" .
Constructed "on a large scale" , she was en route from her birthplace in Scotland to London, and had steamed the 120 miles from Milford Haven against a head wind at an incredible 10 knots.
Early experiments had begun in 1788, and by 1812 nine steamboats carried passengers on the Clyde, followed by links between London and Gravesend and between  Newcastle and Shields.
Only six years after Waterloo there were already 20,028 tons of steam shipping around the coasts.
NAVIGABLE RIVERS
The reach of the sea up estuaries and along the great rivers was much extended over the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
The Humber — into which flowed the Trent, Calder, Aire, Don and Yorkshire Ouse — the Severn, the Cambridgeshire Ouse and the Thames were all major highways for much of their lengths.
The Severn had the longest uninterrupted stretch, and its 20- to 80-ton open barges carried down coal from Shropshire and salt from Droitwich, as well as agricultural produce, and brought up iron from the Forest of Dean for the Midlands metal makers, and a whole range of goods and groceries from Bristol.
Oxford could be reached by boats of similar size, but further up the Thames cargoes were taken over by "lightening" boats.
Most river barges had sails but also relied on the muscle power of horses, or even of the "halers" , working gangs of men.
Acts to enable river navigations to be improved, necessary because the building of locks, new cuts or dredging often affected the interests of local landowners, farmers and especially millers, went back as far as the sixteenth century but were consolidated in a veritable spate of river improvement after the Restoration.
By 1721, with a noted concentration in 1719–21, acts had been secured for, among others, the Stour, Wye, Medway, Great Ouse, Colne, Tone, Aire and Calder, Trent, Bristol Avon, Dee, Derwent, Douglas, Idle, Kennet, Weaver, Mersey and Irwell.
By this time, according to Dyos and Aldcroft, most of the potential for river improvement had been exhausted and the time had come for the deliberate making of waterways, a step which, though it was a natural development from a learning process on the rivers, was yet one of great import.
CANALS
On a sound towpath a horse could pull up to 50 tons.
That is equal to the carrying capacity of as many as sixteen wagons up to 1741  when the statutory load restriction was 3 tons, and as eight wagons when the limit was increased to 6 tons in 1765.
On the basis of 2.5 cwt per animal, it would have needed 400 horses or mules.
Such ratios serve to show the very great importance an extension of the waterway network had for the movement of heavy and bulky materials.
By the time of the spread of the railways in the second quarter of the nineteenth century, the industrial map of Britain was in its main outlines already drawn — a sequence unique in the history of industrialisation and the clearest of testimonies to the role of canals.
The canal age effectively began in south-west Lancashire where it developed naturally from improvements to the river navigations serving Liverpool and Manchester.
The River Weaver had been improved in 1733, but the improvement of the Sankey Brook Navigation from the coalfield around St Helens in 1754–7 was especially significant in that it involved several new cuts.
The historic moment, however, came in 1761 with the Duke of Bridgewater's famous canal from his mines at Worsley to Manchester.
The "Canal Duke's" vision and determination and his employment of the self-taught engineering genius James Brindley combined to produce a true "deadwater" link over a completely new route.
Involving aqueducts and tunnels, it was a demonstration of engineering potential of transforming importance.
It pointed to a future in which the hitherto limiting relationship of water transport to the economy could be inverted: now waterways could be brought to favourable sites: "The controlled application of water to industrial and commercial purposes was indeed the basic and most potent technology in Britain's early economic advancement." 
The new canal was symbolic in a further sense: it was built to carry coal.
It was above all in the transport of this vital material that the canals came to play a crucial enabling role in the development of industrial Britain.
Before the Duke's canal was completed in 1765, coal had sold in Manchester at double its pit-head price; thereafter it was halved to threepence farthing a hundredweight.
Over the next generation the first phase of the opening up of inland industrial Britain proceeded.
Of fifty-two acts for inland waterway improvement passed by 1774, thirty-three were in the Midlands and north and a further five in the Scottish lowlands.
Most of the residue of fourteen for the rest of Britain were concerned with river improvement.
As Professor Duckham has pointed out, the  combined mileage was not great until after 1790 (up to then it was well under a thousand miles) but in terms of strategic linking they were already beginning to turn the "golden key…to unlock the riches of the inland coalfields" .
Great promotional activity until the financial slowdown of 1772 secured in an astonishingly short time a linking of the major English river systems: the Severn, Thames, Great Ouse, Trent, Humber and Mersey.
The links were often circuitous, narrow and made more difficult by differing levels.
It was, however, becoming possible to foresee local initiatives developing into a network which, although unlike the railways was never to become a truly national system of transport, would link the main industrial regions back to their sources of supply and, to a lesser extent, forward to their outlets.
If the inland waterways came even close to being a nation-serving system, this was more a matter of outcome rather than of preconception.
Canal building responded to regional economic needs, above all for the carriage of coal.
If eventually it became possible to access most of the major manufacturing and mining regions, that was a secondary, although welcome development, not a primary intent.
To offer a perhaps extreme example, the Gloucestershire clothiers who celebrated the completing in 1779–82 of the Stroudwater Canal had been trying since 1730 to intercept the coal supplies moving down the Severn from the pits of the Midlands.
Their venture had been from start to finish "planned by the woollen interests, financed from the profits of that trade and built predominantly for the needs of the woollen industry." 
It was a local canal planned by local men with local capital for local reasons.40 An extreme example perhaps because it was on the periphery of the network, but in general few canals were cut with other than local economic benefits in mind.
Accordingly, the full network took almost a century to emerge.
Mantoux's verdict —"in less than thirty years the whole face of England was furrowed with navigable waterways.
In this there was a concerted movement"— is misleading, and is in fact contradicted by the map (Figure 7.2).
Canals were not built in pursuit of a grand national design, although Brindley clearly saw the possibilities for expansion and a    number of key "trunk" canals had been cut.
Thus for much of the period after 1760, canals were important in some areas and over a small number of major routes.
National importance stemmed from the increasing contribution these areas were enabled to make to national output and from the growing share of the national population which they absorbed, not from the fulfilment of preconceived infrastructural provision.
As Dr Turnbull has pointed out, it is hardly meaningful to talk of a trans-regional network before 1810.42 Significantly it was Birmingham rather than London which was the hub.
Bringing food, fuel and raw materials canals allowed inland towns to burst through the bounds which transport limitations had previously set to their growth and specialisation.
The Birmingham Canal, authorised in 1768, in effect gave birth to a port.
The port, as it may be called, or double canal head in the town crowded with coal barges is a noble spectacle, with that prodigious animation which the immense trade of this place could alone give.
I looked around me with amazement at the change effected in twenty years; so great that this place may now probably be reckoned with justice, the first manufacturing town in the world.
Linking the Midlands manufacturers to London by canal undoubtedly assisted the sending of goods to the capital, but conversely the canals which linked them to other major ports sometimes removed their need to send as many goods through London.
A French visitor to Birmingham in 1790 observed: Until the middle of the century there was not one Birmingham trader who had direct relations with foreign countries: London merchants warehoused and exported Birmingham goods.
Now Russian or Spanish firms order…direct…
Since 1768 Birmingham has been sending without difficulty its production to the sea ports, owing to canal traffic.
The movement of finished goods to the sea ports and to London was important.
Some finished products benefited from canals.
Josiah Wedgwood was a major backer of projects forming links to Staffordshire, not only to cheapen the costs of his intake of clay and flints but also because steadier transit on canals reduced the breakage losses in carrying pottery.
But finished goods generally have a much higher value to weight ratio than do raw materials, and  accordingly it was on the transit costs of the latter that canals had their most marked effect.
Wedgwood would have been interested even without the special needs of his product.
The Grand Trunk Canal promoted by him and his merchant associate Thomas Bently was set afoot in 1766 after the Duke of Bridgewater had already moved the line of his Runcorn cut to meet up at its northern end and complete the joining of the Trent and Mersey.
His famous Etruria works were built on the canal and the carriage costs of coal and raw materials from Liverpool, including the vital china clay shipped to the Mersey port from Cornwall, fell to a rate of 13s 4d (67p) per ton compared with the old road carriage rate of £2 10s (£2.50).
As well as engineering this link, James Brindley also built the Staffordshire and Worcestershire (or Wolverhampton) Canal connecting at the other end with the Severn.
Other prominent industrialists were involved in canal promotion, though as a group they seem to have provided only a small part of the necessary finance.
The Darbys and Reynolds, ironmasters of Coalbrookdale, were active in getting the Shropshire Canal built (1788–92), and Richard Arkwright subscribed to the Cromford Canal (1789) which served his pioneering spinning mills in Nottinghamshire.
The industrial bias of canal building can be readily perceived by looking at Figure 7.3.
From the beginning down to the railway age, the concentration in the industrial Midlands, the north-west and the West Riding was emphatic.
In the north the greatest achievement was the crossing of the Pennines.
This process began in the 1770s when the Leeds and Liverpool Canal, eventually to be the most important link, commenced its 127-mile journey via Wigan and Burnley and on through Skipton to Shipley, linking there in 1774 to the Bradford Canal.
It then rested when finances ran out before resuming in 1790 and reaching its intended link with the Aire and Calder and Don navigations in 1816 and thence to the Humber estuary.
Less extended in its construction was the Rochdale Canal, completed between 1794 and 1804; it had needed only two short tunnels.
The Huddersfield Canal, planned in 1774, did not reach Ashton-under-Lyne for another thirty years, through a 5,456 yard tunnel and seventy-four locks, sixty-four of which were in flights.
Outside these regions, canals were fewer and cross linking much  less developed.
Some were not without importance.
The Thames and Severn, begun in 1783, was six years later passing thirty-ton barges into the Thames at Inglesham, but even so the river itself remained largely unimproved and in the 1790s manufactured goods from Birmingham for London were still being carried overland from the end of the Oxford Canal.
That problem was remedied in 1805 when the completion of the Grand Junction Canal, 93 miles long, even avoided use of the narrow and circuitous Oxford Canal and took an astonishing 131 miles off the journey.
It is noticeable that from this time wagon services between London and the Midlands did not expand as did those to other parts of the country.
The link from London across to the Severn estuary reached its best-known stage with the completion of the Kennet and Avon Canal between 1794 and 1810 — the only major canal across the south.
It paid well enough, especially the small link from the Somerset coalfield, but as Dyos and Aldcroft point out, at their busiest the inland waterways of southern England carried only 15 per cent of total traffic and never rewarded those who invested in them in the way those of the industrial Midlands and north did.
The great inland coal reserves of England awaited full exploit-ation, first as fuel and then as energy.
Tapping them was the achievement of the canals.
That this began to happen only after 1760 and to be anywhere near completion only after 1790 has perhaps rather less to do with the availability of investment funds, or the level of engineering knowledge, than with the overall pace of industrialisation, urbanisation and demographic increase.
Only coal could have fuelled the growth of towns and allowed them to concentrate labour to such a degree, and in addition the canals brought building materials and food supplies.
As such their contribution was crucial to the related locational changes in economic activity and in population which became so important from the third quarter of the eighteenth century.
It was claimed in 1803 that no less than 90 out of 165 canal acts obtained since 1758 had been concerned primarily with coal carriage, while a further 47 had been linked to iron or non-ferrous metal works or mines.
By 1815 the canals may have been carrying in excess of 10 million tons of coal, not only more cheaply — on average coal prices (and those of other bulky materials) fell by between 50 and 70 per cent in larger urban centres with the opening of a canal — but also over an extended reach.
Reading, by the early nineteenth  century, was receiving coal from the Midlands via the Oxford Canal and from the Forest of Dean via the Kennet and Avon, but the main beneficiaries were the inland coalfields themselves and the areas adjacent to them.
Canals may have performed a general price-lowering function in, to use Professor Mathias's phrase, "cracking open" local monopolies, but it should not be forgotten that they were in themselves mono-polies, even though canal companies hardly ever operated carrier services and confined themselves to earning from tolls.
The Duke of Bridgewater was exceptional in keeping to his promise of enabling coal to be brought cheaply to Manchester, and on his death in 1803, rates doubled.
The large dividends paid by the more successful companies incorporated a substantial element of monopoly profit.
Furthermore, costs in handling cargoes, the transfer complications brought about by different lock widths and the supplementary road haulage costs, however short the distances, mean that the simple ton-mile difference between quoted road and canal rates represents a gross rather than a net saving.
The latter was, however, sufficient to transform the economic potential of England's indust-rialising regions.
It was not for this reason alone, fundamental though it is, that Phyllis Deane has written of canals that they were "of the essence of the industrial revolution" .
Their role in capital formation will be discussed below, but their role in the advancement of practical civil engineering needs to be noted.
Pawson has pointed out that in building the canals, British engineers had for the first time "to grapple with large scale civil engineering problems" .
This was the main contribution of their construction phase, for they were not much involved, as the railways later were, with mechanical engineering, nor did their building consume large quantities of iron.
James Brindley, by common consent of contemporaries and historians, was a practical genius, but it seems he was unable to spell "navigation" .
Others, however, were better able to "school" a profession.
Thomas Telford was as great a canal builder as he was road maker, and in 1818 became the first president of the Institution of Civil Engineers.
William Jessop, John Rennie and Thomas Green all made contributions, while John Smeaton, better remembered as a builder of lighthouses, was almost certainly the leading civil engineer of the canal era.
The pioneering work of these men provided a bedrock of  knowledge and experience without which the later railway system could not have been constructed with such astonishing speed.
Of the men who actually dug the canals we know less.
But these "navigators" did, of course, bequeath their expertise to those who built the railways.
From the later period of canal cutting to the early one of railway building there was clearly a link in the inheriting of a core of toughened labourers and foremen who, even if posterity has chosen to present them as the antithesis of skilled, at very least knew what they were doing when it came to tunnels, cuts and embankments.
As an operating system the canals never became a large-scale employer like the railway companies, whose "servants" as well as engineers and trackmen on the "permanent way" included the new "uniformed working class" .
That is hardly surprising.
Canals did not create new towns; those built up by the railway companies, such as Swindon, Crewe or Eastleigh, being concerned with the building of locomotives and rolling stock, had no parallel.
Neither did the very many railwaymen who were concerned with passengers, nor, since the canal companies did not usually operate as carriers, did they employ anything like the same number of men in handling freight.
Indeed, a common complaint in their early days was that they caused unemployment.
One writer in 1766 even went so far as to propose that canals be required to end short of their planned destinations.
If a manufacturer can have a certain conveniency of sending his goods by water carriage within four miles of his own home, surely that is sufficient, and profit enough, considering that other people must thrive as well as himself; and a proportion of profit to each trade should be the biasing and leading policy of this nation.
In this way, he reasoned, the ruin of the numbers supported by horse carriage would be avoided.
It is usually argued that fixed capital increasing projects, even if they cause local and short-term unemployment, actually increase total employment through permitting significant increases in output.
It is a smug axiom whose general applicability is doubtful, but, it is almost certainly true in the case of the canals.
The expanding volume of traffic not only brought into being the colourful and idiosyncratic travelling labour force of the canal boatmen but also  increased the need for short-haul overland carriage, more expensive in cost per mile than long-haul and needing just as much muscle in loading and unloading.
Indirectly the permitted industrial expansion must have created extra employment; this effect on the inland coalfields alone was, though impossible to compute, very considerable.
After all, among the activities that most benefited from the canals were many in which labour-displacing technologies had hardly developed.
This was true of coal mining, of hardware manufacture and of pottery in all of which increased output still depended on increasing the labour force.
TRANSPORT AND INVESTMENT
After 1760, with the acceleration in turnpike trust formation and the advent of the canal age, investment in transport came to account for a substantial fraction of total capital investment in Britain.
From then until 1820 it represented above a fifth of gross domestic capital formation (GDCF).
Although with the building of the railways its share reached a third (35 per cent in 1841–60), the 1760–1820 contribution was equal to that in manufacturing and trade in 1761–90, and not so far behind it, or agriculture, in 1791–1820.
In terms of annual capital spending on transport, there was a surge in the late eighteenth century.
Investment in canals and inland waterways peaked at around £1 million per annum in the  canal mania of the 1790s, while outlay on the steady expansion and improvement of turnpiked roads averaged half a million pounds between 1760 and 1810 and thereafter doubled to £1 million.
By 1820 investment in shipping, docks and harbours was also around the million mark, and there were similar trends in bridge building.
To these must be added the continuing high level of expenditure on parish roads, while the construction of new roads during enclosures must be acknowledged even though it cannot be calculated.
Total expenditure on transport services around 1750 probably exceeded £1.25 million a year; by 1800 it was probably over £3 million, and by 1815 may have been approaching £5 million.
The one-fifth of GDCF provided by investment in transport almost certainly understates its importance.
Transport is usually considered as the key component of the provision of social overhead capital.
That is, it is infrastructural and confers a public benefit, from which enterprises in general will gain.
Accordingly investment in this sector probably led more than it followed investment in agriculture or manufacturing.
The initial capital for canals and turnpikes came from local sources.
While it is true that without the transport sector's contribution, the overall rate of investment in the economy would not have exceeded 10 per cent of national income by 1815, concentration on such macro-economic data tends to obscure the fact that the financing of improvements in transport was above all an example of regional capital formation.
virtually all the early canals and probably a majority of the later ones, were overwhelmingly local in both promotion and finance…
Promotion committees were normally closely integrated groups of local interests and worthies, who sought stable financial commitment from men of known substance and probity.
Even in the case of ventures of the scale and celebration of the Trent and Mersey, Oxford and Leeds and Liverpool canals, most of the initial investment flowed from the territories they traversed.
From the scholarship of J.R.
Ward, 55 a great deal has been learned of the structure of this regional capital employment.
Table 7.3 is based on his analysis of 29 per cent(£5 million out of £17 million) of the traceable capital supplied between 1755 and 1815.
The predominance of the first group in the first phase of the canal era is explained largely by one individual — the Duke of Bridgewater — although Buckingham, Grafton, Clarendon, Exeter and Spencer were also noticeable among his peers.
The "Canal Duke" also illustrates another important point: it was as coal owner, not as agricultural landlord that he committed himself.
Although the gentry did invest in canals through rural hinterlands in the later phase, it is evident that agricultural savings were not noticeably tapped.
Despite the interest of some well-known industrialists, manufacturers as a group seem to have contributed only in proportion to their weight in the population.
In contrast to the merchants and traders, they had an increasing need to concentrate on investment in fixed capital in their own enterprises, and indeed, with canal carriage reducing raw material costs and quite possibly releasing capital tied up in inventories, on their ability to increase their stock of fixed capital.
If we assume that some investors within each group were "not interested" in an activity made more profitable by the construction of a canal but only in dividends or, after 1790, in speculative profit, and that this was almost wholly true of women investors, substantially so of the clergy and of the majority of those from the professions, then it is clear that overall at least a quarter of investment in canals was drawn from a net cast unprecedentedly widely.
Opportunities  to invest in other sectors were not equally available to all those ranks in society able to save.
Without prior purchase there was little opportunity to invest in land, except for those "professionals" tapping its rising value indirectly through offering mortgages.
Very few manufacturing enterprises reached beyond family resources, ploughed-back profits or local banking sources.
Government stock was safe, but for much of the period offered poor return and no speculative incentive.
Many urban tradesmen, especially those connected with the building industry, seem to have invested in a small way in housing for rent, but there can be little doubt that the special facilities in raising capital conferred by acts of parliament on turnpike trusts and canal companies enabled them to become the recipients of a flow of capital from sources which would not otherwise have been drawn so directly towards economic improvements.
Such investors tended to come in when stocks were exchanged rather than present themselves at the moment of initiation.
The Duke of Bridgewater's "small waterway empire" on the borders of Lancashire and Cheshire was exceptional.
Most ventures were undertaken by a joint-stock company authorised by act of parliament to raise a capital sum from a share issue and supplementary capital by borrowing.
With the Bubble Act still in force, such a form of enterprise was permitted only through specific parliamentary enablement.
Accordingly, canals offered the only widespread opportunity of investing in £100 ordinary shares.
As Pawson has suggested, it was they, before the railways, who "introduced the better-off to the marketable share, and the chance to invest savings and earn dividends" .
This is an aspect of canal finance for recognition rather than exaggeration, for at no time did total investment in waterways approach the sum in the "funds" .
While a canal was being built, ownership tended to remain with "interested" locals, and indeed, with operating profits as yet ungenerated, recourse was frequently had to local banks for short-term working capital — the Kennet and Avon had an overdraft of £60,000 in 1815.
Once built, share dealings increased the diffusion of ownership, both socially and geographically.
Most of the original £300,000 for the Leeds and Liverpool Canal in 1777 had been raised in the two counties, but by 1800 37 per cent was held in London and the Midlands.
The Truro banker William Praed invested £19,400 in the Grand Junction, and even if it was on behalf of clients, it still represented the mobilisation of savings from a county 300 miles from the canal.
These tendencies became especially marked in the canal mania of the 1790s when, according to an enthusiast in 1796, "perseverance having vanquished prejudice, the fire of speculation was lighted and canals became the subjects of general conversation" .
Fifty-one canal acts were secured between 1791 and 1796, peaking in 1793–4.
Their initial capitalisation totalled £7.5 million.
As with most booms, this one was based on proven results and justifiable prospects.
The Birmingham Canal paid a dividend of 23 per cent in 1789 and in 1792 a single £140 share was sold for £1,250; another for £130 in the Staffordshire and Worcestershire fetched £1,100.
Grand Trunk shares traded at around three times their nominal value.
Such returns were enticing, but exceptional.
However, on the whole most of those who invested in canals in the industrial Midlands and north did well enough.
The average dividend of eighty canals in 1825 was 5.75 per cent, but the top ten were averaging 28 per cent .
The thirty-seven canal companies who in 1825 were barely meeting their expenses were situated mostly in the south, in which region most of the unwise ventures of the boom period were concentrated.
The enthusiasm for canal stock in the 1790s may have been the greater because the yield on Consols had not been very gratifying between 1784 and 1792.
But suggestions, notably that by T.S.
Ashton, that trends in canal investment generally followed changes in the interest rate have not found favour with more recent historians.
Before the war of 1793 the long-term interest rate reached neither heights sufficient to deter nor depths sufficient to arouse.
In any event, most of the holders of government stocks lived in the Home Counties, removed from the centres of canal enthusiasm.
Dr Ward suggests instead that canal construction was more generally related to the level of economic activity, slackening with the economy for example from the mid 1770s to 1782.
This is to be expected given that most of the initial investors were actively involved in the regional economy and anticipated wider gains.
So also with turnpike trust formation.
While it was marked in years when interest rates were low, there is, as Dr Albert has indicated, no evident correlation with the main turning points.
Interest rates had already been low for twenty years when the turnpike mania began in 1750 and remained low after it ended in 1772.
They must be accorded a permissive rather than a causal role.
In  the early 1790s, however, like canals, the trusts did feature in a general investment boom, as they did again in 1809–12.
Turnpike trusts were formed to keep up and improve the "King's Highway" .
It seemed more suitable to employ the legal form of the trust than to set up private joint-stock companies to "own" the roads.
They could not issue shares but were enabled by act of parliament to borrow against future tolls.
Since repair rather than fresh building was their prime rationale, they did not need to raise an initial capital comparable to that needed for constructing a canal — estimated by the Duke of Bridgewater to be £10,000 guineas a mile.
What the trust offered was the opportunity to invest in interest-bearing mortgages.
Up to 1750 the most significant group of investors was made up from gentlemen, landowners, yeomen and tenant farmers.
After that time there was increasing participation from merchants, manufacturers, artisans, shopkeepers and also from widows, spinsters and clergymen, whose concern was limited to a return averaging around 5 per cent by 1800.
The bulk of capital continued, however, to be supplied by the landed interest whose resources and local initiatives did most to provide the improved road network.
Those who lent to the turnpike trusts were even more localised than those who bought canal stock.
In the case of trusts based on prosperous urban centres, there was a considerable increase in the participation of smaller savers.
Dr Buchanan has shown this to have been the case with the Bath Turnpike Trust where it had become crucial by the end of the eighteenth century when the share of the landed interest had dropped below 10 per cent.
Seventy per cent of the £12,000 capital raised in the 1750s was sold in the secondary market within twelve years, while the placing of advertisements is significantly indicative of a developing movement towards soliciting funds from unknown clients.
Investment in coastal shipping yet again reveals how local the process of capital formation in transport was.
There is little detailed information for the eighteenth century, but the geographical pattern of investment was probably even more circumscribed than that revealed by an analysis for 1825 of 315 ships.
These aggregated 31,782 tons, 42 per cent of which was owned within the port of registration and a further 48 per cent within a 20-mile radius of it.
In terms of occupations, at least three-quarters of the tonnage was owned by merchants, mariners or persons connected in other ways with shipping.
CONCLUSION
What stands out about the development of transport in England between 1700 and 1815 is the creation from privately supplied capital of a system which, though not preconceived, was to prove sufficiently complementary in its supply and its operation to accommodate a modernising economy with a growing range of activities.
It was a "social provision" in the most obvious sense that many more gained from it than ever directly drew dividends.
It was because the economy was as yet exhibiting a modest rate of overall growth (by modern standards) that investment could be undertaken on a private and regional basis with the state's role confined to that of legal enablement.
As two econometric historians have succinctly expressed it: "Those who were the beneficiaries of the uncaptured social gains were the residents of the geographical area served by a particular canal…and the same groups constituted the main recipients of private returns." 
Although, as we have seen, shareholding tended to become somewhat more diffused over time, it remains very largely the case that those who promoted and initially financed canal companies and turnpike trusts, were those who expected to benefit from them.
Accordingly, perception of a gap between social and private returns was not a major handicap to investment.
The limited, but in permissive terms essential, role of government in the supply of what later ages were to know as "social overhead capital" must be seen in the context of the close identification the political nation made of the public interest with that of property owners.
Dr Albert has described turnpike trusts as "an administrative innovation brought into being by a small section of the community in what it saw as it own best interests" .
Created by those with social, political and economic power, they redefined a previous property relationship.
Just as enclosures divided the countryside  with hedges, so toll gates divided its roads and a communal institution was replaced by a cash-based one.
It is not very surprising that turnpike proposals were opposed not only by some who saw a threat to their local economic interest but also by others, like the coal miners from Kingswood near Bristol, who destroyed toll gates in 1749 which they saw as infringing their right of free movement.
Overwhelmingly, improvements in roads and waterways happened in response to existing economic pressures and prospects.
That is to say that they were demand led, except perhaps in their respective "manias" when a number must be viewed as having been undertaken ahead of a demand.
Of course, once a new or improved transport link was in operation, fresh entrepreneurial opportunities might be spotted, but for the most part promoters anticipated specific rather than general gains.
A canal, as the Duke of Bridgewater explained, had "to have coals at the heels of it" .
This large degree of regional economic responsiveness served the developing economy well, in that the outcome was a provision whose components were complementary.
Before the railway no single transport innovation offered instant betterment in terms of speed, regularity, reach and all-weather, all-round capacity.
Canals, for example, were not generally superior to roads.
They were better in moving bulky and heavy materials from concentrated locations and their direct water linkages with major ports facilitated the export of manufactures.
But so far as the growing and diversifying domestic market for manufactured goods was concerned, improved road transport was far more important a means of distribution, for here speed and reliability were often sought above cheapness.
Canals were appreciably slower and the advantage of improved roads actually increased in this respect.
True, barges and wagons alike were drawn by horses, but the latter did not have to negociate flights of locks (the Rochdale Canal had ninety-two locks in only 33 miles), and until the advent of "fly boats" at the very end of the canal era there was no night working, with the canals open only from sunrise to sunset.
In contrast, night work was becoming common on the roads after 1780, and by 1800 scheduled wagon services often departed at dusk.
Seasonal conditions which inhibited or prevented travel on the roads have been made much of by historians, but the mushrooming growth in scheduled services after 1760 is testimony to a substantial improvement in this respect.
On the other hand, as Dr Freeman has pointed out, the shortfall of canals in this respect is often overlooked.
Winter freezing closed the Trent and Mersey Canal for five weeks in 1814–15, and Freeman has calculated that on the canals of the Lancashire  plain there must have been twenty-day stoppages in thirty of the winters between 1771 and 1831 and thirty-day stoppages in ten of those.
Perhaps as important was time lost through "short-water working" in dry spells.
Eighteenth-century data are scarce, but the problem is indicated by the fact that the Huddersfield Canal lost thirty-nine days in 1818.
Speed and reliability were important to dealers in manufactured goods who wanted to catch rising markets abreast with or ahead of their competitors.
Freeman has given the example of a West Riding firm which despatched its woollen goods entirely by road, and it was the customers who paid carriage.
By the last years of the eighteenth century the stage coaches were conveying a growing traffic in samples.
Contemporary "conservatives" could feel unease as they glimpsed a "social revolution" of which the turnpikes were harbingers.
A pamphleteer in 1762 foresaw that more frequent trips to London would put increasing numbers of country gentlemen "in the mode" .
They would "get fine clothes, go to plays and treats, and by these means get such a habit of idleness and love of pleasure, that they are uneasy ever after" .
John Byng in 1781 saw the revolution as reaching rather further down the social scale: "I wish with all my heart that half the turnpike roads of the kingdom were plough'd up, which have imported London manners, and depopulated the country — I meet milkmaids on every road, with the dress and looks of Strand misses…" 
We have already noted how improved roads permitted the spread of the newspaper.
If there was a "consumer revolution" in eighteenth-century England, it must have owed a very great deal to an improvement in road transport which, according to one writer, allowed "our very carriages to travel with almost winged expedition" .
There was never a more astonishing Revolution accomplished in the internal system of any country than there has been within the compass of a few years in that of England…
Journeys of Business are performed with more than double expedition…
Everything wears the face of despatch; every article of our produce becomes more valuable; and the hinge upon which all these movements turn is the reformation which has been made in our public roads.
When Henry Homer wrote this in 1767 the canal age was in its infancy, but he predicted that not only by the turnpikes but with the aid of "an even more valuable project of increasing inland navigation, a facility of communication is soon likely to be established from every part of the Island to the sea and from the several places on it to each other" .
Of all the economic "advances" retrospectively labelled by historians, those in the transport sector were the most evident to contemporaries.
Markets
DOMESTIC MARKETS
The Malthusian debate is concerned with the way in which, through the centuries, economic growth has first induced and then restrained population growth.
Great significance has been attached to the "break with the past" at the end of the eighteenth century, when critical economic changes for the first time allowed sustained population growth.
However, there is another important perspective from which population growth can be seen as a precondition in some circumstances for economic growth and, possibly, economic transformation.
Population growth not only increases the supply of labour; in favourable conditions it increases the demand for both food and manufactured goods.
An "optimum" rate of population growth could be considered one which while it increases the labour supply, is not so fast as to outgrow the supportive powers of the economy and prevent income per head from rising.
It has often been asserted that England was favoured in just such a way on the eve of her industrial revolution.
Other historians, inclined to supply-side explanations, have been sceptical about the role of expanding demand.
Supply, they insist, with all the force of their born-again classicism, creates demand.
 "The demand for things in general," according to Professor McCloskey, "is income itself which is determined by the resources and technology supplied to the nation." 
There is indeed a degree of circularity about simple models which explain industrialisation primarily in terms of a mass-production response to an expansion of the home market induced by population growth in favourable circumstances.
In the belief that what matters is the interaction of supply and demand, I will examine the range of market-based explanations which have been proffered by historians, while seeking to avoid an assertive list on either the demand or the supply side.
The general proposition that an increase in demand was central to the industrial revolution was given its best-known exposition fifty years ago by Elizabeth Gilboy.
She sought to redress both the neglect by historians of "changes in the nature of demand" and their concentration on labour as a factor of production rather than as constituting "the major portion of the consuming public" .
Obviously the factory system with its complicated industrial mechanism cannot function profitably without a large and growing demand ready and willing to absorb its products as fast as they are produced.
If we resist the temptation to place the factory system too far back into the eighteenth century and consider the factory mode alongside other prior and parallel methods of manufacturing, it seems hard to deny that there was something of a supply-side response to an increase in demand.
Several historians have employed variants of market expansion to explain the primacy of British industrialisation.
Most notably, a "consumer revolution" had taken a place alongside those other economic "revolutions" which dominate the textbooks.
Of course, there is no simple maxim of "rising population equals rising demand" .
At other times in other places demographic increase has led to falling living standards, even to the extent of pushing large numbers of the population to the margin of subsistence.
Professor Perkin has stressed how favourable Britain's situation was.
Industrialism requires a very delicate adjustment of demographic growth: not too fast; because that will lower wages and thus both consumer demand and the incentive to labour saving investment; not too slow, for that will raise wages so high as to entrench on profits and the capacity for investment.
In the last quarter of the eighteenth century British population hit the critical rate of growth squarely in the middle, slow enough to maintain, or even slightly improve real wages and yet to encourage labour saving innovation, fast enough to keep down labour costs and yet to expand aggregate demand for food and mass consumer goods.
Perkin's placing of the critical moment in the last quarter of the eighteenth century does not mean that a new demand for manufactured  goods suddenly made an impact on the British economy around the time of the American Revolution.
Increasing resort to factory production is a late step in matching output to a rising market.
Dating a "consumer revolution" suggests a beginning at least a generation earlier.
Indeed, Dr Thirsk has suggested that even before the end of the seventeenth century new consumer goods were absorbing an increasing share of the nation's economic resources.
Population growth accelerated only after 1750.
Historians have to explain how it was that slower increase up to then permitted an expansion of the home market which the later faster rate of population increase did not reverse.
Perhaps we could start by banishing that anachronism with which otherwise good arguments have been blemished, and not refer to mass consumption of manufactured goods before the twentieth century.
What took place was a widening and deepening of consumption so that goods previously confined to the wealthier classes came to be purchased next by the middle-income ranks and then, to some degree, by the lower.
Goods once considered luxuries became "decencies" : essential demarcations between a tolerable standard of living and deprivation.
Hence, if there was a "consumer revolution" it was a matter of stages, with different roles played by different social groups at different times.
For example, the first rise in expectations of the lower orders would be for more and better food before manufactured goods.
This in turn could have brought higher incomes for farmers, and, since they constituted a significant section of the consuming population, a consequent increase in their demand for manufactured goods.
Yet in the first half of the eighteenth century population growth was too slow to have had this effect.
Why, then, might the demand for manufactured goods have nevertheless increased?
In fact, by a process almost of inversion.
Professor John in a seminal article stressed the great importance of the coincidence of a modest rate of population growth, putting no general pressure on a food supply expanded by a generation of agricultural improvement, with the bounty of a long period of good harvests.
Output of cereals in fact exceeded home demand.
This configuration was, John argued, propitious for the overall growth of the economy.
Foodstuffs fell in price, especially in the southern wheat-consuming counties.
On average prices were around 25 per cent lower between 1720 and 1780 than they had been between 1660 and 1680.
This shifted the terms of trade between the manufacturing and  agricultural sectors in favour of the former.
Large sectors of the population were left with an increased disposable income after paying for their food.
The effect was most noticeable on middle-income groups.
Because the extra spending had been released by falling food prices, manufacturing employers did not lose their relative advantage by having to pay higher money wages.
Consequently, social groups down as far as the craftsmen and artisans developed "an appetite for mass-consumption" which survived the impact of faster population growth in the second half of the century.
Since John wrote, Wrigley and Schofield's calculation of the consumption—production ratio has pointed to this period before the industrial revolution as having been "very fortunate" in that the age structure meant a smaller dependency burden of non-working children than was to become the case in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
They share John's view that slow population growth from the mid seventeenth to the mid eighteenth century sustained high per capita incomes among the labouring population and thus boosted the output of commodities other than necessities.
This earlier eighteenth-century boost to manufacturing was crucial for the future development of a range of important industries.
While some of the gains to the economy were eroded after 1750 with the return of population pressure once again testing the ability of the economy to provide essentials, critically there was no overwhelming erosion of the living standards of the general population.
Such stagnation as there was in income per capita was offset by the increase in numbers.
The paradox of this maintained demand, despite the return of higher food prices and periodic scarcities, needs explanation.
Grain prices between 1750 and 1800 not only were higher on average than those of the preceding fifty years but conceal years like 1766, 1773, 1795–6 and 1800–1 in which harvest failures brought widespread hunger and food rioting.
A Malthusian crisis threatened late eighteenth-century England.
At times it came very near but, narrowly and not without some years of great misery for most of the labouring population, it was averted.
In the outcome there was no long-term crisis of subsistence, but living standards in many parts of the country did fall.
Yet there was no check to the expansion of the market.
For some, entering the market as consumers had more to do with necessity than with a  growth in personal income.
For several reasons more people had come to depend on the cash purchase of goods.
Self-sufficiency, payment in kind and living-in service were all shrinking.
As Dr Berg has put it: "Certainly the home market grew in the eighteenth century, but its expansion was based on changing social relations and not on a national trend of rising living standards." 
Thus the forces operating to maintain and even continue expanding the home market were multi-directional, in that market dependency can increase irrespective of income levels.
Professor Hoskins perceived the compulsion under which labourers might enter the world of the money wage and the cash purchase when he assessed the impact of "agricultural improvement" on the village of Wigston in Leicestershire.
No longer could the peasant derive the necessaries of life from the materials, the soil, and the resources of his own strong arms.
The self-supporting peasant was transformed into a spender of money, for all the things he needed were now in the shops.
Money which in the sixteenth century had played merely a marginal, though a necessary part, now became the one thing necessary for the maintenance of life…
His Elizabethan master had needed money intermittently, but he needs it nearly every day, certainly every week of the year.
In his survey of the condition of the labouring poor in 1797, Eden contrasted the persistent degree of self-sufficiency in the north with an almost total market dependence on the part of southern labourers.
He considered the advantage to lie with the former.
Bought clothing in the south had none of the hard-wearing qualities of northern home-spun.
Southern bread, bought because of the scarcity of fuel, was more expensive and less wholesome than home-baked, while ready-brewed beer was poor stuff indeed.9 In short, Eden did not consider market dependence to indicate prosperity; rather it was an impoverishing imperative.
If even farm labourers in the south and Midlands were beginning to be market consumers as a consequence of becoming a waged proletariat, the tendency was even more marked among other sections of the working population whose numbers were growing more quickly, the urban population and those who manufactured in the countryside.
The market dependence of the latter group is attested by their proclivity for food rioting, as is that of miners, while urban expansion obviously increased the role and reach of the market.
That growing sectors of the labouring population were pushed into the market falls short of telling the whole story of its expansion.
Much is explained by the growth of purchasing power and consuming propensities among the middle ranks of society.
It is not wise to write, as some have done, of an expanding middle-class market for an ever-widening range of manufactured goods, for "middle-class" is a nineteenth-century usage and too restrictive for the eighteenth century.
In eighteenth-century England there was, in comparison with other countries, a large section of the population which could be described as neither rich nor poor, ranging from the prosperous shopkeeper or yeoman farmer to the skilled artisan in full employment.
The growth in the number of those with a margin to spend after subsistence enables concepts like "rising expectations" or even "social emulation" to be applied quite widely to eighteenth-century English society.
A demand thus based could further expand both from the increasing prosperity of the middle-income groups and from their increasing numbers, absolutely and proportionately, in the population.
Both were happening and enough English people came to live in sufficient comfort to maintain the demand for manufactured goods through the eighteenth century, even though food prices rose steeply and in sharp contrast to the deep and widespread poverty of much of the labouring population.
But what was the bottom income line above which recipients can be presumed to have enjoyed at least the modicum of comfort above subsistence and simple "decency" ?
Professor Eversley has stressed that it need not be drawn very high and points to the importance of groups at the margin, who used soap to wash with and wore some cotton instead of home-spun linen: "what seems neces-sary for growth is that the very exceptional expenditures should become a little less so" .
In fact, that expenditure on what Nassau Senior termed "decencies" — between necessaries and luxuries — should increase.
On the basis of Gregory King's survey, Eversley suggests that growth and the changing structure of the economy drew around 3 million of the population above the line over the eigh-teenth century.
Their incomes aggregated into the £30,000,000 that Arthur Young considered to be the value of the home market for manufacturing and mining in 1800.
That the expansion of exports falls well short of absorbing the growth in manufacturing output suggests that something of this kind must have happened, as does  the fact that the nature of the new products does not allow for explanation in terms of extra spending on luxuries by high-income earners.
The expansion of middle-income purchasing power owes a great deal to England's unique rate of urban growth.
Towns emphasise the switch to money incomes and, as Adam Smith well knew, in general to higher money incomes.
They also provide the context for the emergence and multiplication of the better-paid and more specialised trades.
Even towns which were associated with particular manufactures did not have more than half of their occupied populations employed in them.
Using data from directories, Dr Corfield has shown how urban growth "spawned an immense range of specialist jobs" .
From her sample she recorded 1,964 separate job descriptions in the 1770s and 1780s, yet lists from the late seventeenth century designate only a few hundred.
She considers this multiplication to have been especially marked in the later eighteenth century.
Many of these "specialists" were engaged in merchanting and warehousing an astonishing range of commodities from oil stoves through Newcastle glass ware and Wedgwood china to wines and ostrich feathers.
Many others made up the array of artisan manufacturers, either as independent masters or, increasingly, as waged journeymen.
Still others were engaged in the supply of basics like food, housing and clothing, or in carrying.
They interacted in ever more complex and expanding networks of economic activity and not the least input into the broadening of consumer demand came from those who were themselves employed in meeting it.
In part, the producers of manufactured goods and the providers of urban services were the market.
Those who worked in rural manufacturing, retained only a marginal self-supporting ability and entered the market for most of their needs.
Their purchasing power as households was usually greater than that of families in agriculture.
More specifically, several branches of rural life experienced, at different times, "golden ages" when consumption of non-essentials became conspicuous.
The framework knitters enjoyed such a time between 1755 and 1785, continuing to some extent to 1804, and William Radcliffe described such an age for cotton hand-loom weavers from 1788 to 1803.
When machine-made yarn brought a great demand for their labour, the weavers entered a "higher state of wealth, peace and godliness" .
Their dwellings and small gardens were clean and neat, their families well clothed.
Each man had a watch, while the women's dresses became "fancy" rather than "homely" .
Homes were well furnished with clocks, Staffordshire tea services, silver-plated sugar tongs and a range of utensils and ornaments to display.
Country weavers and knitters were to become better remembered for the long sad days of their early nineteenth-century decline, but they had happier days when they consumed the products made by their fellow artisans in Burslem, Sheffield and Birmingham.
London artisans, too, had their good times.
In his famous survey of 1849 Henry Mayhew found that the memory of the sawyers reached back through better days up to 1826 before the saw mills proliferated, to the even more lucrative times of their fathers, when sawyers could earn £1 a day.
Much of the "extravagant" expenditure of the lower orders so bemoaned by contemporaries went on imported "groceries" — tea, sugar and tobacco — but consuming these also involved consuming the products of growing home manufactures.
Josiah Wedgwood built his fortune on tea as surely as did investors in the East India Company.
Many of Birmingham's population of artisans were occupied in producing trays and caddies, as well as snuff boxes for Virginia tobacco.
From Black Country kettles to Sheffield plate, the consumption of imports led directly to new opportunities for home manufacturers.
Imported raw cotton was the basis for the emergence of the most dynamic of the "new" manufactures, but as late as 1776 Adam Smith omitted cotton goods from his argument for a sustained expansion and downward spread of consumption of non-essentials over the "course of the present century" , and still found examples enough for his purpose.
The great improvements in the coarser manufactures of both linen and woollen cloth furnish the labourers with cheaper and better clothing; and those in the manufacture of the coarse metals, with cheaper and better instruments of trade, as well as with many agreeable and convenient pieces of household furniture.
Supply creating its own demand?
Perhaps so, but the great economist also saw it as confirming evidence of improving real wages.
The common complaint that luxury extends itself even to the lowest ranks of the people, and that the labouring poor will not now be  contented with the same food, clothing and lodging which satisfied them in former times, may convince us that it is not the money price of labour only, but its real recompense, which has been augmented.
Smith was writing as the era of good harvests and cheap food was ending and before the onset of demographic acceleration.
It would be less wise to attribute the continuing importance of the home market in the latter part of the eighteenth century and in the early nineteenth to a general improvement in real wages.
Nor can it be wholly explained by the employment changes which were pushing greater numbers of people into the market irrespective of wage trends.
Neil McKendrick has said of his "consumer revolution" that the rich led the way in the 1760s and 1770s with an "orgy of spending" on their magnificent houses.
The rich, however, also expanded the market for more modest goods than silks, Chippendale furniture and ornate carriages, for they also purchased uniforms for their servants and furniture for the servants' hall, as well as the utensils for their great kitchens.
When the quality took to watering at Margate they travelled overland in their gilded carriages, but their servants and baggage were the mainstay of the passenger-carrying sailing hoys plying the Thames in increasing numbers.
Even if the real earnings of adult males stagnated, household consumption could still have improved if there was an increase or improvement in the employment available for its other members.
McKendrick has suggested that such earnings were able to add a significant number of extra families to the "middling ranks" earning above the £50 a year bottom line suggested by Dr Eversley.
He thinks that expanding opportunities, especially in manufacturing, meant that in some districts the earnings of women and children were able to double family income — perhaps enough to add the extra 150,000 households Eversley considered were needed to explain the leap in home demand between 1750 and 1780.
There were certainly regions where this situation was developing — the new cotton districts of south Lancashire for example, and in the Potteries where females unknown in the industry before 1760 could earn from 12s (60p) to £2 a week by the end of the century.
The household of the skilled potter became in income terms the equal of that of the lower clergy.
But how extensive were such developing opportunities?
The new  cotton-spinning mills created opportunites for some women after the mid 1760s, but in many rural districts the loss of cottage spinning reduced family earnings.
The recent researches of Dr Snell point to a net decline in earning opportunities in southern England, brought about not only by the decline of cottage manufacturing but also by changing work practices in agriculture.
It seems clear that for women as well as for men, the expanding employment and rising incomes provided by manufacturing growth were a markedly regional phenomenon.
The availability of higher wages did not necessarily produce a commensurate increase in consumption.
As we have seen, many eighteenth-century workers chose extra leisure instead.
This was the constant complaint of Arthur Young, among others, and the great sociologist Max Weber later put its link to consumption very clearly.
He did not ask: how much can I earn in a day if I do as much work as possible? but how much must I work in order to earn the wage which I earned before and which takes care of my traditional needs?…
A man does not by nature wish to earn more and more money, but simply to live as he is accustomed to live and to earn as much as is necessary for that purpose.
To the extent that this "pre-industrial" attitude prevailed, earnings and expenditure were forgone.
It seems likely, however, that there was some relative shift away from a traditional leisure preference over the eighteenth century.
It has been argued recently that by 1750, urban workers especially were working "a very disciplined, formalised, surprisingly regular and long working week" .
Perhaps so, but according to employers, Saint Monday still had far too many devotees.
How can we sum it all up?
Higher earnings and increased opportunities for earning by women and children were characteristic of some regions.
Some trades and crafts prospered generally, while others had noted periods of prosperity.
In the first half of the eighteenth century low food prices and slight demographic pressure may have allowed an aggregate increase in spending on non-essentials, even if the relative elasticities meant that more and better foodstuffs were the likely first call on extra income.
Even though more rapid  population growth and poorer harvests occurred after mid century, by then the changing structure of employment was accentuating the trend towards wage-dependency, which had already reached a level quite exceptional compared with that in other countries.
Urbanisation both emphasised this trend and widened spectacularly the range of urban trades, professions and manufactures bringing increasing numbers into the "middle ranks" of income earners.
Taken together all these can explain the existence in England of a home market for manufactured goods which was both wider and more dynamic than that offered anywhere on the continent.
Contemporaries were well aware of this: "Were an inventory to be taken of household goods and furniture of a peasant or mechanic in France and of a peasant or mechanic in England, the latter would be found on average to exceed the former in value by at least three to one." 
Exactly how wide and deep the market expansion ran is hardly knowable.
As Professor Stone has pointed out, while the growing demand for goods and services is a central feature of eighteenth-century England and provides "the most striking evidence of the rise of the" middling sort "" , the really hard evidence comes from the supply side, from the output growth of the goods and services in question.
From its nature it cannot do much to provide an answer to the key question: who were the consumers?
As we have seen, to consider them to have been the labouring people in general is, in the face of the evidence of stagnating living standards over much of the country, hopelessly optimistic.
In any case, as an explanation it is not necessary.
Household inventories contain some clues but as a source are seriously limited by their accidental survival and their social unrepresentativeness.
It is those who had no proclivity towards will making about whom we most wish to know.
Dr Weatherill has been investigating probate inventories for the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
She has discovered that a boundary line for consumption of non-staple household goods existed even across the bequeathing classes, and has cautioned against accepting much contemporary opinion that the "luxury" market had reached well down the social scale.
However, as McKendrick has pointed out, increased spending on a greater volume and range of consumer goods does not need to have been general or even typical.
To underwrite a sound basis of domestic demand for the growth of eighteenth-century manufacturing after 1760 it is necessary only to add "an elite section of the labour force" to those in receipt of middling incomes and to continue the trend towards wage-dependency.
Nor need this group have been composed of the same households throughout: as the fortunes of different employments fluctuated so different groups could have been included at different times.
Eversley has stressed that too much should not be claimed for such a class.
It is enough that there should have been growing pockets of households within the income range £50 to £200 a year, sufficient to have amounted to around 15 per cent of the population in 1750 and 20 to 25 per cent by 1780.
If, he argues, the misery of large numbers of the agricultural and manufacturing proletariats at the end of the eighteenth century had been the general condition of the labouring population throughout the century, then industrialisation could not have taken place for it depended on "the home sales of articles of everyday life to a section of the labour force which was neither very poor nor very rich" but which wielded an effective purchasing power in the face of many difficulties.
The point is echoed by McKendrick who argues that as well as "the many who suffered during the late eighteenth century, and even more in the later stages of industrialisation, there were those who gained" .
Even Professor Mokyr, who considers that the determination of "when, where and how fast" so far as the industrial revolution is concerned should be sought first and foremost in supply factors, accepts that the sustaining of demand was important in maintaining the momentum of economic growth.
That demand did not, of course, come entirely from the domestic market.
Some of the fastest-growing sectors of the late eighteenth-century economy, most notably cotton, owed their extra dynamism to Britain's pre-eminence in foreign trade, and it is to the growth of overseas markets that we now turn.
OVERSEAS MARKETS
Foreign trade is the most visible of economic activities and those who engage in it usually the most vociferous of interest groups.
Over the long eighteenth century there was a remarkable expansion in the volume and value of British overseas trade.
It is not surprising that historians have frequently sought to link the growth of the economy directly to it.
The impressive, though erratic performance of exports certainly encourages this approach, for overall the rate of export growth was ahead of that of output and of that of the population.
As Professor Hobsbawm has put it: "Home demand increased but foreign demand multiplied." 
There is, however, a counter-tendency on the part of some historians to stress the home market and to share the scepticism of contemporaries such as MacPherson, who considered overseas markets to be only one-thirtieth as important for the growth of industrial output as home demand.
That was something of an exaggeration, but any emphasis on the rate of growth of manufacturing generally must take account of the weight of particular export-inclined industries in total output.
Some statistics will illustrate the point.
At the beginning of the eighteenth century domestic exports accounted for around 7–8 per cent of national output, through its middle years perhaps 10 or 12 per cent and at its close peaking around 17 per cent.
All in all, exports did not take up more than a fifth of the increase in the output of the economy as a whole.
A good deal is concealed by such broad statistics.
Up to mid century grain was exported.
Thereafter the situation changed fundamentally and, despite the interference of the Corn Laws, grain came to figure high on the list of imports in years of bad harvest.
After 1750 domestic exports were made up predominantly of manufactured goods.
Even so, recent re-estimates of their weighting suggest a degree of caution in evaluating their contribution.
In 1700 only 7.5 per cent of industrial output other than woollens was exported and as late as 1831 only 7.7 per cent of output other than that of all textiles (with cotton now well ahead of wool) and of iron.
This introduces an important perspective, but since cotton and iron were experiencing a productivity growth ahead of most other industries, their importance exceeds their weighting.
To the extent that spectacular productivity gains were being achieved through technological  advance, a demonstration effect was present for later imitation and emulation.
These are matters to which we must return, but first we need to examine more closely the trends and patterns of overseas trade.
Official trade figures need careful handling, but those who specialise in this area generally agree over what they reveal.
This is that industrial output increased four-fold over the eighteenth century, home consumption of it three-fold and exports six-fold.
The outcome by 1800 was that around a fifth of manufacturing output was exported compared with a third in 1700, and that whereas manufactured goods had then up to a third of imports, by 1815 they hardly figured at all.
The trends towards these outcomes were not unbroken.
There were periods, notably 1720–40 and 1760–1770, when home consumption increased more quickly than exports, but as Professor Cole has pointed out, exports over the century as a whole could well have accounted for 40 per cent of the increase in industrial output.
Exporting to this level clearly offered a significant expansion of the market for manufacturers, an offer which was taken up to different degrees by different industries.
In 1700 British trade was still directed largely towards Europe.
Imports from the continent valued £3.9 million, with linen, wine, timber, naval stores and bar iron prominent.
This was almost balanced by domestic exports of £3.8 million to which £1.8 million of re-exports were added.
Woollen cloth led but was increasingly supplemented by a wider range of manufactured goods as well as by re-exports of tobacco, sugar and dyes.
The most evident change as the eighteenth century progressed was the relative decline in the importance of Europe.
By 1800 less than a third of English imports came from the continent and only a fifth of her exports went there.
Europe was being displaced by the colonies.
In 1700 North America and the West Indies together took only 11 per cent of domestic exports and re-exports while supplying 20 per cent of imports.
By 1815 trade with them had increased more than six-fold, with over a third of imports coming from the North and Central American colonies.
Exports to them had increased by 200 per cent and they were taking more than half of British exports.30 Colonial trade enabled Britain to pay for continued imports of linens, wines and timber from  Europe with re-exported colonial products, which had been paid for by the export of domestic manufactures.
Import substitution tended to close down markets in northern and western Europe, but for the first sixty years of the century southern Europe, especially Portugal, filled the gap and in itself provided a link between the old and new geographies of trade.
In trading with Portugal, Britain was indirectly trading with the Americas.
The two countries had enjoyed a special relationship since the Methuen Treaty of 1703.
Professor Davis has calculated that over 75 per cent of the growth in English exporting over the first half of the eighteenth century depended on either southern Europe or the Americas.
Dr Fisher has clearly demonstrated that the export of manufactures to Portugal was closely bound to their subsequent re-export from Lisbon to Brazil: "The business that English merchants drove to the English colonies in this period was in fact complemented by substantial indirect trades to the Iberian empires in America." 
The expansion in manufactured exports to Portugal was the result of sixty years of prosperity in the gold mines of Brazil.
When that prosperity ebbed in the 1760s, so too did the tide of English exporting to Portugal.
Exports had doubled from 1700 to 1740 to a value of £1,164,000 which generally held steady until the 1760s.
What made this trade especially useful was the small extent to which it depended on re-exports and the very great extent to which it brought markets for English manufacturers, especially in woollen and worsted textiles of the lighter and cheaper kinds.
Hats and stockings featured too, as did iron wares, though only to the extent of an annual £20,000 by the 1750s.
In return England took its favourite wine, some oranges, some figs and a bullion surplus of around £1 million a year in the 1750s.
By the time the Portuguese trade passed its peak in the 1760s, a more than adequate substitute had developed, with special rapidity after 1740.
This was the direct trade with Britain's own North American and West Indian colonies, especially with that part of the former which was to become the United States.
Products from these colonies, notably tobacco and sugar, had joined those from Asia to make up the re-export trade which had been balancing Britain's payments since the Glorious Revolution of 1688.
The earnings of those who provided them pushed things a step further.
They opened up a market of huge potential for English manufacturers in the New World.
The natural advantages of established manufacturing  in England, reinforced by the artificial ones provided by the Navigation Laws and related manifestations of the "colonial system" , ensured that the high incomes of West Indian and Virginian planters created a growing market.
In the case of North America this was further emphasised by a generally high wage level.
For all the pioneer ideology of frontier self-sufficiency which came to surround the early Americans, increasing in both numbers and wealth, they provided a market for consumer goods by 1740 which was not unlike that which had emerged in England itself.
Exports to North America increased eight-fold between 1770 and 1773 and moralists on the eastern seaboard were beginning to echo the condemnation of a tea-drinking, fashion-wearing, luxury-wallowing populace which had become so strident in England.
Home-spun goods, attractive enough as a symbol of frontier self-sufficiency, can become wasteful of time and energy.
Close study of rural households in Massachusetts has suggested that home-making was by no means commonplace in an eighteenth-century America which was experiencing "a steady commercialisation of economic life" .
As the population of the mainland colonies rose to 2.25 million by the time of the revolution of 1776, it suffered no decline in per capita income.
The increasing numbers of white Americans of 1773 purchased British goods to the equivalent of £1.20p per person, compared with £1 in 1700.
Professor Breen has suggested that the American consumer market took off in the 1740s.
He argues that a demand which emanated from the earnings of export staples became itself the driving force behind even greater efforts to balance the increasing import of desired English manufactured goods.
As a New York merchant expressed it in 1762: "Our importation of dry goods from England is so vastly great, that we are obliged to betake ourselves to all possible arts to make remittances to the British merchants." 
Charles Wilson has pointed out that it was the increased incomes of the landed which began the consumer revolution in England.
In a similar way it was the growing wealth of the planters which first drew English manufactures to the American colonies.
The tobacco planters of Virginia enjoyed a golden age between 1734 and 1756.
Notoriously, they hardly changed their spending habits when it ended.
South Carolina rice growers boomed after 1730 and reinforced their fortunes from indigo after 1750.
In the 1790s came  cotton and a crop of 2 million lb in 1791 had reached 182 million by 1821.
The sugar prices received by the West Indian planters rose steadily from 1713, and this too was translated into a demand for manufactured goods.
West Indian plantations also provided a growing demand for fish, grain and timber which was met by North America.
The urban merchants of Boston and other eastern ports who grew rich from it were no less avid in their conspicuous consumption of English goods.
In North America consumer expectations moved quite rapidly down the social scale, drawn by high wages and less marked social rigidities.
Tea consumption had reached the poor Philadelphia house by 1766.
Tea drinkers need cups, fine enough to taste from and strong enough to hold very hot liquid and these qualities were apparently not achievable by colonial potters.
As the range of English consumer goods expanded, Staffordshire and Worcester wares were joined by glass and metal wares including, in huge numbers, the humble nail.
Even where local products could be bought, so superior were English goods presumed to be that place of origin marks on goods of colonial manufacture were often falsified.
Direct trade with Africa was comparatively small, although the export of trade goods and guns to secure slaves for the New World plantations expanded rapidly after 1780.
The notorious Atlantic trade in black Africans has received the extensive and controversial attention of historians, and that is as it should be, for it was a shameful traffic for which apologetics are quite out of order.
Human beings were wrenched from their homeland and crammed into the airless stinking holds of vessels to provide, if they survived, the slave labour of the plantation economies of the West Indies and the southern states of North America.
Just how many made the passage is a matter of considerable argument, but a figure of around 2 million will do.
It is, however, possible to exaggerate the contribution which slaves as a commodity made to the overall value of British trade.
By 1714 there was no longer any monopoly of the slave trade.
Three English ports — London, Bristol and Liverpool — participated to a measurable degree, although the capital's role  declined significantly over the eighteenth century.
The total number of vessels engaged in the trade from the three ports fluctuated.
At Bristol and Liverpool slavers did make up significant proportions of the merchant fleets.
At the former, however, they never formed more than 15 per cent.
At the latter, over the third quarter of the eighteenth century, slavers rose from a quarter to a third of the merchant fleet.
Their importance to the level of employment at the port was recognised by the journeymen carpenters who in 1792 let it be known that if the slave trade were abolished they would riot and pull down the houses of leading abolitionists.
The black trade was not ended until 1807, but after 1800 was offering small returns.
Up to then, however, on Dr Anstey's figures the profits made were at least the equal of most other areas of investment, with 9.5 per cent being the aggregate decennial average from 1761 to 1807.
The slave trade cannot be considered in isolation from the whole Atlantic economy.
It was, as is well known, a triangular trade, taking out trade goods from England to Africa, carrying the hapless Negro slaves to the West Indian and southern state plantations and returning with American cargoes.
Without slave labour the plantations of sugar and cotton could not have been as rapidly developed.
Dr Eric Williams' famous thesis linking the rise of capitalism to the slave trade probably overstated the extent to which capital derived from the infamous traffic fed into the growing  industrial sector of the expanding English economy, but in pointing out that abolition came only when the slave trade was rapidly losing importance he can hardly be far from the truth.
The decline of the West Indian sugar economy, and the near-complete ability of the US cotton economy to supply its own black labour through the reproduction of its gender-balanced slave population, lessened the vested interest which might otherwise have held off the evangelical/humanitarian reformers rather longer.
The East was no great consumer of English manufactures; rather it was a major, if contentious source of imports.
These, including tea brought in by the East India Company from China, grew from around £500,000 in value in 1700 to almost £2 million by 1770.
Throughout, exports met only about half of their cost.
Attempts to reduce the balancing outflow of bullion were having some effect by the 1760s and 1770s, however.
The share of woollen goods exported to Asia was 2.5 per cent in value in 1720, but 5 per cent by 1770.
For other manufactures the shares at the respective dates were 2 per cent and 12 per cent.
Apart from the East India Company, which kept its monopoly until 1813, the domination of English trade by the great chartered companies had dwindled by the eighteenth century.
The rise of the outports and the parallel increase in the importance of the Irish and Atlantic trade had emphasised the growing role of the individual merchants and of small trading partnerships.
The East India Company survived.
Its monopoly of the Asian trade was still its reward for being one of the main holders of the national debt, and after Robert Clive's victory over the French at Plessey in 1757 it was the virtual ruler of Bengal.
The great company received a fluctuating benefit from this situation.
The costs of ruling an "empire" were high, but for a time in the 1760s the revenues of northern India were almost self-supporting, with no bullion being exported in 1767–.
Thereafter, and notably from the 1780s, the company had to make recourse to fresh stock issue not so much to raise fresh working capital but to release it from debt.
As a recent historian has expressed it, "The transition from trader to sovereign was uncomfortable and largely unsuccessful." 
The financial rationale of the great companies had been the way in which they had enabled a generation of investors, most of whom were substantial, to become merchants by proxy.
Even in the merchant activities of the outports, however, a great number of people were taking shares in trading ventures, and from much further down the social scale than was the case with the East India Company, only 1.6 per cent of whose investors held less than £100 in 1764.
It seems probable that the Atlantic trade mobilised capital far more effectively, and equally probable that in aggregate it did so to a greater extent, if the East India Company's heavy non-trading interests are first discounted.
When the cotton trade began to boom in the 1780s, Africa and Asia took between them a fifth of cotton goods exported, with Europe and America sharing the rest almost equally.
The share of Africa and Asia then plummeted to less than 2 per cent by 1815, although it doubled in value.
Thereafter, however, their share increased steadily until by 1850 this market was more important than either the European or North American market, in both of which home cotton manufacture had become significant.
Apart from Indian raw cotton in the early days of cotton manufacture, England took no industrial raw materials of significance from the East.
Indirectly, however, that region contributed importantly to the re-export trade which balanced essential imports from Europe.
Re-exporting of tropical and semi-tropical products had boomed in the later seventeenth century and although expansion was less rapid thereafter, it held firm through the first three-quarters  of the eighteenth century.
By providing around a third of total export value, re-exporting to Europe helped to offset the saturation of the market for woollens in northern and western Europe.
In the first fifteen years of the nineteenth century re-exporting still accounted for between a fifth and a quarter of total exports.
To this, Asian tea and to a lesser extent textiles and dyes can be added alongside West Indian sugar, rum and coffee and North American tobacco and rice.
There is little question that overseas markets, by and large the trophies of war, were of great value for the growth of English manufacturing over the eighteenth century.
That is not to say that without them growth would have been seriously less.
The peculiar framing of econometric questions and counterfactuals may posit alternative arrangements in which, in theory, growth would have been as good or even better.
It is quite proper that it should, for assertions of indispensability are dangerous.
The historian's first and final duty, however, remains the explanation of the world that was, rather than the one that might have been.
The eighteenth-century English economy both shifted an astonishing percentage of its working population away from agriculture and came to rely on importing many of the raw materials it required.
The permissive context for this was an expanding foreign trade.
Dr Lee has recently pointed out that although the resources which went into the exporting industries could have been channelled elsewhere, the return would almost certainly have been less: "An eighteenth-century economy without resource to trade would have been smaller, less  diversified and must have generated less growth even than the modest rate of increase actually achieved." 
England's eighteenth-century manufacturing growth may not have been in any full sense "export led" , but foreign trade did nevertheless have a significant and dynamic role.
A different allocation of resources might also have produced growth, but diverting them merely to the home market would have substituted only on the assumption that resources were already being fully utilised there.
This seems denied by the evidence of unemployment and underemployment and the general cheapness of labour.
To a considerable extent manufacturing expansion over the first three-quarters of the eighteenth century came in response to increasing demand, with overseas markets substantially supplementing the opportunities at home.
This remained the case.
The North American market was to surprise contemporaries by its continuing importance after the revolution brought an end to British rule.
During the wars themselves there had been considerable disruption, but by 1785 trade had fully recovered.
It was worth on average more than £2 million a year from 1786 to 1790 and £2.5 million in the following quinquennium.
Yet this was also the period during which the United States became the main supplier of the hugely increasing need for raw cotton.
Professor North has suggested that the booming of the specialised plantation economy in the southern states was the key factor in the growth of a pattern of dynamic regional specialisation which allowed the north-eastern states to cradle an American industrial revolution by 1830.48 Up to then, however, it was primarily British manufactures which met the needs of the new republic.
A parliamentary enquiry of 1812 revealed the persisting importance of the American market to hardware manufacturers.
One claimed in 1808 that of 50,000 people, excluding 20,000 nailors, engaged in hardware production in Birmingham and the surrounding district, as many produced for American consumption as did for the home market.
A Sheffield manufacturer suggested that 6,000 men, women and children in his district similarly depended on the American market for their employment.
Exports of traditional "smallware" metal goods was increasing, while alongside them metal wares of a new kind, including machinery  and steam engines, were beginning to show up, although by 1820 the value of this last group was still only £250,000.
Prospect and actuality were closer in the case of cotton.
Professor Hobsbawm considers that the rise of the cotton industry marks a fundamental change in that mechanised factory production resulted in such rapidly diminishing unit costs as to be "no longer dependent on existing demand, but to create its own market" .
This point has been emphasised by other writers.
It is essentially that the technological and organisational changes accompanying the factory system were to invert the previous relationship of supply and demand.
Professor Davis noted that the industries which expanded before 1780 did not transform themselves in the dramatic way we have come to know as an industrial revolution.
Following the lead of cotton the later changes revolutionised production.
Cotton was new not only in its methods, but in its product.
Before the advent of machinery, English hand workers could not spin to the requisite fineness to rival Asian calicos.
Machinery overcame this skill deficiency, and did so while bringing constantly falling costs.
The market expanded enormously at home, in Europe and in America.
The negligible export of cotton goods in 1770 was transformed into half of all British exports between 1800 and 1850.
Its example was followed, although more slowly, by woollens.
At first the cotton industry had found its outlet at home, where a latent demand for a cheap, durable, light textile had long existed.
After two decades cotton came to account for a third of the increase in manufactured exports from 1784–6 to 1794–6.
By 1815 Britain was exporting 4 yards of cotton cloth for every 3 used at home, and between 1794–6 and 1804–6 cotton goods accounted for 84 per cent of the increase in manufactured exports.
During that decade of major war, Britain's near-monopoly of factory industry was sustained, and after 1815 she entered a new era of economic history in which the mutual influences of industrialisation and trade expansion could work freely, and in which, as Professor Thomas has expressed it, "trade was the child of industry" .
From the late eighteenth century the rise of the cotton industry not only reversed the long relative decline in the importance of textile exports but  pushed the first industrial nation, if not in an entirely new direction, at least up a much steeper path.
 "King Cotton" spearheaded a new, dynamic but at first narrowly based surge in manufactured goods capable of creating as well as meeting market demand.
In recognising this we must not underestimate the contribution made to the industrialising economy by the earlier expansion of manufacturing in response to home and overseas demand.
Firstly, persuaded by Crafts, Lee and others, we have learned to shift the relative weighting of the traditional and the transformed industries before the early nineteenth century quite sharply towards the former.
Secondly, the cumulative impact of less than spectacular modifications in methods of production and organisation on productivity in long-established manufactures was significant, as Maxine Berg and others have shown.
Thirdly, in Britain the dynamic industries surged ahead not of a generally underdeveloped economy but of one which was in no real sense "pre-industrial" .
That is why Britain largely escaped enclave development and why we must augment Hobsbawm's assertion that the home market "provided the broad foundations for a generalised industrial economy" , by adding that in this provision it was materially assisted by an overseas market for manufactured goods of a kind possessed by no other economy.
Money Matters: Debt, Taxes and Currency
DEBT
Let it be supposed that according to the usual methods of borrowing and funding, the Public Debts, during the present war, should encrease to no greater degree than they did in the last war; which was about 30 millions: And let it be supposed, according to past experience, that in ten or twelve years after a peace; we should be plunged into a fresh war; which might encrease the debts of the nation 30 millions more, and that afterwards we should have another breathing time of ten or twelve years, and that according to custom a third war should ensue, no less expensive than each of the former two; these three wars will swell the national debts to the amount of 170 millions, and that in little more than fifty years.
For if we have no reason to believe that any more of the debts will be paid during the intervals of peace, than have hitherto been: Nay the whole of the Sinking Fund, by such an increased debt, becoming absolutely anticipated, together with numbers of additional oppressive taxes, we have less reason to expect any of the old debts to be discharged, as we go on contracting of new.
Writing this in 1757, at the beginning of the Seven Years War, Malachi Postlethwayt may have failed to prophesy the exact sequence of war and peace, but he perceived clearly enough the interactions between war, debt and taxation which largely determined the public policy of Hanoverian England.
In fact he underestimated the level the national debt would reach; by the beginning of the war with France in 1793 it had reached £242,900,000.
The advent of Dutch William in 1688 may have brought a Protestant ruler, but it brought one already embroiled in war with Louis XIV, and ended a  period in which the offshore island had played small part in the struggles of continental Europe.
For more than half of the years between 1689 and Waterloo in 1815 Britain was at war, mostly with the French.
The longest period of peace was the twenty-six years between the end of the War of Spanish Succession in 1713 and the outbreak of that of the Austrian Succession in 1739.
That celebrated interlude is associated with the strong preference for peace of Sir Robert Walpole.
Especially from the Seven Years War in 1757, the wars in which Britain was involved may have been European and dynastic in origin, but so far as her struggle with France was concerned, they were global in breadth.
Naval superiority succeeded in winning control for Britain of an empire from the Americas to the Indies.
Wars were never cheap, but they were fought over such a span that they became progressively more costly.
Government both borrowed and taxed to finance them.
It borrowed so heavily that the greater part of its peacetime revenue was mortgaged to service and repay its debt.
Financing the industrial revolution was small beer compared with the cost of waging war.
In 1785 it cost £63,174 to build the 100-gun ship Victory.
That was five times greater than the fixed capital value of Ambrose Crawley's celebrated iron works — one of the industrial wonders of the age.
Professor John Brewer has recently pointed out that the capital value of the fleet at the end of the eighteenth century was perhaps five times greater than the £402,651 at which the West Riding woollen manufacture was valued in 1801.
With refits and repairs the upkeep of the fleet by 1750 probably exceeded £500,000 a year, and the wartime floating population which had to be provisioned exceeded that of any town save London.
Only a modest proportion of government expenditure went on civil matters, while between 75 and 85 per cent of annual expenditure went either on current spending on the Army, Navy and ordnance, or else to the service of war debts.
Wars became ever more expensive, and with them the national debt rose to heights that to contemporaries seemed awesome (see Table 9.2).
The bearing of such a burden, as one historian has recently remarked, suggests that in moving from lightweight to heavyweight in the European balance of power while simultaneously acquiring an overseas empire, Britain owed as much to her clerks and administrators as she did to her soldiers, sailors, generals and admirals.
Making possible success on land and at sea was Europe's most efficient  taxation system.
The British government borrowed sufficiently and cheaply enough because its reputation for efficient tax gathering allowed anticipated revenues to provide the security for its present borrowings.
This was the principle of the funded debt, which was the basis of a credit system in which, in response to government's borrowing needs, banking and stock and security exchanging developed into a mechanism capable of serving the needs of the developing economy as well as those of the state.
Underlying confidence was such that the system survived the extraordinary madness of the South Sea Bubble in 1720, so well that, once the vapour had cleared, it became possible to talk of beneficial outcomes from history's most infamous bursting.
Many men played a part in building this system: leading ministers such as the confidence-rebuilding Walpole and the quietly reforming Henry Pelham, and beneath them the officials and clerks.
They established and operated a revenue system which, if far from pure, was less venial and more efficient than that of any other European state: "The ability of government administrators to establish the routine by which revenues were collected, money raised and supply requisitioned could make the difference between victory and humiliation." 
Outside of government the success of public credit depended upon the interest, skills and self-interested cooperation of the financiers of the City, especially on those of the three great corporations who controlled so much of the national debt stock: the Bank of    England, the East India Company and the South Sea Company.
Successful borrowing and taxing were different sides of the same sound coin of reputation, but their relationship can best be understood if we look at the pattern and structure of each in turn.
Borrowing financed 31 per cent of spending in the War of Spanish Succession (1702–13) and over 40 per cent of that in the American war (1776–83).
In more than half of the years between 1713 and 1785 debt service took up more than 40 per cent of total revenue.
At the end of the American war it even reached 66 per cent.
The debt which George I took over in 1714 was of two main kinds: short-term unfunded and long-term funded.
The main concern over the century was to shift as much as possible from the first to the second form.
With each war came a flood of short-term credit in the form of exchequer, Army, Navy or ordnance bills with lengthening repayment periods creating a public credit crisis.
The solution sought was the conversion of as much of the debt as possible into long-term funded redeemable debt, as in 1763 at the end of the Seven Years War when £3,670,739 worth of Navy and ordnance debt was converted into a 4 per cent stock funded on "earmarked" tax revenue.
Here is one obvious link between borrowing and taxation: each new issue of funded stock depended upon either the introduction of a tax or the rescheduling of an existing one.
With indirect taxes more favoured the burden fell on the consuming population at large, but from the point of view of the government, if such conversions did not shrink the national debt, they at least made it more controllable.
In no Hanoverian war did the unfunded proportion of the debt exceed 20 per cent, and it was rarely that high.
The moving from fixed-term to redeemable stock was necessary to secure lower interest rates, and such stock predominated in iss-ues after 1714.
However, there was still a large legacy to service.
In 1714 more than a third of the debt was in the form of fixed-term annuities, most of which had been floated before 1710 and which cost an annual £800,000 to service.
Fixed-term stock did imply that the national debt would have to be repaid, one day, but for most of the eighteenth century control of the cost took priority over reduction of the principal.
Walpole, it is true, kept out of wars and was able to cherish the prospect of reduction from the Sinking Fund established in 1717.
In the ten years after 1727 he managed to redeem £6,500,000 worth of annuities and South Sea stock but after  that the fund was "raided" for purposes other than liquidating the public debt.
Success now was of the kind associated with Henry Pelham, who during his time at the Treasury from 1749 to 1757 rescheduled almost 90 per cent of the 4 per cent debt, down to 3.5 per cent in 1750 and down again to 3 per cent by 1757.
It was as well, for the Seven Years War, which cost £82 million of which £60 million was borrowed, was about to begin a period of widely contested expensive wars.
The national debt surged from its 1756 level of £74.6 million to reach £231 million by the end of the American war in 1783 and £820 million by the time of Waterloo.
Despite this immense burden, only one episode disrupted the generally sound managing of the public debt — the South Sea Bubble of 1720.
Several things interacted to produce that infamous fiasco.
The South Sea Company had been formed under a Tory administration in 1710.
Ostensibly it was to prosper from a mono-poly of trade with Spanish America, which would be bestowed upon it by the government in return for taking over the entire £9 million worth of unsecured national debt.
The holders of this would receive the company's stock at par.
In addition the government would pay an annual sum equivalent to 6 per cent interest on the transferred stock.
But, however genuine the prospects of trade with the South Seas might have seemed, especially when enhanced by the right to sell slaves to the Spanish colonies granted at the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713, it is clear that so hugely capitalised a new incorporation was also intending to contest with the "big two" — the Bank of England and the East India Company — for the profits which came from dealing in the national debt.
The outbreak of war with Spain soon removed even the façade of trade as its main purpose, yet it had royal support and between two and three thousand shareholders.
In 1715, in return for writing off two years of annuity payments worth something over £1 million, the government permitted it a fresh share issue which brought its capital up to £10 million, about half of the entire joint-stock capital in the country.
By 1719 its absorption of so much of the unfunded debt was suggesting to ministers that they might also shift a proportion of the funded debt its way.
This hope had been inspired by events in France, where the financier John Law, exiled after a fatal duel, was perceived to be achieving a spectacular unloading of the public debt.
In England the funded debt selected were the annuities stemming from a lottery loan of 1710.
The company was to be allowed to  increase its capital by £1,150 for every £100 p.a. worth of annuity offered to it by holders up to £2.5 million.
The Exchequer would pay 5 per cent on the new stock and would have reduced its service cost by almost half.
The authorised capital of the company would reach £12.5 million.
Switching the public debt on to the company appealed to the country gentleman's prejudice against public indebtedness, and, feeling sure of parliamentary support, the government went further and sought to shift a total of £31 million of debt, almost equally split between redeemable and irredeemable stock, wrapping it into a single huge annuity on which the company would receive 4 or 5 per cent.
Of course, the holders of irredeemable stock were not obliged to exchange it for South Sea stock, but as fast as they did so the company would issue an equal amount of its stock.
It was a time of speculative fever burning over western Europe, and debt holders not only rushed to exchange, many of them quickly put the stock back on to a soaring market where others rushed to take it up.
The effect was the unloading of a mountain of stock on to a market which was becoming overheated.
By June the total capital of companies floated in a single week reached £224 million, and South Sea stock, floated at 110, had reached an astonishing peak of 1,050, spearheading a speculative mania of spurious company flotation.
Sir Robert Walpole summed up the motives which had persuaded the government to enable the debt transfer by the South Sea Act (6 George I c. 4) of 1720.
to consult the landed and trading interest of the nation, by lessening its incumbrances and public debts, and putting them in a method of being paid off in a few years; which could not have been done, unless a way had been found to make the Annuities for long terms redeemable; which had been happily effected by the South-Sea Scheme, without a breach of parliamentary faith.
With the conversion achieved, the Sinking Fund might, with the lower interest charge, redeem the public debt over twenty-five years.
The government was not to be a real loser.
In September, South Sea stock, which had dropped over August, collapsed, in tune with what was happening in Paris and in Amsterdam.
A financial panic ensued, as frantic as the earlier boom.
By the time the next session  of parliament began in December, the stock stood at 191.
Walpole, who had kept his hands almost clean, began the task of rebuilding, a task that was possible only with the cooperation of the Bank of England and the East India Company in taking up some of the over-issued stock.
The South Sea Company was to be excused payment of sums of £4.1 million, but not the £1 million due on Exchequer bills.
In return £2 million of its capital and a proportionate part of the interest which the government paid the company was to be cancelled.
Dickson has described Walpole as the man who applied "the harsh cautery of common sense to the soaring dreams and megalomaniac expectations of the South Sea year" .
The company had to give up the surplus stock it had accumulated at the expense of the public creditors and rescind its claims to be paid in full for the amount it had sold, but the real victims were the public creditors, who had to reconcile themselves to drastic losses in income and capital.
Historians generally agree that the outcome was favourable to the government.
It had managed to convert most (over 80 per cent) of the termed annuities into South Sea stock, thus paving the way for reductions in interest and capital under Walpole and Pelham.
As Brewer has put it: The scheme, disreputable and corrupt as it was, succeeded in its chief aim of changing the structure of the national debt.
In 1717 the annual charge of terminable annuities to public expenditure was £1,870,000.
Five years later it had been reduced to £212,000.
Professor Charles Wilson views the effects of the Bubble as "salutary" , but considers that the taking over of so much of the South Sea Company's excess stock by the Bank of England and East India Company perpetuated into the 1730s the situation in which more than half of the national debt was held by the great corporations.
The fund-holder, later typical, was still dwarfed.
Nevertheless, the trend towards a greater number of holders was a persistent one.
In 1720 there were 30,000, and by 1757 there were twice as many.
Not only did this dilute the power of the incorporated companies, but there was no replacement by an equivalent power, for the larger and more amorphous body of investors was hardly as able to lobby against interest reductions or other schemes to lessen the weight on government.
When government stock issues had been taken up  predominantly by the triad, there had been little need for anything much in the way of a "market" ; but the change in the structure of debt ownership led inevitably to the emergence of broking and jobbing practices which were to become institutionalised into the Stock Exchange.
Increasingly underwriters took blocks of stock which they moved on to clients.
Men like Samuel Gidion made the City's largest fortunes from dealing in government loans.
Although Henry Pelham managed a successful open subscription, much government stock was still moved through intermediaries in the form of closed subscriptions.
In 1758 the Duke of Newcastle was forced to work through "the most knowing people in the City" in raising a huge loan of £8 million.
It was underwritten by twenty-two financiers who included governors of the Bank of England, East India Company and South Sea Company.
Now, however, they were not taking up corporate subscriptions for their institutions but tapping the resources of their friends and contacts.
By 1750 the buying and selling of government stock had become a straightforward routine.
Purchasers or those seeking to collect interest, or their agents, had simply to attend the offices of the Bank of England, the East India Company or the South Sea houses of the Exchequer on the appropriate day.
By mid century, however, most of those attending regularly were "known to be jobbers" and their presence, together with that of the brokers, was a clear pointer to the development of a speculative stock market.
Not allowed into the Royal Exchange, the dealers had taken to meeting at Jonathon's Coffee House near the Bank, which was to become known in 1773 as the Stock Exchange.
The familiar modern terminology was already in use: "bull" already described a dealer who bought stock and sold it ahead of having to pay for it, while "bear" applied to those who contracted to sell stock they had yet to obtain.
Contemporaries distrusted them in the belief that they brought an unsavoury speculative element to the market in stocks.
The modern Exchange, with its dealing in industrial and other company equities, still lay well in the future.
It awaited the great mobilisation of savings that railway construction elicited and the parallel arrival of limited liability, but, as Professor Wilson has pointed out, "by advertising the opportunities of the stock market" the dealers of "Change Alley" helped in the long run "to widen the circle of investors as well as of speculators, by creating habits of investing rather than of hoarding and possibly levelled out  extremes of fluctuation by increasing competitive bidding for stock" .
Up to the end of the American war the public credit system supported the burden placed upon it.
Ironically for a quarrel which had arisen as a result of a revolt against the colonial taxation imposed to increase the revenue and retrench some of the expenditure on the Seven Years War, the American war doubled national expenditure from £131 million in 1775 to £245 million by 1783.
Britain's resulting debt burden was in fact greater than that of the French, whose consequent indebtedness has been linked to her political crisis of 1788–9.
Yet there was only a small increase in taxation.
The land tax took its usual wartime hike, to 4s (20p) in the pound; the malt tax rose from 9½d (4p) to 1s 4½d (7p) on the bushel, and duties were imposed on wine and tobacco.
Borrowing was pushed to the limit, but nothing broke.
As Professor Mathias has pointed out, on the British side there was resort neither to penal levels of taxation nor to promiscuous paper-money inflation.
The British relied upon "an immaculate credit rating" .
This was guarantee enough to secure loans which left the government in the peacetime year of 1786 paying 55 per cent of its net expenditure in interest on the national debt, compared with a level of 45 per cent before the war.
Subsequent developments in public finance derived from the rea-lisation that a limit had been reached.
The ratio between tax yields and borrowing levels needed to be narrowed, both by extra revenue and by reducing the size of the debt.
Concern swung away from programmes designed to reschedule a reduction of service costs, back towards the earlier aspiration of redemption.
In this respect the arrival of William Pitt the Younger at the Treasury in 1784 was significant.
He commenced by stemming the revenue loss resulting from smuggling by reducing duty levels to lower its profitability, as well as by strengthening the preventative service.
By 1790 the yield from wine duties had increased by 29 per cent, that from spirits by 63 per cent and that from tobacco by 89 per cent .
Two years later Pitt claimed to have added £1 million to the annual revenue from customs duties, £1 million from new taxes, notably on windows, and £2 million from additional excise rising from increased domestic consumption of excised goods.
In that year revenue was 47 per cent higher than it had been in 1783.
A surplus of £1.7 million displaced a deficit of £10.8 million, largely because, although he was no great fiscal innovator, Pitt taxed cleverly and efficiently.
So far as the debt was concerned, the first success was in converting most of the short-term, high-interest credit which had stemmed from the wartime issue of government bills to a funded 5 per cent stock in 1784–5.
The most noteworthy development, however, was the re-establishment of a Sinking Fund in 1786.
This was made possible by the return to a revenue surplus, diversion of part of which rapidly decreased the debt by the repurchase of £10.25 million of government stock.
The Sinking Fund can be considered a success up to the point when the outbreak of the "Great War" of 1793 removed any likelihood of a revenue surplus.
The debt at the end of the American war had been sixteen to seventeen times the revenue, and prophets of doom were widely heard amid the financial gloom.
Yet Pitt during his first eight years managed to raise annual revenue from £12.5 million to £18.5 million.
He even managed to get an extension of the unpopular excise to cover first wine, then alchohol generally.
His whole system was to be tested to its limits when a war with France began in 1793 which lasted, with only brief intermission, for more than twenty years.
Costs were unprecedented.
Britain's most significant land battle in the Seven Years War, at Minden in 1759, had involved 4,400 infantry.
At Waterloo in 1815, Wellington had 21,000.
By the summer of 1809 on land and sea, 786,000 men were serving — one in ten of the adult population.
The government raised £1,500,000,000 from loans and taxes, while the national debt leapt from £242,900,000 in 1793 to £744,900,000 in 1815.
Furthermore, almost all of this debt had been raised from British creditors.
Up to the mid eighteenth century, foreign holdings, predominantly Dutch, amounted to around a fifth of the debt.
By the 1780s it was only half as much and by 1807–10 only £20 million out of more than £500 million of government stock was held abroad.
The only major crisis in public finance came in 1797.
Up to then borrowing had not been difficult, although the cost was high.
A "loyalty loan" at the end of 1796 had produced a subscription of £18 million in less than sixteen hours.
Problems were, however, building up.
Loanable funds were not in total short supply, but the same growing and diversifying economy which could provide them also created competition from private borrowers and investors.
One consequence was that Pitt had to float special government loans at high discounts, because he could not secure a sufficient sum from the "market" .
This would have commanded high interest rates but these might, on precedent, have been subsequently lowered.
Thus by the beginning of 1797, discounting contributed to a situation in which the adding of £200,000,000 to the debt secured an effective loan of only £108,000,000.
This was perhaps the most directly inflationary aspect of Pitt's financial management, and the bridging of the gap between income and expenditure was not helped by his stubbornly sticking to the idea of the Sinking Fund.
It was now that the gold backing of the currency came under strain and, pushed over by fear of invasion, actually broke.
The Bank of England in 1795 had held around £8 million in specie.
Most of this made its way to the government, so that by February 1797 it had been run down to less than a sixth of this level.
The arrival of a French fleet off Ireland brought a further request to the Bank for a loan of £1,500,000 to assist the Irish government.
Increasing invasion paranoia had already started a withdrawing of specie from country banks, who in turn drew on London.
So by the time an actual (although as it turned out farcical) landing took place in North Wales on 25 February, there was little gold in the chest to meet massive withdrawing.
There was now little choice.
The Privy Council on 26 February authorised the Bank to refuse cash payments, and the country banks had to follow suit by tendering Bank of England notes in the stead of gold.
The suspension was initially to be rescinded within four months, but it was to be renewed up to 1821.
That duration testifies to the substantial fact that for all the alarm the crisis produced, the British financial system had reached a level of sophistication and general confidence which enabled it to live through a moment which in earlier times would have seemed the harbinger of doom.
Pitt's great parliamentary opponent, Charles James Fox and  his supporters roundly condemned his profligacy in loans to foreign powers, an obvious but overestimated cause of gold drain, and accused him of bringing the country to the point of bankruptcy.
Meanwhile, according to the Annual Register, petitions against the suspension of cash payments came in from all corners.
That from the nobility, gentry, clergy, yeomanry and freeholders of Middlesex considered the action both illegal and arbitrary as well as threatening to the very concept of private property: "the pretended necessity of reserving for the public service the specie deposited by individuals in the Bank…may be pleaded at any time, and applied, with equal reason, to any private property whatsoever" .
In fact, as an eminent Scottish banker remarked looking back from seven years on, it was remarkable, "after the first surprise and alarm was over, how quietly the country submitted, as they still do, to transact all business by means of bank notes for which the issuers give no specie" .
At least two reasons account for this, besides general confidence.
In the first place, although non-convertible bank notes may have been a new element, many — perhaps most — commercial transactions had long depended on paper bills rather than value-for-weight coin.
In the second place, the Bank of England issued its paper money with a restraint which inflated the money supply steadily rather than drastically.
A recent review of the period has concluded that the "opportunities" presented by the Restriction Act, as it was known, were abused neither by the government nor by the Bank.
Nevertheless, the events of 1797 suggested that there was a limit to public confidence, and contributed to a significant shift in the pattern of war finance.
Of the extra revenue raised to fight wars from 1739 to 1783 the proportion obtained from taxation stayed at around 20 per cent; for the long French wars it was 58 per cent .
Most attention has been focused on Pitt's introduction of income tax in 1798–9, but indirect taxation also rose significantly.
Those on luxuries such as carriages and servants were trebled in 1797.
Sources of income and wealth had rapidly diversified as the economy developed over the long eighteenth century, so a graduated tax on incomes was a logical development to collect revenue from a merchant and manufacturing class which had hardly been as heavily burdened as either the landowners or the poor consumers.
Pitt  managed to collect only half of the £10 million he had anticipated in 1799, but better results were to be achieved when Henry Addington took over the Treasury and reshaped the taxation of incomes in his budgets of 1803 and 1804.
At first Addington had linked the coming of peace in 1802 to the repeal of the hated tax which "should not be left to rest on the shoulders of the public in times of peace, because it should be reserved for the more important occasions, which he trusted, would not soon recur" .
The Treaty of Amiens in 1802 brought a brief peace, and by June 1803 Addington was again presenting a war budget.
In that, and in his budget of 1804, the one-time tax repealer, in Professor Christie's words, "far outdistanced" Pitt as a successful tax gatherer.
He needed to.
Not only was maintaining the British war effort imposing an ever-increasing burden, but subsidies to allies seriously inflated that burden.
Of the total of £66 million, all but £9.2 million came after the Amiens interlude.
Addington's form of income tax introduced the novel principle of deduction at source, which enabled much better anticipation of outcome than had Pitt's own assessments.
His tax, known as a property tax, worked better because it realised that efficient assessment and collection were more important than raised levels.
His top rate, on incomes of £150 or more, at a shilling in the pound was half that imposed by Pitt.
On incomes between £150 and a threshold of £60, a graduated levy beginning at 3d was imposed.
The wartime earnings of most skilled shipyard workers, for example, would have exceeded £60 a year, and with the Admiralty deducting at source and paying over to the Treasury, yields came much nearer to expectation.
Deduction at source was hardly possible with other than government employees, nor on the recipients of rents and interest, but Addington's division of his tax into five schedules, A to E, was not only a major step in the direction of obtaining accurate assessments but remained the basis of income taxation into our own time.
The five schedules were on: land and buildings; the produce of land; interest of fund-holders; profits from trades and professions and on salaries; and incomes from offices, annuities, pensions and stipends.
The closeness of yields to estimates was impressive: an actual £4.76 over £4.5 million in 1803 and £4.9 over £4.8 million in 1804.
Pitt had been a critic of both the principle of deduction at source and the rescheduling, but they proved their worth and he retained  them when it was his turn to present a budget in 1805.
Addington, rather than the Younger Pitt, can therefore be regarded as the father of modern British taxation.
To administer and collect income tax a new arm of administration had to be created comprising experts, officials and clerks: an "army" which in terms of its efficiency and rapacity came to be the equal of the long-esteemed Excise.
Indeed, it was the quality of the latter revenue department, as much as opposition to income taxation in principle, which had inclined eighteenth-century governments towards using indirect taxes on consumption alongside the traditional land tax.
As we noted, Hanoverian wars had always, in the end, been financed by taxation; the novelty of the French war years was the attempt to defray the greater part of their cost from present rather than deferred revenues.
We must now turn to examine the pattern of taxation upon which the success of public borrowing depended.
TAXATION
The Hanoverians inherited a system of taxation which was already shifting away from the taxes on land and immovable property that had provided almost half of government income under the later Stuarts.
By 1793 they provided only a fifth.
Thus, even before the arrival of income tax the relative role of the land tax was shrinking relative to that of indirect taxes.
Only after Addington's budgets of the first decade of the nineteenth century did direct taxation, albeit in a much altered form, begin to recover its share.
In the beginning the land tax had itself been somewhat "revolutionary" .
Its granting by parliament in 1692 had meant that the king was no longer expected to "live of his own" even in peacetime.
Possibly, as Dr Beckett has suggested, nothing radical had been intended, but nevertheless high-yield, permanent direct taxation had come into being.
It rapidly became a conservative fiscal base — an unchanging standby for governments unable to come up with alternative ways of assessing a national wealth that was not only growing but was substantially changing in form.
Financial survival without pushing the burden of the land tax to intolerable levels was in fact possible though the milking of commercial expansion by indirect  taxation.
As Dr O'Brien has recently pointed out, in effect British governments between 1714 and 1815 constructed a revenue system from component parts which enabled them to increase tax revenues per head from Europe's most rapidly growing population much more successfully than the French from the end of the eighteenth century, despite having been less heavily taxed up to then.
The main feature of this system was the relatively small and, on trend, declining proportion of public revenue which came from direct taxation.
Although the land tax assessment could at times be stretched to include houses, windows, servants, hair powder, non-working horses, carriages and playing cards, and although in times of war the 10 per cent peacetime limit was pushed twice as far, there was no fundamental revaluation and in many parts of the country assessment levels were nominal.
In political terms this failure forced heavy dependence on indirect revenue sources.
A lat-ent macro-economic effect was that the social groups most likely to save bore a relatively light burden — important, perhaps, for the financing of economic growth.
Most forms of capital other than land escaped, while the real burden on land itself was, according to O'Brien and Mathias, "light and diminishing" .
If the doubled level of wartime was a more significant imposition, it was to a degree offset by greater farming profits.
A worsening distribution of income in eighteenth-century England was hardly unrelated to the low tax burden on the richest groups, which was not high to begin with and which was to fall overall as the burden on consumption increased.
Custom and excise revenue already formed 57 per cent of total tax income by 1750 and rose to more than 70 per cent before Addington's direct tax gathering of 1803–15 reduced it to 60 per cent.
With the ending of income tax after 1815, indirect sources yet again rose above 70 per cent.
Of the two sources, excise revenues outweighed those from customs duties by a usual ratio of 2: 1.
While stamp duties of various kinds played a useful role in wartime, especially when they could be attached to particular loans, their total importance was slight.
The excise fell heavily on the production and consumption of alcohol: on home-produced spirits, beer, malt and hops.
Walpole in the mid 1730s was deriving as much as a third of the annual  revenue of £4.5 million secured from indirect taxation from malt and beer.
By 1760–5 these two were providing £3 million out of £4.8 million, and by 1800 £4.6 million out of £11 million.
In addition, import duties were levied on wines.
As O'Brien points out, in many years of the eighteenth century the nation's drinkers were the single most important sustainers of public revenue.
As well as these taxes, the consuming masses paid excise on bricks, starch, glass, salt, printed fabrics, paper, soap, candles, leather and, in London, coal.
Customs duties on imported alcohol were producing more than 60 per cent of a total duty yield of £7 million in 1800, although this was in part because Pitt's reforms had cut the duties on tea.
Other import duties fell on sugar, tobacco, timber, silk, iron bars and, in some years, grain.
Indirect taxation was usually regressive in effect, the more so since the households of the rich were commonly self-suppliers of some excisable goods, such as beer.
Tax gatherers and political economists usually subscribed to a rhetoric of taxing "luxuries" , but sufficient aggregate yields can hardly be secured from imposing only on the consuming habits of the well-to-do.
The net has to draw in a least some widely consumed articles: gin and beer, the "curses of the working classes" , had to be included alongside wines and fine brandy.
Silk, especially after the revolution in the supply and cheapness of cotton, was a luxury, but tobacco was widely indulged in.
Salt was a necessity, tea and sugar rapidly becoming so.
If not necessities, soap and candles were at least "decencies" .
Increasing the cost of bricks, timber and glass did not do much to lift the housing standards of the poor.
Stamp duties, which did fall on the luxury consumption of the better-off, made up only 13 per cent of indirect taxation in 1800 and less than half as much of total revenue.
In general there appears little to challenge the important conclusion of Mathias and O'Brien that the main economic incidence of British taxation was on the level of effective demand, for the majority of the taxpayers were not savers.
Just what macro-economic inference is drawn from this depends on the relative importance ascribed to supply and demand in explanations of the increased growth of the economy after mid century.
The main point to be taken, however, is that by then, even if not yet dramatic, the growth of the economy was strong enough for per capita tax yield to rise with the growing population.
This was the permissive factor which allowed the military needs of     the state to be met from the indirect taxation of a wide range of consumer goods, which in turn funded the wartime borrowing needs of a country taking an increasing part in the state system of Europe.
Within indirect taxation there were sound reasons for favouring excise over customs duties.
The most important of these, the sheer efficiency of collection, was also the reason why Walpole found such political and popular resistance in trying to move towards an excise-based system, although over the century most of the commodities he would have included in his general excise did find their way into its embrace.
By 1780 the Excise had watch over 33,000 brewers and  victuallers, 36,000 publicans, 35,500 tea and coffee dealers and several thousand chandlers, as well as smaller numbers in such trades as calico printing and paper making.
By the end of the American war its establishment, which had been 2,738 in 1714, had risen to 4,910 — twice as large as the rest of the financial administration.
Backed by summary jurisdiction applied by local justices in the provinces and by the excise commissioners in London, its ability to secure conviction against evaders was, by eighteenth-century standards, astonishing.
In 1789–90 the conviction rate in London was 79 per cent and in the provinces 85 per cent.
No wonder the great common lawyer Blackstone was of the opinion that "the rigour and arbitrary proceedings of excise laws seem hardly compatible with the temper of a free nation" .
Be that as it may, the efficiency of the Customs service was much less regarded.
That department was less professional, more full of placemen and more frequently evidenced corruption and bribery.
Apart from this, its task of dealing with widespread coastal smuggling was very much harder than that of the Excise in detecting inland evasion.
Furthermore, while economic historians might assess in retrospect the effects of excise on levels of consumption, or by implication on the level of savings, customs duties in their own time were never seen solely from the point of view of the revenue but always as an important instrument of economic regulation.
From the time of Walpole they developed into a system of encouraging home manufactures and food producers while disadvantaging competitors.
Indeed, as the path of economic development over the eighteenth century moved the composition of retained imports away from manufactured goods towards raw mat-erials, the possibility of increasing revenue without harming the productive side of the economy narrowed steadily.
Reforms, like those carried out by the Younger Pitt, were impressive in their own terms but could do little to diminish the greater role of the Excise.
Taxation can be redistributive without being progressive.
That is to say, it can merely shift income from one better-off section to another.
When eighteenth-century gentlemen complained that the landed classes were being taxed to the gain of others, it was not the poorer classes they had in mind.
The process was perceived as a simple one.
The government taxed to finance the national debt, which debt was held by the new upstart class of City men and merchants.
As one jaundiced critic put it in 1733: "A set of brocaded tradesmen cloathed in purple and fine linen, and faring sumptuously every day, raising to themselves immense wealth, so as to marry their daughters to the first rank, and leave their sons such estates as to enable them to live in the same degree.
In 1757 Postlethwayt went so far as to argue that the national debt had had the effect of transferring property to the "money-mongers" at such a pace that, "Since our debts have taken place, not near one tenth of the land of England is possessed by the posterity or heirs of those who possessed it at the Revolution." 
He went further: with the rise in dealing in government stock, true merchants were changing into something else.
…while Men's Heads are busied with the arts of money-jobbing between the Exchange and the Exchequer, they will be drawn off from the solid arts of honourable traffic; which alone can prove nationally and permanently lucrative.
But if we convert our traders into stock-jobbers, who is to carry on the commerce of the kingdom?
Hyperbolic perhaps, but Dr Dickson's analysis of the structure of debt holding confirms that some degree of transfer from taxpaying land-holders to a class of debt-holding financiers was a characteristic of the public finance system.
It was qualified by the extent that financial gains found their way back into land, and by the role that stock holding played in providing a source of secure income for pensioners, widows and orphans (the Court of Chancery was one of the largest holders).
Landed proprietors generally did not much invest in the funds, although some individual peers had substantial holdings.
In the mid eighteenth century only 10 per cent of holders lived outside the Home Counties, the majority of ordinary holders being members of the London bourgeoisie or petit bourgeoisie: merchants, bankers, brokers, jobbers, clergymen, doctors, lawyers, shopkeepers, artisans and sometimes even servants.
Dr Dickson, on whose research our knowledge of the structure of debt holding depends, has analysed the pattern for Bank of England, South Sea, East India and government 4 per cent stock around the time of Pelham's reduction of interest in 1749–.
There were around 30,000 public creditors.
Holders of less than £500 formed around 21 per cent of the total number of accounts in both Bank and East India stock, 38 per cent of holders of the 4 per cent stock and more  than half of the holders of South Sea stock, but in all four cases this group held less than 10 per cent of the total stock.
Holders of £500 to £1,000 worth formed 31.4 per cent of the East India stock hold-ers, 22.9 per cent of the Bank's, 18 per cent of the South Sea Company's and 19 per cent of the 4 per cent 's.
The proportion of stock they held was, respectively 11.5 per cent, 6.3 per cent , 10.2 per cent and 7.7 per cent .
Much more significant in this respect were hold-ers of £1,000 to £5,000, who held respectively 42 per cent, 47.5 per cent , 25.8 per cent and 35.4 per cent of accounts in proportions of 50, 42.8, 41.8 and 43.3 per cent of stock.
At the top of the scale those whose holdings exceeded £5,000 formed from 3.5 to 8.1 per cent of account holders but held from 35 to 48.5 per cent of total stock.
Dickson concludes that: "Tory fears of the great world of wealth and influence, which they hated with the intensity of the excluded, were based on something more solid than ignorance and prejudice." 
If there was a redistributive aspect to funding of the national debt and its associated taxation, it was largely one which operated within the ranks of the better-off.
The redistributive aspects of local taxation, however, were quite different.
Although the statistics are hardly firm, it would seem that by the end of the eighteenth century county rates, used mostly for gaols, criminal prosecution, constables and, to a smaller extent, bridge repair, aggregated only around £300,000, but the levying of the parish rate for the relief of the poor was of much greater import.
Here, as Professor Mathias has pointed out, aggregated receipts were at lev-els comparable to those of the government for civil expenditure.
Just under £750,000 in the mid eighteenth century, they rose through £5.3 million in 1803 to more than £8 million by 1813.
As population grew and harvests failed more often, attitudes towards the rate-receiving poor hardened, especially after the food crisis of 1795–6 when even firmly rising rents were outpaced by the soaring poor rate.
Landlords not only were assessed on their directly occupied land but were constantly calling for relief for tenants, for whom increasing poor rates were setting a ceiling for rents.
Contemporaries such as Joseph Townshend who, in his Dissertation on the Poor Laws in 1786, referred to the poor rate throughout as a tax, were in no doubt that the landed interest, from landlords through the gentry to large and smaller tenants and owners, bore the main brunt of the poor rate: "Monied men have greatly the advantage  over the owners and occupiers of land, as being free from those heavy taxes, which the latter pay to the King, to the church, and to the poor." 
At no time was this "advantage" more glaring than when putting-out capitalists contracted or suspended their activities in rural manufacturing districts, throwing workers on to the parishes.
It seems reasonable to accept the contemporary view that in rural England, albeit with much variation in the pattern between parishes, a significant transfer of income took place towards the poorer members of society.
The view, increasingly held, that the pre-1834 Poor Law was a far from ineffective mechanism in this respect, rests on the recognition that until the sums needed for relief inflated so hugely in the later eighteenth century and especially after the crisis of the mid 1790s, extreme disgruntlement was not often expressed, as a sense of community support and involvement led to a fairly general acceptance of the obligation which rested on the better-off.
It rests also on the insight that income "transferred" by this means was not used only for the minimum relief of destitution, for the old, widowed, orphaned and infirm, but also for the purchase of some "decencies" , for the supplementation of the earnings of the underemployed as well as the relief of the involuntarily unemployed, and for the apprenticing of the children of the poor.
There is strength in the argument that poor rates, viewed as a form of local taxation, were wholly different from national taxation in their redistributive effects.
INSURANCE, BANKING AND CURRENCY
Insurance is one of the longest established of British financial activities.
Its marine branch was developed in the sixteenth century, although Lloyd's Coffee House became its focus only from 1698, producing its first "List" in 1734 and its Register from the 1750s.
Odd instances of life insurance contracts have been found from the same period, while fire insurance was known in seventeenth-century London.
In the period following the Great Fire of London in 1666 several companies were floated, but the real expansion came with the increase in urbanisation of the late eighteenth and early  nineteenth centuries.
The sums involved in fire insurance quadrupled between the mid 1780s and the late 1820s.
This branch was controlled by incorporated companies based in London — a dominance still marked in the first decade of the nineteenth century when City-based firms were responsible for 90 per cent of sums insured.
In 1806 a handful of major companies — the Sun Fire Office (1710), the Royal Exchange Assurance (1721) and the Phoenix Fire Office (1782)— between them still transacted 60 per cent of fire insurance.
According to the leading present-day authority on this sector, Professor Supple, it was over the course of the eighteenth century that it assumed its modern form and structure, with agencies and branches, inter-company coordination of premium rates and policy conditions, and averaging of claims.
Life insurance developed alongside, but did not really take on its modern form until the last decades of the eighteenth century.
Policies were issued from the 1720s by both Royal Exchange Assurance and the London Assurance — the only two survivors of the South Sea Bubble — but these were few in number, rarely issued for more than a year at a time and based on uniform rather than on age-related premiums.
Supple considers the modern form to have originated with the Society for Equitable Assurances on Lives and Survivorships in 1762, but its example was not followed by the Royal Exchange for another twenty years and only two new life companies were formed before 1800.
Indeed, in insurance the eighteenth century was generally a period of establishment rather than of rapid growth.
The inflationary stimulus of the war saw the promotion of fifteen offices between 1793 and 1815, but twenty-nine were to come into existence between 1815 and 1830 and fifty-six between 1830 and 1844.
The underwriting activities of insurance companies are important in both economic and social contexts, but their link with the financial revolution lies in the raising of investment funds.
Like the Bank of England and the great chartered companies, the London Assurance Company and the Royal Exchange Assurance Company received their monopoly status in 1720 in return for lending considerable sums to the government.
These companies and others, such as the Sun Fire Office, through their accumulated resources became major sources of investment.
Sun Fire around 1800 had an  investment income of £30,000 per annum compared with underwriting profits of £12,000.
It also held East Indian bonds, and the fact that it gave substantial mortgages on land has led Dickson to suggest that to an extent it was diverting funds derived from industry and trade towards the landed interest.
Certainly insurance companies, however widespread their operations may have become, were in important respects City institutions.
As late as 1790, less than a fifth of shareholders in Sun Fire lived in the provinces.
The setting up of the Bank of England in 1694 was a major step in the foundation of a sound system of public credit, but the secondary effects of its establishment were at least as important for the development of the eighteenth-century economy.
As Professor Deane has put it, there took place, mainly in the first half of the century, "a series of developments in the money market, an expansion in the number, range and efficiency of English financial institutions which amounted in all to a financial revolution" .
Key elements of the financial system grew up around the Bank, such as insurance, partnership banks, chartered trading companies and the Stock Exchange.
What the Bank got in return for its public lending services were paper assets which ranged from Exchequer and Navy bills to longer-term consolidated stocks.
With these it "further lubricated the channels linking savings and investment by creating a large stock of negotiable paper assets which new savers could buy whenever existing lenders wanted to realise their loans" .
At the same time the Bank took the lead in securing regular deposits sufficient both to underwrite and to secure and expand private credit.
Not only this, for the trusted promissory notes of the Bank easily became a form of paper money.
With the establishment of a safe market in claims to money and credit, a large and expandable stock of liquid assets was fed into the economy, easing transactions and short-term trade credit.
In short, as Dickson has put it, the rise of a regular security market in London had the effect of "making debts that were permanent for the state, liquid for the individual" .
Trusted paper became both a collateral for short-term credit and an immensely important medium of exchange.
The issuing of cheques or bank notes on the security of withdrawable deposits enabled the creation of a paper currency which was central to the financial revolution and crucial for the growth of commerce and manufacturing.
What emerged over the first half of the century was a financial  system which, if limited by comparison with what was to develop over the next two centuries, was capable of mobilising substantial funds and of providing most of the essential services needed by a diversifying economy growing both in output and in sophistication.
Whether it is appropriate to talk of a "national banking system" by the mid eighteenth century is debatable.
Certainly one was emerging, and its embryonic form was increasingly dominated by London.
This tendency, as Professor Joslin pointed out, accelerated once the landed classes came to appreciate both the security and the convenience of lodging a substantial part of their incomes with London banks.
This flow was paralleled by remittances to the City of customs and tax revenues from the district collectors.
As well as the clear dominance of overseas and inland trade by London, it was becoming increasingly common for transactions between separate provincial places to be effected through it.
In important respects, however, the Bank remained, as Clapham termed it, the "Bank of London" .
In terms of note issue, for instance, its volume was more than equalled by that from country banks, although this in part reflected its own increasing specialisation in discounting.
The number of institutions in London which can reasonably be considered private banks seems to have doubled in the fifty years between 1725 and 1775 to reach fifty-two.
Some of these were small; others like Childs, Hoare, and Barclay, were to become major names in the world of finance.
All must be presumed to have been somewhat limited in potential, for the Bank of England's sole right to joint-stock banking constrained the others into the "partnership" form.
The Bank, however, hardly competed vigorously for private accounts before mid century.
Its holdings were dominated by the great trading companies, especially the East India Company.
In any case, the clear separation of the Bank from all others was well enough indicated by Lord North in 1781 when he referred to it as "a part of the constitution" and "to all intents and purposes the public exchequer" .
As well as its management of the floating debt, it had increasingly taken over the handling of the service payments on the funded debt, and it held the balances of many departments of state as well as of provincial tax gatherers.
In the private sector its notes were the main medium of exchange for London transactions; circulation reached £6 million in 1785, backed by a sizeable fraction of the country's bullion stock.
The banks who held the great majority of private accounts were divided by Joslin into two groups.
The first, in the West End, had as its clients the peerage and gentry rather than the mercantile classes.
These depositors were less likely to make sudden substantial withdrawals, which allowed for lower cash reserves: profit without risk, especially since lendings were usually secured on land mortgage.
Banks like Childs and Hoares received the rents from the estates, made investments in stocks and collected dividends for their landed clients.
It may have been this group Professor Ashton had in mind when he drew attention to the way in which London banks played a role in making available the "savings of agriculturalists' to provide" much of the investment in manufacture".
It seems more likely, however, that the banks who received income from the landed re-lent within that class and contributed more to agricultural than industrial progress.
In so far as they purchased stocks for their clients, that was, if an important redirection of resources, hardly an immediate switch between sectors.
If we view this group as "conservative" , the same is not true of the distinct world of the Lombard Street banks whose depositors were the true mercantile and financier groups of the City.
Yet after 1750 this group came to acquire a special connection with the provinces through its links with the country banks.
Increasingly these came to employ London banking houses as agents to honour their bills drawn on London and to cash their notes payable in the City, either investing the realised funds or remitting cash into the country.
The London banker either charged a commission or profited from the use of his clients' cash deposits.
It was the City banks with mercantile connections, rather than the West End houses used by the landed classes, who moved into this relationship — less surprising than it seems, for, as Joslin pointed out, the country banks had themselves most often grown from country merchant or manufacturing activities.
A list of 1797 provides the information that the 25 per cent of London's banks who did not act as agent to even one country bank included most of those in the West End but only a few of the older of the Lombard Street group.
Most of the latter group's banks did so act, some holding as many as ten agencies.
Of these extreme pluralists, only Barclay's had been established before the banking boom of 1769–73.
It is clear, then, that  the independent rise of country banking had, after about 1770, a major impact on the structure of London banking, bringing a new and risky business which needed greater commercial knowledge and expertise.
A clear symbol of the growth of a banking system was the establishment in 1773 of the London Clearing House to cope with the huge increase in inter-bank payments.
Thirty-one out of thirty-six City banks joined in this key venture and it was also from their group that the practice of banks holding accounts at the Bank of England and re-discounting through it developed towards the end of the century.
This looked forward to the main role of the Bank as the bankers' bank and, eventually, to the normal settling of inter-bank debts through it.
The relationship of the development of London banking to the industrial revolution must be sought in the interactions of the macro-economy rather than directly.
Historians have, however, been shown to have underestimated the role in this respect of the country banks.
Ashton pointed out that the late rise of formal banking in the country was due in part to the fact that it grew naturally out of the financial activities of men who "were content to describe themselves simply as merchants or traders, retailers or even inn-keepers" .
To his list we could add attorneys and even local receivers of taxes, six of whom appear in a list of country bankers drawn up in 1784.
Later manufacturers such as Matthew Boulton entered the ranks, though at the same time being himself, through his close involvement with Cornish mining, an account holder with Elliot and Praed of Truro, whose rise and activities were closely linked to that industry.
If country banks were a product of the latter half of the eighteenth century, country banking functionally defined has a longer history, despite the fact that only a dozen institutions formally known as banks were in existence before 1750.
A list of 1797 records 334, which number had doubled by 1810.
Like their London counterparts, their institutional and individual development was limited by the Bank of England's monopoly of the joint-stock form.
In rural districts the banks' main purpose was the receiving of bills brought in by local traders and farmers.
These were sometimes directly discounted for coin or notes but, as we have seen, were increasingly sent on to the London agent for collection.
Demand for funds was more likely to exceed supply in manufacturing  districts, and country banks in this situation drew on their correspondents in the City by sending in immature bills.
As Ashton has pointed out, to the extent that the London recipients discounted these from the balances of rural banks, capital was being moved from areas of oversupply to those of greater demand.
Many country banks lent in their own notes, but others did so only in coin or in Bank of England notes or bills and drafts.
Most of those in rural districts were note issuers, as we know urban banks in Newcastle, Norwich, Bristol, Sheffield and Birmingham to have been.
It seems, however, that few notes were issued in Lancashire and in parts of the West Riding.
More favoured here was the use of promissory notes and bills of exchange in large volume and down to low denominations.
Indeed, until acts of 1775 and 1777 introduced bottom limits of £1 and £5 respectively, some north-western manufacturers issued promissory notes to facilitate the payment of wages for denominations as low as a shilling.
These were taken by local retailers, who accumulated them for exchange against larger bills drawn on London.