

Part Two
15
One Sunday morning, about a week after I had seen my dad for the second time, I was lying in bed when I heard voices in the street below.
They were singing.
Not loudly, but loudly enough for half past six on a Sunday morning.
Among the voices, I thought I recognized Roger Beedini's and Hannah Dooley's.
Mother-life God she is calling Thee!
Mother-life God she is calling Thee!
Holla!
Holla!
Holla!
Awa-a-a-y!
We have very patient neighbours.
I got up, staggered to the window and, while keeping my head below the level of the sill, attempted to close it.
My first thought was that I was 320 duck-jumps behind and if I was ever going to make the state of shai-hai I would probably have to spend a whole weekend duck-jumping.
My second thought, which did not occur to me until I was crawling back along the floor towards my bed, was that today was the day when I was due to Testify.
That was what the choir outside was for.
I had been called upon to show my newly strengthened Christian faith before the whole congregation of the First Spiritualist Church.
Praying with Quigley wasn't enough.
I had to tell the people.
He was very emphatic about that.
I got back under the duvet and felt my balls, for reassurance.
These were probably one of the few things of mine not due to be on show at the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist later  this morning.
As Quigley had said to me, last night, ‘Speak the whole truth of your heart when you testify, Simo!’
There is a sign outside the First Church that reads
ARE YOU A CUSTARD CHRISTIAN?
DO YOU GET UPSET OVER TRIFLES?
JESUS ISN'T.
COME ON IN AND JOIN HIM.
If I was a Christian at all— and I wasn't sure that I was — I thought I was probably a custard Christian.
Or maybe not even that.
Maybe I was a jelly Muslim or a sponge-cake Buddhist.
The whole truth of my heart .
The thought of morning service is always a pain, and the prospect of this one made me stick my head back under the duvet to block out the already brilliant day.
I had also remembered that the Quigleys were still living with us.
‘We're having building work done,’ Quigley had said, ‘so we can camp out with you!’
He had said this as if he was doing us all a big favour.
My mum came in at about 07.15, holding out my black suit and a white shirt that she had just ironed.
She stood looking at me from the end of the bed.
‘Oh, Simon!’ she said.
‘Oh Simon!’
‘Yes, Mum?’
She put the shirt and the suit on a chair by the window.
‘I wonder if Daddy will come through today.
I must say, I hope he manifests himself.
He'd be so proud!’
I thought there was a very good chance of his showing up.
Quite often there are more deceased members of the congregation present on Sunday mornings than there are living punters.
‘Would he?’
She looked at me narrowly.
She was rather less convinced about my conversion than the Quigleys.
I had been doing my best to mime the odd prayer since my dad died, but I had a feeling she saw through me.
‘You're not going to be silly, are you?’
‘No, Mum.
I just wasn't sure whether he would be proud.
I mean, Mum, was he religious or what?’
‘He was…’
She stopped.
I found myself wondering what exactly my dad had been.
He had been religious.
I knew that.
Even if he wasn't always sure quite what religion he belonged to.
She had told me how they met at a First Spiritualist Church ‘Convert the Heathen’ session outside the Anglican church in putney.
Pike, Quigley and Mum used to wait behind the hedge, rattling tambourines and waving placards saying ARE YOU REALLY GOING TO MEET THE LIVING GOD? as the congregation filed out and chatted to the vicar about the problems of British Rail.
Dad had had some kind of religious crisis later, but I didn't know too much about that.
He had mentioned it to me, in a roundabout sort of way, but I could never work out when it had happened or how old I was when it occurred.
It was funny I couldn't remember.
But your own past can be a closed book, even at fourteen.
My mum, as mums tend to do, had divined my state of mind rather shrewdly and moved over to the bed in a thoughtful kind of way.
‘Norman…’
At first I thought she might be addressing him directly.
Then I realized we were into genuine past-tense mode.
She sighed slowly.
‘I very nearly married a man called Flugtermans,’ she said — 'a dentist.’
Why was she telling me this?
‘I met him at a tennis club, and he was a very, very attractive man indeed.
And very fond of me.
But I didn't continue the relationship are these your socks?’
‘Yes.’
‘They're stiff with dirt!
And your father was not, I have to say, a handsome man although he was…’
‘Available,’ I said.
She gave me a sharp look.
‘Anyway,’ she went on, ‘then he went to portugal and everything changed of course you should really have some new blinds but they're so expensive and they warp.’
I knew better than to interrupt.
Sooner or later, out of monologues like this, some really vital piece of information was liable to emerge.
‘Of course,’ she said, ‘I know you still blame me for what happened at Angmering.’
I kid you not, I had not a clue as to what she might be talking about.
People assume that parents and children will understand each other.
It doesn't work out like that.
They share experiences, but they don't seem to share the same memories of them.
Family business is strange.
I can remember my dad opening the newspaper once and saying, ‘There is going to be a war in China.’
And I can also remember him standing in the hall with my mum and her saying, ‘I am going out!’ and him, for some reason I will never understand, bursting into tears.
Why did he cry?
And was he even the same guy as the one with markedly dodgy views about the international situation in the Far East?
‘Gorbachev is a genius!’ was another one of his.
Only to be followed, a few weeks later, by ‘Gorbachev is an idiot!’
How could you explain this human stuff to Globo, Arch Lord of the System of the Blabbenoids?
You couldn't.
You know why?
Because it doesn't make sense.
I looked at mum as she moved towards the door.
She seemed pleased to have got this off her chest.
Whatever it was.
‘In Angmering…’
I said, cautiously.
She suddenly got angry
‘With Veronica, for Christ's sake!’
I still didn't get it.
She went to the window and looked down at our drab patch of suburban garden.
She sighed.
‘I'll never forget that night in Lisbon!’
Then she turned to me: ‘Always be faithful and true, Simon.
Always be honest and faithful and sincere in your dealings with others where are your trainers?’
‘On the floor.’
‘Keep them out of sight!’
Then she puckered her lips and allowed her breast to heave one or two times.
This is usually a sure sign that she is about to quote from the collected works of Old Mother Walsh, and this, indeed, is what she did: ‘Shoes are remarkable, warm, bright and neat.
The best place to keep them is on your feet.’’
And with these words she thumped off down the stairs, leaving me to collect my thoughts for the hard task of Testifying.
I rolled out of bed and, feeling I was doomed to the state of hei-hei , or eternal sloth and uselessness, I wondered whether I could find a pair of unstiff socks.
The choir outside seemed to have stopped, but downstairs I could hear the Quigleys.
Marjorie, who has a carrying voice, was saying, ‘Isn't Testifying the best thing?
Mrs Danby says it's the best thing !’
She sounded rather girlish as she said this.
Then I heard Quigley's low bass, but couldn't make out what he was saying.
I took one last, depressed look at myself in the mirror above the electric fire and clattered down the stairs.
As I reached the landing I heard Mrs Quigley say, ‘We're having the patio done.
Then we're getting a completely new roof.’
They were getting a good deal out of staying at our house.
Some people have to rent places.
And, while we were at it, how the hell were they managing to afford these improvements?
My dad always used to say that we could not afford lunch, although, I have to say, this did not stop him eating it.
They were all in the clothes traditionally worn when people are going to Testify.
My mum was wearing a sort of large red sack and a conical hat that made her look like a gnome in a pantomime.
Mrs Quigley was wearing a loose white robe with a hat and a veil rather like a bee-keeper's.
She looked like a worker at a nuclear power station.
Women at Testifying must be ‘loose and bright’, as Old Mother Walsh once said.
The men are their usual uninspiring selves.
Mrs Quigley held out her arms as I came into the hall.
‘Oh my darling, darling boy!’ she said.
I had been getting a lot of this.
I had so far managed to avoid being kissed by the old bat, but I had the strong feeling that, by the end of the day, she and I were going to be getting physical.
I stayed where I was.
She decided against physical contact.
Instead, she looked up to the ceiling from where she got quite a lot of her inspiration.
Quigley was smirking next to her.
The whore truth of my heart !
How was he going to take the news of the hijacking of earthling bodies by extraterrestrial beings?
I was going to have to be extremely subtle about this.
‘Jesus,’ said Mrs Quigley in sharp tones, ‘can you see this boy?’
‘Thee him,’ said Emily.
‘He'th blethed!’
My face didn't crack.
‘Today’, said Quigley, ‘is a very great day in your life.
You're going to stand up in front of a hundred or so of your closest friends and tell them your deepest, most private thoughts.’
This seemed to me to be a pretty fair definition of hell, but I tried to look like a man who enjoyed such occasions.
‘You're going to tell them’, said Quigley, ‘what you think about…about…everything !’
And then, with a kind of war whoop, he picked me up under the armpits and carried me out to the choir waiting outside.
He was incredibly strong.
As we thundered along the road, he whispered in my ear, ‘And after you've Testified, Simon, you'll be Confirmed in Faith.
In ten days.
Think of it!
Cor blimey, mate, you're not just Simon, old lad.
You're Simon pure!’
Bergman had a barmitzvah and I went.
Everyone there was Jewish apart from me.
There was a Lot of chanting, and after, wards we went to a posh hotel and I got a free hat.
Bergman, at the end of it, was officially a man.
As far as I am concerned, Bergman has been officially a man since the end of the Upper Removes.
He is one hairy guy.
But it was nice to see all these old geezers with huge noses treating him as if he was a man.
In the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist you are Confirmed in Faith, which means you are officially a berk.
There are no free hats.
Quigley held me up with one free hand and opened the door of his car with the other.
He threw me across the front seat, and the choir applauded — whether this was for my benefit or to register approval for Quigley's strong right arm was not clear.
He wanted me Confirmed in Faith did he?
Being Confirmed in Faith is the full masonic job.
I've never been able to find out what goes on at the ceremony, but, from what I've heard, there is more to it than rolling up your trouser-leg.
I know that the male members of the congregation ‘play loudly on the organ and show their bodies’.
I know a fair amount of water gets chucked around, and at some point I think you are expected to wear your underpants on your head.
But in between all these things something happens which is only spoken of in hushed whispers.
Maybe they paint your balls green.
All this stuff dates back years, to Old Mother Walsh and her Sisters.
When they baptized people they stayed baptized.
You know?
There was none of this dip-the-finger-in-the-water-and-let's-talk-about-the-Test-Match bollocks.
They used to run down into the Nerd, or whatever river it is that runs through Ealing, and throw themselves in, yelling about the love of Jesus.
Water was cheap and unpolluted in those days.
He was really moving fast was Quiggers.
He couldn't wait to get me sewn up, could he?
Why the big hurry ?
I wondered, as Mum, Emily and Mrs Quigley got into the back of his brand new car and he thrust it out into the traffic.
One of the areas where Quigley really needs a lot of help from the Lord jesus is in the driving department.
But I have never heard him confess his unworthiness in this field of human endeavour.
He snarls at motorcyclists, accelerates hard at the back of buses, and views the red traffic light as a challenge rather than a warning.
As we careered down towards South Wimbledon, I remembered  other trips I'd taken to church.
Mostly I thought about going with my dad.
I thought about running along beside him as we came up to the main road opposite the church, about his taking my hand and singing, ‘Hold my hand — I'm a stranger in paradise !’
And, as I thought about that, another image came into my mind.
A heavy, silver casket was swinging backwards and forwards and there was that smell in the air — a smell of old leaves and perfume and musty, clinging sweetness.
There was music, too, and those long shafts of light that fell from a high window, somewhere over to my right.
For the first time, I could feel my father very close to me, his face very dark and serious.
He was talking to someone.
Someone I couldn't see.
I wanted to see who it was, but I couldn't.
He was mumbling.
The words he was using weren't English.
They were some old, runic language I couldn't understand.
But there was something even stranger than that about him.
He was on his knees.
Why?
Why was he kneeling?
And to whom?
‘We are come to the Temple,’ said Mrs Quigley, as Quigley reversed into a parked car.
The street was packed with members of the First Spiritualist Church.
It was Day Release at the loony bin.
Over by the door of the church I could see Meriel Viney, wearing a kind of white sack and a pair of what looked like tennis shoes.
On her head was a hat that looked as if someone had dropped a large meringue on her head.
She was chatting away to Roger Beeding and to Roger de Mornay.
There were, I found myself thinking, a hell of a lot of people called Roger in the First Spiritualist Church.
What was it about the name that made them want to funk on down and start praising the Lord?
We had no Peters, no Colins, only one David and, though there had been a Kevin a few years back, we were now understaffed in that area too.
But you just could not keep the Rogers away!
It's for old people, our Church.
Old people called Roger.
Right outside the church, directly in front of Roger Beeding, was a large Rolls Royce.
Sitting in the back seat was a woman in a long, cream dress and a hat the size of a toddler's swimming-pool.
She was smoking a small cigar and sported a face that was a lot less elegant than the hat.
Quigley is down on smokers.
Cigarettes are the work of the Devil.
But smoking was obviously kosher as far as this old bat went.
He rushed up to her as she got out of the Roller, took her right hand and thrust it into his beard.
‘Oh!’
I heard him say.
‘Oh!’
Mrs Quigley looked pretty pleased as well.
She had the air of one who might head for the pavement and start writhing at any minute.
‘Mrs Danby,’ she croaked, ‘I'm so pleased!
Mrs Danby!’
So this was Mrs Danby.
It was strange.
I couldn't remember ever having dapped eyes on her before.
But she was looking at me as if we were long-lost friends.
She was smiling so hard the gauze on her hat wobbled.
And, as I met her eyes, I did have a memory of something, although I couldn't have said what.
It was to do with a smell and some music and a steel thing swinging out and back, out and back, like the pendulum in the story by Edgar Alan poe.
‘This’, Mrs Danby was saying, ‘is one of the greatest days of my life!’
She simpered at me.
I was beginning to feel like a ritual sacrifice.
I mean, had the First Spiritualists moved on?
Was I going to have it off with this woman and a couple of goats?
Give me the goats any time, I thought, as I was shuffled towards her.
‘Has Norman come through?’
I heard her say.
‘We have been in constant touch with him,’ said Quigley, as if he was reassuring the chairman about the Exports Division.
The old bat beamed.
‘How is he?’
Who was this woman?
And why would she not take her eyes off me?
‘What's he doing over there?’
Everyone looked at Mrs Quigley.
‘Oh, he's been…jetting around,’ she said at last.
‘Yes,’ said Mrs Danby, shaking her head winsomely, ‘he was always a busy soul was Norman.
Has he made new contacts?’
‘He feels very, very fully occupied,’ said Mrs Quigley, ‘but we are getting some very serious indications that he has been…having a personal rethink.’
Mrs Danby nodded gravely.
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘Oh yes.
When we fall, how we do fall!’
I couldn't work out what she meant by this.
In fact, I couldn't work her out at all.
She was wearing high-heeled shoes — which is very unusual for a First Spiritualist — and she was smirking at people as if she was at a cocktail party rather than morning service.
Behind her I could see into what is rather optimistically known as the vestry — which is nothing more than a curtained-off area of the floor, rather like what you might see in a hospital casualty ward.
Pike was standing by a wooden rack of pamphlets, including What Has Old Mother Walsh to Say to Us ? and a large, colourful one for the kiddies entitled Daddy isn't Dead, He's Just Gone Out for a Bit .
Mrs Danby started up the steps, and we followed her.
When she got to the large graph that shows the state of the church-roof appeal, she stopped and looked down at the waiting crowds as if she was a victorious politician looking down on her compliant voters.
To avoid catching her eye, I looked at the graph.
As far as I could tell, the roof seemed to be consuming money faster than we could give it.
She grabbed my hand and turned her wrinkled face to mine.
‘You don't remember me, do you?’ she said.
I didn't reply.
I wanted to ask her if she was, by any chance, called Veronica, but I didn't dare.
She tossed her head and looked around at the congregation.
‘I have not been to Service these few years,’ she said.
‘I have been in the Outer Darkness!’
Perhaps she had been abroad, to Africa or something.
That would explain why I didn't recognize her.
She was hard to  miss, even among such a handpicked collection of fruitcakes as the First Spiritualist Church.
‘I was close to your father during his great crisis,’ she said, ‘and it was I who led him astray.
Into other fields, other woods, other pastures that seemed sweet but were full, as it turned out, of stinking weeds!’
They had been on country rambles together, was that it?
‘And now’, she went on, ‘I am hearing Norman again.
I am hearing him loud and clear.
You are helping me, Simon.
And when you are one with us, when you have plunged your head in the cold, clear waters of baptism, then my great sin will be forgiven.
I stole the father and gave Him back the son!’
I didn't like the sound of any of this — especially the bit about plunging the old head in the cold, clear waters of baptism.
But there was nothing I could say.
I still had this uncomfortable feeling that I did know her.
That she belonged to some time, when I was a little kid, that had somehow been barred from my memory.
Down below, Roger Beeding was beginning the traditional question-and-answer routine that always comes before you go into the morning service.
BEEDING: Shall we go in and worship?
CONGREGATION: Let us.
BEEDING: How shall we go in and worship?
CONGREGATION: On our feet.
BEEDING: How shall we worship when we are within?
CONGREGATION: On our knees.
BEEDING: How shall we go before the Living God if He appears before us?
CONGREGATION: On our bellies…
I used to have a friend, the only other boy of my age in the congregation, before he went to Nottingham.
He and I had a version of the Introit that went: BEEDING: How shall we stand in the church?
CONGREGATION: On our heads.
BEEDING: What may we hold when we are within?
CONGREGATION: Our penises.
BEEDING: How may we hold them?
CONGREGATION: Well and tightly…
I thought of him now — he was called Mike Jarvis and he was a great skateboarder — as the congregation swept up the steps, past me and Mrs Danby, and Pike triumphantly pushed back the curtain to reveal the inner sanctum of the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist.
It was a sight as familiar to me as my own front room.
A large, empty room with high, narrow windows through which the bright day filtered slowly on to various shades of brown.
Brown linoleum on the floor, brown chairs, arranged in neat rows, and, on the walls, pictures and photographs and testimonials from dead Spiritualists, all of them, it seemed to me, written in faded brown ink and confined to faded brown frames.
At the back of the raised platform at one end of the hall was a wooden cross, about six feet high.
That, too, was brown.
As we trooped in for the service, the sun caught it and, for a moment, I had a virion of what it must have really looked like, all those years ago, when they nailed poor old JC up before the people, one bright day in palestine.
At the far end of the hall, Quigley was showing Mrs Danby to what looked like a comfortable chair.
There aren't many of those in the First Church.
And, up on the platform, Roger Beeding was calling the faithful.
‘How are we now?’ he called.
‘We are in the church!’ called back the congregation.
‘How are our voices?’ he called.
And they replied, ‘They are rich and fruitful!’
Mr Toombs raised both his arms.
He looked like Dracula about to make a maiden flight.
‘Let us’, he said, ‘praise the Lord!’
We had started.
There was no going back.
And all I could  think, as the service began, was the whole truth of my heart!
I am supposed to tell the whole truth of my heart !
16
In the autumn of 1924, the young Rose Fox was visited by the spirit of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.
He told her that, in a previous life,she had actually been the composer of Eine Kleine Nachtmusik , and, while she was in a trance, he dictated his new work to her — a Concerto in G for harp, oboe and string orchestra.
The piece was performed in Wimbledon Town Hall in 1926, and the consensus was that, in 130-odd years, Wolfgang had not really developed musically.
Some people were so bold as to suggest that he had now lost his grip and was writing pretty fair garbage.
It didn't stop at Mozart.
It turned out that Rose Fox had been an awful lot of people in previous lives — mostly male, and all of them, apart from a rather dull-sounding galley slave in 34 BC, rather famous or important.
These people have always Done Things in previous lives, perhaps to make up for their rather undistinguished efforts while being alive and in their own bodies.
Anyway, one of the people Rose Fox had been was John Wesley.
And, from what I hear, her Wesley was a lot nearer the mark than her Mozart.
He dictated to her many of the hymns that are still in use by the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist — many of whose tunes are exactly the same — bar one or two notes — as the ones the real John Wesley cobbled together in the eighteenth century.
Rose's Uncle Eustace, who lived upstairs in her parents' home when she was a girl, was, incidentally, a staunch Methodist.
The better Wesley went down, the more she did him.
Mozart didn't write much after the concerto for harp, oboe and string  orchestra, apart from an unfinished Requiem Mass, which no one could be persuaded to perform.
But Wesley went on to write hymns, give advice and generally add shape, colour and texture to the ritual life of the First Spiritualist Church.
He was pretty gnomic by all accounts.
He didn't say, ‘Right, men — come in by twos, line up facing east and bang your foreheads on the floor!’
He would come out with lines like, ‘Let your words to God be as the noise of Esau!’
Which meant that, for a couple of weeks, an amazing amount of shouting went on.
So much so that Wesley came back with, ‘And yet softness be a virtue.’
He did sound a bit Mummerset from time to time.
One of the first bits of advice he gave the First Church was, ‘Bend the knee, but not unwisely.’
With the result that, to this day, the guys spend a lot of the service in a kind of crouching position.
He also said, ‘Wave thine extremities and be joyful.’
Which led to all sorts of strange behaviour.
People finally settled on a kind of threshing movement of both arms, which, when combined with the crouch, made the congregation look like a group of canoeists on a particularly tough stretch of water.
But the most important thing Wesley told Rose Fox was, ‘Let there be constant movement in thy church.’
He stuck to that.
In fact he kept on repeating it.
And he made it clear that he wasn't talking about regular reallocation of senior positions in the Church.
So, by the late 1980s, the services resembled the kitchen of a fast-food restaurant during a busy lunch hour.
People would get up, go to the opposite end of the room, jig about, go back to their seat (or, better still, someone else's), get up again and jog round the perimeter of the hall.
As Rose got older, Wesley's orders got stranger and stranger.
Most people agreed that things had gone a bit far when he told the Church, in 1982, to ‘Face north-west whenever possible.’
Did this mean when in the middle of the service?
Or did it mean just what it said?
Were we going to be looking at guys backing into the path of oncoming lorries in order to preserve the decencies?
How about the old sexual intercourse ?
Were  Spiritualists going to be forced to do it in strange, and possibly overexciting, positions?
I'd love to be forced to do it in strange positions.
It's my dream.
Most people ignored this commandment, although I have heard it said that Pike was to be seen with a compass on a number of occasions, trying to align himself correctly.
It turned out the reason we all had to face north-west was because it was the direction ‘from which Rose had come forth’!
She was born in Liverpool.
A year or so later she told everyone that they must make an annual pilgrimage to that city, where she had a cousin in the catering trade who was prepared to give them all cheap rates, but by that time Rose was losing her grip on the faithful.
We started with Healing.
People are always being Healed down at the church.
It is certainly easier to get the medical treatment dished out by Roger Beeding's wife than it is to get to see your local GP.
She does patients in job lots, which is a system I could recommend to the Mayberry Clinic, Wimbledon.
‘Stand before if you wish Healing,’ said Beeding, and his wife — a short, dumpy woman called Clara — walked out in front of the congregation, her eyes tightly shut.
In a high, squeaky voice, she said, ‘Come to me in Jesus's name!’
The usual bunch of hypochondriacs shuffled forward.
Clara Beeding opened her eyes and looked quite relieved to see Jasper Lewens, Tracy Johnson and the guy with the wart.
She had dealt with a case of peritonitis in 1995, and apparently it didn't work out too well.
‘It's my neck,’ Jasper Lewens was saying in a rather whingeing tone.
‘It won't leave me alone!’
Before Lewens could moan on any longer, Clara Beeding put out her hand and touched the side of his head.
‘Your pain', she said, with fantastic confidence, ‘is going!’
Jasper started to rub his neck furiously.
‘O Jesus mine,’ went on Clara, ‘see the pain!
See how the  pain is going from this man!
See how it leaves his body and becomes at one with Thy Word!’
Before he had a chance to respond, Clara had moved on to Tracy Johnson.
Tracy has a thing I can only describe as Non-specific pain.
Some weeks it's in her head, some weeks it's in her chest and some weeks it's in her legs.
This week it was in her womb.
‘O Lord Jesus,’ she kept saying, ‘it is in my womb!’
Tracy isn't as easy to deal with as Jasper.
She likes to make sure everyone knows exactly where the pain is, how long it goes on for and whether it's burning, stabbing, singeing or a combination of all three.
But, before she could really get under way, from one side of the church, the one that leads out to the dustbins, came a group of three or four people one of whom I recognized as Sheldon
Parry, the born-again television director.
Sheldon, who is a really nice bloke and very fond of children, was pushing an elderly lady in a wheelchair.
She looked quite happy to be in the wheelchair.
Or maybe she was happy at the fact that, in a few minutes, after a couple of minutes' contact with Clara Beeding's right mitt, she would be skipping around with the best of them.
Clara did not look best pleased to see her.
The peritonitis wasn't her only disaster.
She had gone badly wrong — so my dad said — with a case of genital herpes.
You could tell that she was looking forward to doing her number on the wart.
She knows where she is with a wart.
But she didn't flinch.
She turned away from Tracy Johnson and went straight to the woman in the chair.
‘O Lord!’ she said, speaking extra loud to drown out Tracy mumbling on about her womb.
‘O Jesus, who made the blind see and the lame to walk, look down on this woman!’
The old lady looked up at her.
Clara stretched out her hands and held them above her client's head.
She was not going to back down on this one, you could tell.
‘You can walk!’ she said, in a throaty voice.
‘No I can't!’ said the old lady, sounding rather perky.
‘I can't walk at all.
That's why I'm here.’
Clara gave a little, silvery laugh and stretched out her hand again until it was about an inch from the old lady's permanent wave.
‘Rise up!’ she said.
‘Rise up and walk!’
The old lady struggled for a bit and then subsided back into her chair.
‘I can't!’ she said, sounding rather apologetic.
‘I really can't.
I'm sorry, but I can't walk!’
For a moment I thought Clara was going to give the old woman a piece of her mind.
Didn't she understand?
You don't get better down at the First Spiritualist Church.
You get Healed.
The two are not necessarily the same thing at all.
And she hadn't said when the disagreeable old trout was going to walk.
It might be next week or a year next Tuesday.
She might, at least, look a bit grateful at Mrs Beeding's taking all this trouble over her.
Before things could get really awkward, there was a movement from the other end of the hall.
It was Quigley.
He always knows when to provide a distraction.
‘I have News!’ he said.
‘I have Great News!’
There is always News at morning service, and it is usually Great News.
It can be news of a member of the congregation's promotion or someone's marriage or — even better — someone being run over by a lorry, but there is always news.
On a slow day, Quigley just goes through the newspapers and rambles on about whatever comes into his brain.
One year, I remember, he gave us half an hour on John McEnroe being slung out of the Men's Singles.
This morning, I had a horrible feeling that the news might be something to do with me.
Quigley pushed his way forward towards the platform as the woman in the wheelchair was hustled away and the man with the wart returned, rather miserably, to his place in the congregation.
Quigley had with him, I noticed, a brown box.
‘I have News’, he said, ‘about one of Us!’
I coughed nervously.
Quigley leaned down, picked up the  box and, from it, pulled out something that looked like a waffle iron.
‘This’, he said ‘is a paper-stripper!’
People nodded seriously.
‘It strips off,’ said Quigley, archly.
Quite a number of heads turned in my direction.
‘It strips off old wallpaper so that new paper can be hung.
New starts be made on old walls!’
Suddenly his face grew dark with anger.
His voice climbed a couple of octaves.
‘But stripping paper isn't the answer,’ he yelled —‘it isn't the answer if the wall is basically no good !’people nodded some more.
‘This paper-stripper’, he went on, ‘isn't doing God's work!
Because God, like us, cannot work with substandard materials.
We are going to throw it aside!’
The man next to me looked a touch apprehensive.
The paper-stripper was about a foot long and nine inches wide.
It looked as if it was quite solidly constructed.
‘Away you go, old paper-stripper!’ screamed Quigley, as he raised the device high over the heads of the congregation.
‘You are only so much rubbish !
Go forth!’
And, suiting the action to the words, he hurled the metal object towards the opposite wall, narrowly missing Hannah Dooley as he did so.
It crashed into the flowerpots on the whitewashed ledge under the window, raining pottery, bits of geranium and John Innes Number 3 Compost all over the congregation.
They loved it.
You could hear them gasp as Quiggers reached out his arm to them.
‘But in this Church’, he said, ‘is a virgin piece of wall.
A piece of wall that is clean and firm and decent even when the paper has been stripped away from it!’
I had a nasty feeling that I was part of this do-it-yourself metaphor.
I stood there looking up at him, wishing that someone would demolish me.
Mrs Quigley, as always, was on cue.
‘Have you got News, Albert?’
He looked at her blankly.
Yes , you could see him thinking,I have damaged a vitally important piece of domestic equipment !
‘News for us, Albert?’
Quigley was still reeling from the impact of his great gesture.
He was, of course, the man who had once brought in a cup, painted black on the inside and white on the outside, and, after pointing out its close resemblance to the soul of the average sinner, had jumped up and down on it, foaming at the mouth.
But the paper-stripper!
This was something that would be hard to beat.
‘News?’
‘News!’ said Quigley, and then looked across at me.
For a moment I thought he was going to get back to the DIY metaphor and start to try to get them to see me as undercoat or Jesus Christ as primer, but, instead, he recovered himself enough to say, ‘Great News!’
There was a sort of rhubarb effect from the pit.
‘What news?’ 'Great news?’'What be this news?’'News, they say!’etc. etc.
Quigley looked in the direction in which he had hurled the paper-stripper as his old lady repeated, ‘O Jesus, Great News!’
She raised her hands above her head, trying to get this going.
‘O Jesus Christ!’ she said.
You could see that the temperature needed raising.
A few people came back with ‘O Jesus!’ or ‘Yes, Jesus!’but nobody was ready for talking in tongues or, indeed, listening to people talking in tongues, which I have often thought is much the more taxing of the two options.
‘Is it News about a boy?’ she asked, reminding me of an actor working with someone who has completely forgotten his lines.
Quigley was looking at her blankly.
‘A boy…’ he said, his heart still with the wallpaper-stripper.
‘What's the boy's name?’ asked Pike.
Short of giving the guy cue-sheets, there was not much else we could do.
Quigley's eyes shifted, weasel-like, from me, to Pike, to his old lady.
At the far side of the church, old Mr Pugh, who had swallowed about half a kilo of compost, was coughing furiously.
‘Yes,’ said Hannah Dooley, who gave the appearance of one prepared to be genuinely surprised by the answer, what is his name ?’
Quigley very slowly raised his right hand.
I had the impression that if he didn't come through on this one soon his position was going to be in very grave danger.
Life at the top end of the First Spiritualist Church has a sharp, corporate edge to it.
But, before our eyes, he seemed to find strength.
The first two fingers closed together as if he was a little kid pretending he had a gun.
He extended his arm fully and began to waggle it in an arc across the faces of the congregation.
‘It's a very special name,’ he said.
It was still hard to tell whether he had actually cottoned on to what the name was.
But quite often Quigley will keep his audience in such a state of suspense that he forgets what it was he intended to say.
‘O Lord!’ said Mrs Q. She looked a bit happier now.
Hannah Dooley was looking as if she might do something usefully hysterical at any moment.
The woman next to Mr pugh seemed to be in tears, but that might have been due to the compost.
‘It's a beautiful name,’ said Quigley.
‘A beautiful and holy name!’
‘Yes,’ said Pike, his eyes glinting madly behind his wire glasses, ‘but what is the name?’
He sounded, I  thought , a touch peevish about this — although years of supporting Quigley might make any man edgy.
I wasn't sure.
A strange change had come over Leo in the last week or so.
Of all of the First Spiritualists, he was the only one who seemed, in some way, to have been affected by this business with my dad.
Why should that be?
‘There's an S in it!’ said Quigley, who was still keeping his cards pretty close to his chest.
‘Ohhh!’ said the congregation.
This was all getting a bit like the Paul Daniels show.
‘There's an I in it!’ said Quigley.
‘Ohhhh!’
‘And an M and an N and E!’
I wondered who he was talking about.
A new recruit called Smein possibly.
‘And an O!’ said Quigley, sounding a bit perturbed.
Maybe he was talking about someone called Simone.
Or a new Japanese Christian called Monsei.
Not that it mattered.
No one is liable to comment on a renegade E in the First Church.
Quigley was now back on course, and you could feel the relief in the audience.
‘It's a SIMON!’ he said.
‘Ohhhh!’ moaned the punters.
The paper-stripper was forgotten.
He could have flung fifty paper-strippers at them now and they wouldn't have minded.
‘It's a SIMON!’
Or a Simonie or a Nemois.
I felt myself propelled towards the stage.
Terry Melchett, the supermarket manager, whose wife left him for another woman, gave me a hard shove in the small of the back.
Kate Melville and Sue d'Argy Smith, whose daughters left the Church, as so many do, just before they became nubile, each took a hand and gave it a sharp pull, and over their heads came the long arms of Gordon the Bachelor, whose fingers stroked my hair, as countless other key personnel in the body of Christendom, South Wimbledon, stroked, shoved, pulled and all but carried me towards the stage on which I was supposed to pour out the secrets of my heart.
‘We're going to sing!’ shouted Quigley.
There is no order of hymns in the First Spiritualist Church.
You sing as the spirit moves.
Sometimes two different sections of the congregation will be belting out two completely different numbers.
‘What are we going to sing?’ called someone at the back.
There was a lot more rhubarb, along the lines of ‘Yes, what?’ and ‘What are we going to sing, brothers?’and then Mrs Quigley  cut in over the top of this with a cadenza that would not have disgraced Dame Kiri Te Kanawa.
‘Te-e-e-sti-fyyy!’
We all looked around.
There was a hunting-horn quality to this which suggested that someone else was supposed to get up and answer.
They did.
‘hat shall we Te-e-e-stify?’ sang young Mr pugh.
‘We shall tes-ti-i-i-fyy’, sang Mrs Quigley, to a tune that seemed to be completely of her own devising, ‘to-o-o the-e-e Lor-or-ord!’
‘Give me a one!’ said Quigley.
Over by the piano, Mary Bunn squirmed on her piano stool and gave him a one.
‘Give me a two!’ said Quigley.
Next to Mary Bunn, Big Louie the Jamaican, on drums, gave him a two.
‘Give me a three !’ said Quigley.
Next to Big Louie the Jamaican, Sylvia Margaret Williams, our seventy-nine-year-old bass guitarist, gave him a three.
Quigley leaped into the air like a monkey that has sat on a bunsen burner and gave a sort of primal grunt.
The First Spiritualists needed no encouragement.
They had done this before and they would do it again.
As one voice they went into one of Rose Fox's greatest hits:
Testify!
Testify!
Take your troubles to the Lord!
Testify!
Testify!
Take your troubles to the Lord!
Take your troubles —
Oh take your troubles—
Take your trou-ou-ou-oubles—
Take your troubles to the Lord!
There is more, I fear.
I don't think it was dictated to her by John Wesley.
But, when in doubt, it is the one we always reach for.
Great truths are always simple, right?
And, whatever else  you might want to say about this number, you would have to admit it was simple.
The tune sounds as if it was dictated to Rose Fox by a three-year-old child.
The band hit their instruments harder and harder and the congregation started to stamp in time.
Testify!
Testify!
Take your troubles to the Lord!
The walls were shaking.
On the roof above me, the shabby light-shades shook on their long flexes.
The glass of the windows shook in its wooden frames.
Mary Bunn, hitting the keys harder and harder for Jesus, lifted herself off the stool and brought her bum down with a crash as she laid down chord after chord.
The congregation were like different parts of a huge engine, each one passing a movement on and the recipient taking it up and changing it.
It was as if there was a wave of water and the wave turned a wheel and the wheel turned a cog and the cog turned a piston and the piston punched out a wave, bigger and more overwhelming than the first wave, turning a bigger wheel, a bigger cog, a bigger piston and then finally a wave that seemed enough to swallow everything in its path.
The whole crowd was shouting, like some awful, natural machine.
Testify!
Testify!
Take your troubles to the Lord!
Testify!
Testify!
Take your troubles to the Lord!
As I got closer to the raised platform at the far end of the church, it was as if the sound was pushing me forward.
The sound was shaking the roof and rocking the floor.
It was rapping in my back as I was pushed past Roger Beeding and Roger de Mornay and closer and closer to the eight steps that led up to the low wooden platform on which was the gigantic cross and the large black-and-white photograph of Rose Fox.
It was only when I was actually up there and the music had  stopped, and I found myself looking down at a hundred or so expectant faces, that I remembered the magnitude of the task in front of me.
I had not only to Testify as to how, where and when the Lord Jesus had entered my heart but also give the punters a detailed account of the innermost secrets of my heart.
What I felt about life, my immediate family, the Church and the wider issues facing society.
Such as the full-scale invasion of SW19 by extraterrestrial beings.
I did not feel confident of my ability to do any of these things.
But I was dead sure that the last item would take some getting round to.
‘Hi, guys!’
I said, eventually, ‘I'm Simon Britton.
Remember me?’
17
This got a laugh.
People do laugh in meetings of the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist.
In fact they do just about everything short of brushing their teeth, but this was what I would call a really good laugh, if you know what I mean.
I felt they were really pleased to see me.
They were genuinely amused.
Suddenly, Testifying didn't seem such a big deal.
You know?
I was just going to tell them about all the things that were on my mind, about my dad and about Jesus and about aliens taking over the…
I looked round at the faces.
They didn't look ready for aliens.
Not yet.
Not in SW19, anyway.
I must work round to the subject gradually.
‘Basically,’ I went on, ‘I'm fourteen.
You know?’
There was another laugh.
A sort of happy, let's-all-be-friends-there's-no-problem kind of laugh.
‘And’, I went on, doing something a bit casual with my hands, ‘being fourteen can be a hass!
Right?’
‘Right,’ said a small, fat man in the front row whom I could not remember ever having seen before.
Sooner or later I was going to have to turn this conversation round to Jesus Christ.
I figured it was better to start with Jesus.
They knew where they were with Him.
‘I'm at Cranborne School,’ I said, ‘and I'm doing GCSE in two years’time.’
This didn't go down quite as well.
I could feel them getting restive.
‘In biology, chemistry and physics,’ I continued, ‘geography, IT, English, French, Latin, Spanish and maths.
Which is not my best subject!’
They did not want to know this.
‘But’, I said, ‘I haven't come here to talk about my exam prospects!’
‘No’, said a voice from the back of the hall, ‘you have not!’
I flung my arms wide.
‘Right, too right!’
What had I come here to talk about?
Jesus Christ.
‘Jesus Christ!’
I said.
‘Amen,’ said Quigley, rapidly.
‘Amen,’ said everybody else.
This seemed safe ground.
It wasn't too committing.
It was giving everyone a lot of pleasure.
And it was certainly an improvement on my thoughts about the core curriculum.
I tried it again.
‘Jesus Christ!’
‘Amen,’ said Quigley.
‘Amen,’ said everyone else.
Maybe I should just go on doing this all night.
You know?
‘Jesus Christ!’
I said.
There was a pause.
‘Amen,’ said Quigley, rather grudgingly.
‘Amen,’ said everyone else.
I was going to have to get to the point.
‘The other day, my father died.’
They liked this.
A sort of appreciative hush fell upon them.
‘He went out to the…er…pub, and he had a heart attack and he died!’
‘Alleluia!’ said the strange fat man in the front row, who was clearly new to this sort of thing.
‘But,’ I went on quickly, ‘very soon after this, he turned up outside our house at 24 Stranraer Gardens!’
There was a lot of nodding.
This was par for the course, they seemed to be saying.
You kicked off, you had the death experience and back you came to tell people about it.
‘When did you make contact?’ asked old Mr pugh, who seemed to have recovered completely from the compost.
I really was going to have to get round to discussing the extraterrestrial problem.
We could be here all night rapping about the finer points of mediumship.
‘It all depends what you mean by making contact .
And who you're making contact with.
We all talk about making contact, don't we?
It's one of our big things as…er…
Christians, which of course we all are.
But this contact I am talking about is a terrifying, although of course in a way wonderful, but also terrifying, form of…er…contact.’
This was very well received.
I've noticed that in sermons of any kind it is important not to state your hand too early, or too clearly.
You have to dress it up a bit.
You know?
You may have come there to say something really basic like ‘Sin is Bad!’ or ‘God is Good!’but it is crucial to start by talking about your Auntie Renee's operation or why your dog was sick in the back of the car on the M4.
Were they ready for me to get closer in?
‘hat I have to say’, I went on, ‘is so important and so …vital that at first it may be difficult to believe.
You may say, ‘Oh no!
That Simon's a loony!’
You know?’
‘We won't!’ called Quigley, with what I feared was misplaced optimism.
‘You may say, ‘Cart Simon off to the nuthouse!’’
You know?’
‘Amen,’ said Hannah Dooley.
‘Alleluia!’ said the fat man in the front row.
It was now or never.
I had to go in, and go in fast.
‘If I were to tell you’, I said, trying to look each one of them in the eye, which is not an easy thing to do with ninety-odd people, ‘that Wimbledon was being invaded by alien beings from another planet, you would probably laugh and call me a lunatic.
Right?’
They did not look as if that was the case, actually.
If anything, they seemed rather receptive to the idea of talking about invasion of the locality by monsters from deep space.
The fat man in the front row was shaking his head vigorously.
He  obviously wanted aliens on the agenda of the First Spiritualist Church.
‘But’, I said slowly, looking round the hall, ‘I think I have evidence —clear evidence — that something of this sort is going on, right here, under our very noses in our…’
I groped for the right word and found it'…
Christian community.’
We were on course here.
We had said goodbye to GCSE options and we were on course.
The awful thing was that, as I said it, I began to have serious doubts about it.
as if what I thought and what I said were two completely different things.
But I found myself looking straight at Pike.
And he was leaning forward on his chair, his hands clasped together.
He was nodding!
He seemed so attentive, so clued in to my every word, that I suddenly found the confidence to go on.
In a kind of rush I went back to the main menu.
‘Well, I can't be very specific about them.
About who they are or why they are doing it or what they want.
But all I can say is that I am certain that there is, as I speak, an extraterrestrial presence in the area.
They are here , guys.
As is, of course, Jesus Christ!’
I thought I had better bring things back to Jesus.
And it certainly did help.
People were nodding seriously, as they tended to do when you mentioned JC.
‘I know that a lot of people find this sort of thing ridiculous.
A lot of people dismiss it out of hand.
But I don't think they should.
Impossible things can be true.
I saw my father, I am telling you — out in the street.
And he's dead!’
At the back I could see Quigley purse his lips.
He did not, I have to say, look at all pleased.
Jesus , I thought to myself.
Work in Jesus.
Now !
‘Jesus’, I said, ‘healed the sick and raised the dead.’
‘Alleluia!’ said the fat man in the front row.
‘And a lot of people found that ridiculous!’
I realized as I said it that this could sound a little tactless.
Especially in view of the fact that, in the far corner, the old lady in the wheelchair was making determined but unsuccessful efforts to get up and walk.
‘Not’, I went on, ‘the sick and the dead, of course.
They were very glad to be helped in that way.
But the cynics, who refused to believe the evidence of their eyes.
People who scoffed.
People who sneered at what others truly believed.’
This was good.
Quigley was looking foxed.
Everything I was saying was, so far anyway, completely acceptable Christian dogma.
As far as I knew.
Although what is and is not acceptable in the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist changes from minute to minute.
‘Aliens’, I went on, ‘are somewhere out there in the universe.
It stands to reason that in such vast space there must be some other beings.
Are we saying that God has absolutely no imagination at all?
That all he can come up with is a few rotten old…humans?’
This was even better.
The old direct questions seemed to be quite a good technique.
You could see them struggling for answers and coming up with nothing at all.
I tried a few more, in quick succession.
‘as something happened in your life that you can't explain?
Have you seen something that just doesn't fit into the normal pattern of things?
Do you have a feeling, for example, that you are being watched?’
‘Alleluia!’ said the fat man in the front row.
He was on my side, guys.
He could stay.
I raised my voice slightly.
At the back Quigley was looking very worried indeed.
If he was going to interrupt, he had left it a little late.
‘Are you’, I continued, ‘unable to lay your hands on familiar domestic objects, and have you come to the conclusion that someone must be moving them?’
Hannah Dooley, who is notoriously absent-minded, was nodding furiously.
I paused dramatically and raked the audience with my eyes the way I had seen Quigley do.
‘Who do you think might be responsible for all these things you can't explain?
Who do you think might be here, even as we stand here in Christian worship?
Who might be walking among us even as we pray to the Lord Jesus?’
‘Aliens!’ shouted Pike with sudden tremendous enthusiasm.
‘Aliens!’ yelled Hannah Dooley.
‘Alleluia!’ said the fat man in the front row.
Quigley was white with fury.
I saw him whisper something to Mrs Danby, but she didn't seem to hear him.
But it was too late for Quigley.
‘If you really want something, boy,’ my dad used to say, ‘then go for it!’
I went for it.
‘Aliens’, I continued, ‘are right here at this moment!
They have landed!
And I have conclusive proof !’
There was more rhubarb.
‘He has proof!’ 'Conclusive proof!’'He says he has proof, Mabel!’etc.
I stopped for a second and tried to think what my conclusive proof was.
The thought of describing it out loud to over a hundred people made it feel less convincing than I thought it had been.
‘A close friend of mine called Mr Andrew Marr has disappeared !’
I saw Pike's weatherworn little face watching me with intense concentration.
‘Aliens!’ he yelled.
He was getting the idea quickly, guys.
Years of intensive training in the paranormal had taught him how to draw these kinds of conclusions with consummate speed.
‘Aliens!’
I said.
‘And these same aliens have also…’
Here I paused again.
I gave the next sentence a great deal of lip and tongue work.
‘…taken my father!’
Here I raised my hand to heaven and shook my fist at the sky.
My voice rose an octave or two as I screamed, ‘Give him back, you bastards!’
‘Give him back, you bastards!’ yelled Pike.
‘Aliens!’ yelled Hannah Dooley.
‘Alleluia!’ said the fat man in the front row.
Quigley made his move.
But both he and I knew it was too late.
He sounded positively mealy-mouthed as, with a great show of wonder and puzzlement, he started to say, ‘These aliens…’
‘Yes’, I said, sticking with the simple idea, ‘Aliens!
These aliens!’
‘Aliens’, said Pike, dead on cue, ‘are come amongst us, my friends!
Hear!
Hear the word of the Lord!’
If there had been any danger from Quigley, it was headed off, once again, by Pikey, who dashed into a space by himself and, springing up and down like a goblin, started to shout, ‘Hear the word of the Lord!’ at regular intervals.
I could see Quigley was about to make another move, but before he could do so I held out my hands, palm downwards, in a gesture much favoured by Mr Toombs in his last ecclesiastical campaign.
‘Let us pray,’ I said.
‘Oh let us pray!’ said Hannah Dooley.
‘pray!’ squeaked Pike.
‘Oh let us pray!’
He looked up at the ceiling.
‘Old Mother Walsh,’ he said, ‘prithee the snake not be come!’
This went down very big with the lads.
When she was feeling down, Old Mother Walsh was always going on about how the snake was slithering in our direction.
It was entirely feasible, of course, that it should be at the controls of an interplanetary vehicle of some sort.
‘Old Mother Walsh,’ Pike said again, ‘let not the snake come out of the sky!’
There was much murmuring of assent at this.
You would have thought, from the way they were all carrying on, that they were all closet members of the British Interplanetary Society.
Quigley was looking at me in open horror now.
You could see that my attack had taken him completely by surprise.
Even if he had wanted to try unmasking me, he wouldn't have dared.
This was the most exciting News the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist had heard in years.
They were bored with all this let's-hear-it-for-Galilee-purify-your-heart rubbish.
Even talking to the dead can pall.
They wanted Simon Britton.
‘Let us pray’, I said, ‘that this…alien menace be…dealt with!
By the…proper authorities and by…’
‘Jesus Christ,’ said Quigley, smartly.
‘Alleluia!’ said the fat man in the front row.
‘Amen,’ said Hannah Dooley.
‘Because’, I said, looking straight at Quigley, ‘don't let's kid ourselves.
There are other planets and there are people on them, and from time to time those people may well want to get on board ship and head down here.
And if we refuse to believe that, we're being like the mockers and the sneerers who refuse to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ.
Because belief…’
Here I raised my right hand and pointed my index finger straight at the bearded one.
He didn't flinch.
He looked straight back into my eyes.
‘…is the important thing in the world.
And arguing for what you believe, however stupid or illogical or plain mad it may seem.
And standing up for what you choose to believe against those wicked people who just want you to believe what they tell you.
Who just want to take over your mind and not let you think for yourself.
Who…’
‘Who welcome the snake!’ said Pike.
I had a sudden vision of a reception committee for the snake.
It wasn't difficult to imagine it wriggling out of a cigar-shaped object on Wimbledon Common.
Pike did a sort of wild leap and whirled round to face the congregation.
‘Aliens!’ he said, sounding like the compère at a Hallowe'en party.
What I had said had clearly got to Pikey in a major way.
Maybe I was more eloquent than I thought.
It was only much later that I remembered my speech had been more or less word for word something my dad had said to me once.
It was funny — when my dad had said it to me it seemed like the rather tired, friendly sort of thing that parents often say to you.
Spoken, or rather screamed, by yours truly in the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist, it was dynamite .
It certainly put the wind up Quigley.
He didn't say anything at all as, led by his former lieutenant, the congregation swarmed up to the dais and lifted me high on their shoulders.
Yelling ‘Aliens!
Jesus!’ and ‘Aliens are come!’and ‘Prithee the snake  not be here!’in about equal proportions, they carried me round the body of the hall.
I shook my hair back and waved my arms above my head as Pike mopped and mowed in front of me and the band struck up an impromptu tune.
I could have been old JC himself, I tell you, riding into Jerusalem on his donkey, ready to spread the Good News.
I could have been one of those prophets who foretold him.
I could have been almost anyone I chose that day.
I had testified all right.
I had put Unidentified Flying Objects right back on the agenda where they belonged, and, from this day forth, the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist was never going to be the same again.
18
That, more or less, is how the First Spiritualist Church experienced its last and greatest schism.
I mean, it was ripe for it.
I sometimes like to think it was my eloquence, but the fact of the matter is that if I had got up on my hind legs and suggested a bit of Karaoke instead of the morning service, they would have leaped at it.
They were ripe for change, and, as it happened, I couldn't have chosen a better subject with which to widen the scope of the Church's activities.
Or, indeed, to discomfort Quigley.
There was, as I subsequently discovered, quite a high cross-over between ufology and fundamentalist Christianity.
Hannah Dooley knew a bloke in Birmingham who had been set on by a group of small ‘pod-like’ creatures while out walking his dog.
They did a number of very unpleasant things to him and left him, dazed and confused, at New Street station at two in the morning.
Mr Toombs had been a founder member of the British premonitions Bureau in 1967 (it registered 500 premonitions, most of which were concerned with major transport disasters).
The place was a powder keg.
It wasn't only ufology.
There were six clairvoyants, four water diviners and nine people who had had direct contact with poltergeists.
They all wanted space.
Sheldon parry, it turned out, was a life member of the Society for psychical Research and had been deeply involved until he had lost his library books.
They all needed to express what they felt.
All I did was get things started.
There had always been schisms in the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist.
There had been Lewis, the guy who was down on cutlery and condiments, and much earlier a bloke called Evans, who maintained that Old Mother Walsh was really a man in drag and that it behoved members of the Church ‘to wear the clothes of the other kind’.
Evans was arrested in piccadilly in 1908, wearing ‘lace petticoats and stays and drinking from an opened spirit bottle’.
And there were a lot of memories.
You know?
Since the days of Ella Walsh, the real main event had been table-rapping, but people in the Church still talked about Old Mother Walsh and her prophecies.
It wasn't only the snake with Two THOUSAND YEARS GO BY on it.
There was a whole lot of other stuff scheduled for the beginning of the second millennium: green rain, black snow, animals learning to talk and a heck of a lot of red-hot hail.
One guy had already arranged to sell his house and go and live in the Caribbean in 1998 because, as he said, ‘You might as well have a decent last couple of years.’
I don't think I would have made quite so much impact, however, if it hadn't been for the fact that, while they were carrying me round the church yelling, ‘Aliens!’ 'Jesus Christ!’and ‘The snake cometh!’the roof fell in.
I say ‘fell in’.
In religion these terms are relative.
You know?
One minute Jesus is a sort of cross between Batman and Captain America, next thing he is ‘just a bloke with a few special powers’, and before you know it he is a deranged Jew with a no more than ordinary claim on our imaginations.
A couple of sheets of corrugated iron broke loose and fell on Mr pugh's head.
That was all.
But it was enough.
In a week or so you would have thought a crowd of angels had wafted in from putney singing my name and crying ‘Hosanna!’
The burning bush, right?
I mean, did it?
You know?
Or did it just look kind of…reddish?
Nobody said much to me after the service.
As we trooped out of the hall, the old lady in the wheelchair was still trying to get up, and Clara Beeding was kneeling in front of her.
I thought I heard her say, ‘Go on, you can do it!’
A couple of people came up to shake my hand as we got into  Quigley's car.
He stood back, a tight smile on his face, as Roger de Mornay said, ‘A beautiful, beautiful, beautiful speech!’
Once we were inside the car, Quiggers allowed himself a full-blooded sneer.
‘Well, well,’ he said, ‘little green men!’
I didn't speak.
In fact nobody said much on the way back.
Just as we came into Stranraer Gardens, Mrs Quigley said, ‘We have worked so hard to bring you to the Lord, Simon!
You cannot know how important to the Church this is.
Mrs Danby…’
Here Quigley cut her off sharply.
‘Don't let's talk about Mrs Danby.
I'm sure we can manage Mrs Danby, Marjorie!’
There was something really horrible about the way he said this.
A pure flash of creepiness.
I missed my dad more than ever as I went into the house, ahead of the others, and climbed the drab stairs to lie on my bed, looking out at the bright blue sky above the street.
After a while, the door to my bedroom opened and my mum's head peered round it.
Her mouth was turned down and her little eyes were beady with worry.
She blinked at me for a minute or two and then said, ‘Aliens!’
I didn't respond.
She clicked her tongue in the way she does when I eat peanut butter straight from the jar.
‘Spacemen!’ she went on.
I sighed.
Mum went over to my window and looked down at the street.
In a small, far-away voice, she said, ‘Mr Quigley's awfully cross with you and Pike.
He's very worried.
He's very worried indeed.
And he cares about you, Simon.
He thinks about you and prays for you all the time.
He does!’
She went out then and left me alone.
The next week saw a constant procession of Spiritualists in and out of our kitchen.
Some of them came to talk seriously with Quigley and to shake their heads at me.
Rather more, including Pike, came to shake me by the hand and ask me detailed and unanswerable questions about the nature of the extraterrestrials who had landed in the Wimbledon area.
Once  or twice, at mealtimes, I thought Quigley was going to speak to me about the matter.
But he didn't.
Usually he likes to get you alone, as, I have noticed, a lot of Christians do.
So, when he suggested that we all go ‘to furnish the larder’ on Saturday morning, I thought I was reasonably safe.
Normal people go shopping.
First Spiritualists go to furnish the larder.
Shopping is a tricky one for them.
You have to be very careful when prowling along the shelves.
A First Spiritualist doesn't drink coffee, or eat white bread or cheese (apart from Gorgonzola — the Good Cheese as it's called), and faced by a frankfurter is liable to scoot off into a corner, whimpering.
Nobody quite knows who decided all these things were dangerous and evil, or why they did so.
But they take the rules pretty seriously.
Branston pickle is ‘harmonious and honest’, but all forms of sausage are, basically, in league with Beelzebub.
One of the reasons they go shopping in groups is because not everyone agrees about which foods are OK and which ones are going to plunge you into hell-fire.
Someone will reach for a tin of fish-paste only to be brought up short by another member of the party reminding them that fish-paste is unclean, while someone else may get as far as the checkout with a year's supply of baked beans, when, across the crowded shelves of the supermarket, comes a voice reminding them of the danger they are facing.
There are a lot of scores paid off when shopping.
My dad used to love chocolate cake, and, whenever they were having a row, my mum would remember that chocolate was ‘a poisonous thorn in the side of Creation’.
At other times the two of them would wolf down a whole packet of After Eight mints with no apparent difficulty.
This Saturday we went with the Quigleys, Hannah Dooley, Pike, the Clara Beedings (as Roger and Clara are known) and, to my surprise and dismay, Mrs Danby.
She showed up in her Rolls in the car park of the supermarket, and, although there was a lot of nodding and smiling and remarks about coincidences, it was pretty clear that her presence had been arranged for someone's benefit.
I suspected it might be mine.
I hate going around in groups.
Especially groups of people from the Church.
I'm terrified we might see Khan or Greenslade on a day when everyone has decided to follow Mother Walsh's directions about placing the feet on the ground without damaging the old insect life.
But on this particular day we looked almost normal.
Everyone was very friendly, and there was much jolly laughter as we passed the frankfurters and Quigley made as if to ward off the evil eye.
He waited until we were browsing through the chilled fish before raising the issue: ‘Do you really think that Old Mother Walsh's snake is actually going to wriggle down Wimbledon High Street when the time comes?’
I didn't ask what time he meant.
The time of Snakes Wriggling Down Wimbledon High Street presumably.
‘Er…’
My mum was piling tinned ravioli into the trolley.
She looked like a small animal that expected to be surprised at any moment.
‘I don't think you do, do you?’ said Quiggers, ‘I think you think, as I do, that Old Mother Walsh wasn't talking about a real snake.
She was talking about the snake that is in all of us all the time!’
What snake was this?
A tapeworm perhaps?
‘A lot of the simpler souls’, said Quigley, ‘probably think a great big snake is going to slither out at them and start gobbling them up in a few years.’
You could see from Pike's face that this was exactly what he thought.
If this snake did show, I thought, please God it liked the taste of men with beards.
‘Cor lumme, young shaver!’ said Quigley.
‘Your little green chaps are no more than that snake really, aren't they?
They are a way of saying, ‘The world's in pretty bad shape, Jesus, and pretty soon someone will come along and give us pain and suffering and woe.’’
I looked him straight in the eye.
‘No they're not.
They're just there , that's all.
And I never said they were green.
What I said was, it looks as if they're here.
You know?’
Quigley laughed.
He was still being Mr Nice Guy.
My mum had finished shovelling the ravioli into the trolley.
She and Emily and Mrs Quigley were headed for toilet tissues at a brisk pace.
‘Little talk with Jesus?’ he said, and, halfway through reaching for a tube of tomato purée, he closed his eyes and froze solid as if overtaken by a large quantity of molten lava.
I waited for him to finish.
When somebody pressed his PLAY button, I said, ‘People think I'm stupid because I think there's something in this alien business.
But I'm not!’
Quigley grabbed my arm.
‘No, li'l' Simo,’ he said.
‘You are not.
You are special!
You are favoured.’
He rocked to and fro, his eyes half-shut.
On the line to Jesus once again.
‘A boy will come ‘fore the snake's unfurled, and preach the woman to save the world!’’ he said.
A bloke who was trying to get at the tomato purée gave him rather an odd look, but Quigley was not bothered.
I recognized another of Old Mother Walsh's rhymes.
‘Go to the river in ones and twos, but be sure you put on your overshoes!’’
I quoted back at Quiggers.
He became enormously excited and, as the rest of the party started back towards us with a huge mound of lavatory paper balanced on the ravioli, he hopped from foot to foot, clutching my arm.
Only Pike, I noticed, had stayed with us.
He was watching Quigley, a sour look on his chapped little face.
‘That’, said Quigley, ‘is the point.
Old Mother Walsh didn't always mean what she said to be taken literally .
But, by God, the end of world is coming and, by God, a pure and holy boy will preach the woman who will speed his coming !’
With these words, he pointed dramatically at Emily Quigley.
If anyone was going to be chosen to usher in the end of the world, she could well be the girl to do it.
She had the face for  it.
Was this the deal?
Did Quigley see me as some kind of John the Baptist figure?
If he did, it wasn't surprising he was trying to get me Confirmed in Faith.
Anything to make Emily Quigley look good.
I may not be pure in heart, but, since Mike Jarvis the skateboarder went to live in Nottingham, I am about the only fourteen-year-old boy in the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist.
It gave me a spooky feeling, actually.
Maybe he had a point.
Maybe what I was saying wasn't so very different from what Old Mother Walsh had given the troops all those years ago.
He could see I was wavering and he held my arm tightly as the others came up.
‘Extraterrestrials’, he said, ‘may well be on their way.
I don't dispute that.
Who knows what the Lord will send us on Judgement Day?
But, cor lumme, snakes and aliens don't have to be taken literally.
All we know is that, as Mother Walsh said,when the pure boy preaches the woman …’ here he gave Emily a meaningful look —‘…something pretty nasty is going to be heading in our direction.
Don't call it aliens, Simo, call it Sin.
Call it Wickedness.
Call it pain and Suffering!’
Pike gave him a curiously malevolent look.
‘Call it aliens!’ he said, in a rather spooky, hollow voice.
‘I know it's aliens!’
Quigley looked rattled.
But, before he could say anything, Mrs Danby emerged from round a large pile of tins of tuna-fish.
She was carrying an armful of cat-food cans and smirking to herself.
Quigley, with a short, convulsive movement that was halfway between a bow and a twitch, took my hand and led me towards her.
‘Here's your boy,’ he said.
‘Shall we away the noo?’
This whole thing had a prearranged feel.
What were they going to do to me now?
Take me out to a patch of waste ground and kick my head in for spreading dissent?
‘Where are we going?’
‘We have a sufficiency of ravioli,’ said Mrs Quigley, ‘and…er…
Norman has something to say to us!’
‘What?’
I said.
They all started to look at each other rather furtively.
Mrs  Danby dumped the cat-food in the trolley and came close to me.
She smelt of dried flowers and pepper.
There were bags of skin under her neck, and she had a deep, posh, drawling voice, like an actress in an old film.
‘Norman has specifically asked to talk to us at Mr Quigley's house’, she said.
‘Even though the kitchen is only half-completed!’
‘Maybe’, I said, with a completely straight face, ‘he wants to see how the units are getting on.’
Mum gave an eager little nod.
‘Yes…yes…maybe he does!’
I marvelled, once again, at the rapid change in my father's attitudes after his death.
The last words he had spoken to me on the subject of kitchen units had been really quite abusive.
I wasn't at all sure about this.
Look what had happened at the last seance.
And, since then, there had been Mr Marr's disappearance and my Dad's own, frightening version of the Second Coming.
I couldn't bear the thought of hearing that voice again — the low, small voice like that of a child alone in a house at night.
‘Do we have to?’
I asked.
There was suddenly a very, very tense atmosphere.
All of them were looking at me.
Mum started to sing, in a light, quiet voice — something she only does when she is nervous.
They had clearly been leading up to this all week.
‘Oh Simon,’ Mrs Danby was saying.
‘I led your father down dark and narrow ways.
Ways strewn with thorns and brambles and alive with venomous snakes!
And now the whole Church is in danger!’
Quigley nodded vigorously.
‘I think', he said, with a rather savage look in Pike's direction, ‘that we are in need of Guidance.
Splits in the Church, Master Pike!
Splits in the Church!
Remember the Lewis Doctrine!
Remember the Schismatics of New Malden!’
I had not heard anything about these guys.
But as, presumably, they had been wiped off the face of the earth by someone  pretty close to Ella Walsh or Rose Fox, there seemed little point in asking about them.
There was nothing I could say.
I am fourteen.
I have no rights.
I followed them out into the car park and sat, miserably, in the back of Quigley's car as, in a mood of forced cheerfulness, we drove towards the Quigleys' house behind Mrs Danby's Rolls.
I was squashed between Pike and Hannah Dooley in the back seat.
The summer still hadn't gone away, although we were almost out of September.
Above us, great masses of cumulus clouds stood out in the sky like old-fashioned sculptures.
The Quigleys live further out than us.
To get to their house you drive down arterial roads lined with buildings that are neither warehouses nor shops.
They squat on ragged patches of grass like abandoned containers, painted bright colours, stuffed with more than anyone could want of Do-It-Yourself Equipment, Garden Furniture or, in one case, pure Leather.
The Quigleys live next to a park.
Their house is semi-detached.
It is worth £300,000.
So Mr Quigley keeps saying.
I wouldn't live in it if you paid me twice that amount.
It is a big, square box, painted dirty white, and, although he is always knocking through, extending, repapering and spring-cleaning, there is something dead about the place.
The furniture stands around listlessly, as if it is waiting to be sold.
In the garden, the flowers and vegetables are as neat as Mr Quigley's accounts.
There is an apple-tree up against the fence that separates them from their neighbours, but it has been given a kind of Buddhist monk's haircut.
It does not look capable of bearing fruit.
The sun was still bright as we approached the Quigleys' house but it didn't seem to have reached their road, which was the same as it ever was: dank and green and desperately quiet.
The first thing I noticed was that the whole of the top half of the house was swathed in what looked like green plastic bandages.
There was scaffolding rearing up the face of the house from the front garden and, next to the front door, a large notice saying:
GORDON BRUNT GENERAL BUILDER SINCE 1964 SERVING SOUTH LONDON
Next to the notice was a fat man in blue dungarees and a white hard hat.
He looked as if he might well be Gordon Brunt.
He also looked as if his mission might be to make South London completely and utterly miserable.
As the crowd of us came out of the car, he leaned backwards over Mr Quigley's fence and spat, slowly and deliberately, into the geraniums.
‘What do they do, Marjorie?’ said Quigley, with sudden and violent passion.
Mrs Quigley was curiously calm as she replied, ‘They take our money.
They abuse us.
They leave their filthy newspapers in the loo !’
When she actually spoke to the guy she was quite amiable.
‘Hallo, Kevin.
Are there problems?’
Kevin looked at her blearily.
‘It's a bastard this one, Mrs Q,’ he said.
‘It's a real bastard!’
Quigley coughed., e need', he said, rather stiffly, ‘to use the house for prayer.’
Kevin looked at him suspiciously.
‘You what?’
‘We need’, said Quigley, with deliberate, offensive clarity, ‘to use our dwelling to talk to the Lord Jesus Christ.’
Kevin looked at him doubtfully.
‘I'm not sure about that,’ he said.
‘The plumbers are in.’
At this moment a loud banging noise came from one of the upstairs windows.
Quigley, who seemed not quite in control of himself, grabbed the man by the ears.
‘This is my house, wherein I dwell.
And I would be grateful if you could get up there and tell that oaf Duncan to stop whatever it is he is doing!’
I hadn't understood, until now, why it was so important for the Quigleys to make contact with my dad at their house.
Now it was clear.
When he's at home, Mr Quigley is even more masterful than he is in other people's houses.
The man shambled  off into the house, and the rest of us picked our way across the front garden.
As we came into the front hall I heard Kevin yelling up the stairs, ‘Stop the hammering!
They want to pray!’
‘You what?’ said an invisible plumber.
‘They want to pray!’ said Kevin.
A large, hairy youth came out of the bathroom at the head of the stairs.
He was carrying what looked like a huge steel club.
‘Why can't the idiots pray somewhere else?’ he said.
Then he saw Mr Quigley and his hand went to his mouth.
Quigley clearly had a master-slave relationship with these people.
‘We will be in the back room,’ said Quigley in tones of quiet authority, and, watched by several more astonished employees of Gordon Brunt Ltd, we all filed through into Quigley's dining-room.
The ceiling had been removed and we were looking up at where the roof of the house once had been.
That, as I had seen from the outside, was shrouded in green plastic, and, as all the windows seemed to have been boarded up, there was scarcely any light at all.
It felt as if you were in the middle of some enormous forest where the trees had grown together, blocking out the day.
Quigley pushed the seance table into the middle of the room, grinning at me over his shoulder as he did so.
‘We're rough and ready, young shaver,’ he said.
‘But we're homey, aren't we?’
His confidence, which had slipped a little since my Testifying, was coming back.
Here, surrounded by his family, his vast collection of Gilbert and Sullivan records, his several hundred bound copies of What Car magazine, his three watercolours of Wimbledon under snow and his collection of rare antiques, he was a man again.
Even though all these objects were shrouded in heavy-duty plastic, he was a man again.
‘Shall we pray?’ he said, in an insidious voice.
‘Yes!’ said Hannah Dooley.
Mum sat at the table and pushed the grey hair back from her  eyes.
She pressed her hands together.
They were red and raw from cooking and washing, and the lines on her face seemed to have multiplied since I last looked at it.
‘Norman’, she said quietly, ‘is very, very near.’
Mrs Danby, who was dressed in sporty tweeds, as if for a shooting party, gave a superior kind of nod.
I wondered whether there was anything in the teaching of Tai-Fing that could get me through the next half an hour.
I though about sei-sei-ying , or the condition of being a birch leaf in early autumn, but did not find it helpful.
What was needed here, rather than meditative technique, was a pump-action shotgun.
I had no choice.
They were all sitting waiting for me.
With a mounting feeling of dread, I went to a chair at the far end of the table from Quigley and lowered my head in the gloom.
Quigley stretched out both his arms across the table and looked up at what was left of his roof.
‘O Jesus, we seek Thy help.
As our Church is itself in a confusion Thee Thyself often experienced when on this earth in places such as, for example , Gethsemane, which was, by anyone's standards, a pretty tough time for You.
Hear us now as we attempt to contact Simon's father and help him in the great spiritual work that awaits him in this prime time of his boyhood!’
He shot me a quick look from under those bushy brows.
I kept my eyes down.
Emily was looking at me in a way I found frankly flirtatious.
Suddenly Quigley stopped praying.
His old lady was bearing down in her chair and generally showing signs of getting off the psychic runway in double-quick time.
She hadn't even frothed yet.
I was two down from her, but I could see Hannah Dooley wince as Marjorie started.
Quigley stopped, clearly expecting her to give it a bit of movement, but, instead, she went into a sort of mammoth clench.
She bound her brows and bit her lower lip and generally carried on like someone with serious  constipation.
After a quite incredibly long time she said, shaking her head wildly, ‘No!’
Everyone looked a touch put out.
In twenty years of psychic work, Marjorie Quigley had never yet refused her fence.
I looked up and saw Emily looking at her mum in consternation.
Her mum shook her head again.
‘No no no no no!’ she said.
She gave a huge sigh.
‘There's no one there!’
Look.
This was ridiculous.
We're going out to lunch or what?
We knew there were loads of people there.
We'd only just put down the phone to them.
The woman was just not doing her job and getting through.
She started to tap herself on the forehead.
‘Total blank,’ she said.
‘Nothing there at all!’
We did her the favour of pretending that she was not talking about her own lack of brains.
She bit her lip furiously.
‘Damn!’ she said, like a tennis player who has just lost a point.
‘Damn!
Damn!
Damn!
Damn!’
Mrs Danby leaned across and took her hand.
‘Gently,’ she said.
Then she looked at me and sighed.
‘Norman always liked to go gently.’
This struck me as amazingly suggestive.
Why was she looking at me like that?
I looked across at Mum and found she was looking at Mrs Danby with an expression I did not recognize.
It could have been fear or sympathy or irritation or a combination of all three.
I thought about her and about Dad and the Danby woman.
I had no idea, really, what any of them thought or felt.
Mrs Danby was simpering at Mum.
When she'd finished simpering, she said, ‘I blame myself!’
My mum looked vaguely hurt.
She scratched herself behind the ear and said, ‘Oh don't do that, Mrs Danby!’
‘If it hadn't been for me,’ Mrs Danby said darkly, ‘Veronica would never have gone to that wine and cheese party.
Or to Angmering for that matter.’
Everyone started to sigh and shake their heads.
Mrs D held up her claw-like hand.
Quigley started to ooze humility.
He  bowed forward over the table.
He got his head so low you could practically see the cleft in his buttocks.
‘Oh Mrs Danby,’ he said, in the tone of voice he usually reserves for Jesus Christ.
‘Oh Mrs Danby!’
Mrs Danby smirked.
She didn't have to do a lot to get results.
But I've noticed that a certain amount of loot helps to invest even your most casual remarks with a certain significance.
Mrs Danby shook her lizard-like head and pointed at me dramatically.
‘When all's well with the boy,’ she said, ‘we will come into our own!’
I felt they had money on me.
You know?
Like I was a horse or something.
Mrs Danby was well away.
She broke her hands free of the grip of those on either side of her and pressed her palms to the table.
‘Thou seest me, Lord,’ she said.
‘Thou seest this boy also.
Help him!
Grant that he be not in Error!
Help him back to the circle!
And may he be the healing of the things I wrought with his father!’
‘Wrought ’, eh!
What had she and my dad wrought, I wondered?
Suddenly I was in Error!
Error is pretty bad.
If you're in Error you are one step away from the thumbscrews.
If there had been less enthusiasm among the congregation for ufology, maybe they would have devised a public punishment for me.
People who fail the Church are sometimes made to appear at morning service ‘as they were first made before God’, which these days usually means in their underclothes.
If they have been just very bad, and if they have someone to stand up for them, they are given three strokes of the whip, usually by Sheldon Parry, the born-again television director, and then made to put on a short green smock for the duration of the service.
If they have been very, very bad and are not well connected inside the Church, the man with the wart gobs all over them, people chuck potato peelings at them and then they are turned out into Strathclyde Road in their underpants.
I was moving dangerously close to the potato peelings.
This  much was obvious.
I checked under the jeans to make sure I wasn't wearing the Donald Duck boxer shorts.
‘Yes,’ said Quigley, looking at me.
‘Grant that what he has seen may not be a thing sent to tempt him!’
Pike made a kind of snuffling noise, and Mrs Quigley tried once again.
She took the hands of those on either side of her, lowered her head and gave a constipated grunt.
She grunted until sweat stood out on her brow.
She grunted so hard there seemed a very strong chance she might drop a turd right there and then.
But, after a minute or so, she shook her hands free, waggled her head furiously and said, ‘Nothing.
Nothing.
Nothing.’
They were in a meeting, guys!
Mozart was talking to Rose Fox.
Rose Fox was talking to Vivaldi.
My dad was tied up with Dickens or waiting for General Franco to turn up.
‘Damn!’ said Mrs Quigley, ‘Damn!
Damn!
Damn!’
‘precious…’ said Quigley.
‘Fuck!’ said Mrs Quigley.
‘Fuck!
Fucking arseholes!’
Everyone looked at her oddly.
It was OK for her to do this kind of thing when in a mediumistic trance, but this wasn't quite that, was it?
She was, allegedly anyway,compos mentis .
If this kind of thing was allowed to continue, she might well start swaggering into Sunday service and shouting things like ‘Bugger!’ or ‘Piss off!’if she found someone in her seat.
It was then that it happened.
Leo Pike, in forty years of attending Spiritualist seances, had never made much impact on the spirit world.
He had an aunt in Leicester who had died of double pneumonia in 1964, but she had never wanted to speak to him.
In fact, none of the dead, famous or unfamous, had ever shown any interest in Pike.
And, as far as I had been able to judge, the feeling was pretty mutual.
In all the years I had been watching him, he had, as far as I could tell, absolutely fuck-all interest in them.
You could wheel in Julius Caesar and Pike would just sit there, peering at him through his gold-rimmed glasses.
You can imagine my surprise, then, when Pikey, without prior warning, started to hum like a top.
At first I think most of us thought it was some electrical appliance.
Then we noticed that the Pike head was sort of pulsing backwards and forwards like a mechanical toy.
Nothing unusual in that.
Pike's head quite often pulses backwards and forwards like a mechanical toy.
In fact, he has an extraordinary repertoire of mannerisms, all of which could be reasonably mistaken for possession of one kind or another.
There isn't a moment when the lad isn't twitching or jerking or going into spasm.
So, at first, we saw nothing unusual in his bonce doing the rhumba on top of his neck.
Then his toupee started to slip.
Pike's rug was a topic of endless fascination in the First Spiritualist Church.
I can still remember the day when it walked into all our lives.
I must have been about nine, but I still remember my dad putting his back to the door, after Pikey had gone home from a seance.
‘Did you see it?’ he said in hushed tones.
‘Did you see it?’
‘Sssh, Norman,’ said my mum.
‘Don't let's talk about it.’
But it was impossible not to talk about it.
One minute there he was with a few scraps of grey hair plastered across his scalp — the next he looks like a prizewinner at Cruft's Dog Show.
This wasn't just any old wig, you know?
It looked like it had been grown in a tropical rain forest.
For weeks we had talked of little else.
How was it held on?
Was it stitched?
Was it pure will power?
Was it, perhaps, Blu-tack?
One woman was prepared to swear she had seen Sellotape on the back of Pike's neck.
And now it was moving.
The more his head jolted backwards and forwards, the further down his scalp it crept.
By the time he had finished rocking, his fringe hung over his eyes.
When he finally spoke, it was as if his voice was coming out of a large, brunette bush.
‘O Lord,’ he said, in a high pitched voice.
‘O Lord!’
We all just goggled at him.
I mean, no one had ever seen  Pike do this before.
Right?
Then he slewed round hard in his chair.
His wig was now at a slight angle.
He looked as if someone had just hung a mop on his nose.
From behind the toupee came a deep, deep voice.
‘How y'all doin'? it said, in a strong American accent.
‘An’ how's little Nelly?’
19
No one had an answer to this.
For a moment I thought Quigley was going to tell him to snap out of it.
But then my mum said, in a timorous voice, ‘Do you mean Nelly Woodhouse that was with the Guardian Building Society?’
There was a silence.
Then Pike said, in the same Texan drawl, ‘Don't rightly know, ma'am.
Don't rightly know.’
Mrs Danby was looking at Pike with a new respect.
This all went to show just how far Quigley had slipped since I Testified.
Time was when no one would dare open their traps in front of Mrs Quigley.
‘The spirits wander,’ said Mrs Danby, ‘and find their homes in new bodies.’
Everyone nodded with fantastic respect.
‘The spirits wander ,’ right?
You heard Mrs Danby.
She said the spirits wander, and she has a Rolls Royce, guys!
I thought to myself that, however far they had wandered, if they ended up in the body of Leonard Arthur Pike they must be really desperate.
Pike started to sing ‘Home on the Range’ in quite a loud voice.
I had never heard Pike sing in real life, so I couldn't tell how this spirit voice matched up to the real one.
Whoever was talking to us from Over Yonder, however, knew all the words.
Oh give me a home where the buffalo roam
And the deer and the antelope play…
I thought there was a strong chance that some of the lads might join in, but this proved not to be the case.
Pike gave us all four verses, including the one about the wagon train being  painted green, which I had never heard before.
When he had stopped, there was silence.
Nobody could follow that.
We all looked at Pike.
What was he going to do next?
Would it be with or without music?
‘I'll mosey on down now,’ he said, now sounding as if he came from Alabama rather than Texas.
‘I'll mosey, ah guess.’
‘Stay, spirit!’ said Mrs Danby., ho are you?’
Pike gave a deep chuckle.
‘Tex,’ he said.
‘Tex is my name.’
Then he started to sing ‘Home on the Range’ again.
I don't think we would have worn all four verses again (especially the one about the wagon being painted green) but, when he got to the line about the deer and the antelope playing, he burst into tears.
‘What's the matter, Tex?’ asked my mum.
‘Little Nelly!’ said Pike, now sounding vaguely Australian.
‘Little Nelly Woodhouse died on the prairie!’
That was all we could get out of Tex.
Mrs Danby tried.
My mum tried.
Even Quigley abandoned his dignity and had a go.
But Tex had nothing more to say to us.
I still wake up at night and think about Nelly Woodhouse.
It was haunting, somehow.
There followed the longest silence I can ever recall at a seance.
Pike just sat there with a toupee and tears all over his face, and we sat there staring at him.
After three or four minutes Quigley said, ‘He's in deep, deep trance.’
‘Yes,’ said Mrs Quigley, ‘he is very, very far away.’
Mrs Danby nodded.
‘I have been where he is,’ la Quigley continued, ‘and it is a bleak and lonely place.’
‘Yes,’ said Mrs Danby.
Mrs Q was finding her way back into the action.
‘It is a place’, she went on, ‘where the soul is buffeted by winds, and violent storms and feelings from the old, old time.’
‘Yes,’ said Mrs Danby.
Before Mrs Quigley could start drawing us maps of the terrain on the far side of the Veil, Pike gave an absolutely agonized  scream.
It really was scary — I kid you not.
What was even weirder was, it sounded like his own voice.
‘Mr Marr!’ he yelled.
‘Mr Marr!’
I leaned forward.
‘What about Mr Marr?’
But Pike went on screaming.
It was a horrible sound.
as if someone was being hurt, badly.
The sort of noise you imagine coming from a torture chamber.
‘Mr Marr!
Mr Marr!
Mr Marr !’
‘What about him?’
Then a new voice came out of him.
It was a mechanical, grating sound from deep in his throat.
I'm not easily spooked, but I didn't like this voice.
It reminded me of the voice that had started all this, the night my dad died.
‘I serve a different master,’ said the voice.
‘I serve other gods!’
It was well weird.
No one was holding hands any more.
We were all staring at Pike.
As we watched, his wig fell forward over his nose and landed on the table in front of him.
No one tried to pick it up.
Pike continued to stare ahead of him, but his eyes weren't focused on anything.
‘Where are you from?’
Pike gave a glassy smile.
His head turned to me, just the way Mrs Quigley's had done when she passed on that first message from my dad.
And, when he spoke, I'll swear it was my father's voice coming out of him.
It sounded just like him.
‘I'm a long way away, Simon,’ said my dad.
‘I really am a long, long way away.’
‘Dad…’
Then the mechanical voice cut in on him, like a radio changing channels.
‘Our planet is dying,’ said the mechanical voice.
‘We have no food or water.
Help us, please!
We have no food or water.’
Quigley's eyebrows drew in tight.
He wasn't sure about this at all .
‘Our sun is weak,’ said the mechanical voice.
‘Our canals are dying.
The moon is in its last quarter.
Help us, please!’
‘How can we help?’
That's my mum.
If she met an alien in Wandsworth High  Street, she'd be telling it the way to the supermarket and offering it free babysitting before you could say ‘flying saucer’.
I wasn't sure what Mrs Danby thought of all this.
She was gazing at Pike in bewilderment.
Before Quigley could interrupt, I leaned forward and said, ‘From which planet are you?’
I practically spelt this out.
I wanted this thing to hear me loud and clear.
It didn't, however, answer me directly.
Which, if you think about it, isn't surprising.
Anyone — even an advanced being from the other side of the universe — who is forced to use Leo Pike as a channel of communication is bound to experience transmission difficulties.
‘From which planet ?’
Pike's head was still facing me.
At my last question there was movement behind the eyes.
You could see a thought stirring, but you couldn't say if it was Pike's or not.
Then the voice started again, cracked and dry.
‘Our planet is old and tired.
The craters are dying.
There is no night now.
We need food and water.’
Whinge, whinge, whinge, eh?
When we finally meet beings from another galaxy, all they do is moan!
As I was thinking this, Pike started to laugh and the voice took on more colour.
It didn't sound mechanical now.
It sounded sneaky and mean, like a kid that thinks it's got away with something.
‘We got Marr,’ it said.
‘We fixed Marr good!’
‘Which planet ?’
I said again.
I was getting annoyed, as well as frightened.
But before I could say any more, my dad's voice came back.
‘Don't look any further, Simon, please,’ he said.
‘It's too dangerous.
Please don't look for me any further.
We all have to die, my darling.
I didn't want to go!
I didn't want to leave you!
But I'm dead.
You must stop looking for me…’
‘Dad…’
I almost shouted.
But, as I did, the mechanical voice came back, loud and clear.
‘I am Argol, from the planet Tellenor in the constellation of the  Bear.
And I bring death with me.
I am the bringer of death to your world!’
Pike clambered to his feet and tried to walk forward.
The table was in the way, but he was still trying to move.
Emily Quigley started to scream.
Pike's legs went up and down like someone walking the wrong way along a travelator.
He still stared straight ahead as he ploughed into the heavy dining-table.
Then, suddenly, he picked it up and flung it across the room.
Pike isn't a big guy, but he did this like he had been in secret weight-training.
As the table fell against Mrs Quigley and my mum (who started to cry), Pike just kept on walking, like a robot responding to an invisible signal.
When he got to the wall, he didn't stop.
He just kept trying to walk through it.
‘Leonard…’ whimpered Hannah Dooley.
‘Oh Leonard…’
‘I am not Leonard,’ said a sneering, robotic voice.
‘I am not Pike .
I am Argol from the planet Tellenor in the constellation of the Bear.
And I bring death with me.
I am the bringer of death to your world!’
We knew this.
But we were still interested.
No one had ever seen Pike express an opinion about anything.
His job was to open car doors for Quigley.
Now here he was walking into walls!
Mrs Quigley could roll.
She could froth.
Although she seemed not to be doing a lot of that these days.
But did she walk into walls?
We were looking at a very serious contender indeed.
Mrs Q was looking rather critically at Pike's performance.
And he was certainly not getting the kind of back-up she got from her old man.
He was just quietly walking into the wall, while the rest of us stood around in an awkward half-circle.
From a room somewhere else in the house came a loud gurgling sound, followed by a scream.
It was hard to hear what was being said, but someone had put a nail through a pipe.
None of us paid this any attention.
I looked at Pike, my mouth open.
How had he got hold of that name?
Why ‘Argol’?
I'll be frank.
In a way, I thought he was putting it on.
I mean, I thought there were aliens, or something like aliens, out there.
But I wasn't sure they were the kind of entities that come from other planets.
They could have been the kind you find here.
It is easy to make up someone to look like someone, isn't it?
And to play on someone's fears and hopes.
Could they have got an actor to pretend to be my dad?
It was possible.
Somebody was trying to freak me out, and, from what I could gather, it might well have something to do with the Quigleys, with Veronica and this Mrs Danby.
But what I thought and what I believed had been moving further and further apart in the weeks since my father had died.
What I was prepared to believe now, although it changed from day to day, was something frightening and surprising and new.
Belief is spooky.
It's something you use to get you from A to B, I guess, and right now that seemed a long way to me.
Besides, for reasons I will come to shortly, the name Argol was familiar to me.
‘Look, Argol,’ I said, trying to get the boy-to-alien tone just right, ‘if that is your name.
How did you get here?’
Pike's face was now pressed firmly into what was left of the Quigleys' wallpaper.
He had stopped using his legs.
He was just concerned with getting his nose as far into the brickwork as humanly possible.
‘I think’, said Mrs Quigley, sniffing the stale parlour with her long, dog's nose, ‘that there's a bit of play-acting going on here!’
Pike leaped into the air.
He sort of bounced off the wall as if he was on a piece of elastic and someone had just yanked it from the other end.
He whirled round, stood in a kind of ape-like crouch and started to swing his arms in front of him.
Mrs Quigley backed away nervously.
It was, I thought, the last time that she would make sarky remarks about a fellow medium's performance.
When Pike spoke again it was in that mechanical voice.
But there was nothing human about it at all now.
It was 100 per cent artificial.
It sounded like a menacing version of my Amiga 500.
‘Why do you not believe?’ it said.
‘Why do you pretend you are the only beings in the universe?
Why should that be, my friends?
Why do you not recognize us?
We are here.
We are among you.
Quigley folded his arms.
He was starting to get annoyed with Pike, you could tell.
‘Just in Wimbledon?’ he said.
‘Or are you all over the place?’
Pike started to walk towards him.
His mouth was open and he was dribbling down his front.
‘Leonard!’ said Quigley, his voice shaking slightly.
‘Don't be…’
Pike's face started to distort.
One hand came out in a kind of claw and swiped at Quigley.
My mum jumped and screamed.
Hannah Dooley, her nostrils flared, was muttering something to herself.
When the voice came back it was the full robot job — an awful, grating sound.
‘We landed in Wimbledon,’ it said, ‘and soon the rest of the planet will be ours!’
With these words the forty-eight-year-old accounts clerk leaped at Quigley's throat and, pinning him to the floor, started to bang his head on the dust-sheets that shrouded the household's £700 Persian carpet.
20
This was, I thought, just what Quigley needed.
He was not of this opinion.
He got his hands round Pike's neck and started to squeeze.
But Pike kept on banging his head against the floor.
‘Look,’ said Quigley, ‘let's be reasonable about this, shall we?’
Not an easy thing to say when someone in the grip of an alien being is trying to make scrambled eggs out of your brains.
‘Let's…er…discuss…’
You had to hand it to Quigley.
But Pike would not stop.
His face was dark purple and there was that look in his eyes again.
I didn't say anything, guys.
I had remembered where I had heard that name before.
‘Leonard…’
‘I do not know of Leonard ,’ said Pike.
‘I am Argol from the planet Tellenor in the constellation of the Bear.
And I bring death with me.
I am the bringer of death to your world!’
And death number one looked set to be that of Albert Roger Quigley.
Mrs Q was pulling at Pike's cardy, and even Mrs Danby was weighing in on Quigley's behalf, but Pike kept right on banging.
‘Argol,’ said Quigley finally, ‘I beseech you in the name of Jesus Christ — Argol!’
Pike stopped banging and a slow smile spread across his face.
When he spoke he sounded more like Pike than anyone else.
‘Argol,’ he said, with childlike delight.
‘Do we have to bang our heads on the floor before we understand?
Argol .
It isn't difficult to say, is it?
You can say Persil can't you?
You can say  Daz and Flash and Bold .
You can say Argol can't you?
Argol is my name , lunkhead!’
Quigley remained cool.
If he wasn't such a complete bastard he'd be a great guy.
But, say what you like about him, he was probably the perfect bridge between us and a being from another world, especially when that being proved to be as mean and nasty as Argol looked to be.
‘Argol,’ he said, ‘please let go of my head!
OK?’
‘All right,’ said Pike.
Then the breath seemed to go out of him, like air out of a lilo.
He fell forward on Quigley's chest.
But, just as he did so, he gave us one more burst of the mechanical voice: ‘Andrew Logan Manningtree Marr, born Glasgow 1946, died Wimbledon 1990.
Marr knew too much.
Andrew Logan…
Manningtree.
Manningtree Marr.
Operation Majestic.
Operation Majestic
There was a clicking at the back of his throat.
I stepped away from him towards the wall.
What he had just said, if that was what he had said, was as frightening as anything else that had happened since my dad died.
He went on: ‘Operation Majestic UK8.
Marr knew too much!’
Then Pike, or Pike's body anyway, fiopped all over Quigley as if the two of them had just been exchanging bodily fiuids.
Pike did not move.
After some time, Quigley said, curtly, ‘Get him off me!’
Mrs Danby, Mrs Quigley, Hannah Dooley, Roger Beeding and my mum rolled Pike off him.
Pike curled up on the floor.
He seemed, as far as I could tell, to be fast asleep.
‘Let us pray,’ said Quigley.
‘Yes,’ said Mrs Danby.
What a man!
He has just been pulverized by a being from the other side of the galaxy and what does he do?
He is right on the line to Jesus.
He didn't even get up.
He just rolled neatly over on his side and commenced talking to the Big Man.
‘Jesus Christ,’ he said, as if he was an experienced soldier talking to a rather dumb general, ‘there are many impostors in  Thy world and many of Us have failed to Grasp the…er…
Meaning of these Things.’
He stopped.
When he has those upper-case problems, you know he is running out of steam.
Then he said, in a thick voice, ‘Is he all right?’
‘I think so,’ said my mum.
I looked at her.
It was weird.
Since my dad died she had got smaller and smaller.
If she went on this way, you'd be able to pick her up soon.
Everyone has their moment, right?
And hers was the day he croaked.
It was like he hadn't done anything really interesting until he kicked off.
He couldn't surprise her.
Maybe dying is the only honest thing we do.
As I looked at her, I thought of her shrinking, like someone in a fairytale, and how one day I might hold her in the palm of my hand with her little voice squeaking commands at me as if she was a mouse I'd picked up in the garden.
I didn't like that idea.
I figured I ought to be the person to make her grow, but I just didn't know how.
‘He was in the grip of some Force,’ said mum.
‘I was reminded of that poltergeist in West Germany!’
Quigley shot her a glance.
‘Let us pray,’ he said again.
‘Let us pray that Our Church, which We have built up through Thy Faith and trust, will…hold together…and that…although there are Beings that…’
There was a pause.
Then a thin, hopeless little noise came out of him, like a half-hearted fart.
To my horror, I realized Quigley was crying.
We were getting to him.
We were getting to him.
Me and the aliens were finally getting to him.
No one moved.
We had seen a lot of people cry in our time, but this was the first time that Quigley had done us the honour.
We let him finish.
He did make a pretty thorough job of it.
He started with a series of gulping sobs, went through to a noise like a drain emptying out and finished up with a sort of throaty sob.
Mrs Danby went to him and put her arms on him.
‘Albert,’ she said, ‘I want to help you.
I want to help.
I promised the money to the Church and I want to give it.
But I must see the boy's faith, do you see?’
‘My dear…’ began Quigley.
But she was having none of it.
‘We all know how I led Norman astray.
How I led him out of the garden and into a rough and stony place where naught but thistles and brambles grow!
How I made him betray what he believed !’
This whole thing was about what you believed.
My dad and I had talked about these things so rarely.
We just never seemed to get round to them.
It was always the joke or the next argument or the next meal at La paesana with my dad.
And yet he must have believed in something.
He said to me once, when he was driving me to school, that there was nothing left to believe in these days.
I said to him, ‘But you believe in…well, in…in what Mum believes, don't you?’
He gave me a kind of bleak look.
‘I'm not sure, old son.
I'm not sure what I believe in any more.
I thought I knew, but it's…it's so hard…’
I looked out at the school.
The school he'd wanted me to go to so that I could be as clever as he had once been and go to Oxford the way he'd done and not waste it as he had been foolish enough to do.
I leaned across to kiss him goodbye and I said, ‘Believe in me, dad!’
As a joke, right?
But he put a hand on my shoulder and said, in that philosophical, gravelly voice he had, ‘All we have to believe in is our children.
And yet we betray them!’
He said things like that, my dad.
But not usually in the early morning.
Usually when he'd had a few.
Betray?
I mean, be serious!
Who said we trusted each other in the first place?
It is nearly the year 2000, my friends.
I looked up.
Mrs Danby was staring across the darkened room at me.
Upstairs the hammering and shouting seemed to have stopped.
Her voice sounded shaky.
‘You know…
Simon was to be…was to…’
She looked at me sort of pleadingly.
‘And now he has changed us all!
Hasn't he?
He has made us think!’
You can say that again , was what I read on Quiggers' face.
‘You know…’
Mrs Danby went on, ‘are there beings from other worlds?
Here?
In Wimbledon?
It's perfectly possible, isn't it?’
She laid a hand on Quigley's shoulder.
‘I cannot give the money until my doubts are resolved.
I am deeply confused.’
She spoke for all of us here.
She shook her head wildly.
‘Too much, Albert!
Too many things that cannot yield their secrets!’
And, with these stirring words, she went outside to her Rolls-Royce.
Although why anyone with a Silver Cloud needs to worry about things yielding up their secrets is still a mystery to me.
Whatever they were talking about had had a very bad effect on the Quigleys.
Mrs Quigley was hyperventilating and giving me some very dirty looks indeed.
My mum dabbed her eyes with her handkerchief and said, ‘Arnold Bottomley had a seizure when he was on a canal boat and it took four of us to hold him, although he had been so easy-going on other trips, especially the Greek one that I didn't go on.
He did quite well at Sussex University!’
Nobody responded to this.
Nobody knew whether the seance was over.
Were we still talking to Jesus?
Very slowly Pike got up.
He shook his head.
Touched his face.
Realized he hadn't got his glasses.
Then he said, ‘Where am I?’
‘32 Strathclyde Road,’ said my mum.
‘At the moment…’ said Quigley ominously.
‘You what?’ said Pike.
Quigley too sat up now.
The two men looked at each other in silence.
Somehow or other Pikey found his glasses and, in the course of getting them hung on his ears, discovered his rug was missing.
‘Oh my God !’ said Pike softly.
‘Yes’, said Quigley, ‘Oh my God!’
Pike, on all fours, started to pad around the floor in search of the missing toupee.
I could see it over by the wooden boards that had been nailed across Quigley's windows.
It looked like a sleeping dog on the white sheet.
I didn't like to point it out to him.
I just wanted to get out of there.
‘Spacemen…’ said Quigley, with a sniff.
‘Spacemen…’
‘You what?’ said Pike.
‘Spacemen!’
Pike's bum was in the air as he groped his way forward.
Suddenly Quiggers was on his feet and, before anyone could say anything, he was taking a brisk run-up at the Pike bottom.
Moving like a man who has played more squash than he need, he spun round, drew back his right and booted his wigless ex-sidekick right up his grey-flannelled arse.
‘Argol from the planet Tellenor,’ he said.
‘Argol from the fucking planet Tellenor!’
‘Who?’ said Pike, as he fell face forward into his rug.
But Quigley was not to be stopped.
He was raining kicks into all the softer bits of the body chosen by the being who was to bring death to our world.
If Argol had any bollocks at all, I thought to myself, this could well be the end of Albert Roger Quigley.
Rog did not, however, disappear in a white sheet of flame.
He just kept right on kicking Pikey, and Pikey kept right on taking it.
Their relationship was right back on course.
There was absolutely no sign of Argol.
Maybe he had zoomed off into another body.
You know?
Maybe he was in the body but he just liked getting kicked by earthlings.
Maybe they were into S & M on the planet Tellenor.
Pike was curled up into a ball, like a hedgehog, clutching his wig to him the way a kid might hold on to its teddy before going to sleep.
Rog just kept on putting the boot into him.
Each time the toecap went into his stomach, Pike moaned quietly, his knuckles tightening round his toupee.
In the end, Quigley put his hand on his hip and stepped  back a pace.
‘Now,’ he said, ‘what was all that about,please !
Argol from the planet Tellenor!
And as for Mr Marr — did you ever see him more than twice in your life?
Eh, ‘Argol’?’
‘Who is Argol?’ said Pike, evenly.
‘And where is the planet Tellenor?’
If this was an act, it was a good one.
It certainly threw Quigley, because he turned his attentions to me.
Breathing heavily, he reached for my shoulder and pulled me towards him.
‘We are going to bring you to heel, boy.
You hear?
We are going to stop your troublemaking.
You hear?
We are going to draw the reins in very, very,very tight!’
‘Albert…’ began my mum tentatively.
Quigley turned on her.
‘There's something bad got into your son, Sarah, and Mrs Quigley and I are going to have to do something very serious about it.
He is going to have to be Confirmed in Faith.
You hear me?
He must be.
You hear?’
Here he grabbed my arm and squeezed it, hard.
‘Even if we have to drag him kicking and screaming before the Lord.
Our Church needs funds.
You understand, boy?
Our Church needs you!’
I was scared.
But not just by Quigley.
I was scared because if what Quigley had said to Pikey was true and he really didn't know Mr Marr, how come he had access to his full name and date of birth?
The only person in the world who knew those was me.
For some reason he hated that middle name of his.
It was almost as closely guarded a secret as Operation Majestic UK8.
Oh yes, there is such a thing.
That was the real reason I was sweating as I went to bed that night.
Operation Majestic UK8 is dynamite .
Nobody else, apart from those directly involved — and, of course, Mr Marr — knew about that stuff.
It's dangerous even to mention it to people, according to Mr Marr.
But Pike knew about it.
If it was Pike talking.
Not someone or some thing using his poor little body to give us a dreadful warning.
21
You may find this hard to believe, but Operation Majestic 12 really happened.
You can look it up in The UFO Report , by Timothy Good, if you like.
It's the most convincing evidence we have of an alien invasion of this planet, and a matter of public record.
In 1952, according to the American nuclear physicist Stanton Friedman, a top-secret briefing document for president Eisenhower was leaked to the public.
It revealed that the wreckage of a flying saucer was allegedly recovered seventy-five miles north-west of Roswell, New Mexico, in July 1947.
Admiral Hillenkoetter's report for the CIA noted, among other things, ‘that the characteristics of the human-like bodies were different from homo sapiens; that there were strange symbols on portions of the wreckage which had not yet been interpreted’.
And ‘that it was strongly recommended that Operation Majestic 12 be kept accountable only to the president of the United States’.
There is objective evidence that something odd did happen near Roswell in 1947.
We know for a fact that the area was sealed off and that army and rescue services were called to the scene.
And that no one, not even the press, was allowed near.
Stanton Friedman, who has years of experience in the design, development and testing of advanced nuclear and space systems, concludes, in his 1990 report, that the leaked documents are genuine .
Before you say, ‘Then he is barking mad,’ think hard about this.
There are plenty of things they don't tell us about.
And Operation Majestic UK8, like its American counterpart, is one of those things.
The reason you haven't read about it, even in  the official UFO journals, is that it has been kept so secret that not even the ufologists know about it.
Operation Majestic UK8 refers to a set of documents shown to Mrs Thatcher in secret in 1984.
These documents refer to a spaceship that crash-landed on the island of Jura in the Inner Hebrides in the autumn of 1983.
(Autumn, as you will have noted from this manuscript, is a busy time for the extraterrestrials.)
An alien who was brought from the wreckage in a container to the Mill Hill Medical Research Centre survived in our atmosphere for three days, five hours and twenty-five minutes.
According to the UK8 papers, a full-scale invasion of the earth was planned, although, from what the creature told them, the research scientists concluded that it would be eight or nine years before the ‘fleet’ was fully prepared.
The alien, who was, according to the scientists, ‘of humanoid form’, was from the planet Tellenor in the constellation of the Bear, identified subsequently by scientists as probably belonging to star system BG4543/2221 in the Beta Principis cluster.
Mr Marr reckoned that he conveyed ‘certain information’ to the scientists, including that his planet was controlled by a creature.
The creature's name was Argol .
Hardly anyone knew this apart from me and Mr Marr.
How could Pike have possibly known?
Wasn't it likely that the thing that had got into him at the seance was really from the planet Tellenor?
It hadn't been like any other seance I had ever seen…
I thought about this the day after Pike went crazy.
It had been a particularly bad day at school.
‘Dummy’ Maxwell had told me I had a ‘hunted look’about me.
I ask you!
My dad always used to say that he didn't pay teachers to make personal remarks.
I was sitting with my feet up, watching a film about a puerto Rican mass murderer.
First of all Emily Quigley came in.
‘All Daddy wantth you to do’, she said, ‘ith to thay that alienth ith only an ecthpwethion!
He thinkth tho highly of your thtwength!’
I ignored her.
The puerto Rican mass murderer was letting  off a pump-action shotgun into a bus queue in downtown Los Angeles.
After a few minutes she went out and Quigley came in, waving a piece of paper.
He grinned madly at me and said, ‘Well, young shaver!
This should sort you out!’
He put his hands on his hips and gave me a kind of larky look.
Why do you always look so sullen , fellow?
Gosh!
Jesus ain't arf depressed at seeing his children down in the mouth, me deario!’
I kept my eyes on the screen.
I never look sullen.
Especially when I am watching puerto Rican mass murderers.
This one was now sobbing over his attorney's shoes.
Quigley waved the paper over my face.
When its flapping had started to irritate me, I snatched it from him and saw that it was ruled like a timetable.
On it were written, in crude capitals, things like:
07.45–08.10 — HOOVERING
08.10–08.15 — CHRISTIAN WORSHIP
08.15–08.25 — BREAKFAST (optional)
I went back to looking at the screen.
Events move swiftly in these films and it's very easy to miss things.
The puerto Rican mass murderer was now in bed, surrounded by a crowd of admiring listeners, lawyers, policemen, close relatives and beautiful women make with the pump-action shotgun.
You know?
Quigley reached forward and turned it off.
I turned it on again.
I was quite calm.
At this moment my mum came in.
‘Do you think’, Quigley said to her, ‘that the little bloke should be watching this…?’
‘Oh…’ said my mum.
She sounded scared.
Behind her came Mrs Quigley, who was holding a frying-pan.
‘It's only some rubbish about a puerto Rican mass murderer…’ she said.
‘He's got off by the blonde one in the wig, anyway!’
I knew she had psychic gifts, but I could not work out how  she was so clued in to this film.
Surely there was no way she could have seen it before.
Quigley started to pace up and down the room as the mass murderer, who had now leaped out of bed and on to the window-sill of his hospital suite, announced his intention of travelling the sixteen floors between him and the pavement without the aid of lift or stairs.
‘You, me laddio,’ said Quigley, ‘are on pindown!
You will be picked up from school by Marjorie or me or your mother or all three of us from now on.,
I kept my eyes on the screen.
I tried to imagine Greenslade and Marjorie Quigley together.
I just could not do it, somehow.
‘Golly, Simo, you are making it hard for us,’ Quiggers went on.
‘We want a pure boy that we can hold to our bosoms and we get a kind of…
I dunno, ol' matey…a kinda monster !’
The puerto Rican mass murderer had decided to jump.
His attorney's girlfriend was holding on to his legs as he went through the things that were wrong with his life, in broken English.
‘Itta steenk!’ he was saying.
‘It alla steenk, thees life!’
I knew how he felt.
My mum and Mrs Quigley were now ritting on the arm of the sofa, their eyes glued to the screen, as Quigley paced around the room.
‘There is to be no hanging around the High Street and staring into shop windows,’ he went on.
‘There are to be none of those ‘hamburgers’ either.’
You could really hear those inverted commas click into place.
What was he trying to do to me?
We were talking Colditz here, guys!
‘There are no phone-calls in or out.
There are no little ‘subs’, and there are no trips to the newsagents either, me deario.
Until you stop this upsetting talk and this…divisive rambling about…’
‘Aliens,’ I said, rather irritably.
I knew he was trying to rile me, but I was determined to keep calm.
I thought about  sang-sang-dang , or the state of being a rose-bush in early May.
It helped.
On the screen they had let go of the puerto Rican mass murderer's trousers and he was on his way to the sidewalk, head first, at about seventy miles an hour.
It was better for him really.
He didn't look the kind of guy who could have taken a long prison sentence.
‘Sin is a busy old thing when out!
See how it travels, Lord, all round about!’’ said Quigley, who often reaches for the wise words of Old Mother Walsh when things are getting tough.
After the mass murderer hit the deck, I got up and, resisting the temptation to fold my left forearm over my right elbow, make a prong of the middle finger of my right hand and then lift it in Quigley's face while telling him he was a motherfucking asshole, I went to the door.
‘And don't look so sullen, me laddio!’ he called after me.
Sullen?
I wouldn't know how to , my friend.
I had risen above him and was now in the state of dung-hai , or complete and utter superiority to Quigley.
What was really getting to him was the fact that alien-fever was proving hard to eradicate in the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist.
I thought about his notion that ‘alien’ was just another way of saying ‘devil’, or that Old Mother Walsh and her snake weren't, actually, any more real, although just as powerful, as Argol and the things from Tellenor.
It didn't stand up.
I don't say I knew what was happening, but, whatever it was, it was real .
You know?
I hadn't even dared go near Furnival Gardens since I saw my old man for the second rime.
I would have to go down to Mr Marr's house.
And, with this new regime in force, tonight would probably be the last chance I had to do it.
I decided to wait until they were all asleep.
I lay on my bed with a computer magazine and, from time to time, went to the window and looked down at the darkened street.
I could make out the spot where my dad had stood that night.
Down below, Quigley shouted goodnight at me and I shouted back, and, at last, my mum tiptoed to the door and, looking  fearfully around her in case Quigley saw, blew me a little , damp kiss.
‘You can be so sweet, Simon,’ she said, ‘but you're such a stubborn thing!’
I didn't answer.
I might have provoked even worse charges.
Then she said, ‘You're so like him.
You're so like poor, poor Norman!’
Quigley was always the last to go to bed.
His routine was monumental, guys.
When everyone was in bed he would go round to every window, double-check if it was locked and then, before he came upstairs, place a few key obstacles in the path of any potential intruder.
I swear he was obsessed with burglars.
He spent a lot of time swaggering about the place, flexing his muscles and telling everyone what he was going to do with those ‘foolish little feller-me-lads’ if they showed up.
I had to wait for what seemed like hours.
But, eventually, after several tours of inspection of the windows and much talk of the need for Banham locks, Quigley, exhausted by his own vigilance, staggered to bed.
Minutes later he was making a noise like a pneumatic drill.
I slipped out of bed, got into a pair of jeans and a T-shirt and headed down the stairs.
It was like a slalom down there.
There was an ironing-board, two kitchen chairs and a couple of broken wooden boxes snaked around the front room.
In the back kitchen was a dresser, three pails of water a yard or so apart and a small scattering of drawing-pins.
In the front hall — in case any burglar should choose to throw himself through the fireproof glass in the window or slice through the mortise lock with a flame gun — was a selection of things to trip over.
There was a rubber ball, a few of Emily's textbooks and a sort of forcefield of nails resting heads down and points upwards towards the unseen burglar's face.
As I discovered this arrangement, I began to feel almost sorry for any potential thief.
After fighting his way through all this , he would have to face an angry and almost certainly stark-naked Quigley.
The street was empty.
In one house, on the corner, there was a light on in the front bedroom.
A middle-aged woman, wearing what looked like a turban, was looking out at the night.
I don't  know what she was looking for, but she didn't see me.
There was a warm wind on my face and hands as I made my way towards Mr Marr's place.
I didn't look up at the sky.
But I really felt they were looking at me.
Like you do in the supermarket sometimes, when you can sense something behind you and you turn and there's this camera, mounted at the edge of a shelf, swivelling its one black eye this way and that, like some malevolent goblin at the door to a secret cave.
I didn't look behind me either.
They were here weren't they?
They could be keeping pace with me, along Forrest Avenue, down Gladewood Road, and across up through Park Crescent.
Maybe they had got people in every third house.
Maybe Mr and Mrs Lewis at 119 Cedar Avenue were not in their usual positions, snoring back to back in the bed they bought twenty years ago.
Maybe they were out in the garden, walking around stiffly, expressionless as vacuum cleaners, as they prepared the Giant pod for Argol of the planet Tellenor.
I had a feeling that, when Argol finally showed, he was going to look a lot more scary than Leo Pike.
I had heard his soundbite, and he sounded like a man who meant business.
Looking in front wasn't really safe either.
Suppose Argol, or someone like him, suddenly leaped out of someone's driveway to give me a taste of his galaxy's latest in combat weapons.
The Jura alien had had a lot to say about Tellenorean life-forms.
Much of it, Mr Marr said, was just too horrible to tell me.
He didn't want me to have nightmares, he said.
I thought about what they might be like.
In a way, not knowing made it worse.
I used to feel that way about Old Mother Walsh's snake when I was a little kid.
Now it's something to laugh at, but then…
I was feeling more and more like a little kid with each day that passed.
As I turned into Mr Marr's I was shaking.
I had to force myself down the street to his house.
I had to force myself up the path to his front door.
And, when I fitted the key into that lock, my hands were trembling.
Listen — no one could have got into Mr Marr's.
I had the only key.
No one had forced any doors or windows, because they didn't need to, did they?
On Tellenor, according to the Jura alien, they have mastered the technique of passing through solid objects — one of the things Mr Marr said was worst about the Tellenoreans was that you never quite knew when they were there.
If it was them, they had been through the house very, very carefully.
Since my last visit they had had another go.
Someone or something had been through the fridge and taken away a few samples of earthling diet — a chilli con carne and a cold lasagne that was probably even now being scoffed by a load of blobs up in the ionosphere.
They had also started to take away literature.
They had been pretty systematic.
Most of the stuff missing was from Mr Marr's extensive collection of material dealing with invasions from other galaxies.
And the huge file dealing with Operation Majestic UK8, which had taken pride of place in Mr Marr's top-secret collection of UFO papers (in the cupboard under the stairs) was nowhere to be seen.
I thought about the police.
But if these beings had left any fingerprints I had the strong feeling they wouldn't be the kind you get down at Scotland Yard.
He had kept the file under a pile of back numbers of the Wimbledon Guardian , because, as he said, ‘there were a number of people who would be only too happy to see all documents in the case suppressed.’
At one point, I seem to remember, he'd kept the papers in the fridge — which is why the top sheet had a large blob of sweetcorn in the top right-hand corner.
Our Tellenorean friends had taken the Wimbledon Guardian as well as the UK8 papers.
I didn't like to think why they needed the local paper.
By now, probably half the small ads in the current issue had been placed by aliens.
I was scared, though.
I was really terrified.
And then, as I came out from under the stairs, I heard something moving upstairs.
Two creaking boards and that was it.
I stopped.
I listened hard.
I could hear my heart tap against my  ribs.
My face suddenly felt very hot, and then, as suddenly, very cold.
There was silence.
I wanted the silence to go on, but, as I listened, it felt as if I was racing it.
That the thump of my heart was challenging it to go on and not to be broken by a…
Crrreak…
There was something up there.
And, while I was not in possession of definite proof, my money was on it coming from somewhere a little further away than the Fulham Palace Road.
As I changed from listening to walking mode, I tried to work out whether it had feet or flippers or ran on rollers.
The noise had an insistent quality — like a small animal gnawing away at something or gathering food and stopping every few minutes to listen, as hard as I was listening in the dark of Mr Marr's house.
I did not want to find out if it was friendly.
If it was friendly, how come it was scurrying around stealing magazines and not coming out into the open and asking who was in charge round here.
Everything seemed to indicate that it was our friend Argol, or some flunkey of his.
I tried to remember if Mr Marr had ever said anything about how Argol looked.
Was he a thing or a person?
Hadn't someone said something about his teeth?
I was almost sure they had.
His teeth !
My Christ!
The gnawing was starting again.
Not content with stealing Mr Marr's library, the bastard was chewing up his bedroom furniture!
Then I heard the humming.
A high-pitched noise that seemed to come from the head of the stairs.
It wasn't the kind of sound an engine made — or a dishwasher or a television or any of the things I was used to seeing round the house.
I only realized what it was when I got to the front door.
It was a human sound, but unlike one I had ever heard before.
It was more like the noise dogs make sometimes — a see-sawing musical phrase, as if it was talking to someone you couldn't see.
That was it.
Human and yet definitely not human.
I looked up at the bedroom window as I closed the door behind me.
I saw Pike's face pressed to the glass.
He looked  as if he was lit from below, and his nose and cheeks were spread out in a white, lifeless slab against the window pane.
But his eyes were glinting, as if he was looking at something no mere human could see.
Or — and this thought only occurred to me when I was out on the street and running for the hill as fast as I could — as if there was something else behind his eyes, looking out at the world, waiting for the awful moment when it would start to take apart our little corner of the planet, piece by shabby piece.
22
They had done something to my dad.
And now Pike was under their control.
The only comforting thing about this was that, although they were well placed to take over my brain, they had, so far at any rate, declined to take up the offer.
Maybe I secreted some hormone that gave the average Tellenorean a violently unpleasant feeling.
Or perhaps Argol had an enlightened policy towards young people.
Maybe it was going to be like the Cultural Revolution in China and we were all going to be given the chance to team up with the aliens.
Certainly, if offered the choice between Quigley and an eighty-foot beige monster with a corkscrew head, I knew where my allegiance would lie.
I tried to remember what else the documents had said.
A lot of them, of course, were so secret that Mr Marr couldn't even show them to me.
They were, he said, the kind of documents you eat rather than read.
The guys at Mill Hill who had worked on the Jura alien had been very cagey about this, apparently, but I think Mr Marr said there was a lot of stuff about mind control.
The Tellenoreans don't talk the way normal people do.
They just sit there by the fire projecting their thoughts into each other 's brains, like me and Greenslade.
In fact, it was rumoured that one of the Mill Hill guys had had his brain messed around with by the visitor who screwed up the landing in the Hebrides.
The trouble with this alien business is that you cannot trust your senses.
As Jenny Randles says in Abduction (according to Mr Marr, the only really reliable guide to the spacenapping phenomenon), ‘Of course I am making no assumptions about what it means to have been abducted [by aliens], but if some  researchers are correct many of you reading this book might have undergone an abduction experience without consciously realizing it .’
It was possible that all this business with my dad was a deliberate ploy by Argol and his pals to destabilize yours truly.
After all, I was close to Marr, wasn't I?
And he was the only guy on to them.
Maybe my dad was really and truly dead and what I had been looking at, in the road outside our house and in Furnival Gardens, had been a hologram put out by the Tellenoreans.
Maybe it was me they were after.
Maybe the reason I had Testified the way I did was a kind of double bhiff on Argol's part.
Maybe they had already got to me .
I was running now.
Putting one foot after the other in a style I have developed during cross-country runs organized by Cranborne School, I allowed my head to sort of loll forward and my legs to patter after it, leaving the middle bit of me completely free for inflation and deflation.
At any moment I expected one of the masters, placed at strategic intervals to stop a guy taking short cuts or lighting up a Havana cigar, to leap out from a place of concealment, brandishing The Times and bellowing, ‘Come on , Britton!
Come along there!’
As I panted into Stranraer Gardens, following the no-hopers rule for cross-country —never run in a straight line — I was flailing my arms left and right and zigzagging at an angle of about ten degrees to the horizontal.
Everything in Stranraer Gardens was as still as I had left it.
The trees in the street were shamming dead.
Every last bit of unkempt hedge in our front garden was taking the same attitude it had always taken.
In whatever street we live, our garden is always the shabby one.
‘Gardening vexeth the spirit,’ my dad used to say to me with a broad wink whenever my mum asked him to get out and cut the lawn.
Whenever she said to him, ‘But, Norman — don't you want to sit in it, like other people?’ he would reply, rather grandly, ‘A garden, my dear, is a place for passing through as quickly as possible on the way to the pub.’
I stopped a few yards from the house.
All around the fences, the parked cars and the neat roofs was that weird stuff you get just before dawn in the suburbs — it isn't light or darkness but some other thing entirely — shadowy, ghostly, but so much itself you feel you could reach out and run it through your fingers.
I got my breath back.
With that stupid feeling of relief you get when you're home, I pushed open the door, tripped over what felt like a set of billiard balls and fell headlong into a carefully arranged selection of this week's vegetables.
As I went face first into about two kilos of potatoes, a large hand seized hold of my T-shirt from behind.
The hand pulled me up towards the ceiling.
‘Where've you been, my laddio?’ said Quigley's voice, quiet but deadly.
‘What have you been a-doing of?’
‘I've been…’
That was as far as I got.
‘It's been on the Common looking for little green men has it?
And holding their little green hands and having little green drinks with them and having little green chats about their little green planet ’…
‘Listen…’
I said.
He was hitting me really hard.
It was only when I swung to the left and broke free for a moment that I was able to observe that he was wearing my dad's grey towelling dressing-gown.
My dad wasn't a tall man and it only just covered Quigley's enormous willy.
It made him look as if he was wearing a mini-skirt.
‘What are you trying to do to our Church, Sonny Jim?’ he hissed.
‘Why are you trying to split us in two?
After all I have done for you!’
I could not think of a single thing that Quigley had ever done for me.
But now was not the time to tell him.
He hit hard.
‘Do you know what hangs on Mrs Danby's covenant?’ he said.
‘Have you any idea ?’
I had an idea what the covenant was.
It sounded as if all this was as much about money as it was about religion.
From upstairs I heard my mum shout, ‘What is it?
What is it?’
Quigley went mad.
He started to clout me around the head, yelling, ‘Burglar!
Burglar!
Burglar!’
‘Burglar?’ came a cheeping from the back bedroom.
‘Burglar!’ yelled Quigley.
‘Burglar!’
Pronouncing the word seemed to bring him to his senses.
He stopped, looked over his shoulder and put both his hands up to my face.
‘O Jesus Christ,’ he said, looking over my shoulder as if JC had just wandered in from the garden, ‘did you die for this boy?’
I kneed him in the balls as hard as I could.
‘Jesus Christ!’ he said, doubling up in pain.
‘Oh, screw Jesus Christ,’ I said.
‘Screw him.
And screw his mother Mary too!’
Quigley gave what I can only describe as an eldritch screech and came at me with both arms, legs and the front bit of his head.
‘Blasphemer!’
Mrs Quigley was now at the head of the stairs.
‘Burglar!’ she screamed.
‘What is it?’ called my mum again.
What indeed?
A burglar who blasphemed?
Who broke into your house in the middle of the night and, after paying the usual compliments to your stereo, got on with the job of pouring scorn on your most cherished convictions?
Quigley beat me through into the back kitchen.
I heard my mum's voice.
‘Simon! she called, in feeble tones.
‘Is that you?’
‘It is!’
I yelled.
The one who was in your womb for nine months and a day, remember?
And, if I didn't think this bastard who's making so fucking free with my dad's house would follow me there, I'd jump right back in this minute!’
‘He called Albert a bastard!’ yelled Mrs Quigley.
‘Well he is,’ I said.
‘He is a bastard.
He's a complete and utter bastard, if you want to know.’
‘He thaith Daddy ith a bathtard!’ came Emily's voice.
Quigley clouted me smartly across the side of the head.
I fell  to the floor and crouched, Pike fashion, in a corner of the kitchen, covering my face with my hands.
Quigley went to the door to check there was no one around, then, unable to stop himself, ran back to me and twisted my ear hard.
‘Stop play-acting,’ he said.
‘I didn't hit you hard!’
‘Let go of my lugs.’
He started to shake my head about.
It was not going to be long, I reflected, before I made my contribution to discussions in 24 Stranraer Gardens via a Ouija board.
I sensed, rather than heard, my mum come in.
Quigley had made sure he had stopped hitting me as soon as he heard her on the stairs.
‘Mum…’
‘Oh, Simon…’
Quigley leaped back, pulling down my dad's dressing-gown with a surprisingly prim gesture.
I looked up at my mum.
I noticed that she was crying.
Those little eyes of hers were red and angry, and her chin quivered helplessly above her neck as she came towards me.
‘Why do you let him do this to me, Mum?
Why don't you stand up for me?
Don't you love me, mum?’
My mum dabbed at her eyes.
She didn't answer.
‘If daddy was alive he wouldn't let him do this to me!
Why do you?
Why do you let him?
You don't love me, do you?
You don't even like me, do you?
Why don't you like me?
What have I ever done to you?’
Unable to answer this to her or my satisfaction, my mum started to cry.
But they weren't her usual tears.
Usually she cries like the rain we had on a holiday once, up in Scotland — a soft, grey drizzle — but this time her body shook with real sobs.
Quigley joined in.
He's a big guy, but he seemed to have got to like crying.
It was him, not me, that went to her and got hugged.
He needs a lot of help.
I don't think he finds himself any easier to live with than the rest of us.
‘Help me through it, Sarah!’ he was saying.
‘Help me through this!’
Help me through the hitting-Simon experience!
Why won't you?
I could see my mum's face on the other side of Quigley's shoulder.
I could also see something I had absolutely no wish to see at all, which was Quigley's bottom.
It was long and sausage-shaped and coated with fine, black hairs.
It peeked out from under the rim of my dad's dressing-gown with a horrible sauciness.
Mum's eyes were signalling to me — something far-away and desperate.
I could not work out what it might be.
Eventually Quiggers rounded on me.
‘Now, Simon, apologize to your mother for that disgusting, manipulative little display.
Could you?’
I was obviously not taking the punishment right.
I was not observing the Christian decencies for getting thumped.
How tactless could I get?
‘I'll never apologize to you, Quigley,’ I said.
‘I hate you.
And I hate your creepy wife and your creepy daughter and I wish you were all dead.
I wish you were dead and my dad was alive.
I think you stink.
I think all religions stink, actually, but Christianity stinks worse than any of them.’
There was silence.
Just in case I hadn't made this absolutely clear, I added, ‘I'll never forgive you and I'll never apologize to you and I'll never do anything you say.’
He was still looking pleased with himself.
‘Why is it so important to get me back in your rotten little Church, Quiggers?’
I said.
‘Is there some grubby, horrible reason?
I bet there is.
Well I tell you, Quigley, by the time I'm through with it there won't be a fucking Church.
The aliens are
He twitched slightly, like a lizard's tongue.
I pushed on, sensing a weak spot.
‘They've got into your congregation, Quigley, and they're going to wreck the Church.
They are.
You're finished here, I tell you.’
It was then that my mum came over to me.
She knelt next to me and, peering into my face, she said, ‘Testify, Simon.
Please.
Come back to Jesus.
Please.
I don't want you to be damned.
If you'll be Confirmed in Faith I'll never ask you to come to the church again.
And Mr Quigley will go.
He will.’
She stroked my hair then, very gently, the way she used to do when I was a little kid.
‘I want you to be saved, that's all, darling.
And then we can get on with our lives.
Please, Simon.’
I looked up at her.
She put her hand to my cheek.
‘It's like Mr Quigley says — you're a pure boy!
You are!’
I remembered some of the nice times we'd had.
Me and mum and the old man.
Laughing at things or sitting together round the table and my dad making jokes and…
Why is life such a bitch?
Why does it lay these things on you?
Why does it pull your heart two ways?
And why do feelings always surprise you?
I wish we were machines.
You know? people go too far.
‘Why’, Greenslade whispered to me, ‘isn't semen an element?’
Up behind the desk, ‘Pansy’ Fanshawe was preparing to see how sodium reacted with something whose name I could neither remember nor pronounce.
Pansy had a far-away expression on his face.
He looked a bit like a sorcerer as he stirred the mixture in a small clay crucible.
‘It's a pretty big element in my life,’ I said.
On the other side of me Khan sniffed.
He doesn't like us talking like this.
If Khan ever whangs off, it is probably for the purposes of spectroscopic analysis.
Pansy looked up wildly.
He is about sixty and they should have retired him years ago, but he has nowhere else to go.
I sometimes think they may not be paying him.
‘Now’, he said, in a quavery voice, ‘molybdenum is…’
He stopped in mid sentence, as he often did.
I stared at him intently.
It was about a week after my showdown with Quigley and I should have been at Harvest Festival.
I have to avoid the last period on the second Friday in October, which is when the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist celebrates ‘the rich goodness of God's vegetables’.
I was supposed to be there.
But I wasn't.
Outside, on the sun-soaked Common, they were piling up French loaves and bottles of Beaujolais.
But I was staying inside, learning about what the world was really like, or, rather, what Pansy Fanshawe thought it was like.
After the night Quigley had kicked my head in, I had finally seen something I should have seen a long time ago.
I didn't have to do any of these crazy things they made me do.
I didn't  have to stand up and tell the whole truth of my heart unless I wanted to.
I didn't have to say shit to Jesus Christ if I didn't feel like it.
I had stayed in bed on Sunday morning, even though Quigley had nearly kicked the door down and then burst into tears all over my duvet.
‘We need you, Simo,’ he said.
‘We need your deep love!
We need your purity!’
I was lying there thinking about fellatio at the time.
How did they actually do it?
Did it hurt?
He didn't need my purity.
He needed me to sweeten Mrs Danby.
But I didn't need him.
You see, it was really my dad that made me go along with the Church, even though he didn't really involve himself.
Somehow he managed to make it fun, the way he made so many things fun, and, now he was either dead or else taken over by some force I could not even begin to understand, there was nothing whatsoever to keep me in the Church.
‘Now’, said Fanshawe, ‘stand well back, because there may be a bang!’
Pansy's chemistry lessons are mainly a question of lobbing stuff out of the cupboard into a crucible and trying to get an explosion going.
Most of the time he doesn't even know what elements he is trying to combine.
He's closer to a mad chef than a chemist.
Khan was trying to say something.
He looked worried.
‘Sir,’ he said, in his precise, slow voice, ‘under certain circumstances, compounds of the substances which you are attempting to combine may have a reaction in which, say, the sodium…’
He did not get to the end of the sentence.
With a mad gleam in his eye, Pansy lobbed a small chunk of brown rock into the crucible.
There was a colossal bang and the sound of the clay crucible hitting the desks, walls, windows and members of the Fourth Form.
Thackeray started screaming.
Greenslade and I had hit the floor early.
We know Pansy.
When we raised our heads above the desk there were clouds of smoke blowing across the chemistry laboratory.
Fanshawe  was giving a kind of war whoop as, through the grey fumes, I saw the unmistakable figure of Quigley.
He stepped in front of the class like a demon king making his appearance in a pantomime.
Behind him I could see my mum, Emily and Mrs Quigley, who appeared to be carrying a large sheaf of corn.
It was, I think, the worst moment of my life so far.
I was absolutely terrified that Greenslade or Khan might discover that I was anything to do with these people.
How had they got in here?
I seriously thought of crawling through the smoke to the door.
But it was too late.
Quigley was pointing at me, dramatically.
‘I think this boy must come with us,’ he was saying.
Fanshawe clearly thought that Quigley was the product of the chemical reaction he had just engendered.
He was goggling at the First Spiritualists like a medieval alchemist who has just raised the Devil.
‘Are you…er…a…parent?’ he said feebly.
My mum stepped forward as more smoke billowed across the laboratory, circling around the faces of pupils, master and visiting religious maniacs.
‘I am his mother,’ she said, in a quiet voice, ‘and he is excused today's last-period chemistry to attend a Christian service.,
Pansy looked at her as if he was trying to work out how to combine her with deuterium and to calculate the effects of the resulting explosion.
‘It is’, said Quigley, with quiet dignity, ‘a festival of the faith to which Simon belongs.’
Greenslade gave me a sideways look.
I raised my eyebrows, resolving, as I did so, to let him know my side of the story as soon as possible.
There was no point in fighting this one.
Not in front of twenty-three members of the Fourth Form.
I got up and walked, with some dignity, towards the door.
When I got level with them, I rounded on Quigley.
‘This is the last time, scumbag!’
And, with that, I stalked out into the corridor, as pansy, still dazed from the effects of the explosion, meandered  feebly after my mother, muttering about notes and the headmaster's policy on being excused important school activities.
‘Where's Pikey?’
I asked, as they marched me towards the car.
Quigley did not answer this.
Since Pike's behaviour at the last seance, he had been banished from the Quigley presence.
I noticed that the assistant bank manager was biting his lower lip and grinding his right fist into his left palm.
As we got to the car, I stood back from them and said, ‘You can do this to me once, but you can't go on doing it.
I don't believe, you see.
I don't believe any of that rubbish you talk.’
Emily Quigley looked really distressed.
‘Thimon,’ she said, ‘it'th like in Narnia when Athlan thaith to Edmund that he mutht have faith !’
‘Narnia ’, I said, ‘is bullshit.
Give me Wimbledon any day.’
I looked straight at her.
‘Why do you believe all this rubbish?
It's crazy.
You all know it's crazy.
It's only habit keeps you doing it.
If you once stopped and thought about it rationally, you wouldn't believe any of it.’
I looked back at the school buildings.
I was amazed at what I was saying.
And yet I knew, as I spoke, that this was what I had always thought but had been too frightened to express.
Silently, we all got into the car.
There was a mood of quiet desperation about Mr and Mrs Quigley.
As we drove up towards the Common, they looked at each other briefly, then looked away.
‘Has Pikey left?’
I said, ‘Has he joined the true cause?
Is he out looking for the bastards who stole my father?’
They didn't answer this, but my mum leaned forward and patted my hand absently.
In the boot was a large pile of tins of tuna-fish and a harvest wreath that had clearly been designed by Marjorie Quigley.
We were coming to the end of the day, and the light was starting to fade.
The First Spiritualists were camped out at the edge of a grove of birch trees.
There weren't many of them.
When I was a child I could remember gatherings of two or three hundred people, but there were less than a hundred out on the dry grass.
Someone had told me that no less than twenty people had left the Church after my speech, many of them to join the Raelian Society, a group that exists to set up embassies on earth for alien intelligences wishing to make contact with earthlings.
‘What's keeping them away, Quiggers?’
I said.
‘Is it the weather or what?’
Quigley twitched, then decided to ignore this remark.
As we walked towards the circle of Spiritualists, he turned to me and said, in a high, pleasant voice, ‘I know you will come back to us, Simo!
The Lord Jesus will make a way for you!’
‘Listen, Quigley,’ I said, speaking in a clear voice, ‘Jesus Christ is out of the picture.
When beings from another planet get started on you they will laugh at your beliefs.
You'll be like some savage to them, clutching a wooden idol.’
Although they could all hear me, no one responded to this remark.
Quigley looked more than usually Christian.
The First Church of Christ the Spiritualist was arranged in a huge circle around a large pile of groceries.
The produce did not seem to be of high quality.
The recession seemed to have hit Harvest Festival rather badly, I thought.
I saw a lot of tins of spaghetti.
Old Mother Walsh had urged her followers to ‘bring living things and offer them to the Lord’, and there is an account somewhere of the Sisters of Harmony sacrificing a sheep.
These days people bring hamsters and terrapins and rabbits and dogs, but nobody quite has the nerve to pin them down on a slab and cut their throats.
As we sat down a little way away from the rest of the group, I saw a small girl waving her hamster's cage at the sky.
‘There You are, God!’ she was shouting.
‘There's Hairy!
You can have him if You want!’
There are a lot of children at Harvest Festival.
It's quite a jolly occasion.
Looking at it now, I suddenly started to feel old.
Older than anyone else there.
A group of little kids were doing what is called the Carrot Dance, over by the groceries.
It's a  crazy thing where one child pretends to be a carrot and the others top and tail him and put him in boiling water.
As I watched them, I thought about all the crazy things the people I've grown up with believe and do.
How we bury people, how we marry people — First Spiritualists are always married as close to 3 February as possible, and, when the bride has made her vows, someone pours a bottle of milk over her head (‘to feed her young’)— how we pray, how we hang sheets out of the upstairs window to celebrate a birth, how we seem so utterly and completely deranged and yet feel so utterly and completely sane.
For a moment I wondered whether the First Spiritualists are any crazier than other people.
People who pride themselves on being rational won't walk under ladders.
Famous physicists talk about God without really knowing what the word means.
Much of the faith of my mother and father's Church would seem bizarre or laughable to Greenslade and Khan.
But to me, standing there in the autumn sunlight, it suddenly seemed natural and comforting.
Maybe because, at last, I had finally lost it.
I was no longer part of the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist.
My dad was dead, and he was never coming back.
Over by the birch trees, Mervyn Finch had started to play his squeezebox to Vera ‘Got All the Things There’ Loomis, and a few of the adults were dancing the old dances that have been passed down for nearly 200 years.
Old Mother Walsh's ‘Rabbit, Skip O'er the Lump of Bacon’ and, my personal favourite, ‘Who's Away to Jesus?’
Hannah Dooley was pressed close to Sheldon parry, the born-again television director, crooning softly to herself.
Clara Beeding was chatting amicably to the man with the wart.
The sun was over the rim of the Common now, and there was the beginnings of darkness in the tangled trees.
‘Danth with me, Thimon,’ said Emily's voice at my elbow.
I looked down at her, as the music grew louder.
She was so full of hope and decency and trust.
And that voice!
Emily was, according to her mother, an absent-minded girl, but she never  forgot to lisp.
Why not ?
I thought to myself.
This is the last time I'll be part of these people .
I took her hand and led her into the centre of the dancers, as the light failed over Wimbledon.
24
We went through every dance in the book that night.
We even did ‘Goodbye to Clonakilty’(a title no one in the Church has ever been able to explain), and, when it was quite dark, the group over by the trees lit a fire and we went into ‘Ella Walsh's Foxtrot’ or ‘Bless the Lord and Shame the Devil’.
You grab your partner by the waist and sort of waddle for a bit, then stamp four times, hard with each foot, on the ground.
It's a dance designed for fat people who are not light on their feet.
After you have stamped, you raise your right hand and, for some reason, shout, ‘Shame the Devil!’
Except at Christmas, when some people yell, ‘Stuff the Turkey!’
I usually try and say something different from both of these.
Such as, ‘Rinse the Saucepans!’ or ‘phone Your Auntie!’
In the slow bits, I moved away from Emily and waggled my ears.
It's something I have only recently learned to do, and she seemed to appreciate it.
As the music pounded on, I pulled Emily this way and that across the baked earth.
It was almost dark.
Over to our left, in the field that lay between us and the road, was the shape of a horse.
A solitary man walked his dog home, up in the direction of the Windmill.
And, all around us, people were swaying and shaking, clapping and singing, as the beat grew wilder and wilder.
Emily cannoned into me, her face red with pleasure.
‘Why do you believe in alienth?’ she said.
‘Because I think they're there,’ I replied.
She grinned.
‘Thatth why I believe in Jethuth!’
I grinned back.
‘Why believe in alienth, though?’ she went on.
‘Alienth are thuch a complicated thing to believe in!’
I thought this was rather a shrewd point.
Maybe away from her mum and dad she was capable of being a human being.
I shrugged.
‘You've got to believe in something,’ I said, ‘and I believe in aliens.’
I couldn't stop dancing with her.
I moved with her, close, towards the centre of the circle and that crazy pile of groceries.
I took her by both hands and I started to swing her in a circle, singing as I went, shouting the words of the song over and over again.
Quigley wasn't dancing.
I saw him by the camp-fire, standing next to my mum, watching me hungrily.
Maybe he thought he was going to get me back into the Church, but what I was doing was strictly pagan.
I was dancing for dancing's sake, not for Jesus's.
I was almost at the centre of the group when I saw the light in the trees.
It was a reddish glow, moving unsteadily towards where we were at a height of about fifteen or sixteen feet.
It would weave towards us then veer away crazily.
Sometimes it would stop and shine downwards, as if it was scanning the earth for something.
Then it would move off on course again.
I could see a vague shape behind it.
I was the first to notice it.
Then Emily, following the direction of my gaze, watched the light, or lights, as they swayed through the trees towards us.
Mr and Mrs Ian Gilliemore, who were taken from their Hillman Avenger on the night of 24 September 1958 and subjected to scanning by a ‘big light’ from a group of midgets in the traditional green cloaks, reported seeing ‘a sort of dancing light’just before the midgets struck.
They said the light moved in just the way this one seemed to be doing.
Other people had seen it now.
A guy next to me was nudging his friend and pointing at the trees.
My arm was tingling, like it's supposed to do when the Neptunians come at you through  the undergrowth, foetal implants in hand.
I went hot, then cold.
Word was spreading among the crowd.
Even Mervyn, whose hands were flying across the keys of his accordion, was seen to gape up towards the thing dancing like a huge firefly in the dusk.
The music slowed and then stopped.
People stopped dancing and stood in silence looking over at it.
They looked just the way they did when they turned to the altar on Sunday mornings.
There were whispers, too.
‘They're here!’
I heard one man say.
And another, ‘It's true!
They've come!’
Quigley, who was now standing next to Mrs Danby, a little away from the rest of the congregation, was watching open-mouthed.
Next to him, I saw my mum push her grey hair from her temples.
There was an expression on her face I hadn't seen in a long time.
She looked hopeful.
She was eager to welcome whoever was coming to her out of the darkness.
She was going to exchange knitting-patterns with the Visitors, and ask them if they would like a hot drink after their 17 million light-year journey to Wimbledon.
That was the most common look on people's faces.
Hope.
Stronger than you saw it in church.
More various, shifting, fading, like the light at the end of a day, as the lights came closer and closer towards us.
Maybe they wanted the groceries.
You know?
Were they lights or was it just one light?
It seemed to have changed colour.
It was white now, and behind it you could see the shape.
It didn't stop but came on towards us out of the trees.
Next to me a woman gasped, ‘It's here…
It's…’
Emily clutched my hand and stepped back.
Now it seemed at least twelve feet in height, roughly humanoid in shape and wearing what looked like a plastic bucket on its head.
Its legs — if it had legs — were covered in what looked like a large brown sheet, and the light seemed to come from a kind of lamp attached to the back of what could, or could not, be its head.
As it came on across the grass, quite a few people dropped to their knees and pressed their palms together in prayer.
Emily  held my hand even more tightly.
‘Jethuth…’ she was saying, ‘Jethuth…
Jethuth…’
I held my ground.
Even at this distance, in the gloom, I could see that the thing on its head that looked like a plastic bucket actually was a plastic bucket.
In fact, I thought I recognized the bucket.
The large brown sheet was quite clearly a large brown sheet, and the thing at the back was none other than my bicycle light.
‘Roughly humanoid in shape ’, was, too, a fairly accurate description.
Because, as the creature swayed around in front of us, it was becoming obvious, even to the more short-sighted of the congregation, that we were looking at Leonard Pike.
‘I come’, he said from inside the bucket, ‘from the planet Tellenor!’
There was quite a good reverb effect on his voice.
The woman next to me was quite clearly not at all sure whether this was Pike.
From the look on Quigley's face, it was obvious that Pike was soon going to wish that Pike was not his name.
I couldn't figure this.
If the Tellenoreans had got into Pike's body, wasn't this a slightly odd thing to make him do?
Were they not as bright as we had supposed?
Were they complete idiots?
Or were they, perhaps, a nation of satirists? perhaps they had come all those billions of miles for the purpose of taking the piss out of us.
As I waited, Pike started to fall, jumping clear of the stilts that had been holding him up.
The bucket, miraculously, remained on his head.
‘I come’, he said again, ‘from the planet Tellenor.’
He was losing his audience.
‘And I come from Epsom, mate!’ said a voice at the back.
There was a gust of laughter.
Pike, aware that the bucket was not helping him, removed it.
The effect was startling.
In the darkness, Pike's face, illuminated by the bicycle light, looked positively ghoulish.
He was breathing rapidly, and his pinched, chapped little face was urgent with venom.
He looked crazy with fear.
‘He was taken,’ said Pike.
‘He was taken from the grass.
Here on the Common.
And I can prove it.’
With a shriek, he pointed his finger at Quigley.
‘He's lied to you,’ he said.
‘He's a liar and a fraud.
He's a cheat.’
Quigley looked white.
‘Ask him what he's done with the money!
Ask him what he plans to do with Mrs Danby's money!
Ask him where it's gone!’
Quigley didn't speak.
He started to open and close his fists, but he didn't say anything.
‘They are here!’ said Pike.
‘Follow me!
Don't follow the liar and the cheat!
Follow me!
I'll take you to the spot where they took him!
I've looked through the accounts!
Follow me!’
If Quigley had ever had a chance of regaining his grip on the First Spiritualist Church of South Wimbledon, he had lost all hope of it now.
There was an awful conviction in Pike's voice.
You just knew that what he was saying about Quigley was true.
You knew.
Quigley just stood there, his immense arms loose at his side, as the mass of the congregation, murmuring among themselves like extras in a bad production of a Shakespeare play, swept after Pike as he turned and, bucket in hand, ran off across the Common towards the spot where Mr Marr had been sitting the night the aliens came.
25
He was yelling something as he ran.
Something about somebody dying.
I couldn't tell who.
Something about how he, Pike, was guilty.
Guilty of what, though?
As we got to the narrow road that runs past the spot where Mr Marr used to watch the night sky, he turned and held up his hands towards the stars.
‘Help!’ he screamed.
Once.
I'd heard (or was it seen?) that cry before.
Where was it?
‘Help !’ yelled Pike, again.
Of course.
On the mirror in Mr Marr's bedroom.
HELP! scrawled in lipstick.
The First Church of Christ the Spiritualist was, as its leading members were fond of saying, on the move.
It was, literally, going places.
Every single member of the congregation was haring through the bushes of Wimbledon Common in search of flying saucers.
If ever there was a flight from the true religion, this was it.
We stopped on one side of the narrow road.
Pike was on the other, jumping up and down like a man with a swarm of bees in his underpants.
It was as if he was on the other side of a river that no one knew how to cross.
And the road had the look of water, silvered under the rising moon.
Pike was pointing to the grass near to where Mr Marr had been sitting that night.
‘Look at it!’ he yelled.
‘Look at it!
It's where they landed!’
One or two of the braver spirits moved closer to the road and peered across at the grass.
You didn't see it at first, but you saw if you held you head at the right angle.
About twenty yards from where Mr Marr had been sitting, the grass had been  flattened.
It lay as if some giant hand had combed it out and then blow-dried it, in a perfect circle.
It was curious.
No one wanted to cross the road.
It was as if there was a force field there.
as if Pike was behind an imaginary glass wall, cut off from the rest of the Church.
As he railed on at us, more and more people came up to the edge of the tarmac, looking across at him, helplessly, in the moonlight.
‘I'm guilty,’ Pike was saying.
‘I'm guilty too.
Jesus, forgive me.
Oh forgive me, Jesus!’
‘Jesus forgives you,’ said someone over to my left.
This was standard with the First Church.
You went out — you had a good time.
You drank gin.
You coshed old ladies.
You embezzled Church funds.
And Jesus forgave you.
But Pike looked like a man who would not, could not, be forgiven.
as if whatever he had done had cut him off from the mercy he had been seeking for so long.
‘It was here,’ yelled Pike, ‘on the road!
Here!’
I looked at Quigley, who was standing well away from the crowd.
His face was still that dead white colour.
He was looking at Pike as if he expected him to change shape, to flower into some awful creature.
‘I'm a murderer!’ yelled Pikey.
He moved towards us across the road.
Instinctively — as if faced by some poisonous animal — people moved back a little.
Pike stopped in the middle of the tarmac.
Somewhere, over on the other side of the Common, a truck moved up from below the hill and, headlights hooded, started across towards Parkside.
‘I'm a murderer!’ yelled Pike again.
‘Leo,’ came a voice that I recognized as my mum's.
‘You're not a murderer!’
Pike's face reddened with fury.
The truck turned right by the big houses at the south edge of the Common and started along the straight stretch, where we were standing.
Pike turned and saw it.
For a moment I thought he was going to stand there facing it, daring it to stop.
Then he moved back towards the circle in the grass on the other side of the road.
‘Who did you think you murdered?’ called my mum, in a bewildered tone.
The truck was coming closer.
You could feel the earth shake as it changed down, ready to turn out into parkside.
Pike's face was distorted with anger.
‘Marr, of course.
I murdered Marr, you morons!
Right here I murdered him!’
His lips puckered up.
‘lt was…it was like spacemen took him.
It was.
He was lying here.
He was dead in the road.
I wasn't driving fast, honestly!
When I came back, he was gone.
He was lying here.’
He gestured towards the centre of the road.
He seemed very intent on showing us the precise spot where Mr Marr's body had lain.
That was all that seemed to matter to him.
Then, with a blitheness I had never associated with Pike, he stepped two paces back into the path of the oncoming truck.
It hit him in the chest.
The guy was quick on to the brakes, but not quick enough for poor old Pikey.
By the time the truck had stopped, Leo was under its offside wheel and starting the long, complicated journey to the spirit world.
It's some consolation to reflect that of all the UK citizens undergoing the death experience, Leo was probably the one most prepared for it.
He had spent nearly all of his forty-eight years in the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist, and during that time he had witnessed literally thousands of encounters with people from the Other Side.
He had never missed a seance or a service, and he died, as Mr Toombs said next Sunday, a 100 per cent, fully operational Christian.
But his death and the mystery surrounding it spelt the end for the Church in which he had worshipped for so long.
It wasn't the Wimbledon Crop Circle, as the shape in the grass came to be called, that destroyed it.
Most people agreed that Pike had been out the night before working on it with an industrial fan.
It was tiredness that finished the First Church.
That and the fact that it lost faith in the nearest thing to a  charismatic it had had since Rose Fox.
In fact people seemed to be losing interest in aliens.
One by one, over the next few weeks, they just drifted away.
You could see it in their faces, minute by minute.
They were getting that worried look you see on people's faces on the Tube.
They were becoming, at long last, ordinary.
The elders started to investigate Quigley and the Church funds the day after Pike's death.
The Quigleys were still living with us.
Gordon Brunt and his friends had taken away a wall without putting in the proper structural support, so the whole of the left side of Château Quigley had collapsed.
They had also done something terrible to the boiler, and discovered dry rot in the airing-cupboard.
I heard a lot of the commission of inquiry.
One night I heard Quigley shout, ‘Would you bleed me dry?’
All I heard of the answer was the low bass of Mr Toombs and the nasal falsetto of Roger Beeding.
But, from Quigley's face when he came out, I gathered that that was precisely what they were intending to do with him.
Sometimes, in hushed voices in the evenings, I heard my mum and the Quigleys talking about money.
But nobody said anything to me about that, nor about where Mr Marr's body had gone after Pikey ran into him with Lethal Weapon II.
One evening, after he'd been answering more questions from Coombs and Beeding, Quigley came into my room when I was doing my homework.
I didn't look up.
There was something scary about him these days.
He just came over to my desk, looked down at what I was writing and whispered, almost to himself, ‘You're as bad as your bloody father!’
Then, with the back of his hand, he hit me, hard, across the side of my face.
One day, towards the end of October, I came home from school late to find my mum, Marjorie and Emily sitting in Quigley's car outside the house.
My mum looked as if she was in the middle of being kidnapped.
She gave me a weak smile and a fluttery little wave.
It gave her, suddenly, the helpless look of royalty.
I tapped on the glass, and she wound down the window.
‘What's going on?’
I said.
‘We're off to write prayers,’ said Mrs Quigley, answering for her, as she tended to do these days.
‘Do come, Simon,’ said mum.
The back wall of the First Church is littered with scrap pieces of paper on which are written things like PLEASE HELP AUNTIE JOAN THROUGH THIS PHASE OF THE TREATMENT or DEAR GOD, HELP ALL THE PEOPLE I SAW ON WATERLOO STATION THIS WEEKEND AND PRAY FOR ALL, ALIVE AND DECEASED, AT 110 HOLDEN ROAD, FINCHLEY.
I wasn't sure for whom they would be praying.
Under the present circumstances it could equally well have been me or Quigley.
‘Where is he?’
I said.
They all looked shifty.
‘He's out the back,’ said Marjorie.
‘With Danzig.’
Danzig!
It sounded as if Quigley had passed beyond the reach of prayer.
Who the hell was Danzig?
A German missionary, perhaps.
I turned my back on them and marched towards the front door.
‘Danzig’, called my mum, as I disappeared into the house, ‘looked as if he might do it.
So Roger stayed with him.’
This was getting even more mysterious.
As I went through the drab little hall, I wondered whether there was an overseas branch of the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist and, if so, whether it contained a man called Danzig.
He sounded like a guy with a problem.
As I came to the door that leads out to the garden I heard Quigley's voice.
‘No, Danzig,’ he was saying in a coaxing sort of way.
‘No, no, no.
Not there, Danzig.
There!
There!
See?
There!’
Had Quigley finally come out of the closet?
Was he trying to get Danzig to do to him what no other man had ever done?
I suddenly had a clear mental picture of Danzig — a hairy-chested man with a gold medallion and tight, white trousers.
I walked through on to what my dad used to call ‘the wide  green spaces of 24 Stranraer Gardens’ and heard Quigley's voice again, this time low and thrilling.
‘Yes, Danzig,’ he gasped.
‘Yes, yes, yes!
There!
Good!
Good!
Good!’
I turned to my left and saw a large Labrador.
It was squatting on the flower-bed.
Its back legs were straining furiously and its face wore a fixed and glassy expression.
It was almost certainly going through the final stages of the digestive process.
Quigley peered down at its bum.
He looked pleased.
‘My dog,’ he said.
‘Hundred and ten quid!’
The animal gave a final grunt and expelled whatever it had to expel.
There was certainly a lot of it.
When it had finished, it hared off across the garden as if it had done something clever.
‘So,’ I said, ‘they're off to pray.’
He was wearing one of my father's ties.
My dad always claimed to have gone to public school, but he was never precise about which one.
The ties all looked as if they came from a jumble sale.
I never liked him wearing them, but I liked them even less round Quigley's neck.
‘To pray for you, Simo,’ he said.
‘They needn't bother, Quigley,’ I said.
He came over to me then.
He was breathing heavily.
I could see everything about him very clearly.
The black hairs on his hands.
The ridiculous, wiry neatness of his hair.
The pallid, clammy surface of his skin.
‘You need help, boy,’ he said.
‘Listen,’ I replied, ‘pretty soon the whole of south-west London is going to be under the iron heel of Argol of the planet Tellenor.
I should move on out if I were you.’
Quigley sneered.
‘You never believed any of that rubbish, did you?
It was just a stick to beat me with, wasn't it?’
I didn't move back, although he shoved his face close to mine.
‘No,’ I said.
The really pathetic thing about all of this is I did.
I still almost do believe it.
That's how badly you bastards have fucked up my brain!’
Quigley started to twitch.
‘I'm not leaving, Simon,’ he said.
‘I'm going to be here for the rest of your life .’
I still didn't move.
With a sort of grunt, he wound his hand back and again clouted me, hard, on the face.
It hurt a lot, but I didn't let him see that.
I just stood there.
After a while he didn't seem to see me.
He turned to the dog and said something to it.
For a moment I looked away, and when I looked back he was gone.
A minute later I heard the car engine start.
I was alone in the house.
My dad was dead.
There were no aliens.
Or, if there were, they were playing it so cool as to be almost unnoticeable.
There were no ghosts or gods or any of that stuff.
There was only the unlimited prospect of Quigley.
It was time to go.
I went back into the house and, when I was sure no adults had sneaked back in to spy on me, I went upstairs to my bedroom and started to pack.
I didn't take much.
A few computer magazines, some cash I pinched from Quigley's drawer and my Abbey National card.
I have £300 in there, which is quite a lot of money.
My dad always said it was for when I got married.
If I hung around here any longer, it would all go on a nose job for Emily Quigley.
I took two paperback books, a toothbrush, my Ventolin inhaler and a copy of the repeat prescription, four T-shirts, two pairs of jeans and my other pair of trainers.
Everything I really care about fitted into my games bag, which, according to the principles of Tai-ping, is how it should be.
I looked round at the picture of Bruce Lee, the travel poster of Malaysia my dad gave me, my certificate of merit for Grade Two Saxophone, my 320 computer discs, my colour picture of an iguana and the tattered remains of a portable snooker table we got when I was twelve.
I thought about mum and wondered whether to leave her a note.
I decided not to — simply because I couldn't think of what to write.
Outside, the October day was darkening.
I headed down the stairs into the silence of the early evening.
When I got out on the street, I would just keep going.
The sun was almost gone, but that was OK.
I'd find a field or a park bench, and early  next morning I'd head on down to the sea.
Somewhere or other is a place my dad took me once, where there are tall stone buildings huddled above a blue sea, donkeys, and guys in grey suits with open white shirts and faces that look like their owners have had time to consider every move they make.
Somewhere there's somewhere that isn't Wimbledon.
Some place that isn't full of narrow grey streets and closed-up lives and people like Albert Roger Quigley.
I had one call to make before I hit the road.
There's a pub about four streets away from us where I used to go with my dad.
Sometimes he'd look across at me, when my mum was deep in a copy of Psychic News and there was nothing on the television, any time from May to October.
He'd say, ‘Fancy a pint?’
‘Don't mind if I do.’
Not that I ever drank beer.
I'd sit with a Coke and some crisps and watch him drink.
Watch him sip in that amazingly slow way that adults do.
Watch him stretch, yawn, look across at me and come out with those perfect forty-year-old clichés they use to make the time pass easily and without controversy.
‘It's a hard road, Simon.’
‘It is, Dad.
It is.’
It is .
I wasn't going to drink or anything.
I'm not one of those fourteen-year-olds who go to pubs.
I look my age.
You know?
I'm a straight-down-the-middle ten-plus-four wonder.
One of those aimless youths you stumble over on their way from the pinball machine to the nearest shop that sells electrical equipment.
A blurred, white, not-quite-grown-up face in the crowd.
The garden there, where we used to sit, has a swing and a slide and is framed by a huge chestnut-tree.
This mother was in the terminal stages of yellow.
From time to time, a leaf would detach itself and sashay down to join its friends, slicing rideways, plunging headlong and then ripple-dissolving to the damp grass.
There was dew on the white steel tables and a feeling that, at any moment, a man would come out of the bar  and start stacking the chairs away.
It was just dusk, when things start to look not quite themselves.
I watched the light drain away and felt the cold clawing at the earth between the tables.
The end of the year.
I sat at the table we used to use and tried to think what I really believed.
I felt I ought to be thinking something momentous.
It isn't every day you run away from home.
Surely I had got some things clearer since he died?
I hadn't.
I was just as confused as that day she came in and told me the news.
Did life go on like this, I wondered?
Did it offer absolutely no solutions?
Is it all punishment from now on in?
There were a couple of drinkers in the far corner, but no one noticed me.
I was just getting up to go and make my way on down to Greece when I felt a hand on my shoulder and heard a deep voice.
‘Hi, kid!’
I looked up.
It was my dad.
26
I jumped.
For a moment I was right back in my bedroom that first time.
I blinked.
I closed my eyes and opened them again.
He was still there.
Viewed from close up he showed absolutely no sign of being controlled by an extraterrestrial intelligence.The guys from Tellenor were probably so good that they had over-reached themselves and programmed free will into him.
You know?
He was holding a pint of beer in his left hand, and, when he smiled, I could see the fillings in his teeth.
The dentalwork was a perfect match.
They had worked wonders on the timing too.
He drank, wiped the froth off his mouth, put the glass on the table, readjusted it, dropped his hand and then put it behind his head.
I sat there, waiting for him to dematerialize.
He didn't.
Instead he did a couple more fortysomething things.
He pursed up his lips, looked at me, then away, and then, after shifting carefully on his seat, he farted.
What more do you want?
It drinks beer!
It picks its nose!
It farts!
We will never catch up with this galaxy, no matter how hard we try.
They mimic our greatest achievements in a way that puts our own selves to shame.
‘I was not as surprised as I thought I was going to be’, he said eventually, ‘to hear myself pronounced clinically dead!’
I goggled at him.
‘I hadn't been feeling terrific’, he went on, ‘since I got into the hospital.
A coronary thrombosis doesn't exactly leave a guy feeling perky!’
He yawned.
‘They don't really check on you very  closely.
It's very much a wing-it oh-he-looks-a-bit-stiff situation.
I mean, they don't hold a mirror to your lips or anything.’
‘They don't?’
They do not, old son.
They thump your chest a few times and call the old crash unit and then they grope around for your pulse, but it's a very amateurish affair really.’
He wasn't wearing the suit he'd been wearing in Furnival Gardens.
He was wearing jeans, a sports shirt and a cardigan.
For some reason I found the cardigan really offensive.
It wasn't the sort of thing my dad would wear at all.
Maybe the aliens had got into shopping.
‘I don't think that your average British doctor is very good at diagnosing death,’ he went on.
‘I don't think it's taught at medical school.
I wonder the mortuaries aren't full of people banging on the doors and trying to get out!’
‘Do you mean’, I said, ‘that you weren't dead?’
He grinned.
‘I didn't experience myself as dead.
Although that was the medical profession's analysis of my condition.
At first I thought I might be having an out-of-body experience.
Then I thought it might be an in-body experience — that my soul was to be confined to my body for some sinister theological reason.,
I reached out across the table to touch him.
He took my hand and held it in a very un-Tellenorean way.
This was him, all right.
This was my dad, just as he had always been.
‘What did…’
‘I think the first clue I had that I might still be on the team was when your mum pitched up to inspect the body.’
‘You mean…’
‘They got me out of the ward and put me under a sheet in this side room.
I lay there quite quiet.
I could hear everything that was going on, but I couldn't move or speak.’
I tried to picture him under the sheet.
The light filtered through.
Like lying in bed in the morning when they call you to get up and you lie there, listening to the noises in the street below, wondering whether you'll ever get up and join them.
‘I heard the nurse ask her if she wanted to take a last look at me.
She said she didn't think that would be necessary.’
‘Typical!’
‘I was a bit pissed off,’ said my dad.
‘I mean, it isn't every day you get the chance to view your old man's corpse, is it?
It's an experience, isn't it?’
There was a pause.
Then he sucked at his teeth and went on.
‘She was actually surprisingly complimentary about me.’
‘I know,’ I said glumly.
‘They all were.
The nurse said I had been a very good patient.
Christ, I'd only been in the hospital for about ten minutes before I snuffed it!’
It must have been weird lying there.
Presumably trying to move a leg or an arm or get your mouth to move.
And hearing these voices from a long, long way away.
Voices that had been chattering away at you all your life.
‘The nurse said I was very good company, which I thought was praise indeed for a guy who had just had a coronary thrombosis.
Then your mother went on about how I had always wanted to be buried at sea.’
‘That's what she said to me.’
He scratched his head.
‘Did I ever say I wanted to be buried at sea?’
‘Not in my hearing.’
‘She seemed very convinced of the matter.
From the tone of her voice, I thought I was not going to be able to avoid being slung in the box and slipped off the Isle of Wight ferry.
I just couldn't move or speak .
You see?’
I could picture my mum and the nurse, who, for some reason, I had decided was Irish.
A short, plump woman from Galway.
‘She said I was an interesting and sad man in many ways.’
‘Who?
The nurse or mum?’
He gave me a strange look.
‘Your mum, of course.
Do you think I'm a sad man?’
‘No,’ I said, rather shortly.
He took another deep draught of his beer.
He looked up at the pale white sky above the half-ruined trees.
He looked like a guy glad to be alive.
With each minute that passed he was getting less and less extraterrestrial.
But, at the same time, more and more alien .
I didn't recognize some of his gestures.
He'd got a new one where he crossed his feet, and a new version of his smile.
It seemed to stay on his face for slightly longer than was necessary.
‘Anyway,’ he said, in a conversational tone, ‘then they took me down to the morgue.’
‘Christ!’
‘Indeed.
Ganymede, they call it.
I mean, the guys who took me down were real incompetents.
They treat the dead with absolutely no respect.’
He sounded rather civic about this.
as if his experience was going to lead to a campaign for the rights of corpses or something.
He looked at me thoughtfully.
‘She didn't cry or anything.
It was just sort of‘Shall we take him down then?’ and Bob's your unc.’
‘She was…’
‘She was pretty calm about the whole business.
I could have done with a bit of weeping and gnashing of the old teeth.
We got a very low-key response.’
Well, that wasn't how she had behaved at home.
Hadn't she said she'd gone wild?
I didn't feel like finding out whose version of events was true.
I was too busy holding on to the edge of my chair and waiting for him to rise twenty feet in the air.
‘We had our problems, but…’
He sucked his lower lip.
‘It makes you think, being in a mortuary.’
I could see that this might well be true.
‘It makes you think, when you hear people call you Chariie as they sling you on the slab.’
‘Why did they call you Charlie?’
‘I think they call all the stiffs Chariie.
I mean, they're dead.
They don't count, do they?
That's it.
Sling them aside.
You  know? pickle the bastards in formalin and donate their remains to medical research.’
We were on to Dead Lib again.
He looked quite morose at the treatment handed out to cadavers.
Then he took another long drink of beer.
‘We don't understand life, do we?’ he said.
‘I mean, it's here and its so sweet and we don't understand it.’
‘1 don't understand it,’ I said.
‘I haven't got a clue, I tell you.’
It was amazing, really, that he had managed to recover from the heart attack so easily.
He looked, I have to say, absolutely great.
Still, I suppose this was what happened in the Middle Ages.
You rolled around, went blue and your eyes shot up into your head.
And then, if you made it, off you went to till the fields or whatever.
I had heard the National Health Service was in a bad way, but I didn't realize that do-it-yourself, take-your own-chances medicine had reached this level of intensity.
‘I started to come round when they put me on the slab.
I was lucky not to go straight in the fridge, I tell you.’
‘I bet!’
‘The word ‘autopsy’ kept running through my mind.
You know?
But they were at the end of their shift.
They closed the old door behind them and there I was, alone with a few dozen stiffs.
Assuming they were stiffs and not a fresh consignment of medical mistakes.’
He narrowed his mouth into an O shape and pushed his eyebrows up into what was left of his hair.
There was still foam from the beer on his moustache.
I watched the bubbles wink in the ghostly light, glisten, and then die.
You could see the pulse beat in his neck.
You could smell him too — a whiff of new soap and old changing-rooms.
You could see the broken veins on his nose and see the puffy skin above his eyelids, bunched up like old crêpe curtains.
And you could watch those little blue eyes that never quite met yours.
It was my dad all right.
‘I don't know how long I was in there before I sat up and looked around.
I know I banged on the door, but no one heard.
And when I looked down at my ankle they'd put this label on me.’
‘What did it say?’
I asked.
‘FRAGILE?
Or THIS WAY UP?’
He grinned.
‘You are a witty little bastard, aren't you?’
Then he yawned.
I could see the red trap of his throat.
‘Actually, it said NORMAN BRITTON, C OF E.’
‘Did it?’
‘It did,’ said my dad.
‘Not NORMAN BRITTON MA OXON.
Just NORMAN BRITTON, C OF E. After forty-odd years of being a good boy and paying the mortgage and…’
I could see that it had been an upsetting experience.
But what did he expect them to write?
NORMAN BRITTON, NOVELIST AND TRAVEL AGENT?
‘Anyway,’ he went on, ‘I wandered round and checked out the corpses.
They all had labels on.
You know?
And there was one just next to the door that must have come in while I had been lying there, unable to move.
It didn't have a name on it.
Just a ticket that said UNIDENTIFIED RTA.
It was a real mess, I tell you.
Looked as it someone had been practising three-point turns on its chest.’
He shuddered.
I said nothing.
‘And I thought to myself:What's it all for ?
You know?
Did I want to go on being NORMAN BRITTON, C OF E?
What's so great about my life?’
I couldn't, for the moment, think of an answer to that.
So I still said nothing.
‘There are big pluses about being dead,’ said my dad.
‘You don't have to take the dishes out of the dishwasher and put them in the dish rack and then take the cutlery out of its little plastic box and then put it in the cutlery drawer making sure that the spoons go in one compartment and the knives in another compartment and the forks in another compartment except there are always forks in the spoons compartment and knives in the forks compartment when you get there so it's hopeless it's always too late to get things right it's a total frost honestly is life you are  a lot better off dead in my opinion.
Do you know what being dead felt like?’
‘You tell me, dad!’
‘It felt like a good career move.,
Of course.
That long white robe I had seen him in that night was a sort of hospital gown.
They dress them up like ghosts.
But how had he got down to Stranraer Gardens?
‘They brought some other poor sod in,’ he said, as if in answer to my question, ‘but I was over behind the door and they didn't see me.
I just slipped out, walked down a corridor, out through a side exit and came down to home.
I just stood there looking up at it.
You know?
Wondering whether to take up my life or walk right out of it.’
He put one hand on mine.
‘I changed the labels,’ he said.
‘I put my name on the road-traffic-accident victim and I walked out with UNIDENTIFIED clutched in my paw.
He seemed to find this next bit difficult to say.
His eyes were watering as he started it, and he looked away from me again, towards the deserted white tables around us.
‘It was so strange ,’ he said.
‘Sometimes I think there's something at the back of all this that's so…so bloody bizarre.
You know?
Roots of coincidence and all that…’
‘What, dad?’
He looked straight at me.
The body they brought in during the night.
The one on the slab.
The unidentified traffic accident.
I saw the face.
It was your mate.
Mr Mere.
The guy who sat out on the Common, waiting for the spacemen to come.
I walked out free, you see.
And the undertakers buried him.’
27
It was at that moment that Mr quigley passed the entrance to the pub garden.
He stood under the street-light, looking back from where he'd come.
He shook his head and clucked to himself like the White Rabbit in Alice .
He was carrying a bag of shopping.
He looked annoyed about something.
I got the impression he was looking for something to hit.
Probably me.
He didn't see me.
‘What's up?’ said my dad.
‘It's Quigley, he's after me!’
‘Quigley!’
It was now quite dark in the garden.
For some reason we were both whispering.
Out in the street, Quigley shouted off to his left.
He was calling to someone, but I couldn't hear what he was saying.
It sounded as if he was calling a dog.
‘What's going on with Quigley?’
‘Oh,’ I said, ‘he's had a lot of heavy conversations with you.
Apparently you've repented of your wicked life.’
‘I have!’
‘Sure,’ I said.’
I've been talking to you myself, you know?’
Dad looked away.
I said, ‘Quigley's a bastard.
He's living with us, and he treats me like shit.’
My dad looked back at me.
I tried to think of the worst thing that Quigley had done.
‘He's gone and brought a dog!’
I wasn't asked for any more information.
But I gave it just the same.
I told him about how he'd hit me.
About how I was  some kind of prophet as far as he was concerned and he was desperate to have me Confirmed.
There was a bit of a silence when I'd finished, and then dad said, with a grin, ‘Quiggers is right about one thing, old son.
I had a really wicked life, and I repent!’
Somewhere in the distance I heard the growl of thunder.
I looked up at the sky and saw that the clouds were one dark, lurid, compact mass.
My father looked really ghostly in the light from the street, and for a moment I found myself thinking:He is a ghost.
He really did die.
This is all a story .
As I did so, he got to his feet.
His face changed suddenly.
There was none of the humour you usually saw in it, and there was a fixed look about the eyes that I found almost frightening.
He rose, slowly and mechanically, staring ahead of him and beyond me.
Then he lifted his right hand with the index finger extended.
Behind me I heard a kind of yelp.
It wasn't a sound I ever remembered him having made, but certain things about it made me think it came from Quigley.
There was a thump as his shopping hit the floor.
My dad still didn't say anything.
He just stood there, staring past me, his arm flung out in front of him and his attention fixed on what had to be the assistant manager of the National Westminster Bank, Mitcham.
Dad didn't speak.
He didn't need to.
I could hear Quigley give a sort of low whimper, but otherwise he said nothing.
The silence in the garden was as loud as Marjorie Quigley's trousers.
It went on and on and got louder and louder.
And then, finally, my dad spoke.
Not in his normal voice but in a low, throaty baritone that reminded me of Vincent price in The Haunted Palace — my dad's favourite picture: ‘Albert Roger Quigley, do you remember me?’
It was fairly obvious from the noise coming from behind me that the man in question did remember him fairly clearly.
In fact, as far as I could judge from the old hearing system, the effect on Quigley was fairly stupendous.
I mean, look at it from his point of view.
My dad had recently  been cremated.
Quigley had sat there while the good people from the Mutual Life provident Association had come round and told my mum the news about her death benefit.
He had, in fact, been in close personal touch with the guy's spirit via one of the finest psychic talents in south-west London.
He just did not expect to come across the late Norman Britton in the garden of the Ferret and Firkin at half past six in the evening.
And he certainly didn't expect the said Britton to be pointing at him in a manner usually affected by people like Darth Vader or Banquo.
I turned round in my chair.
Look, I have seen people surprised in my time.
I have seen people very surprised.
I have, on occasions, seen very, very, very surprised people.
But I have never seen anything like the expression on the face of Albert Roger Quigley that evening.
He looked like a man who has just stepped into an empty lift-shaft.
His mouth kept opening and shutting like a mechanical shovel, but no words — not even a direct appeal to the Lord Jesus Christ to be excused this experience on health grounds — passed his lips.
It was, in one sense, a stupid question.
I mean, how short did Dad expect Roge's memory to be ?
But the way he delivered it would not have disgraced your average member of the Royal Shakespeare Company.
It wasn't just that he was pitching it lower.
He gave each word an incredibly fruity emphasis.
When he got to the R in Roger, he vibrated the old tongue on the palate with the brio of an international string player.
The finger, too, seemed to be going down fantastically well with Quigley.
He was staring at it the way a cat looks at a dinner-plate.
Would he ever get over this initial shock period?
Was he going to have a thrombie right here on the spot?
Come on Quigley, pull yourself out of it!
Deal with the situation!
This sort of thing should be right up your street.
Think of the articles.
Think of all the hands-on psychical research that is just coming at you free of charge.
Make with the sketch maps of the area.
Measure the ambient temperature.
Get down the  witnesses, names and addresses.
This is a one-off, my friend.
If you move quickly you could bag this one — jam it into the specimen bottle and whip it off to the Society for Psychical Research prontissimo!
He did not, I fear, seem to be prepared to experience the phenomenon in a truly objective, scientific way.
He was kind of staggering, with one hand held to his temple, and from time to time making a noise like water running out of a bath.
Dad, warming to his role, moved a couple of steps forward, his arm still flung out in front of him.
He looked, I thought, a touch over the top.
‘Quigley,’ he said in a spectral voice, ‘repent!’
There was another growl of thunder.
Behind Quigley, Danzig appeared at the entrance to the garden.
He lowered his head and, whimpering, sidled towards his master.
Quigley looked ready to repent.
He looked ready to tear his clothes apart.
He looked rather less rational than his dog.
‘Oh!’ he said finally.
‘Oh!
Oh!
Ohhhhh!’
He gave me a quick look to check that I was really there, and an even quicker look round the garden to see if there were any other responsible local citizens around to witness this triumphant affirmation of an afterlife.
But the drinkers at the far end of the garden were gone.
There was only me and this spirit in the gloom of the garden.
‘Oh!’ said Quigley, again.
‘Oh!
Oh!
Ohhhhhh!’
‘Quigley,’ said my dad, moving into the shadows away from me, ‘I am in hell!
And you will join me here!’
Quigley stared at me.
It was weird.
Once my dad had got started, I had started to believe him.
To believe his act.
You know?
When I think about it now, he was an actor.
He was a guy who could be something for a brief period of time and then he vanished like the spirit he was impersonating.
When I looked at him in the darkness, I began to wonder if all of what he had told me earlier could be some trick on me, played by the spirits who had sent him.
‘How can you sit there?’ said Quigley.
‘How can you sit there?’
I opened my eyes and gave him a puzzled look.
‘What do you mean, Mr Quigley?’
I said.
‘What are you staring at?’
‘That !’ said Quigley, ‘That…that thing !’
Quigley gestured feebly towards my old man.
Then he turned to face him.
Dad was flaring his nostrils and giving him a wild stare.
I thought he was going well over the top, actually.
But Quigley was not in a mood to ask why my dad had returned to earth.
He was not in the mood to ask rational questions.
I don't think he'd have noticed if someone had dropped a set of kitchen units on his head from 30,000 feet.
Dad took a couple more steps towards him.
Quigley started to whimper.
‘No,’ he moaned, ‘no!’
‘Yes, Quigley,’ said my dad.
‘Yes, Quigley!
Yes!
Yes!’
He looked as if he was all set to strangle the forty-four-year-old assistant bank manager.
My dad always was something of a ham.
The sensible thing to do, having made the initial impact, was to walk off in a slow and menacing way, leaving Quigley to gibber.
But Norman was determined to give full value for money.
‘Do you know what hell is like, Quigley?’
‘No,’ whispered Quigley.
‘Hell is being blown across vast empty spaces with the wind at your back and dust in your eyes.
Hell is the taste of your own vileness, Quigley.
The sour smell of your own wickedness and wrongdoing.’
If this was the kind of stuff he had put in his novel, it wasn't surprising that he hadn't found any takers for it.
But it was still kosher as far as Albert Roger Quigley was concerned.
‘Who are you talking to, Mr Quigley?’
I said, in what I hoped was an awestruck tone.
‘Who is it that you can see in the garden?’
‘O Jesus!’ said Quigley, suddenly remembering who was supposed to be in charge around here.
‘O Jesus Christ, help me!
O Jesus Jesus Jesus!
Jesus Christ!’
There is no Jesus Christ,’ said my dad, in solemn tones.
‘There is no God of the Christians.
There are no prophets in your world, Albert Quigley.’
I hoped he wasn't going to start rubbishing the Koran.
You never know when those Muslims might be listening.
Quigley dropped to his knees, his face white and shaking.
‘Oh Lord,’ he whimpered to himself.
‘Oh dear Jesus Christ!’
‘There is no Jesus Christ, Quigley,’ said my dad, in a very authoritative way.
Quigley looked up at him, dog-like.
‘Who is there?’ he asked, pleadingly.
‘There is no one!’ said my dad.
‘There is no one beyond this life.
Those who return, return as themselves, condemned to live out the circle of their lives again and again!’
Thunder broke again, and this time there were two or three brief flashes of lightning.
The chestnut-trees opposite me were suddenly vivid green and, as suddenly, dark again.
The brick wall round the garden broke into focus and faded to black.
Once again I had the feeling that what my father had said to me in the garden could all be some horrible trick.
That he really had died and that what he was telling Quigley was the truth.
Not what he had told me.
Quiggers was gibbering.
‘What…
There must be…
What is…’
It was almost as if he'd stopped seeing Dad at all.
That made it all scarier.
Because I started to believe that I wasn't seeing him.
That the familiar switchback nose and scraps of grey hair were going to melt away into the darkness.
‘There must be…something !’
Quigley said.
‘There must…
God…’
My dad came back well.
He raised his hands above his head and then stretched them both out at the unfortunate First Spiritualist.
He was now doing quite a lot of acting tormented.
His head was wobbling violently, and there was dribble down his chin.
Whatever he did would have gone down well with Quigley.
The presentation was right.
Albert Roger was very involved with the performance.
He had suspended disbelief completely.
‘There is nothing,’ said my dad.
‘There is nothing.
No faith.
No light in the darkness, Albert Roger Quigley!
Nothing but the smell of your own loneliness and guilt!’
This was very much the kind of stuff that Quigley was used to dishing out.
But it didn't look as if he was capable of taking it.
He hunched up his shoulders.
He looked as if he was about to cry.
‘What's the matter, Mr Quigley?’
I said again.
‘Who are you talking to?’
There was no stopping my dad.
I wanted to say to him:Get off!
Quit while you're ahead !
And a bit of me wanted him to stop the way you want an actor in a film to stop.
Because he is so damned real that you think this pain and suffering is really him.
You know?
‘Death’, said my dad, ‘is not a journey to some pleasant place.
Death is simply the stopping of your heart.
The end of is death.
And there are no spirits.
There are things.
Fleshly, heavy things that come back to mock and torment you!’
‘Argol,’ cried Quigley, who was, rather gamely I thought, trying to make some radical alterations to his cosmological system.
‘Argol of Tellenor!’
Dad laughed.
The laugh was really horrid.
It was low and cracked to begin with, then it rose up the scale, eerily, and shook out its top notes across the damp, half-lit glade until I really did think that my father had come not from the hospital but from some horribly, cold, empty region that lies in wait for us instead of all the heavens we have dreamed up to make things bearable.
‘I am not he of Tellenor,’ said my dad, who was always good at bluffing.
‘I am he that was Norman Britton when on the earth, now returned to haunt you, Albert Roger Quigley, and to tell you that you are an evil man and that you will fall as I have fallen!
Down and down, until you can fall no further!’
There was another roll of thunder, and once again the lightning lit up the garden and the surrounding trees.
As the sky's noise faded, my father moved into exit mode.
He walked, slowly and stiffly, towards the ramp that led from the garden to the street.
As he approached Quigley, Quigley started to sob.
Then my dad paused.
‘What must I do?’ asked Quigley — always a man anxious for instructions.
My dad gave him the sort of look that only someone declared clinically dead can manage.
‘I will come again, Quigley,’ he said, ‘when you least expect me!
I will haunt your dreams and yea your waking moments!’
‘What must I do ?’ said Quigley, understandably keen to get on the right side of this spirit.
‘Touch not my son, Quigley,’ said the old man, ‘Leave him be!’
I found myself wondering who we could haunt next.
There were a few members of staff who could do with a visit from beyond the tomb.
Dad did a bit of sneering, then he said, ‘Farewell, Albert Roger Quigley!’
Farewell,’ said Quigley, clearly anxious to keep up the tone necessary for spirit dialogue.
My dad started off again towards the street.
From the back he looked even better.
He kept the shoulders stiff and he rolled a little, like a sailor back from a long voyage.
Quigley ran towards me like a kid let out of primary school.
‘Can't you see him?
Can't you see him?’
‘See who, Mr Quigley?’
I said, widening my eyes just a touch.
‘See who?’
My dad was almost out into the street.
I had the strong impression he might be tempted to come back and give us a bit more front-line colour from the other side of the grave.
I leaned closer to Quigley, who, in a kind of transport of enthusiasm, grabbed me by both ears and squeezed my head hard.
‘Oh my God!’ he said.
‘Oh Jesus!
Oh God!’
You see how hard it is to get people to adapt?
If he thought about it rationally, on the basis of the evidence presented to him, he had no basis for trusting Jesus Christ any further than  he could throw him.
But there he was, reaching for familiar things, as we all tend to do when scared out of our brains.
After a while he let go of my head and started to cross himself furiously.
He was doing quite a lot of this, I noted.
And it wasn't exactly the kind of thing endorsed by the First Spiritualist Church.
Perhaps all this was going to push Quigley towards Catholicism — often, so my dad used to say, a good port of call for those on the way to a nervous breakdown.
‘I have been a bad person,’ he said.
This was no more or less than the truth.
I had been telling him so for the last few weeks.
But would he listen to me?
Would he hell!
‘I have done awful, awful things…’
Yes, Quigley.
I know.
‘…
To you, li'l’ Simey, and to the Church I love.’
He pushed his face close to me.
He smelt of garlic.
‘I have embezzled Church funds!’ he said.
Sure.
We gathered.
What we really wanted here was a tape recorder.
I mean, where did he think I thought he got his new car and his loft extension and his fridge-freezer?
‘I masturbate,’ he said, in thrilling tones.
I did not want to know this.
Not at nearly seven o'clock in the garden of the Ferret and Firkin.
Not anywhere, actually.
I mean, we all do it, Quiggers.
We get down in the darkness and from time to time we pull the wire.
But we don't boast about it.
‘Your father’, he said to me in a kind of sob, ‘has just appeared to me in this garden!’
I tried to look impressed.
‘He has told me some very important things.’
‘Are you feeling OK, Mr Quigley?’
I said.
‘Oh Simey!’ he gasped.
Then he did something really vile.
He flung his arms around me and pushed his beard in my face.
Something soft and dry touched my face.
I realized, with some alarm, that these were the Quigley lips.
The bastard was kissing me!
‘I think’, I said, trying to duck, ‘that you should go and lie down.,
Preferably not on top of me !
I knew nothing of Quigley's sexual life, but it was entirely possible that Marjorie and Emily were not enough for him.
He was a red-blooded assistant bank manager.
Up at the pub window I could see Mr McIvory, the owner.
He's a tolerant man, but I just wasn't sure how he'd take me being frenched by a middle-aged man in the garden of his public house.
‘Look,’ I said eventually, ‘fuck off and leave me alone.
OK?’
‘Fuck off and leave you alone!’ echoed Quigley, as if I had just taken pi to sixteen decimal places off the top of my head.
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘Yes,’ said Quigley.
And then — do you know what he did?
He started to back away, just as he had when he saw my dad.
He wound his way back over the leaf-strewn grass like a toy duck.
His mouth gaped and his hands flapped.
I held up my hand very much in the manner of Salvius the tribune greeting Glabriolix the slave and giving him news of the Emperor's dog, Pertinax.
‘Quigley,’ I said, ‘wait!’
He waited.
He was in a suggestible mood.
‘Oh Simon!’ he said, looking at my face as if he was trying to memorize it for some exam.
‘Oh Jesus, young shaver!
Oh me deario!’
He put his hand to his mouth.
‘I must tell the world!’ he said.
This might work better for me than his lying in a darkened room, which was what he really needed to do.
We had to get him telling his story as soon as possible.
Preferably to a tough-minded clinical psychiatrist.
He turned on the balls of his feet and spread his arms wide.
He was keen to tell everyone the Great News about my dad coming back to life to expose Christianity.
With a man of Quigley's energy and commitment behind him, I decided, it would not be long before Norman had a cult all of his own in south-west London.
‘Tell the world!’ he almost shouted, and ran, swiftly, out towards the street.
After he had gone, I sat back at the pub table.
My dad's glass of beer, half-empty, was still there.
But Quigley, if he'd noticed it, would have seen nothing unusual in a spirit getting outside of a pint of Young's Special.
If you were a ghost and you could choose who you could appear to, Quigley would be a good bet.
I don't know how long I was sitting there, but eventually my dad came back and sat down in his chair opposite me.
He looked the way he looked when he had been telling jokes and there were no more jokes to tell.
His face looked old and crumpled and sad, and, as he picked up his glass again, I had the strong sensation he was about to tell me something I didn't want to hear.
‘I'm in love with somebody else.’
I didn't say anything.
‘There's another woman in my life.
Has been for six years.
I love her, you see?
I just can't…’
He paused.
I didn't help him out.
‘I can't live without her.’
It was, I decided, a ridiculous cardigan.
Had she bought it for him?
He just didn't look himself at all.
He was sort of smirking as he said all this stuff.
In a way I found very irritating.
I tried not to listen.
I thought that, if I didn't listen, soon he would stop and then we would go home and life would start again, the way it had always been before.
But he kept on talking, and I couldn't stop myself from hearing.
‘She's called Veronica,’ he said, ‘and your mother knows about her.
Has known about her a long time.
And it's why she and you and…and why we…’
He stopped.
‘I don't love mum any more, you see?’ he said.
‘I don't love her.’
I looked up at him.
Straight in the eyes.
‘Is that where you've been?
With this Veronica woman?’
‘That's where I've been, and that's where I want to stay.’
He drank again.
But this time as if he wanted to get the beer over and done.
as if he suddenly didn't want to be here at all.
‘I met Veronica at the Anglo-Catholic church in putney — St Mark's.
When Mrs Danby took me there.
The old bat led me astray in more ways than one.
After I started with Veronica, Mrs D went back to the First Spiritualists.’
‘But you kept going to these Anglo-Catholic geezers?’
A lot of things were becoming clearer.
That smell of oil and candles and that light from a distant window and him on his knees, mumbling.
He must have taken me there.
‘She seemed pretty keen to get me on the team,’ I said.
Dad leaned forward and tapped me on the knee.
‘She felt guilty.
She offered a covenant to the Church if I came back or you were Confirmed in Faith.
A lot of money.
But I wasn't going to go back…’
He looked away.
He had that look he used to get on Saturday mornings after he had come back from the shops.
as if he was looking at his life and not enjoying what he saw.
as if there was a whole load of things behind him and nothing in front but age.
You know?
as if the night was coming in and he couldn't stop it.
‘In the end, Veronica and I packed in Christianity.’
He tapped me on the knee.
‘Make up your own mind,’ he said.
‘Look at the world and make up your own mind.’
I kept my eyes on his face.
‘Do you believe there is a God?’
I said.
‘Yes,’ he said, slowly.
From the way he said it, he might have been talking about Krull of Varna.
The thought didn't seem to bring him any comfort.
Or make the prospect of that long night any easier.
‘But I don't know what I mean when I say that word.
It's just something I say…because I have to say it…
Because it brings me some comfort.’
‘Like Veronica,’ I said.
I had to say it, guys.
I could not help myself.
I just did not like the sound of this woman.
She was young, probably.
Younger than my mum.
Nearer to my age than his, I felt sure.
She sounded fat and self-important, I thought.
‘I know you'll be OK, Simon,’ my dad was saying.
‘You're very tough and very smart and you're your own man.
You always have been.’
He put his hand on my hand again.
I moved it a little way away.
‘Will this Quigley guy be finished now?’ he said.
‘Now they've rumbled him?
He will, won't he?
I mean, if he causes trouble you can call on me, you know?’
I just looked at him, blankly.
‘If I thought you couldn't look after yourself, you see…’
I wasn't sure I cared for this ‘look after yourself’ stuff.
I never like it when people say that to you.
It was the same as this ‘make up your own mind’ line.
I wasn't sure I could make up my own mind.
You know?
‘What are you telling me?’
I said, in a flat voice.
‘I don't get you.’
‘I'm going away, Simon.
I'm going away and I'm not coming back.’
It's funny.
I knew he was going to say that.
Just the way I knew my mum had bad news when she came in on me in dad's study all those weeks ago.
The evening he died.
‘Where are you going?’
I said, evenly.
‘Veronica has a place.
It's a long way away from here.
We can start all over again.
You know?’
‘How can you start all over again?’
I said to him.
‘It doesn't make sense.
You only get one life, don't you?
How can you start it over again?
It's started already, hasn't it?’
‘Darling…’
I didn't like him saying that.
He sounded like Quigley.
He reached for me again, and this time I moved even further away from him.
I'd had enough middle-aged men slobbering all over me for one day.
‘I'm sorry, Simon,’ he said.
‘I'm sorry.’
And they were all apologizing!
‘I didn't realize that Quigley…
I mean, if it's that bad, of course I'll…’
‘I can handle Quigley,’ I said in a steady voice.
‘Are you sure?’
‘If I can handle you, I can handle Quigley.’
‘Simon — sometimes I don't know…
I don't…’
‘Look at life,’ I said, nastily, ‘and make up your own mind, guy ’!
He changed tack then.
He gave up trying to grab me.
He started going on about the life insurance.
He knew just how much he was worth.
He said that his not coming back was much the best option for all of us.
He was insured with four different companies, he said, which was probably another reason Quiggers was hanging round.
‘Dying on your partner’, he said ‘is much fairer and more financially beneficial to them than divorcing them.’
He put his head in his hands then.
He was a bad man, he said — a weak, bad man.
‘You're not bad,’ I said —‘you're really nice!’
It wasn't true that he was bad.
He cried a lot, but I didn't cry.
I didn't see why I should.
I'd done my crying for him the day they told me he was dead.
Funnily enough, that hadn't seemed at all real.
It was only now it was like he was really dying.
When he'd stopped feeling sorry for himself, he handed me a piece of paper with a number on it.
‘If this Quigley gets too much,’ he said, ‘write here.
Give me a bit of time to get settled.
It's a box number.’
‘What's wrong with your address?’
I said.
‘I won't tell anyone.
You can trust me, guy!’
He looked at me.
He looked all crumpled now.
Those new clothes she'd bought him looked even more stupid than they had before.
He said something — I forget what, but it was pretty clear he didn't trust me.
Or maybe Veronica had got to him on the subject.
I thought about how I'd walked around all those weeks and what I'd felt about him and the crazy things I had found myself believing.
And I thought:Where were you when I needed you, Dad?
Where were you when you died on me?
You know ?
He had done nothing.
There was a lot of stuff about is life too.
About his novel and his business.
That was in all sorts of trouble, apparently.
If he did come back to life, he was in real problems with the  bank.
Although isn't that what life is ?
Being in trouble with the bank.
He went on about mum.
How she had always held him back.
How he had never really been able to write because of her.
I couldn't figure this.
What did she do?
Start banging on the ceiling every time he took out his biro?
I mean, she goes on — but what the hell?
They all go on, don't they?
‘When you're my age,’ he said, ‘you'll understand.’
‘I won't,’ I said.
‘I understand now.’
He pushed the glass along the table.
‘Come with us,’ he said.
‘You'd like Veronica.
Come with us!’
‘To Box 29?
You reckon?’
As I said this, I realized it was too late for me and him.
That I wasn't going to leave.
Ever.
And that he didn't really want me to.
He had said that just to be polite.
Oh, he was polite.
He was polite and good fun and a hell of a laugh at parties.
But, at the end of the day, you couldn't trust him.
‘Your mum needs you,’ he said.
I'd noticed.
But I hadn't noticed him clocking the fact until the day he decided to bugger off to Box 29 with Veronica.
I was almost ready to tell him I couldn't face Quigley on my own.
But I couldn't find the words.
And they wouldn't have had any effect.
When it comes down to it, grown-ups think about themselves.
After that they think about other grown-ups.
And a long way after that they think about children.
Children really are on another planet as far as they are concerned.
‘I want you to look after her,’ he said.
‘Well,’ I said, ‘you don't seem to be intending to do it, do you?’
Then I looked back at the table.
I was giving that table a lot of attention.
Suddenly I felt I was talking to my mum.
Because it was feelings and stuff.
Me and Dad never talked about that much before.
She did all that.
But, now we were talking about it, I felt this great weight on me.
as if we would never have the time to say all the things we needed to say to each other.
as if we just didn't have the words for them.
You know?
‘Well,’ I said, in the end, ‘you'd better bugger off.
You're taking a risk being here really, aren't you?
Someone from the Mutual Life Provident might drop in…’
‘Veronica's got the car…’ he said.
She had a car and everything!
He was made up!
‘Look, Simon…’ he muttered, as he got up, ‘I'm sorry.
I am so sorry!’
‘Don't be,’ I said.
He came at me again and I could tell he was gonig to make another stab at a heavy masculine embrace.
I just sat very still, waiting for him to go.
‘You're very angry with me now,’ he said, ‘but one day…’
‘I'm not angry.
I'm fine.
Just fine!
OK?’
There was a pause.
‘What's she like?’
‘Veronica?’
‘Yeah.’
‘She's…’
Another long silence.
‘She's funny.’
He looked at me.
His eyes seemed to be coming from a long way away.
‘Like you, Simon.’
He was wearing jeans.
That was my dad — always trying to keep up with things.
But I figured the jeans wouldn't last long.
Veronica would be working on something to go with the brown shoes and the cardigan.
She would reshape his whole wardrobe.
And when she'd finished that she'd start on him.
He wouldn't be allowed to fart or pick his nose or put his feet on the table.
After a while he wouldn't be my dad at all.
He'd be Veronica's husband.
‘Write,’ he said, ‘don't you?
Because I can't.
Write.
OK?’
‘Sure,’ I said.
Then, at last, I looked him straight in the eyes.
‘I won't give you away,’ I said.
‘I promise you that.
I won't tell anyone anything about any of this as long as I live.
I swear it.’
‘I know, Simon,’ he said.
He made a half-hearted move towards me, but I gave him no  encouragement.
I didn't even look up as he went up the ramp into the street, so I'm still not sure when he passed out of the garden and into the rest of the world.
Sometimes I picture him walking out with his head held high and his step straight.
Other times I see him sort of shuffling, as if the world had finally got to him.
as if he was suddenly old and tired and defeated.
But mostly I try not to think about him at all.
Quigley never recovered from that evening.
He told quite a lot of people what he'd seen.
He even told the people at work, who were most impressed.
He went through a brief period of chatting to the customers down at the bank about how he had seen someone come back from the dead.
In a garden at twilight.
But, although they were amused at first, I don't think they liked it and, after a while, he was sent for treatment.
He told the doctors all about how my dad had come back to life in this grey cardigan and had told him the secrets of the universe.
Nobody's bothered about Pike or how or why he went through Mr Marr's pockets, cleaned out his ID, took his keys and squatted in the house to acquaint himself with the principles of ufology.
It is as if Marr, Pike, my dad and Quigley had never been.
as if they were all part of some troubled dream I was having.
Quigley's in a mental hospital near Tooting.
He went in just before Christmas last year.
Mum and I go to see him sometimes, and we agree that he is a much nicer person than he used to be.
He tells us about Old Mother Walsh and how the snake is coming for him.
It has five heads, apparently, and is from the planet Tellenor.
Lewis set it on him.
It has a number on it, but not the number of the second millennium.
It is marked with a 24, the number of our house.
He's worked Argol in there too.
Argol is on his way in a kind of steel tub, apparently, and when he gets here we are for it.
The only thing you have to be careful not to mention is the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist.
I don't understand the details, but apparently Mrs Danby got her lawyer on to him about some financial thing.
She herself left the Church and is going to leave all her money to the Battersea  Dogs' Home.
She wrote my mum a long letter saying that I was a Devil Child and the best thing my mum could do with me was have me exorcized.
My mum wrote back and said that she didn't have that kind of money.
‘She's an old hag,’ said mum.
‘Oh, I don't know,’ I said —‘I think I could do with a bit of exorcism!’
Mum and I get on a lot better these days.
We'll never be close, if you know what I mean, but we've got something worked out.
Mum has been a lot more cheerful since Quigley was declared bankrupt, insane and guilty of fraud.
She's got bigger.
Her eyes, which used to be dull and filmy, have got some of their sparkle back.
She and Hannah Dooley left the First Spiritualist and founded a Household Church.
They've called it the Fellowship of Christian Spiritualists of 24 Stranraer Gardens, and they have a lot of fun, singing and dancing and playing the tambourine in the back room downstairs.
Once or twice my mum has even gone into a light trance, and, though she hasn't yet contacted anyone interesting, we have great hopes of her.
They reckon it was all Quigley's fault.
That Old Mother Walsh had it right and that Ella Walsh should never have led the Church into the ways of men.
They are quite down on men, but they seem to like me.
Mrs Quigley and Emily still live with us.
They had to see the house — what remained of it after Brunt had finished with it.
Mrs Quigley doesn't say a lot, and what she says she says quietly.
Sometimes, if she's good, my mum lets her chop the vegetables.
Emily turns out to be really quite decent.
She has had a crisis of faith since her old man was put in the bin, and, a month or so ago, she took all her C. S. Lewis books out into the garden and burnt them.
For some reason, shortly after the First Church of Christ the Spiritualist took its number out of the phone book, she started to forget to lisp.
Who knows, one day I may marry her.
On the other hand, I may not.
I used to think sex was all about condoms and fellatio and  getting girls to show you their underwear.
These days it seems something more mysterious, but also somehow more real.
as if it's just over the horizon, waiting to happen to me, as weird and wonderful as all the things that happened last autumn.
I think about the aliens quite a lot.
I still think they're out there.
I think they're still spacenapping people, if you want to know.
Not in the obvious way.
I don't think they cruise into our atmostphere in saucers , exactly.
But, whatever name you choose to give it,something gets into humans one way or another and makes them do things that are very hard to understand.
I'm staying as far out of it all as I can.
I'm based on the moons of Jupiter from now on, and the only time I'll come back to earth will be strictly on a day-trip basis.
I'm behind that glass that separated us from Pike that night on the Common.
I never wrote to that box number.
I never will.
I keep the piece of paper in a tin next to my dad's glasses — the ones he'll never come back for — but I know I'll never use it.
You see, I was a little kid a year ago and I made the mistake kids make.
I let things get to me.
I let them all get to me — Quigley and Pike and my mum and Mr Marr.
Most of all I get my father let to me.
I let him get under my guard.
But I'll never let anyone do that again.
From now on I'll never let anyone under my guard.
No one gets close to me.
Not ever.