

President's Statement
Membership
In 1992–93, as the UK recession continued and banks went on reducing staff numbers, things became more difficult for the Institute and many of its members.
Membership in the Institute, which had declined by more than 10,000 during the previous year, fell again by a similar amount to approximately 100,000, thus coming back to levels last seen in the 1970s.
An encouraging feature of these statistics however, is that the decline in the number of Fellows and Associates was smaller than that of ordinary members, showing that the qualifications are still highly prized.
The operating surplus for the year was still healthy at £601,000, following £720,000 the previous year.
This did not obviate the clear need to retrench in the face of failing numbers and, during the year, the staff of the Institute was reduced from 117 to 106.
The fact that this is happening so widely does not make it any less unwelcome, and I would like to express my own thanks to staff for their steadfastness and continuing hard work in these conditions.
Merger with CBSI
It was against this background that the proposals for a merger between our Institute and the Chartered Building Societies Institute were developed.
These proposals have been approved by special general meetings of both institutes, and now only await Privy Council approval.
The merger is expected to come into force on 1 July 1993.
It is not only an appropriate response to falling numbers, but also reflects a natural convergence in the business of banks and building societies.
After the merger the name of the Institute and the general framework of its structure and examinations will remain unchanged, but its life and work will be enlarged by the accession of new members at all levels, from students to Council members.
I warmly welcome existing CBSI members, and hope that new members from both banks and building societies will be attracted by the more marketable qualifications that the merged Institute will offer.
Standards
At a time when banks are being widely and often unfairly criticised, their best response lies in the maintenance of the high standards on which their calling has always rested.
The Institute exists to promote those standards, both professional and ethical, through its examinations and through its social events at national and local level.
In running these, it must itself set an example of competence and imagination.
Education is a long-term investment — and all the more crucial for being so.
It needs constant and creative re-appraisal to ensure its relevance.
The Institute strives to achieve this and, in doing so, it deserves the support of its members and of the companies to which they belong.
Equally, the maintenance of that support through a difficult period will reflect back credit on banking as a whole.
Sir Jeremy Morse KCMG, FCIB President 
Secretary-General's Statement
If the Institute had been a private company preparing for flotation at the end of 1992, then its operating surplus of over £600,000 on a turnover of above £8m would have made it a very attractive investment.
We can congratulate ourselves on the forecasts which led to fixing fees at the right levels, but commercial criteria are not the only means of judging the fortunes of professional institutes.
The effect of the recession has been to reduce membership numbers to the level of 15 years ago, with a drop of 10,000 in 1992, and an even greater proportionate fall in the number of examination candidates.
Local centres have mainly proved resilient, but financial cutbacks by the banks have meant a decline in the numbers attending local dinners.
The brightest sports have been the expansion of the Institute's international work and the expectation of a successful merger with the Chartered Building Societies Institute.
The relationship with the National Council for Vocational Qualifications develops slowly, but our moves to ensure the continuing provision of tuition for banking candidates (especially by greater use of distance learning) have proved effective.
The worst feature of the recession has been the need to reduce the number of staff, including some with very long service.
For the future, I am optimistic that after such a disastrous period in banking we shall continue to enjoy a return to the traditional virtues embodied in professional qualifications; and that in order to continue providing members with good value for money we shall need to co-operate more than we do at present with other institutes.
An appealing prospect for Institute staff who like a challenge.
Eric Glover Secretary-General
Merger with CBSI
As with the merger in 1977 between the then Institute of Bankers and the Savings Banks Institute, the latest partnership will in a few years' time look entirely natural.
This does not imply that there has been fierce opposition — indeed, the vote in favour of the merger has been nearly unanimous at each meeting.
There is, however, bound to be some unease on both sides, and this will disappear only as members of both institutes work together in running courses, planning local centre events, and other ventures.
If the SBI merger is a good guide, then building society staff will soon be playing a very prominent role.
The consultation period was a long one, to give all members the chance to think through the issues involved.
By the end of it, some members may have forgotten the reasons for the whole idea, so let us recap briefly: there are economies of scale, certainly, though the addition of 6,500 members to 100,000 does not in itself produce any great saving in CIB operating costs (we used to recruit nearly three times that number of new members from the banks alone in a good year in the 1980s); there is potential recruitment, from more than 60,000 building society employees; but, above all, the merger demonstrates to the public that two major parts of the much maligned financial services sector are keen to improve their standards, and gives commercial rivals an exceptional opportunity to enjoy the benefits of co-operation in educational endeavour.
Treasurer's Statement
In a difficult year, the Institute's financial position has been properly strengthened for the continuing uncertainties ahead.
A satisfactory surplus has been achieved and the effect of the decline in membership and examination entries has been contained.
Though unwelcome, this decline was predicted and planned for — and spending was therefore rightly under tight constraint in 1992.
At the end of the year, the surplus added to the general reserve was £325,000, meaning that our liquid reserves total just over £2m — equivalent to three months' operating costs.
This is a reasonable position given the predictability of the Institute's cash flow but, with the outlook for membership bleak, we will have our work cut out to maintain it.
Treasurers are natural pessimists but I am happy that our reserve position is now one of reasonable strength.
During the year, we have also reviewed the investment of our liquid funds, we have planned a ‘Patrons’ scheme, with an eye to support particularly from the smaller banks in the City; we have introduced credit card payments, and resolved a major uncertainty I referred to last year over our Lombard Street offices.
We succeeded in negotiating a further period of tenure, until April 1996, at a rent substantially lower than we have previously paid.
Banker's Books, particularly the mail order side, continued to make a useful contribution in spite of the recession.
The special niche Bankers Books has established was enhanced by the publication of its catalogue which led to a significant increase in sales late in the year and a year end profit of £79,000.
The merger with the CBSI should slow down the fall in membership and thus the subscription base, though the eventual impact on reserves is hard to forecast.
Much will depend on the speed with which the practical aspects can be carried through and the extent to which new members can be attracted from the building societies.
One of the few things certain about the outlook is that 1993 will be a difficult year financially.
However, I believe we are going into it in good shape and can fact it with out usual, and properly cautious, optimism.
George Cracknell FCIB Treasurer 
Cambridge Seminar
The 20th Cambridge Seminar was held at Christ's College, Cambridge from 6–11 September.
Directed by Robert Rendel, Deputy Secretary-General, it focused on the topical theme of ‘Banks and their Obligations’.
A first-class team of syndicate chairmen was provided by the banks.
They made a vital contribution to the lively syndicate and plenary discussions, as well as to the other events, including a debate on who should not be thrown out of a hypothetical sinking hot air balloon.
Four excellent papers and a case study formed the core of the week's work: ‘Obligations to the Personal Customer’ by Professor Robert Jack CBE, Chairman, Banking Services Law Review Committee; ‘Obligations to Small Businesses’by Stan Mendham, Chief Executive, Forum of Private Business; ‘Obligations to Society’by Jeremy Mitchell, Director, International Consumer Policy Bureau; ‘Obligations to Shareholders’by Brian Pearse FCIB, Group Chief Executive, Midland Group and ‘Case Study: Corporate Social Responsibility’by Professor Kevan Scholes, Director, Sheffield Business School.
Forthright debate flourished and the 85 seminar members were treated to a variety of views from the speakers and from their fellow members.
It is this diversity which provides the fresh and stimulating argument which makes the Cambridge Seminar format so successful — and it is much helped by the differing backgrounds of the members.
This year, as well as corporate and retail bankers, there were participants from building societies, a contingent from the European Community and, for the first time, 11 members from Eastern Europe, sponsored by the Overseas Development Administration.
Participants and organisers at the Seminar.
The Seminar Director and the syndicate chairmen are in the front row
Qualifications
Examinations
The Institute offered examinations in 32 subjects in 1992 held in 994 centres in the UK and 525 overseas.
They attracted a total of 42,800 candidate entries (80% from the UK).
The examinations are held in May and October and, for the most part, accommodation is provided by banks and colleges.
Supervision is undertaken mainly by bank staff, and their support is crucial for the smooth and efficient running of the examinations — as is the help of the local centres.
Question papers are set and moderated by specialists in each subject area.
Chief examiners and moderators are drawn from the banks, professions and the higher education sector.
The papers go through a rigorous vetting procedure, most importantly by question paper panels, which comment on the technical content and standard of the draft papers.
Papers from the three different levels of qualification are considered together, within subject groupings.
Chief examiners are invited to attend and find this helpful in finalising their papers and formulating ideas for subsequent sittings.
The examining teams are selected by the chief examiners and made up of practising bankers — members who are interested in keeping up to date and ‘putting something back’ into the profession.
Teachers are also represented, and many find marking helpful in shaping their approach to the subject; they are not involved, of course, in the setting of question papers.
Education Officers
The role of the local centre education officer is to liaise between the students, colleges/teachers and the CIB.
Often this involves serving on college committees.
It is the education officer's job to inform the colleges of likely numbers for enrolments in the coming session and to ensure that students are suitably informed about enrolment procedures, which may mean holding a special meeting — perhaps at a college.
Throughout the year, the education officer will deal with any student problems which arise and help to find teachers for colleges.
Sometimes the education officer finds himself standing between rival colleges which are each vying for a larger share of the diminishing student market.
In overseas centres, the education officer is often more directly involved in organising tuition.
Several centres organise classes and recruit their own part-time teachers.
In the UK, the secretariat organise revision courses, and education officers help on the day.
Overseas, the education officer has a wider role in revision courses and often deals with marketing, premises and accommodation for lecturers sent from the UK.
National Vocational Qualifications in Banking
It remains difficult to judge the precise impact NVQs might have on the CIB's qualifications.
A pilot scheme at level 2 has run its course, and the banks are now deciding whether a business case can be made for its extension.
Although level 2 represents work below the standard of the Banking Certificate, the CIB has been involved as joint awarding body partner (with the City and Guilds of London Institute) and has gained valuable insights into the nature of NVQs.
In the meantime, work has continued on the validation of draft standards at levels 3 and 4.
These should be ready for accreditation by March 1994.
There is the prospect of some government funding to compare the underpinning knowledge of NVQs/SVQs at these higher levels with that demanded for qualifications offered by the CIB.
Education Conference 1992
‘Quality of Tuition’ was the theme for the 20th Education Conference.
Representatives of correspondence colleges were invited, in addition to education officers, local centre council representatives, participants from the banks, and the ABT.
Following the Secretary-General's review of the year, which included the information that college enrolments were 43% down on the previous year, Charles Rutt FCIB, Assistant Director, Business Line Liaison, Barclays Bank, explained what a banker expects of the providers of tuition.
David Triesman, of the National Association of Teachers in Further and Higher Education, made it clear that his association was as interested in quality as the banks and students.
Quality of tuition was notoriously difficult to judge: in-class assessment of teachers bore no correlation to examination results achieved.
George Kwasniewski ACIB, Education Officer for Croydon, described how his centre kept an eye on quality in the colleges.
Quality control of correspondence courses was covered in a paper by Elisabeth Ingham of the Council for the Accreditation of Correspondence Colleges.
Lively syndicate sessions in the afternoon left the secretariat with the task of producing guidelines for flexible learning courses and redesigning the students' questionnaire on tuition standards.
Phil Sykes ACIB, Education Officer, Cleveland Local Centre, proposed the toast to the Institute and Council at the conference dinner.
Brian Pearse FCIB, Deputy Chairman, responded and made strong reference to the need for a return to high standards of banking education.
The Lombard Scheme
The Lombard Scheme was given a major boost in 1992 through the graduation of its first 31 MBAs.
Master's Degrees in Business Administration were awarded to 28 Financial Studies Diploma holders who had followed special ‘conversion courses’ and to three ACIBs who took the full course.
The Lombard Scheme has had an increasingly high profile, thanks partly to the success of the new MBAs, which has been widely reported.
The enthusiastic support of the influential Association of MBAs has also been a great asset.
The MBA graduates have stressed the value of their courses for self-development, particularly in gaining a wider business perspective and an understanding of strategic matters.
The found the opportunity to learn from fellow managers from different backgrounds invaluable, particularly those from outside financial services.
All feel they now have a great deal more to offer their customers and their employers.
More than 100 students are currently enrolled on courses.
They study by a variety of methods, including evening classes, distance-learning and full-time study.
Overseas Associates have access to the scheme through the distance-learning and one-year full-time programmes, and students have enrolled from locations as diverse as Hong Kong, Ghana and the West Indies.
The shape of the Lombard Scheme is constantly evolving, and a working party on its future development will report in 1993.
Some of the first Lombard Scheme MBA graduates with the Institute's President
Financial Studies Diploma
In the penultimate year of the Financial Studies Diploma, another 38 candidates completed the examinations.
These Diploma holders, together with a further four members who qualified for the FSD under the Lombard Scheme, bring the total number of FSD holders to 387 worldwide.
The last FSD examinations take place in 1993 and study and revision support for students has been maintained.
More than 70 FSD holders have taken advantage of the generous exemptions from selected MBA programmes under the Lombard Scheme.
Associateship
Degree Status
Following an extensive and rigorous accreditation process by Sheffield Hallam University under the Credit Accumulation and Transfer Scheme (CATS), the Associateship qualification has been formally recognised as the equivalent of a first degree.
With one additional year's study beyond the ACIB, Associates may obtain a BA (Hons) Financial Services degree.
Plans are under way to develop a package of special ‘top up’ courses in time for the 1994/95 academic year.
Post-Wilkinson Developments
As the business of banking becomes progressively more complex and diverse, so too does the range of knowledge covered by the Associateship examinations.
However, thanks to the ‘core plus options’ structure of the Associateship course, introduced as a result of the recommendations of the Wilkinson Committee, individual candidates are not expected to become ‘Jacks of all trades’, but are able to concentrate on specialisms that are in keeping with their own career aspirations and their employers' needs.
The core subjects — management, accountancy, law and economics — are pivotal to a successful career in any financial services area.
Trustee Diploma
A good example of the flexibility offered by the Wilkinson changes is the absorption within the Associateship structure of the former Trustee Diploma.
Trustee candidates are able to choose subjects similar to those from the Trustee Diploma within the ‘core plus options’ framework.
A little further adjustment may be required to ensure that specialist interests are fully covered.
Work on this is under way.
The final Trustee Diploma examinations were conducted in May and October 1992, with a total of 173 candidates.
Students with any subjects outstanding have transferred to the new structure, with full credit being given for subjects already passed.
Similarly, the last examinations for the specialist Credit Card Certificate were conducted in October 1992.
Pre-Associateship Route
‘A’ level entrants to the financial services industry are able to take advantage of the Pre-Associateship Route, introduced in 1991, which enables them to progress to the Associateship examinations after completing a foundation programme of four Banking Certificate subjects:
.
Economics and the Banks' Role in the Economy
.
Introduction to Accounting
.
Banking: The Legal Environment, plus one chosen from:
.
Supervisory Skills
.
Banking Operations — UK Lending and International Business
.
Customer Services — Marketing and the Competitive Environment
This is no easy option as candidates are required to complete all four subjects in no more than three sittings.
With only around 1,350 candidates throughout the UK in 1992–93, the availability of tuition might have been a problem; however, as the subjects are ‘shared’ with the Banking Certificate, evening classes and correspondence tuition are widely available.
Students with access to an IBM-compatible computer also benefit from being able to obtain CAL courseware from the Institute for all of the Pre-Associateship Route subjects.
Using CAL for Banking Certificate studies
Banking Certificate
The Banking Certificate, launched in 1986, continues the long-established Institute tradition of providing every bank recruit with the means of attaining the highest professional status, regardless of entry qualifications.
It consists of nine subjects ranging from Business Communications to Supervisory Skills.
For successful students who possess at least two years' relevant experience and have been members of the Institute for at least two years, the Banking Certificate leads to a qualification in its own right — the Cert.
CIB.
Changing recruitment patterns in the 1990s are having a profound effect upon the market for the Banking Certificate, with numbers falling down from more than 10,000 candidates in 1989 to around 5,000 today.
The largest uptake is for the subjects in the Final section, which are common to the Pre-Associateship Route.
As students are widely dispersed, the Institute's CAL (Computer Assisted Learning) courses for all nine subjects are of immense value.
Several colleges, which are unable to mount formal evening classes because of lack of student numbers, have instead developed various systems of flexible learning based around the Institute's CAL courses.
The colleges' computer facilities are made available to students and limited tutorial guidance is available from the college staff, including the setting and marking of homework — a vital element of the CAL concept.
A number of banks have adopted a similar scheme to enable staff to continue their studies where tuition would not otherwise be available.
Revision Courses
Local Centres
Following the excellent results achieved in 1992 (61% pass rate), Lloyds, Midland and Yorkshire, once again, decided to sponsor selected students to attend the 1993 courses.
The Council appreciates their support of the programme and the invaluable help provided by the local centres which run the courses.
In 1993, more than 1,000 students attended the weekend revision courses which were run at 24 centres around the country.
Organised into subject teams, the 30 tutors covered 77 courses for eight selected Associateship papers.
Revision course students and officials in Jamaica
Computer Assisted Learning — CAL
The Supervisory Skills course from the Institute's CAL programme has been highly commended by the International Foundation for Computer-based Education in Banking and Finance.
CAL courses continue to play a vital role in the tuition of Banking Certificate and Pre-Associateship Route students, filling the gap left by colleges which are unable to mount evening classes because of local authority funding constraints and limited demand.
Coverage of the Banking Certificate syllabus was completed with the release of two new courses in April 1993: Banking Operations — UK Lending and International Business; and Customer Services — Marketing and the Competitive Environment.
With computers featuring increasingly in education at all levels, the Institute has extended the market by promoting relevant CAL material to sixth-form students.
Initial reactions from schools have been favourable: both the content and quality of presentation have been well-received.
Meanwhile, Banking Certificate and Pre-Associateship Route students are taking advantage of the Institute's CAL revision packages, which combine the advantages of computer-based teaching with the opportunity to iron out any problems with the aid of a tutor helpline.
Jos Bellefroid, Chairman, IFCEB (left), presents an award for CAL to Justyn Young FCIB
Evening Courses
This year's evening revision course programme in London was held in association with Northwick Educational and Training Services for the fourth successive year.
Courses, held over three evenings, were run for nine Associateship papers at the Great Eastern Hotel.
Overseas Courses
In recognition of the difficulties facing overseas students, the Institute once again arranged for tutors to travel to them.
This year, courses were held in the Bahamas, Cyprus, Egypt, Jamaica, Kenya, Malta and Sri Lanka.
Courses have also been arranged in Eastern Europe with the help of the Know How Fund.
Meet the Examiners
These popular lectures once again attracted many students.
Over a series of evenings at the end of March and the beginning of April, 13 chief examiners gave Associateship candidates invaluable advice on the techniques which could lead to success in the approaching examinations.
Candidates also had a unique opportunity to question examiners about their individual concerns.
Meetings were held in London and at local centres up and down the country.
Students who could not attend were able to obtain the examiners' notes, which highlighted the main points of each talk.
Association of Banking Teachers
The Association of Banking Teachers, which has a membership of 881, has continued to provide valuable services for its members.
The CIB helps by maintaining the membership records and providing Institute publications at discounted rates.
In return, the ABT runs courses for full- and part-time teachers to keep them up to date with developments in banking education.
The Association publishes an excellent ‘Bulletin’ and holds an annual conference.
The 1992 conference was held in Wakefield with the theme ‘Moving with the Times’.
International
London Banking Seminar
The aim of the Seminar was to give an overview of the British banking and finance industry to the 22 German bankers who attended.
There were visits to London Docklands, a major bank training centre and all the main City institutions.
This was the 35th London Banking Seminar under the auspices of the Bundesverband Deutscher Banken and the Carl Duisberg Gesellschaft.
The Corporation of London kindly hosted a dinner in the Guildhall to celebrate 35 years of Anglo-German co-operation.
The Seminar was held in October 1992 and participants were selected and financed by their banks in Germany.
German Banking Student Tour
The tour took place immediately after the Sterling crisis in 1992, so visits to such places as the Bundesbank, the German Stock Exchange and Deutsche Book were particularly interesting for the participants.
Fifteen Associates, plus two from each of the Irish and Scottish Institutes, travelled to Frankfurt, where they spent the first week of the ninth German Banking Study Tour.
The second week was spent in Berlin, where the group was able to study the effects of unification on the banks.
Visits included a trip to a chemical factory in former East Germany.
As in previous years, the tour was organised by the Bundesverband Deutscher Banken and the Carl Duisberg Gesellschaft.
Members of the German Banking Study Tour at the Brandenburg Gate, Berlin
International Relations
During the year, the Institute's international role continued to expand, as more countries turned to Britain for help with their systems of education.
Our overseas advisory role goes back to the 1950s, when bankers in Commonwealth countries first started to become members in significant numbers.
It was then a natural development for local centres to be formed, and later, independent institutes — for example, Singapore, Nigeria and Malaysia.
During the late 1970s and the 1980s, the Institute found a demand for its services in less traditional areas such as the Gulf countries and Indonesia, and a revival of interest in Sri Lanka and Tanzania.
Then came the startling developments in Eastern Europe and a British response which has been much admired.
The British Government Know How Fund and the Chancellor's scheme for the secondment to Britain of bright young Russians, including bankers, have been very successful.
In 1992, the first ever conference of East European banking institutes was held in Hungary with help from the Know How Fund and the CIB.
Why should the CIB undertake this role?
The answer is that by furthering the interests of the banks themselves, the Institute increases support for all its activities and thereby benefits individual members.
In the short term, some of those members who are  bedevilled by domestic banking problems may question this, but, in the longer term, such work is essential for the Institute's future.
Of the many people involved, three in particular stand out — Andreas Prindl FCIB, Chairman of the Institute's Eastern European Working Party; Alan Dearden FCIB, a Know Fund consultant, who in his first year organised over 1,000 weeks of banking training; and Jack Storer OBE, Hon FCIB, who was in the New Year's Honours List.
Eastern Europe
Since 1991, the CIB has supported the Eastern and Central European banking section of the Overseas Development Administration.
Countries to benefit include the Baltic States, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Poland, Romania and Russia.
Approximately 360 weeks of training have been provided for more than 7,000 students.
There are now courses in CIB examination subjects in St Petersburg and the Institute is helping the Romanians to set examinations based on the Banking Certificate.
CIB examinations and services were promoted at the Russian Banking Conference in Moscow, and the CIB organised a study tour for officers of the Moscow State Finance Academy.
Funding for this work is provided principally by the British Know How Fund.
St Petersburg
Egyptian Banking Seminars
In co-operation with the Egyptian Banking Institute and the ODA, which financed the project, the CIB arranged three seminars for senior bankers in Egypt on the problems facing banks during an era of deregulation.
Amongst the delegates were three British senior tutors, who have been seconded for two years to the EBI financed by the ODA, to assist with the setting up of tuition and training services — Geoff Sales, Phil Brear and Pal Mangla.
Training Networks
The European Bank Training Network is comprised of members from the European Community countries and the CIB is a founding member.
The Network assists the growth and development of the European banking and financial sector, and bank training in Central and Eastern Europe.
The International Foundation for Computer-based Education in Banking and Finance encourages the use of computers and technology in banking education and training.
The CIB is represented on the Board and this year, the CIB Supervisory Skills course received an IFCEB award.
Benefits of Membership 
Membership of a professional body with approximately 100,000 members worldwide;
Qualifications which have worldwide recognition;
Automatic receipt of the monthly magazine Banking World ;
Participation in local centre events, including the Banking Game;
Use of extensive lending and reference library, provision of reading lists, etc;
Priority booking for Institute lectures, seminars and courses;
Eligibility for study tours;
Discounted prices on Institute publications;
Ties, brooches, scarves, etc;
A feeling of belonging to the international banking community.
Statistics
At the end of the financial year, the Institute's membership register contained, in addition to the eight Honorary Fellows, the names of 103,415 members who had paid their subscriptions for 1992 or were eligible for free membership.
The total number of members fell in 1992, reflecting the reorganisation taking place within the British banking industry, and very low recruitment.
There was a far less marked drop in overseas membership.
The membership register in 1992 included employees from more than 4,000 banks and other institutions in more than 150 countries.
Fellows (FCIBs)
The Council elected 130 Fellows in 1992, 110 resident in the UK, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man and 20 resident in other countries.
Associates (ACIBs)
1,674 Associates were elected in 1992, 1,413 resident in the UK, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, and 261 resident in other countries.
Ordinary and Student Members
5,826 new members were enrolled in 1992 (1991: 8,186), 5,622 ordinary members and 204 students.
Of the total, 3,525 were in the UK and 2,301 overseas.
Membership
Subscriptions
At a special general meeting in October, the Council's proposals for increases in the annual membership subscriptions were approved and the following rates came into effect from 1 January 1993.
Fellows £70
Associates resident in the UK, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man £47
Associates resident elsewhere £42
Ordinary Members resident in the UK, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man £42
Ordinary Members resident elsewhere £40
Student Members £37
These subscription rates compare very favourably with those of other professional bodies, particularly since all Institute members receive a monthly magazine.
UK members continue to qualify for tax relief.
Banking World
Banking World continued to address current issues facing those employed in financial services.
The June 1992 cover story put the spotlight on the banks and their image.
In July, the cover story looked at property problems and an article in the September issue asked whether lending was an unfashionable activity.
A three-part series entitled ‘The Bank of England in the markets’, by David Llewellyn and Brian Tew, started in January 1993.
The editorial panel's interview with Sir Jeremy Morse made fascinating reading in February.
The special reports on technology, charities and dealing rooms continued to be popular with readers.
The Institute featured a wide range of items for student members in the ‘Signpost’ series and also reported its activities worldwide, including a special section on international relations.
An increased use of desktop publishing technology helped to tighten up publishing deadlines and improve the design process of the magazine.
A reader's survey of 1,769 people was encouraging: 46% rated Banking World as good, with 14% thinking it very good and 34% fairly good.
Seventy-nine per cent felt that Banking World was informative and 63% found it particularly interesting.
Library
‘To be secure in your job you must increase your talents daily.’
This seems to be the maxim of those who use the library and information service which has been even busier in the last session.
Usage
Usage of the library was boosted this year by promoting its services at conferences and local centre meetings and by showing foreign visitors how the library could help them.
The 4,244 members who now have library tickets borrowed 12,087 items in 1992 and the library was used approximately 22,000 times in total.
Members based outside of London used the telephone service or wrote to the library for answers to 1,465 queries about banking practice.
Requests for specific books and articles totalled 10,615.
The number of requests from those who were not members fell during the year as staff resources were concentrated on members.
Non-members were charged a total of over £2,000 for use of library services.
Research Resources
During 1992, more CD ROM products were added to stock, including the Financial Times 1990–92';Research Bank (stockbroker reports); and the new Oxford English Dictionary .
On-line databases introduced during the year were DIALOG, DATASTAR and FT PROFILE.
The book stock now includes texts to support the CIB's developing MBA programme, as well as all the subjects for Certificate and Associateship examinations.
The stock is also being developed in anticipation of the merger with the CBSI.
CIB Publishing
CIB publishing activities have changed emphasis this year as, with the reduction of oral teaching, there has been increasing need to provide tuition aids such as Lesson Programmes for students taking up private study.
Items published in 1992–93 were as followed:
Tuition Aids — Examiners' Reports: Autumn 1991, Spring 1992, Autumn 1992. — Lesson Programmes: 8 subjects.
— Study Guide: 1 subject.
— Updating Notes 1993.
New Titles — Applied Lending Techniques.
— Practical Trust Administration.
— Bankers Workbook: Investment — How to Pass Series: The Monetary & Financial System; Management in Banking.
— Occasional Papers Series: Economics of Securitisation.
New Editions — Law Relating to Banking Services.
— Revision Card Pack: The Monetary & Financial System.
— How to Pass Series: Branch Banking — Law & Practice.
Lectures — Ernest Sykes;— Gilbart;— Presidential Address.
Bankers Books Limited
After deduction of a management fee of £245,000, which covers all associated business costs, the profit for 1992 was £78,700, i.e. 10.5% of turnover.
End of year sales for 1992 for the bookshop and the mail order business were £753,000 (£869,500 in 1991).
Mail Order
The mail order business suffered from the lack of recruitment by the banks and the decline of the Banking Certificate market.
Sales dropped by 15% from December 1991 to December 1992.
Mail order sales in 1992 were £525,000 (£617,500 in 1991).
Bookshop
The Bookshop also suffered from the recession in 1992, but fared better than the book trade generally.
Sales for the year were £228,000 (£252,000 in 1991).
The Bookseller has reported trade down by 25% whereas the trade in the bookshop dropped by only 9.5%.
The effect of publishing a complete catalogue at the end of 1992 has been dramatic, with December 1992 sales up by 65%; January 1993 up by 10% and February up by 33%.
Local Centres
Activities
Local centre events were often challenging as well as rewarding and perhaps none more so than South Cumbria's ‘Operation Isolate’.
Best summed up by secretary, Jim Crewe ACIB: ‘The day started fairly easily with our having to negotiate a minefield and then climb a greasy pole — everyday activities for today's modern banker!
Of course, the tasks had a serious side and those that were not well planned and not executed as a team were generally unsuccessful!
Industrial visits, such as South Yorkshire's visit to Forgemasters Steel in Sheffield, were among the particularly interesting events.
Other centres visited a range of industrial locations from airports, radio stations and breweries to farms, local newspapers and hospitals.
More than 1,000 meetings were held by UK centres.
Of these, 700 were of a banking or economic nature; 129 were industrial visits and the remainder were social events.
Overseas Centres
A highlight of the year was the formation of the Gibraltar Centre in December 1992.
There are now seven overseas centres: Bermuda, Colombo, Cyprus, Gibraltar, Hong Kong, Malta and Mauritius.
They arrange extensive programmes for both qualified and unqualified members.
They help provide tuition materials and college facilities for examination candidates and some run revision courses.
Most have their own premises with libraries set up with advise from the London secretariat.
Hong Kong remains the largest overseas centre, with over 6,700 members.
Cyprus is the second largest with 1,800 members, an increase of 442 over the last year.
Conference
‘Working Together’ was the theme of the March 1993 conference for Council representatives, presidents, honorary secretaries and publicity officers who would be in office in the following session.
The main theme of the morning was the role of local centres, with emphasis on the opportunities before them in view of the proposed merger with the Chartered Building Societies Institute.
Eric Glover, Secretary-General, set the scene and Philip Charlton OBE, FCIB, gave a personal view of the subject and this was followed by a question and answer session.
In the afternoon, there were ‘teach-ins’ on the roles of local centre officials.
Council representatives heard about the experiences of two representatives — Tony Fox FCIB, Worthing, and David Dimmer FCIB, Bristol.
Presidents and publicity officers listened to a presentation by Wade Martin ACIB, Liverpool Institute's President, and Val Smith ACIB, London East's Publicity Officer.
The teach-in for secretaries was by Helen Hobbs ACIB, Bristol and Simon Robinson ACIB, Newcastle, both Honorary Secretaries.
How a president and council representative can support a centre was the last subject of the afternoon when Don Piper FCIB, Council Representative, Bromley & North Kent, and John Harris FCIB, President, London West End addressed all 255 delegates.
At the conference dinner, David Sayer FCIB, President, Birmingham, responded to the toast to the local centres.
‘Operation Isolate’
Local Centres
Local Centres' Trophy
This was the 12th annual competition in which centres were judged on programme booklets and associated publicity material — posters, press releases and newsletters.
Twenty-five entries were received, five fewer than last year.
The judges unanimously deemed Malta to be the winner for the second year running.
Entries from Colchester, Jersey, London East, Norwich, Southampton and Southport, were highly commended.
The results were announced at the local centres' conference, and the presentations of the Trophy to the winner and prizes to the runners-up were made by the President at the conference dinner.
Sir Jeremy Morse KCMG, FCIB, CIB President, presents the Trophy to Paul Spiteri FCIB, President, Malta Centre
Banking Game
Home International
The 1992 Home International, the climax of the Institute's computer-based branch banking game, was held in Cardiff in June.
During the year, the competition had involved over 300 teams and 1,500 competitors in the four home countries.
The CIB was represented by South Yorkshire, captain: Steve Gillespie DipFS, ACIB (England) and Newport & Gwent, captain: Steve Jenkins ACIB (Wales).
Their opponents were teams from the Institutes of Bankers in Ireland and Scotland.
The teams competed against each other(and a freak heatwave) to make the highest profits for their branch, and the eventual winners were Ireland, with England runners-up, Wales third and Scotland fourth.
Ian Lindsey OBE, FCIB, member of the CIB's Council, presented the Bank of Ireland Trophy and a cheque for £500 to John Graham, captain of Ireland, and the Clydesdale barometer and a cheque for £300 to Steve Gillespie.
Thanks were recorded to John Watkins FCIB, Council representative for the Cardiff Centre, for his contribution to the success of the event.
The South Yorkshire team
Local Centre Competition
The live finals of the Institute's local centre Banking Game were held in February.
One hundred and two teams from 65 local centres (including two teams from Malta) entered the competition.
After two postal rounds, ten teams survived to compete in the finals for the Cup and the Plate (the competition for the runners-up in the first round).
In the Cup Final, Malta were the winners, followed by Cardiff, South Yorkshire, Colchester and the Liverpool Institute.
The winners received the Banking Game Cup and a cheque for £500.
The Plate Final was won by London East followed by Norwich, Chelmsford, Cleveland and Sheffield.
The winners received a salver and cheque for £300.
The trophies were presented by George Cracknell FCIB, Treasurer of the Institute.
George Cracknell, CIB Treasurer, presents the Banking Game Cup to Hubert Taylor-East ACIB, captain of the Malta team
IFCEB
A recent pilot competition for the International Foundation for Computer-based Education in Banking and Finance may result in future use of the Banking Game by IFCEB members.
Lectures and Seminars
Gilbart Lecture 1992
In October, the Great Hall at King's College, London, was filled to capacity for the Gilbert Lecture given by Hilmar Kopper, spokesman of the Board of Managing Directors, Deutsche Bank.
The title of the lecture was ‘German banks: what role do they really play?’ and the question and answer session at the end, chaired by Lord Alexander of Weedon FCIB, Chairman of National Westminster Bank, was particularly frank and revealing.
The Institute is very grateful to National Westminster Bank for sponsoring the event.
Presidential Address 1992
A return to relationship banking, particularly longer-term relationships, in a time of great changes for the banks was called for by Sir Jeremy Morse KCMG, FCIB, in his address.
The theme of the address was ‘In Praise of Banking’, and it was illustrated with examples from Sir Jeremy's experiences during 40 years in the industry.
He spoke of the importance of professional education and the need to maintain professional standards.
An audience of 200 people attended the event.
The text of the lecture, which was available to guests on the night, was later updated to include the questions and answers and it was printed in booklet form.
The lecture, which attracted press publicity, was followed by a buffet reception.
Sir Jeremy Morse KCMG, FCIB, giving his Presidential Address
Sykes Lecture
‘Reflections on Corporate Governance’ was the title of this year's lecture by Sir Adrian Cadbury, Chairman of the Committee on Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance.
He said that it was more important than ever that all worked in financial services knew what their company stood for and it was the task of leaders to distil and instil company values.
He emphasised the need for standards to be set by those at the top of organisations.
The lecture attracted a capacity audience.
Sir Adrian Cadbury
Short Seminars
A number of short seminars were held during the year and these were well supported.
The Institute worked with a variety of different partners on the following courses: Relying on Audited Financial Statements (twice), with the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales; Lending to Registered Housing Associations — the Accounting Implications, with The Housing Corporation; Managing Costs — Making the Most of Resources, with KPMG Management Consultants; Registered Housing Associations — Legal Implications of Lending, with the Housing Corporation; and Lending and the Environment, with Wilde Sapte.
Banking Law Seminar
‘Banks, Fraud and Crime’ was the topic which gave the speakers, commentators and participants plenty to debate and learn about at the 11th annual Banking Law Seminar.
The seminar was directed by Professor Ross Cranston, Sir John Lubbock Professor of banking Law and Director of the Centre for Commercial Law Studies at Queen Mary College.
Speakers included Professor Michael Levi, University of Wales; Neil Alton, Department of Trade and Industry; and Dr Max Hall, Loughborough University.
The Rt Hon Sir Thomas Bingham, Master of the Rolls, gave a fascinating account of the BCCI affair in a speech following the Seminar dinner.
The Rt Hon Sir Thomas Bingham, Master of the Rolls, speaking at the Banking Law Seminar
Banking Law Lectures
Speakers from the City law firm Cameron Markby Hewitt addressed a packed house in the Institute's library each Wednesday evening for eight weeks from January to March.
Subjects for this season, the fifth series, were: ‘Guarantees and Performance Bonds’, speakers: Professor Graham Penn FCIB and Robin Parsons; ‘Warranties and Covenants in Loan Agreements’, speakers: Professor Graham Penn FCIB, Robin Parsons and John White FCIB; ‘Recovery Problems in Practice’, speakers: John White FCIB and Stephen Foster; and ‘Asset Securitisation’, speakers: Professor Graham Penn FCIB, Emma Lubbock and John Hitchins (Price Waterhouse).
All speakers, except the last two, are partners at Cameron Markby Hewitt.
The eight lectures were chaired by Tony Davies FCIB, Head of Litigation Unit, Royal Trust Company.
Business Strategies for Financial Services
The 18th annual residential seminar run jointly by the Institute and Henley Management College was well supported by senior executives from all over Europe.
An impressive line-up of speakers included Brian Pitman FCIB, Chief Executive, Lloyds Bank; Thomas Krayenbuehl, Senior Vice President, Union Bank of Switzerland; and Derek Wanless FCIB, Group Chief Executive, National Westminster Bank.
The seminar was directed by Professor Bernard Taylor and Christopher Batt FCIB.
A case study on Royal Insurance was introduced by Professor Bill Weinstein.
Participants and officials at the Henley Seminar
Council
AGM 1992
The 11th Annual General Meeting took place in the Institute's library, 10 Lombard Street, on 20 May 1992.
Roger Flemington FCIB, took the chair and, at the conclusion of the meeting, formally handed over the Presidency to Sir Jeremy Morse KCMG, FCIB.
At both the Annual General Meeting, and the Council Meeting earlier that day, tributes were paid to Mr Flemington for the energy and commitment with which he had presided over the Institute and promoted its work.
He had previously served as Deputy Chairman and as a member of the Central Council (since 1986).
The Council elected Brian Pearse FCIB (Group Chief Executive, Midland Group) as Deputy Chairman for 1992–93 in succession to Sir Jeremy Morse.
Mr Pearse had been a member of Council since 1987.
At the Annual General Meeting George Cracknell FCIB (Deputy Managing Director, Banking Division, Barclays Bank) was re-elected Treasurer for 1992–93.
Sir Jeremy Morse KCMG, FCIB, receiving the presidential chain of office from Roger Flemington FCIB, immediate past President
President's Dinner
On 19 January 1993, the President hosted a dinner for about 250 guests from banking, the professions and education.
Brian Quinn, Executive Director of the Bank of England, responded to the toast to the guests.
The dinner was held in the City of London at the  Plaisterers ' Hall.
Local Centre Visits Council members visited local centres during the year and the picture shows Sir Jeremy Morse KCMG, FCIB, President, signing the visitors' book in the Lord Mayor's Parlour during a visit to Cardiff centre.
Visit the Cardiff centre.
Left to right: Councillor Andrew Cretton; Eileen Cronin ACIB, Dinner Secretary; Eric Glover, Secretary-General; John Steward FCIB, President, Cardiff Centre; Elaine Allinson, Lady Mayoress; Sir Jeremy Morse KCMG, FCIB, CIB President; Tom Lockyer, President, Cardiff Chamber of Commerce; The Rt Hon The Lord Mayor of Cardiff, Derek Allinson.