

House Newspaper of Stoddard Sekers International PLC
PROFITS DIP AS RECESSION HITS DEMAND
LAST year's accounts were concluded with my statement —‘We must continue to be of cautious mind as to the immediate future, confident nevertheless that our chosen strategy best equips the group to weather the ongoing economic turbulence.’
Sadly, one year on, the degree of caution has not lessened, while there is only scant evidence that the economic turbulence is abating.
During the year to 31 March 1993, the trading environment for British industry remained depressed and fraught with uncertainty, fuelled by political indecisiveness.
In these circumstances, the group's trading performance has suffered a setback.
While turnover overall has advanced from £46.09m to £55.37m, reflecting the inclusion of BMK for a 10 month period, comparable turnover year on year was down 11%.
Pressure on selling prices and a more competitive mix of product sold into the market have depressed operating profits by a third from £3.63m to £2.43m.
After additional interest charges, as a result of the BMK acquisition, and a reduced taxation charge, profits attributable to members fell from £2.65m to £1.16m.
Given the widespread fragility of confidence in the economic recovery, the directors believe it prudent that the dividend for the year to March 1993 should reflect that year's results and not be presumptuous as to any future economic upturn.
Accordingly, the board recommend a final dividend of 0.75p which, together with the interim dividend already paid, gives a total dividend payable for the year of 1.50p.
During the year, strong management of the balance sheet has been maintained to ensure that our financial health is such that we will quickly benefit from any sustained improvement in our markets.
The increase in gearing from the extremely low level of last year to 38% is primarily occasioned by the acquisition of BMK.
This acquisition, which complemented the group's sales profile, has been well integrated during the year.
However, after an encouraging first half year, they along with other parts of the group, were not immune to the increasing pressures of the recession.
In the current debate on corporate responsibility, the board continue to be mindful of the necessity for a high level of competence and integrity.
The Cadbury Report has been received and discussed, and we believe that our standard of governance is of the calibre envisaged in that report, given the size and nature of the group.
We will monitor the further developments and pronouncements of the several bodies presently addressing the subjects of corporate governance and accounting standards.
Hugh Laughland, Chairman
We have reacted to the uncertainties of recessionary pressures by reducing our cost base while maintaining our quest for improved productivity and quality.
The skill with which management and employees have responded bears testimony to their commitment and resilience.
My thanks are due to Ralph Ellis and his management team who, with diligence and determination, continue to battle through these difficult times.
Our purpose remains to develop your company for the benefit of shareholders, together with employees, customers and suppliers — success for one will be success for all.
The above figures summarise a very difficult year for all in the group.
Although we had bucked the recessionary trend in the previous year, demand for carpets was even more depressed, and in a fiercely competitive market place, we all had to work harder for our share of the smaller ‘cake’.
Under these difficult conditions, some firm decisions had to be made on cost savings, both with regard to investment and labour.
This belt tightening has left us leaner and fitter to compete in the UK and world markets; and we will need to remain in good shape to ensure our leading position in the industry and the achievement of reasonable profit growth.
Without BMK, our turnover was £5.2m less than in 1992, which fully illustrates the difficulties encountered in all areas of selling.
Reyburns and Lyles traded well in difficult economic conditions.
Stoddards and Sekers, however, were unable to avoid slippage in sales and bottom line performance, but both have prepared the ground for better performances in the current year with the launching of new ranges and, in the case of Sekers, the development of major new sales outlets.
Although not profitable in the first year of acquisition, BMK with its complementary customer base and very different range of production equipment, will greatly strengthen us in the longer term.
I would like to thank everyone for their efforts in 1993.
Let us all hope for better things in 1994.
Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive
AMERICAN AGENTS VISIT
Stoddard's North American Agents, Patrick Carpet Mills from California, were welcomed to Elderslie for a three day visit in April.
As one of America's largest tufted manufacturers, with a 50 strong sales force covering North America, they are an important part of Stoddard's export activity.
Following an agreement set up two years ago, their President, Ken Lawrence and Vice President, Craig Lepere, together with eight others visited the factory at Elderslie to further their knowledge on traditional Axminster and Wilton weaving.
Already well established in the contract market with their tufted products, Patrick Carpet Mills now offer Stoddard's Custom Service alongside their own.
Contrasting the different methods of production was a valuable exercise to those unfamiliar with traditional weaving methods with many unique sales points being identified in the process.
It was their first sight of an Axminster plant in operation.
The visit not only included manufacturing but also a tour of Douglas Reyburn to see yarn spinning and dyeing.
This, altogether with a day spent in the Design Studio at Elderslie, showed all aspects of making a Stoddard carpet — the craftsmanship, technology, flexibility in specification and an unparalleled design resource.
It is the ‘power behind the product’ and judging by what they said — they liked what they saw.
Stoddard's American agents on a factory tour of Elderslie with Ronnie Cleland, Production Manager (left) and Keith Bill, Works Director (right).
STODDARD TEMPLETON TAKE PART IN MAJOR GLASGOW EXHIBITION
TRADE SHOWS as they are known, are a normal marketing exercise for most companies, but this is one with a difference because it is about trade itself, the business of manufacturing.
‘Making Glasgow's Future’ was a ten week exhibition in the Peoples Palace launched in response to the urgent need for the revival of British Industry.
It was as though the recent remarks of John Major had been anticipated as the exhibition was already running when he expressed concern over the future of manufacturing industry in the U.K. One reference to the exhibition by Campbell Christie, General Secretary, Scottish T.U.C. stated ‘The problem we face in Britain is that we don't manufacture enough of what we consume.
It was not always like that and it need not be like that now.’
Hundreds of firms contributed to exhibition stands, showing their manufacturing processes and their products.
Stoddard Templeton was among them as a major manufacturer, impressively displaying the exhibition logo part woven as a carpet and part as a print out from the design studio computer.
Photographs, coloured yarn and a short text made up the rest of the display.
The exhibition was mounted by one of Glasgow's famous and oldest organisations ‘The Trade House of Glasgow’ which dates back to 1605 when fourteen groups of Craftsmen were brought together.
These groups, or incorporations, were set up to help protect the interests of each craft and to uphold individual standard of workmanship.
Over the years The Trades House has had an important role to play in promoting trade and industry in the city.
Today much of the House's work is concerned with the well being of Glasgow, actively encouraging youth and industrial initiatives within the city.
The Incorporation of Weavers could not be more closely connected with carpets and it was under their aegis that Stoddard Templeton took part.
Over 70,000 visited the exhibition, amongst them Scottish Office Ministers and the Lord Mayor of London.
The special careers data base received over 1000 enquiries, fulfilling one of the main aims of the exhibition to ‘excite the interest of young people and to reinforce the notion that there is a good and satisfying life to be had in following a trade.’
RALPH ELLIS MEETS MP'S AT WESTMINSTER
Fighting for the interests of British Carpet Manufacturers and the 1400 employees of the company, Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive of Stoddard Sekers International, met fourteen MPs at Westminster to express concern about the continuing recession and the need to restore consumer confidence.
He went as part of an influential industry delegation, all members of the British Carpet Manufacturers' Association, of which he is Vice President.
Each of the MPs had carpet firms in their constituencies which included Gordon McMaster, MP for Paisley South and Willie McKelvey, MP for Kilmarnock and Loudon.
The group of MPs were made aware that government assistance for export promotion and international standards was essential.
The Qualitas Furnishing Standards Scheme, set up in response to an Office of Fair Trading report in 1990, was expensive and would need active support if it is to progress.
Distortions to the single market, the famous ‘level playing field’ were rife by other member states.
Non repayment of one huge subsidy to comply with a ruling by the European Court of Justice was one particular example.
Other hidden subsidies, VAT evasion and illegal practices, are all areas where British carpet manufacturers expect the UK authorities to redouble their efforts.
Regarding the environment, there are impractical proposals emanating via Brussels, designed merely to placate noisy pressure groups.
It is essential that any proposals should be scientifically justifiable otherwise costs increase and jobs are threatened with no real environmental benefits.
Further regular meetings are intended so as to maintain the vital liaison between the carpet industry, Parliament and government, and to enable carpet manufacturers to voice their concern.
Ralph Ellis (right), Chief Executive of Stoddard Sekers International Plc, meets Gordon McMaster, MP for Paisley South, at Westminster.
Millions are being spent on the refurbishment of Paisley Town Hall.
The work is being phased over a number of years but already some of the refurbishment has been completed.
One such project, the Alexander Wilson Suite, involved weaving part of Paisley's historic past into the border of the carpet.
Councillor Stevenson is well placed to comment on the carpet as he was once a weaver at Stoddard.
The historic past is a reference to Alexander Wilson, a Paisley weaver, poet and famous ornithologist, whose statue stands in the Abbey grounds.
In his day Wilson was very conscious of some of the injustices from which the weavers suffered, and through his pen he sought to champion their cause.
This led to imprisonment after which he sought greater freedom in America.
There he became a renowned ornithologist where his work is recognised to-day as being of immense scientific value and he is accepted as being the father of American Ornithology.
His original paintings and drawings of American bird species are priceless.
Many form part of the world famous collection in Paisley Museum.
Copies also hang as decoration on the walls of the Alexander Wilson Suite in the Town Hall, and within the carpet and bird motif, copied from one of the drawings is a major feature of the striking border that surrounds the newly decorated reception room.
Looking at the special carpet, woven by Stoddard Mercia for the Town Hall in Paisley, Jim Maxwell (right), Regional Sales Manager, is discussing the design with Robert Stevenson, Councillor for Elderslie.
In his hand is a copy of a drawing that was used by Stoddard's design studio to create a unique border design for the carpet.
JACK MILLAR RETIRES
At the end of March one of the carpet trade's well known personalities, Jack Millar, National Sales Director of Stoddard Templeton, retired after forty two years service.
Over 100 guests attended his retiral dinner at the Normandy Hotel, Renfrew.
It was an occasion filled with memories of a life time in the carpet business, highlighted with speeches by Ralph Ellis, Rod Turnbull, Steve Higgins and from customers who have known him for a long time.
Jack Millar himself recalled a few stories of his experiences as a salesman, much to the amusement of all present, including his family who had come from far and wide to be there.
It was an eventful evening with more to follow.
Stewart Roxburgh gave a tongue-in-cheek ‘This Is Your Life’ presentation.
Photos of Jack were shown, each thrown up on a large screen with a running commentary.
Jack in a push chair, in the Scouts, his school report.
Then came shots spanning his business career, his appointment as a rep, his first car, as sales director and finally his personal life and his children.
His career started with Templetons in 1951 as a Management Trainee in the Despatch Department.
In his speech Jack said ‘I had 18 years with James Templeton, which until 1969 never failed to make a profit.
Then Guthrie came on the scene and there followed thirteen years of hassle, restructuring and losses.’
‘But I was fortunate because then Stoddard took over as a professionally run and profitable company and I've spent 11 happy years with them.’
Although Jack has retired he remains an advisor so that, as Ralph Ellis said at the dinner, ‘We'll have the benefit of Jack's expertise for some time to come.’
From left, back row: Stewart Roxburgh, George White, Steve Higgins.
Front row: Ken Forrest, Rod Turnbull, Jack Millar, Graham Harvey.
CUSTOMERS DEMAND CARE — THE BEGINNINGS OF A NEW WAY TO WORK
Changing a concept into reality.
That is the challenge which faces Stoddard Carpets, its Directors, Managers and Workforce.
It is not merely a technique, but a complete philosophy which puts quality first.
Quality not only of the product but of every aspect of every job function of every service.
It stretches the meaning of quality into a new sphere, all encompassing and demanding.
C.D.C. has been described as ‘a mature business development strategy which is being actively pursued throughout every sector of the global economy by companies seeking to establish and build a profitable enterprise by delighting the customer.’
Others have described it as ‘accelerated performance improvement.’
There is no one answer.
Already it has begun.
Six cross departmental projects are nearing completion.
Stage two will involve projects within departments and the involvement of all concerned.
Initially, at managerial level, an educational programme was undertaken by outside consultants.
Armed with the new approach, projects were identified where improvements could be made.
Communications, Customer Feed Back Review, Customer Complaints Procedure, Grading and Inspection, Carpet Waste and Production Scheduling.
Teams were established and leaders appointed.
C.D.C. recognises that employees' contributions are a valuable resource.
In the past, Quality Circles have been used in a similar way but their scope was limited in comparison.
Waste for example is an obvious subject for consideration but with C.D.C. it is defined in a new light ‘anything which is not valued by the customer’.
Parameters are wider and projects go deep.
Those that are involved in the day to day activity can contribute substantially.
‘There is no greater waste than that of willing employees prevented by insensitive leadership from applying their energies and ambitions in the interest of companies for which they work.’
C.D.C. can not be introduced all at once.
The time scale is measured in years rather than months.
It is a change in culture and in attitude from the top to the bottom.
A powerful Steering Committee, chaired by Rod Turnbull, Managing Director, with four directors is responsible for the implementation.
Those projects already in hand have made progress presentations to the Steering Committee.
Their development is also being guided with the expertise of professional consultants.
Final recommendations where real benefits have been identified are not far off.
Stage two, C.D.C. at departmental level, is scheduled for the Autumn.
Improvement groups on workshops will be established to form the basis of C.D.C. training across the company.
Each group will identify a task, an opportunity to contribute to the success of their department.
Only one other carpet company has been identified as implementing this strategy.
Elsewhere it is known as T.T.Q.M. or Total Quality Management.
Within Stoddards it has been renamed to a more focused ‘Customers Demand Care’.
In support of C.D.C.'s introduction to the company, partial funding of the exercise has been agreed with Renfrewshire Enterprise, an organisation which helps with the development of local industry.
No longer is the customer at the end of the line, nor does the supplier only relate to raw materials.
With C.D.C. your product is what you do.
Every department will have its customer(s) and its suppliers.
Each individual uses the product of another supplier and his/her output has to satisfy a customer.
The relationship between customers and suppliers is fundamental to C.D.C. Responsibility is devolved, ownership of the problem becomes personal.
Japanese companies, recognised as being leaders in this field, have a special word for continuous improvement —‘kaizen’.
Their goal is to get it right first time and then start improving.
It is an attitude that allows for the acceptance of continual change and advancement.
To manage this, all barriers to performance are systematically identified, analysed and removed.
C.D.C. means that initiative not only comes from the top but from the bottom up.
Everyone is involved.
It establishes a mechanism for self management, the reward is personal success.
Your customer demands care.
C.D.C. in operation as Ronnie Clelland, Production Manager and team leader, makes a progress presentation to the steering committee.
The subject — A review on customer feedback.
STODDARD TEMPLETON'S SPRING LAUNCH
In a massive marketing exercise, Stoddard Templeton launched three new ranges at the beginning of the year.
The Spring Collection 1993 was introduced to the trade at ten different roadshows spread throughout the country.
Each was an exhibition in itself lasting two or three days to which retailers for that area were invited.
Special wall units with large panels were built for the occasion.
These now feature in carpet shops along with more exclusive display units of various sizes built to suit every purpose
Over 300 rolls of carpet were sold at the highly successful roadshows.
The new ranges, Braemar, Rannoch and Royal Deeside, were welcomed by the trade.
Other new items added to existing ranges were also included in the Spring Launch.
New colours in Medici and more in Highland Tweed enlarged an already impressive collection as Stoddard Templeton launched their new products into the field ahead of the rest.
‘Palmette’— a beautiful traditional design is one of the ten items in ‘Rannoch’, the new Axminster range from Stoddard Templeton.
A wide range of style makes a compact but varied choice comprising of traditional and oriental design, petite floral bouquets and other showing a delicate tracery of spring blossom.
Rannoch is woven with a newly developed 80% Wool 20% Polypropylene yarn using an inspiring range of heathers and solid colours.
‘Rouge Fresco’ one of twelve items in Stoddard Templeton's new Axminster range ‘Braemar’launched as part of the Spring Collection.
The range cleverly combines a diversity of abstract design styles from classical to modern in a well balanced selection.
Each pattern is closely integrated with a textured background to give an especially homely appeal.
Their warm colours are easily matched with contemporary furnishings.
Braemar is woven in 80% Wool 20% Nylon and is available in a choice of three widths.
It has a top quality rating suitable for extra heavy domestic use.
‘STODDARD SALES — GOOD MORNING — THIS IS JANETTE — HOW MAY I HELP YOU?’
If you are a customer, then this is what you will hear on the phone when contacting the sales desk.
The name will change but the professional service remains the same.
Recently everyone in the sales administration department attended a course on how to deal with customers on the phone.
An outside agency, experts on tele sales, spent four days teaching how to deal with every conceivable request that a customer could make.
Many in the sales office were new to this as a complete internal reorganisation had taken place.
No longer are export, contract and retail sales desks the separate organisations they once were.
All have joined together and all have had to become familiar with serving a different type of customer.
Telephone technique was only part of it.
Familiarity with export procedures, contract enquiries and retailers' orders all formed part of a steep learning curve.
As a result, knowledge has increased all round, everyone is involved and problems, if any, are quickly dealt with.
Tele sales training in progress for one of the two groups from the Sales Administration department.
From left, the Instructor, Sandra Arkless, Sharon McCormack, Linda Whyte, Kirstie Armstrong, Claire Niven, Jackie Prunty and May Finlay.
REWARDS STIMULATE IMPROVEMENTS
Rewards for good ideas, as part of Stoddard's ‘Doing It Better’ scheme, were presented to six employees by Rod Turnbull, Group Managing Director.
They are photographed holding their cheques, given for ideas that will benefit the company either in production, the offices or anywhere within the organisation where improvements can be made.
Hugh Flynn, Maintenance Fitter, received £50 for developing a machine that would strip waste yarn from used bobbins using only air pressure.
Simple and efficient, it has been developed beyond the prototype stage with a mark one version now in operation.
Tom Walker, Sales Administration Dept., suggested telephone headsets for hands free working.
Sales Desk staff would be able to talk to customers and simultaneously operate a VDU obtaining instant information.
He received £50.
Eddie Heley, Maintenance Fitter, was given £10 for an idea that could  reduced wear and save down time on Axminster looms by fitting hardened brushes to the sneck sleeve bracket.
If viable he would be given another £40.
John McMannus, also a Maintenance Fitter, has thought of a way to reduce maintenance on spool gantries by fitting a limit switch for early detection of moving chain wheels.
If viable £40 will be added to the £10 already given.
Alan Macdonald, Assistant Shift Manager, recommended using an ‘O’ ring chain to replace the standard chain used on looms and other equipment.
The chain is pre-packed with grease and virtually maintenance free.
This got a £10 reward with £40 more if it proves successful.
With a view to improving internal communications, Sandra Arkless, Sales Admin., suggested that notices should be put up alongside test areas so that the carpet and its purpose can be identified.
Interest would be stimulated among those not directly involved with the test.
The ‘Doing It Better’ scheme does not operate continuously.
From time to time it is introduced when ideas can be submitted to a committee.
The scheme is co-ordinated by Simon Fraser, Technical Director.
LAUNCHING THE SPRING COLLECTION
Bales of carpet samples fill the pattern room in time for the deadline.
Intense activity preceeded the launch preparing thousands of samples for despatch to retailers throughout the country.
Launch costs reached a targeted sum of £¾m when roadshows and marketing literature are added to the sum.
It grows even larger when design and development costs are including.
From left: Alan Macdonald, Rod Turnbull MD, Tom Walker, Sandra Arkless, John McMannus, Edward Heley, Hugh Flynn.
John Kelly, Bobbin Boy operates the new yarn stripping machine developed by Hugh Flynn, Maintenance Fitter, as part of the ‘Doing It Better’ scheme.
Salesman of the Year — Trevor Goldsmith (left) is presented with a silver quaich by Managing Director, Rod Turnbull.
The presentation was made at the Annual Sales Conference in March, where Trevor's achievement was noted as holding particular merit in such competitive trading conditions.
Winners of the Stoddard Templeton Challenge Shield are presented with their trophies by Steve Higgins, Sales Director (far right of photo).
The competition was the final part of an intensive three day sales training course for retail customers which was run by Stoddard Templeton in May.
Another course is being run in September.
Each year a series of courses is run to train staff in all aspects of carpet manufacturing and retail selling.
It is credited as being one of the most professional courses available to carpet retailers in the U.K.
TO THE PALACE FOR DESIGN REWARD
Bill Naysmith, Group Design Director, has been nominated and chosen as a finalist for a National award ‘The Prince Philip Prize’ for the Designer of the Year.
For this prestigious annual award, organised by The Design Council, his name was put forward by the Glasgow School of Art.
Nomination is in itself a considerable mark of achievement but also he has attained further distinction by being selected as one of ten finalists.
Together with the winner, finalists were presented with a signed certificate by Prince Philip on 8th July.
The presentation was followed by a reception and lunch in Buckingham Palace.
For nomination, top designers, leaders in their field, were chosen by professional bodies and organisations.
They represent a complete cross section of design disciplines.
The Royal Society of Arts, The Royal Institute of British Architects, The Royal Designers for Industry, The Chartered Society of Designers, The Royal Academy of Engineering The Royal College of Art, British Standards Institute, Institute of Marketing, Trade Associations, Universities and Art Colleges that have a significant design faculty.
At all stages Bill was particular about stressing the team approach to his work, recognising the contribution of others with himself as leader.
To achieve the rank of finalist is not only an honour for himself but he feels that it is shared with those who have worked with him in the team.
SEKERS IN OVERDRIVE WITH FABRIC FOR CARS
FIESTA takes on a new meaning at Sekers as those with Spanish holidays on their minds adjust to making fabrics for the car instead.
Amongst other new orders Sekers has secured a significant contract to supply the automotive industry with fabric for car interiors.
It also includes the Ford Escort, Vauxhall Astra and fabric for a limited edition Rover.
Confirmed early in the year, the order came as a result of two to three years' work.
‘A team effort from all concerned’ said Director, Keith Jackson.
The lead time, although prolonged, is not unusual in the world of contracts when extensive development work is necessary.
Special designs, trial runs and samples were all part of winning the order as the production unit and design studio lent support to the sales effort.
Much happens to the cloth before it is ready for use in a car.
Specialised techniques are required to finish the material and to laminate backing substances that greatly increase the comfort factor.
Exact sizes have to be cut and prepared for each model.
This is the work of a separate organisation, specialist suppliers of automotive fabrics from whom Sekers secured the order.
They in turn supply the car companies direct.
It required close liaison as Sekers tendered for the business, adding their own design flair to the interpretation of the brief, and their technical skills to the specification.
Production is now in full swing — a busy time on the road to success.
Aimed at the hotel and brewery market Victoriana is a new range of jacquard woven fabric by Sekers.
This top quality upholstery range, woven in 100% wool is currently in mid launch with an initial 500 pattern books being individually distributed by Sekers sales force to specifiers throughout the country.
A feature is the Moquette weave, of which there is a limited facility within Europe.
Varese and Vilaro are two designs from Sekers Verona Collection, a new range of seven classic damasks and stripes woven in 100% Trevira C.S. It is for use as a curtain material and designed for hotel bedrooms.
From Sekers Verona Collection ‘Vieste’ a new design.
It is part of a major launch of new designs and colours not only in the Verona Collection but also across the whole portfolio of Sekers ranges.
Stephen Bound officially joined Sekers in November after seven months as a trainee on the Government sponsored Job Training Scheme.
He works as a packer and is training towards becoming a final examiner.
Stephen is a keen Rugby League player and recently was in the winning team for Cumbria Cup Final.
Frank Johnston joined Sekers in January, to work as Yarn Storeman.
His father, also called Frank, is Warehouse Manager in charge of finished stock.
Young Frank is a keen Rugby League player having gained four caps for Gt Britain in the under 19's.
These include a tour of New Zealand and two visits to France.
He has also just achieved a Brown Belt in Judo.
With a watchful eye Angus Bates weaves fabric that will be used in car interiors.
It is part of the substantial order recently won by Sekers.
A CASE OF FORTY YEARS
For 40 years service to the company Donald Biggam, Personnel Manager (left) was presented with a canteen of cutlery by Hugh Laughland, Group Chairman.
The presentation took place in November with all Directors present on this special occasion.
Donald joined Sekers as a wages clerk in 1952.
Since then he has held many positions including Company Secretary and has seen many changes within the organisation over the years.
Donald is a keen fell walker and photographer.
In this issue of the Glenpatrick News he also provided all the photographs taken at Sekers.
All that is except this one when it could be said he was dealing with a special case — of cutlery.
JUST A FEW ‘OUTSIDE INTERESTS’
‘If you want something done then give it to a busy person’.
That is the saying and in the case of Chris Macleod he is certainly busy enough to qualify.
Chris joined Sekers last year as Management Accountant.
Number crunching by day, he is also more than fully active after work and at weekends.
Just to keep fit, or as he said ‘to warm up for a day at Sekers’ he swims about three miles each week.
Golf is also one of his interests, playing at a local club trying to reduce his 13 handicap.
He plays for the Whitehaven Tennis Club and is involved in their purchase of new tennis courts.
If not chasing a ball, he plays another game, this time it is Chess.
It reaches the parts other sports can't reach — exercises the mind.
Currently he holds the position of being in the top three in Cumbria.
A good all rounder Chris is a member of the Cockermouth Round Table where he recently organised a trip for 90 old age pensioners to the lakes.
Well aware of the undertaking he added ‘The day before I went for a load of beers to prepare for the ordeal.’
The recent government policy on Care in the Community has also increased his involvement with Copeland Mind, a charity for the mentally handicapped, of which he is local secretary.
‘It has been pretty hectic, anyhow’ he explained before pointing out that the Chairman and Treasurer have both resigned, and he was left holding the fort.
After all this he is then ready for another day at Sekers — where he works!.
NO RECESSION AT DOUGLAS REYBURN
There is a hive of activity at Douglas Reyburn, the Kilmarnock based spinning and dyeing company that supplies the group with carpet yarns.
Managing Director, Andrew Steel, states that ‘We are working round the clock.
Three shifts are operating flat out to keep up with demand.
Production is at the maximum with record levels being achieved.
Three lorry loads are leaving each day bound for Cumbernauld, Elderslie or round the corner to BMK.
Additional orders are also being placed with other yarn spinners to keep pace.
Considerable work has also been undertaken to develop new blends using wool and experimenting with new man made fibres and dyestuffs.
Douglas Reyburn, while running at full capacity, has also remained flexible, dealing with special orders in addition to bulk trials of development work.
Plans are also in the pipeline for the gradual alteration of existing storage bins to double the size of blends that can be achieved.
It involves removing steel partitions, twenty-five feet tall, that presently separate each compartment.
Ageing machinery that opens or teases wool, a ‘fearnought’, has also been moved away from the blend bins and a new one inserted at an earlier stage of production.
More Gilbos winding machines have been added in the spinning department and in the Dye House a new office has been constructed to where the colour computer will be moved.
Working flat out to keep up with demand, bales of yarn are stacked ready for the next load by Despatch Foreman, Peter McCall.
Peter has been delivering yarn to Elderslie since 1946 when he worked with his family's haulage business before joining Douglas Reyburn.
Alex Muirhead, Textile Technician, makes final adjustments to the new Gilbos Winding Machines recently installed at Douglas Reyburn.
Wrapping it up — bulky bales of yarn, vacuum shrunk to half their normal size, are expertly packed by Bill Muirhead, left, and Jim Ward in the Despatch Department at Douglas Reyburn.
FIRE DURING NIGHT SHIFT — SAFETY PROCEDURES WORK WELL
It took the fire brigade just three minutes to arrive at Douglas Reyburn when a twisting frame burst into flames in the early hours of the morning.
The machine, thirty feet long on the first floor of the new building had overheated.
The cause is unknown.
Immediately fire drills were followed and the building vacated.
Extinguishers were used at first but to no avail.
By now, only seconds after the alarm had been raised, the fire was already well established along its full length.
Further attempts to fight the fire were abandoned as thick acrid smoke filled the department.
Quick thinking machine operator, Archie Fulton grabbed the fire extinguisher as Jean Hamilton, working opposite, told others to activate the alarm.
She then informed chargehand George Morton, who together with Gavin Hanna, Nightshift Manager, took the decision to abandon any further fire fighting as the smoke become unbearable.
All this within three minutes.
Sprinklers doused the flames as the fire brigade arrived to finish the job.
Meanwhile, a roll call was being taken.
No one was missing and no one had been hurt.
Safety procedures and quick thinking of those involved had worked well.
Water was now the problem as it dripped onto machinery from the floor above.
Already equipped for this the fire brigade provided tarpaulins and arranged for more to be sent round.
The nightshift helped in this task, restricted to the ground floor initially, then onto the first floor in a massive clean up operation as electricians isolated affected areas.
Damage limitation was successful.
By the next day most machines were running.
Intense heat had melted and buckled the twisting frame that caught fire.
Charred and blackened cones of yarn, melted plastic and rubber mixing with the mess.
It will not run again for some time, but from the human point of view, all was well.
TWENTY FIVE YEARS' SERVICE
In January this year, three long service presentations were made at Douglas Reyburn to those who had worked for a continuous twenty five years with the company.
As is the tradition, watches were given to each, presented by Managing Director, Andrew Steel.
Those who received the rewards were Stephen Kunz, Technical Manger; Duncan Dawson, Chargehand Fitter and Hugh Quinn, Serviceman in the Winding Department.
Stephen Kunz, Technical Manager, receives his watch for 25 years' service.
From left, Bill Brown, Production Director; Bill Cumming, Finance Director; Stephen Kinz and Andrew Steel, Managing Director.
Duncan Dawson (left) is photographed with Engineering Manager, Ian Haveron, after being presented with his watch for 25 years' service.
Hugh Quinn (right) receives his long service award from Andrew Steel, Managing Director.
NINE TIMES BETTER
Given that trained and qualified first aiders makes for better treatment of those unfortunate enough to need it, then Douglas Reyburn is well positioned with an extra nine first aiders.
A special course was run early in the year, organised professionally by the Red Cross who sent an instructor to the company — and charged for it.
It ran for four separate days over a period of weeks, followed by an exam when all managed to pass.
A complete first aid kit has been issued to each first aider which is kept ready to hand at their workplace.
Those who passed the course are Robert Longmuir, Marilyn Cleland, David McMenemy, Aileen Young, Kate Connell, Ivy Thompson, Betty McGill, Sandy McGregor and Alan Ferguson.
TESTING TIME FOR LAB TECHNICIAN
The laboratory at Douglas Reyburn has been working flat out to develop over 130 colours for Stoddard Templeton's new Rannoch range of carpets.
The launch of a new range does not always involve this amount of work but with Rannoch a special blend of 80% wool 20% polypropylene was being used.
It meant the development of new dye recipes, one for each colour.
Polypropylene has replaced nylon in this range and no standard recipes existed for such a blend.
By trial and error, together with years of experience, Lab Technician Wendy Little, worked through an average of six dyeings per shade.
As she explained, it was not easy to start from scratch.
It took over 800 individual dyeings to complete the programme, changing the proportions until exactly the right colour was achieved.
Once the percentages were established these could be used in bulk production, where blends of up to four tonnes are produced.
Any error and it could result in lorry loads of the wrong colour.
It was one of the most complicated developments undertaken for some time, with Wendy working weekends and holidays to complete the project.
Time was imperative as the pressure was on to produce a result that would enable Stoddard Templeton to achieve a Spring Launch for the new product.
Wendy, who has worked eight years with DR, has recently experienced another rush project.
On this occasion it meant working through a weekend developing special colours for a Royal carpet.
It was for the Queen at the Palace of Holyroodhouse.
As Wendy's birthday fell on the Saturday her endeavours showed true loyalty to the Royal cause.
To celebrate her birthday cream cakes were purchased, and doubtless devoured, as she continued to experiment with a suitably Royal colour — blue.
Working with colour, Lab Technician Wendy Little prepared over 800 dye recipes for the new Braemar carpet range.
VITAL STATISTICS
If an average is taken, then D.R. is producing enough yarn to manufacture 65,000 square metres of carpet each week.
If laid on the ground, a year's production would stretch 130 times round the world.
To wind it round the world as it was being produced, the traffic police would object.
Your speed they would say was in excess of 600 miles per hour, 611 to be precise!
When asked to explain, the statistician would say ‘that's a good yarn — is all in the telling.’
Supporting her thoughts on her hand, Nancy Wallace, Lab Technician happily contemplates her wedding on 9th July.
Photographed when engaged, she is now married to Peter Bell from Kilmarnock.
OBITUARY
On 4th December, Hugh Anderson died after a short illness.
Hugh was 62 years' old and had been with Douglas Reyburn for 28 years.
During that time he worked with wool blending as Teasing Foreman and latterly as assistant to the Raw Materials' Manager in the Warehouse office.
During the war he served with the R.A.F. and before joining Douglas Reyburn he was involved with retail grocery business.
He was an active member of his local church in Newmilns and is survived by his wife Isobel, two sons and a daughter.
TIMES ARE HARD BUT DEVELOPMENTS AND IMPROVEMENTS CONTINUE AT BMK
Within the plant plans are established for continual updating and improvements to quality and efficiency.
Terry Hamer, Production Director, together with his team are undertaking several projects, some almost completed and others well on their way.
At the finishing cropper where carpets are given their final sheer to achieve a smooth and even surface, £25,000 is being invested on an automatic height adjuster.
The precision high speed cutting rollers are also to be protected from potentially damaging metal fragments by metal detectors.
Efficiencies of waste material, an inevitable result of the weaving process are also under scrutiny.
A scheme to measure the waste yarn has been introduced.
It will ultimately lead to improvements in yield.
Tufting machines are being upgraded with modular needles.
At any one time over 15,00 needles are now being replaced with precision made modules in groups of 10 to significantly improve accuracy and the split second timing necessary to evenly cut the yarn.
An improved surface will result.
New chip technology that will give a variable speed drive is also being introduced with a replacement control panel.
It is the interface of craftsmanship with technology.
Although Jacquard looms have been going for over 100 years, improvements are still being carried out.
BMK have developed a system borrowed from tufting technology that bring the many differently coloured yarns from the supply creel at the back of the loom forward to the loom itself.
Previously they would be drawn directly from over a thousand bobbins straight to the loom in a visible display of colour.
Now they are all tubbed in miniature diameter plastic pipes each part of their journey supported.
Less drag improves efficiencies with fewer missing tufts an re-threading becomes simpler using air pressure to blow the yarn through the multitude of small pipes.
Plant has also been streamlined into a more obvious production line flow with the transfer of winding machines onto the ground floor.
Change may cause disruption but without it improvements can not be made.
Throughout the factory a new gas heating system has been installed the independent heaters doing away with the need for the central boiler house.
The old fired boilers have now gone, their space to become a technical development area in time.
BMK WEAVE A PATH THROUGH HISTORY
When BMK joined the Stoddard Group in 1992 it brought with it another large chunk of Stoddard's carpet manufacturing history.
To-day, the Stoddard Group encompasses nearly all of what there was in Scotland, with BMK adding a last major chapter.
Carpet manufacturing in Kilmarnock had already been established for over 150 years when the company as we know today was formed in 19088.
It was then that William ford Blackwood took Gavin Morton into partnership to form Blackwood Morton & Sons Ltd.
This was later shortened to Blackwood Morton, Kilmarnock or BMK, as it became known.
EARLIER TIMES
The original factory was built around 1820 on ground previously used as a market garden alongside the river ‘Kilmarnock Water’.
Burnside water, as it was aptly called, is now the headquarters building rebuilt in the 1920's as a multi storey plate glass building of some note at that time.
The manufacturing plant once surrounding it, is today located separately about half a mile away.
A supermarket now occupies what was once a substantial spinning mill and green fields have replaced the massive four storey plate glass weaving shed that could be seen miles away with the BMK logo illuminated on top.
It is presumed that the original building had a textile manufacturing purpose but it was not until 1847 that there was a definite record of shawl printing.
Later, in about the 1850's John Wilson set up at Burnside to manufacture rugs, weaving Scotch Carpets (or Ingrain as they are also called) on hand looms.
These carpets had no surface pile.
They were constructed as cloth but were much coarser and harder wearing.
In 1879 John Wilson sold out to James and Robert Blackwood.
It was then called Blackwood Bros & Co.
This partnership was dissolved in 1882 to become Robert Blackwood and Sons which lasted to the formation of Blackwood Morton, when Robert Blackwood's son William Ford Blackwood joined forces with Gavin Morton in 1908.
The Mortons were already well established in textiles and had invented a power loom which his own family company, ‘Alexander Morton & Co’ were unable to develop.
It is presumed that they were then introduced at BMK but it is also recorded that hand loom weaving had already stopped at Burnside in 1881 when second hand power looms rom Crossleys of Halifax were introduced.
These continued until 1929.
BOTH WARS AND THE YEARS BETWEEN
BMK's own book ‘From London to Lathe’ covers this exact period.
It was written by an unknown author from within the company and records proudly their contribution to the war effort.
‘The Great War of 1914–18 interrupted our progress and development.
Much of our resources were then directed into the manufacture of Forces’ blankets.
When peace came again in 1918 we followed up the production of reversible wool rugs with the making of chenille Axminster carpets.
These gained so much in esteem that in 1932 a bold decision was taken to scrap existing plant and to concentrate on the production of chenille Axminster and spool Axminster carpets and rugs’.
It was between the wars in 1933 that Gavin Morton became sole partner.
W. F. Blackwood left to purchase a nearby spinning company of hosiery yarns — none other than Douglas Reyburn & Co who were taken over by Stoddard in 1947.
Production increased tenfold in the period leading up to the second world war.
By then 1800 were employed.
Discussions with the Ministry of Supply had already taken place during 1939 and it was agreed tentatively that blankets would be made.
War declared on a Sunday.
On Monday morning a priority telephone call ordered BMK to ‘proceed immediately to manufacture service blankets’.
As the book records ‘Disorganisation had begun’.
It was referring mainly to personnel.
However, by the time the war ended BMK had long since finished with blankets (after they had produced 2.5 million) and had turned to engineering.
The looms had been replaced with lathes, which responded to urgent and sometimes panic requests to anything from shell casings to aircraft, gun or radio parts.
All orders were controlled by the Ministry of Supply.
BMK's offices in Birmingham and London were both completely destroyed by bombing.
Just prior to the outbreak of war BMK had acquired Cooke Sons & Co Ltd of Liversedge, Yorkshire, a carpet company dating back to 1795.
They remained in textiles throughout the war and likewise suffered the bombing of their London Offices and warehouses.
The fate of the company is not recorded except like BMK they reverted back to carpet manufacturing as soon as possible after the war ended.
In 1945 BMK were constructing a large carpet factory in Northern Ireland at Finaghy near Belfast.
It was to employ 1000 people.
Once again the outcome of this venture is unknown.
DECADES LATER
For three decades post war BMK grew, expanded and flourished.
Factory buildings were established in many different areas of Kilmarnock.
At its height over 200 people were employed.
The famous lamb logo was introduced as early as 1949.
Chenille weaving ceased as Axminster and Wilton weaving expanded.
Tufted was introduced in 1966 with the custom built Thisletex factory being commissioned in 1967.
THE EIGHTIES AND BEYOND
Having succeeded through the ‘73 recession BMK went into receivership in 1981, caught by the next severe downturn in the economy.
After considerable rationalisation the company was bought by Mr Logue in 1982.
Many of the old sites were sold.
From thousands previously employed in the past the new workforce numbered 185.
There followed a few years of growth with turnover increasing from £11 million 1982 to £18 million in 1987.
The workforce grew to 500.
BMK became the first carpet manufacturer in Britain to be registered with the 1987 version of British Standard 5750 for Quality Assurance.
In 1992 BMK was purchased by Stoddard Sekers International.
By this time the company had been crippled by the latest recession and was once again fighting for survival.
One year on the workforce stands at 300, a lean organisation with a name that is respected and well known in the trade.
BMK BOLDLY ATTACKS THE MARKET
Taking the initiative BMK is revamping its products with the launch of new ranges and major changes to its established products.
In June 3 new ranges were launched.
Kingsbury a patterned tonal Wilton with a Venetian style in 10 colours.
Brompton, a new development with 20% polypropylene is an Axminster with 10 items some abstract and others with modern versions of Traditional Persian styles.
The third is Royal Thistle a patterned tufted in 50% Wool 50% Polypropylene in 10 colours.
Other ranges already established have had a major face lift.
Matrix has 8 new designs out of 10.
Orchard Park one of BMK's best known ranges and Royal Highland were each given 3 and Fjord a beautiful plain range has 4 new colours.
One Contract range Kinross has retained 2 original items and introduced 12.
These considerable changes reflect a strong marketing initiative.
It is one that is comprehensively supported with new point of sale with an emphasis on display that is vital in today's competitive market.
WHO ARE THEY…
Drew Watson Managing Director
Adrian Murphy Retail Director
John Hicks Contract Director
Bill McDonald Export Director
Terry Hamer Production Director
A VERY FISHY STORY
FLY tying has become an absorbing hobby for Jim Lister as he puts the finishing touches to another specimen during his lunch break in the BMK canteen.
Once ‘hooked’ this hobby dominates the spare time of many a dedicated fisherman and Jim is no exception.
Within 6 months he excels at the art.
To prove the point his shrimpfly caught the first salmon for 15 years when Kilmaurs Angling Club, of which he is chief fund raiser, visited a river near Crianlarich.
Jim has since caught 6 more salmon in Ayrshire rivers on the same fly.
The magazine ‘Practical Game Fishermen’ has also recognised Jim's expertise by awarding a £15 prize for his invention of a ‘Dubbin Twister’, a technical device to help with fly tying.
The irony of it all is that Jim does not eat fish.
Perhaps it gives them a false sense of security.
Whatever his secret, it works well as the 5 pound trout in the freezer at BMK discovered.
This one, a proud size for any self respecting fisher, is to be auctioned for charity.
Dick Morrow, Tufting Technician upgrades the last in a series of tufting machines at BMK with modular needles.
This state of the art technology will considerably reduce maintenance and increase durability of the needles three fold.
One of the rest rooms at BMK, discovered by the ‘Glenpatrick News’ as an impeccable source of information, advice and suggestion.
Taking a break are (from left) Tom Frew, Allan Morrison, Bill Kirkwood, Tom Adams and Willie Shaw.
It may be a contradiction in textile terms but these weavers spin a good yarn.
STODDARD AND BMK DESIGNERS IN JOINT ART EXHIBITION
DESIGNERS from both companies got together and half a joint exhibition of paintings in the Dick Institute, Kilmarnock which ran from 20th March-10th April, 1993.
Altogether eighteen artists took part, all of whom are either practising or have been carpet designers in the past.
Of these only a few are not currently employed by one or other of the companies.
The exhibition was called ‘Take Five Plus’ an original name developed three  years' ago when five designers clubbed together for their first exhibition.
Since then it has expanded and this year Stoddard designers were invited to participate.
It was organised by BMK designer Jane Gillies.
Many varied styles were on display with most of the paintings available for sale.
The successful outcome means that they intend to repeat it next year.
In the meantime, Jane Gillies and six other artists, this time not all from the company, are holding another exhibition in the Pitlochry Festival Theatre from 16th August-9th October, 1993.
On its way out — one of the two oil fired boilers being removed from BMK.
At 36 tons each it was an interesting engineering project to slide the old boilers across the floor of the boilerhouse on special rollers before being craned onto a low loader.
Andy Beckett changes the bobbins on a creel that holds a vast bank of coloured yarns for a Jacquard Axminster loom at BMK.
Marlene McConnell operates the newly positioned Gilbos winding machines in the weaving shed of BMK's Riverside factory.
NEW APPOINTMENTS
Terry Hamer was appointed Production Director at BMK in December.
Previously Terry worked at Stoddard Carpets as Production Services Director.
John Ayton has been appointed Chief Designer at BMK.
John has always worked with the Stoddard Group beginning with Widnells in 1960.
Prior to this appointment John was Design Development Manager at Elderslie.
BMK have appointed Robin Hurl as the new Sales Representative for the North East area.
He has many years experience in carpet retail selling.
Two appointments have been made within the Production Department at BMK.
Michael Conway is promoted to Production Controller and Pauline Halliday to Trainee Assistant Production Controller.
Michael has been with BMK for 5 years and was previously assistant to Production Control.
Pauline has been with the company for one year.
John McSporran has been promoted to become Sales Administration Manager.
He has been with BMK for 12 years and has previously worked in sales and production.
One of his first tasks is to introduce the computerised Sales Order Processing System.
Joylon Hooley joined BMK as Major Projects Manager for London in December.
He has been on the manufacturing side of the industry for over 30 years.
Previously Joylon was one of the original Directors with Mercia Weavers and lately a Director of Stockwell, Riley Hooley in London.
ROYAL INVITATION
In recognition of their charity work, Mr & Mrs Dick have been invited to attend the Royal Garden Party.
Willie Dick, Axminster Weaving Manager is the first to point out that the invitation is due to his wife's extensive work with the Red Cross.
Over the years she has managed to raise more support than any other branch in the West of Scotland.
The garden party held in July, took place at the Palace of Holyrood House.
The Dicks were amongst many others who have been recognised for their contribution.
TWO INTO ONE AT RUNCORN
IN the last six months substantial changes have taken place within Stoddard's manufacturing unit at Runcorn.
In a move for greater efficiency, the two factory buildings have been merged into one.
Brian Steven, Commercial Director responsible for activities at Runcorn, explained that the reorganisation was the inevitable result of fierce competition.
‘The response was to lower our cost base and increase efficiency levels.
This is in line with the tougher market conditions we are experiencing and like the hard hit retail sector, the contract and hospitality business (in which Runcorn majors) has also been squeezed.
In a move to achieve these goals we have merged two factory units into one.’
The entire backing plant was transferred during the Christmas holidays.
To accommodate this a new boiler house and latex tank were built.
Disruption was minimal with the backing plant up and running again in time for the factory re-opening.
Although floor space has  beed reduced by about one third, loss of overall production capacity has been minimal.
New storage areas have been created by raising the Planning floor to mezzanine level.
Yarn is now stored beneath with carpets being laid out and pattern matched on the Planning floor above.
Yarn stocks have also been reduced and the warehousing of stocked Prelude and Medley carpet ranges has moved to Elderslie.
Linda Dwyer, Mender, with carpet to be mended!
Although this implies fixing something that's broken, it is more to do with hand finishing a woven carpet.
Inevitably tufts are occasionally left out in the weaving process.
These are all replaced by hand, individually sewn.
Linda also helps with Final Inspection when required.
Looking like a standard industrial plant — albeit a large one — this is the home of Stoddard's factory in Runcorn.
It shows the length of the factory with the Design Studio on the right hand side.
All production is now concentrated in this one unit.
NEW PRODUCTS, INVESTMENT AND SALES BOOST LYLE
AS Lyles customer base grows to include an ever increasing number of independent retailers it places increasing marketing emphasis on their point of sale material.
Pattern books and display units such as tombolas branded with the Lyle Carpets logo have increased.
Cut length business has  noticably improved with resulting but welcome strains on their cutting table and warehouse storage and distribution systems.
Matching this positive development on the sales side, Lyle continue to invest in quality.
Modular tufting needles will replace individual needles on two more machines.
Their precision made accuracy will improve the surface finish of the carpet.
For efficiency a new electric eye stop motion system will be added to detect any broken ends to eliminate or reduce tufting without yarn.
Two machines already have variable speed drives.
Now a third will be provided with this facility by the addition of an electrical control panel.
A £20,000 straight bar is to be added to the tufting machine which produces Royal Deeside, Stoddard Templeton's new tufted range, to further enhance a perfect velvet finish.
The backing plant, already improved beyond recognition, is to be given an upgraded main drive for the latex applicator, and the cutting table already mentioned is to be upgraded to result in a 25% increase in the cut length capacity.
Development of new ranges has also continued at a considerable pace.
Tweedsdale, a 50% wool 50% polypropylene twist pile range is now joined by Super Tweedsdale with a considerably heavier face weight and superior quality.
Likewise a new range Iona is joined by Iona Supreme, again with a heavier weight, but this time in luxurious 80% wool 20% nylon.
Launch pad for these new ranges was the International Carpet Exhibition at the N.E.C. in Birmingham.
Lyles stand reported good interest and considerable activity at the show which they judged as a successful exhibition.
Training sessions for the sales office staff were moved after hours as the pressure to cope with both routine business and training became too strong.
It reflects a successful year for Lyle Carpets.
Visitors to Lyle on a factory tour stand on the final inspection platform.
They are being shown the end of the production line by Ian Morris (far right).
The group formed part of the twenty seven strong Sales Training Course run by Stoddard Templeton which visited Lyles in May during their three days of instruction.
Tour guides organised by Lyles consisted of Ronnie Gallacher, Eddie Docherty, Ian Morris and Gordon Bowers.
On arrival an initial briefing was given by Ronnie Gallacher to explain details of the tufting process followed by a Q and A session, before being shown the manufacturing method
Two or three courses are run by Stoddard Templeton each year for the staff of retail customers who require comprehensive sales training.
Over 500 candidates have completed the course so far and all have visited Lyles.
A happy surprise for Eddie Docherty, Stock Controller, on his 50th birthday.
This one he did no know about, a cake specially baked for the occasion by office colleagues.
It is pure coincidence that the date of his birthday was 1st April.
Martin Sloss has been promoted to become Assistant to the Finishing Manager.
INSITE TO RUNCORN
At the behest of the Glenpatrick News, Jenny Moffat, Factory Manager with Gerald Swift, Shift Supervisor as photographer, to walk about the factory to capture a few snap shots of everyday happenings as work continues.
George Swift, Axminster Weaver and Heather Dunne, Creeler, inspect the vast array of coloured yarns that are mounted on a frame (a creel) behind the loom.
Much of the preparation work of traditional weaving is labour intensive.
It is this which makes a patterned woven carpet something special, a point not always understood by the customer.
Leisl Martin, Wages and Purchase Ledger Clerk, completely surrounded by computers, keyboards, VDUs, typewriters and printers.
A fax and photo copier complete the electronic work station.
 Liesl also helps on Production Planning and Contract Sales when needed.
Helen Smith operates a card cutting machine, part of the Axminster Jacquard loom patterning process which prepares punched cards.
Once transferred to the loom, each card determines the colour of every tuft in the carpet.
Helen has been with the company for two years.
She can also turn her hand to mending and spotting.
Her brother, Paul Roberts, also works at Runcorn as a weaver.
LDP MOVES TO NEW ADDRESS
LOUIS DE POORTERE have moved their offices from the old factory complex in Warwick to smart new offices in Leamington Spa.
Customers can now be invited to view carpets in their new showroom, a facility not available in the old office.
It was one of the main reasons for the move and already has proved its worth with V.I.P. customers being able to see the large number of ranges fully displayed.
In addition to the showroom there are two rooms where Tony Fallon, Sales Manager and his five strong team run the business.
Tony with his ‘hands on’ approach to the practical side of moving and a view towards being economical, decided to do the whole move in house.
It was all hands on deck as they worked flat out over a weekend in March.
Somebody in the office proved how resourceful they were by organising the help of three local firemen and together they completed the job in time for Monday morning.
It was a D.I.Y.
move, complete with numerous boxes acquired over weeks before from local supermarkets.
Doubtless there were a few stiff backs and aching muscles to contend with after it was all finished.
Coincidentally Tony mentioned ‘that as a result of the move to central Leamington we are now fitter and healthier as we have all joined the local gym for keep fit sessions in the lunch hour.’
The new streamlined ‘Action Team’ at L.D.P. in Leamington Spa, headed by Tony Fallon, Sales Manager with (from right), Anna Harris, Sales Office Supervisor who has many years of experience with L.D.P.; Natalie Anstey with the all round versatility of youth; Cynthia Clark and Jan McGrath having strong accountancy/customer liaison skills and Cora Lake with a sales/marketing background.
A drawing of L.D.P.'s new 2nd floor office and showroom in Leamington Spa.
This drawing was reproduced on the front of their change of address cards.
LONG SERVICE AWARDS
TO reward a quarter of a century of loyal service with Stoddard Carpets Ltd, Group Chief Executive, Ralph Ellis, presented an inscribed watch to sixteen members of the workforce.
A special presentation was also made to Rex Wolfe, Northern Regional Sales Manager, for a remarkable forty years continuous service.
The ceremony took place in the works canteen during December as an important and established event in the annual calendar of the company.
All who have received watches in previous years were invited together with the families and friends of those being presented.
About seventy people attended.
In his speech Ralph Ellis paid tribute to their experience as a valuable asset which contributed to the success of the company.
Following the formal presentation tea and sandwiches were available as old friends and colleagues met.
To mark forty years of continuous service to the company Rex Wolfe, Northern Sales Manager of Stoddard Templeton, is presented with a set of crystal glasses and a decanter by Group Chief Executive, Ralph Ellis (left).
Records are made to be broken and Tom Walker, although holding the record for the longest serving employee within the group, may well qualify for an industry wide record if it were possible.
He is shown contrasting an original dipping pen — the kind he once used, with the computer he uses today.
The photograph — on 10th March marks the exact day on which he joined Stoddards fifty-two years previously.
Recipients of Long Service Awards (from left)— Front Row — Eleanor Park, Beryl Patterson,(Chief Executive, Ralph Ellis), Betty McIntosh, Margaret McLaughlan.
Centre Row — Ronald Reid, Janice George, Anne Meechan, Minnie Lindsay, May Welsh, Issobel Hendry, John Gralko.
Back Row — Rex Wolfe, George Kerr, Thomas Hay, Jim Hopkins, Eric Lang, Robert Tait.
louis de poortere
An eye catching display unit for L.D.P.'s popular range of stair carpeting has been introduced in a new marketing initiative.
Already well received by selected retail outlets, it is being used for window and in-store displays.
The flight of three stairs with a mahogany look finish and brass stair rods is proving a winner with customers.
L.D.P.'s stair runners are woven with borders in a variety of narrow widths.
They are one of only a few companies to offer stair carpeting in a choice of stocked ranges.
60TH BIRTHDAY SURPRISE
It was a 60th birthday surprise when Simon Fraser, Technical Director, entered his office and found the room full of well wishers and birthday decorations.
By careful arrangement he had been lured away while preparations were made.
He is shown, composed after the initial welcome shock, cutting his specially made cake.
The office was festooned with balloons, streamers, cards and a large 60th birthday banner.
Margo Leckie, Secretary, and Heather Gibney, Admin Assistant, both main conspirators to the surprise, had also organised a poster size cartoon of Simon with a birthday message.
APPOINTMENTS
The Design Studio at Elderslie have appointed Sharon Fernandez as Trainee Contract Designer.
Sharon with a B.A. Hons. in Textiles from Galashiels, previously worked for Courtaulds Automotive Textiles for three years.
She joined the Design Studio, Elderslie in June.
Mike Lane has been appointed Head Tuner at Elderslie.
He joined the company in June and brings with him 38 years of experience.
This includes 7 years with L.D.P. Warwick, where he was Head Tuner until its closure.
Mike has also worked abroad in Denmark and more recently in Portugal, setting up a new carpet factory.
His home is presently in Kidderminster from where he weekly commutes while he looks for a new house in the local area.
David Anderson has been promoted to Product Development Manager from his position as production Development Co-ordinator, a post held since 1987 when he joined the company.
During that period he obtained B.A. degree from the Open University.
He is currently the Scottish Secretary of the Society of Dyers and Colourists.
RETIRALS
At her farewell presentation, Jean Henry (centre) holds a bouquet of flowers given to her on retirement in February after twenty four years' service.
Jean worked in the same department as a Spotter and Darner since she joined the company in 1969.
As well as the presentation, Jean was also given a retirement night out by her friends a month or so before the actual date.
Since leaving she has visited her son in Australia spending six weeks ‘down under’ on a holiday that she always wanted to take.
Archie Watson retired in early July after thirty three  years' as a weaver.
For the last year Archie, under doctor's orders has been unable to work, but hopes to get back on his feet within a few following an operation.
Unable to come in for a presentation, Archie was visited at home to be given a retirement gift from the company and one from his colleagues.
Alec Watt began his work with Stoddard in 1948 and forty five  years' later he retired at the end of March.
This remarkable service makes him one of the longest serving employees and something to be proud of.
Apart from his initial training he has been a weaver all his time.
Although he has retired, the family connection remains, with his son Billy Watt who works as a Crabtree Tuner and his grandson Alec Watt in General Services.
With the cheque he received from the company, together with one from his workmates, Alec put these towards a long awaited trip to Australia.
A shorter trip for a long night out was also organised by friends before he retired with a private coach taking a very large party to Ayr.
After forty four years' service with the company David Smith, Shift Supervisor, retired on 19th February.
David started as a Tuner just a few days before Christmas in 1949.
He later became Supervisor in the Bonded Department before becoming Shift Supervisor.
David and his wife live in Howwood.
He has five grandsons and hopes to buy a garden hut with cheques he received as a leaving present from work mates and friends.
Margaret Gibson, Maintenance Cleaner, retired at the end of April after twenty three  years' with the company.
She first began working in the winding department and then in the Dye House before her thirteen  years' as a cleaner.
Everyone knows Margaret as she travelled between so many departments.
Her popularity was obvious when so many colleagues gathered for her farewell presentation at which she was given a crystal vase and some luggage as a leaving present.
Arthur Hawthorn (right), Threading Supervisor in the Crabtree weaving department has retired after thirty five years' service with the company.
He began on 1st November 1948 earning £4–7/ — for a forty five hour week in general service.
Just over a year later, already a trained weaver, he left to join another company for eight years before returning to complete thirty four years' continuous service.
He became New Spool Weaving Supervisor in 1969 and on the closure of the department transferred as Supervisor to the Crabtree Threading section.
Arthur comes from a large Elderslie family and is the last of his brothers and sisters to retire.
He was presented with a video recorder by his colleagues and friends who had gathered to wish him the very best on his retirement.
WEDDINGS
Summertime is wedding time for Tracey McConnell when she married Billy Laverty at High Parish Church, Johnstone on Saturday 26th June.
The reception was held in the Lynhurst Hotel, followed by a party that continued until late into the night.
For their honeymoon Tracey and Billy spent a week in Tenerife before returning to their new home in Johnstone.
Tracey works in the sales administration department.
Joan Keith was married to David Ritchie on 25th June at St Marks Church, Paisley.
Joan is Secretary to the Managing Director and Commercial Director and David, whom she has known for seven years, works with British Steel.
After the wedding a large reception and evening ceilidh was held at the Glynhill Hotel.
David kept the honeymoon as a special surprise, arranging everything including time off for Joan without her knowing.
It was not until they had just left the Church that Joan discovered they were going for two weeks to Tenerife.
They will return to their new home in Houston.
A JOINT SALES ADMIN PRODUCTION
CONGRATULATIONS to Donna and Craig Barrowman on the birth of their son, Greg.
The news of the happy event was of special interest to all in the sales-admin office as it is where both mother and father work — Donna as Customer Service Supervisor and Craig as Financial Accounts Manager on the admin side.
It was not long before the event was called ‘a joint sales admin production.’
Weighing 8lbs. 4oz.
Greg was born on 4th February at Paisley Maternity Hospital —‘two weeks early’ said Donna.
With fourteen family visitors on the first day, the hospital rebelled.
F rom then on visiting was rationed.
From then on visiting was rationed.
Now that Donna is back at work both sets of Grandparents are vying to share the care of Greg during the day.
Donna was delighted by the present of baby toys, clothes, etc. and in particular a generous cash present from her many friends in the office.
‘Greg is a lucky boy.’
Brand spanking new, £19,000 worth of boom truck being driven by Robert Pringle as he delivers rolls of carpet to the warehouse cutting table.
It is one of two new boom trucks delivered that day.
Suits off, jeans on, Kim Dyas, Business Development Manager for Stoddard Mercia, gets stuck in to sort out samples.
Gordon McKinnon, Bobbin Minder (holding bobbin) and Philip Mallard, Weaver, working on the new Jacquard Axminster carpet for Aberdeen Football Club.
Philip moved to Elderslie two years ago when L.D.P. Warwick factory was closed down.
He is now married and is the proud father of a three week old baby boy.
David McLeod, Carpet Planner, prepares one of twelve rolls of contract carpet — a large order for the George Hotel, Edinburgh
DOUBLE WINNER AT LYLE
Opening the 1993 season, Lyles Golf Club started its third year with two competitions on the same day at Braehead Golf Club, Alloa, on 16th April.
The morning was taken up with the Townhead Cup, a stroke play competition resulting in a close fought battle between Eddie Docherty and Andrew Beattie.
Eddie won by a single stroke only after a back nine countback.
With a good break for lunch they came out fully recharged and in fighting spirit for the afternoon's W. Byers Shield, a competition based on the Stableford system.
Once again it was the Club Secretary Eddie who came to the fore maintaining his good form and romping home a clear winner.
Definitely it was Eddie's day and with his fiftieth birthday just past the ‘auld yin’ as he described himself also admitted that he was now eligible for the Seniors' Tour!
Everyone then retired to the Clubhouse for some apres golf where this year's Captain, Dugald Ferguson presented Eddie with both trophies.
Prizes were also handed out which included head covers, gloves and golf balls, courtesy of Townhead Carpets who were thanked by the Captain for their generous contribution and support of the club.
Dugald Ferguson (right) Club Captain Lyles Golf Club, presents Eddie Docherty with his winning trophy.
Winners of BMK's 1993 Bowling Trophy from left are Michael King, Joseph King, Andrew Pelling and Ellen Mitchell.
The competition was enthusiastically supported by 48 players of the Bowling Club.
This meant a full programme on the afternoon of Saturday 27th February when the competition was held at the Galleon Sports Centre in Kilmarnock.
Match secretary William Stalker helped by Danny Cassidy organised the event with Gordon McIlwraith procuring the winning trophies.
Players were divided into 2 sections with the winners of each section meeting in the final.
Teams were evenly matched with experienced players and beginners carefully balanced.
Beginners luck stayed with Ellen Mitchell and Andrew Pelling as one year on from when they started both of them reached the final for the second time.
Ellen was also in the winning team last year which will make it a hat-trick if the 1993 season brings her another win.
GOLF CLUBBING AT BMK
Winners of the 1992 Singles Competition, David Lorimer (on right) is presented with the Burnside Cup, BMK's annual golf competition.
The Golf Club at BMK, captained by Jim Reid, has 38 members.
Their first outing for the 1993 season was held at Brunston Castle, Ayrshire — Scotland's newest Golf Club, where 16 members competed in a game won by Martin Docherty and Hugh Vernon.
The next outing will be at Loudon in September.
In the meantime the 1993 Singles Tournament continues for the Burnside Cup.
LYLE MAKE A FIVE-A-SIDE FOR STARTERS
This was a five-a-side that became six.
Team spirit it was that refused to leave out the reserves or was it because there was an accountant in one of the teams.
Anyhow — it was Lyles at play or post work recreation when they gathered two teams together on 3rd May and had a good game of football at the Cumbernauld Sports Centre.
Team ‘A’ for want of a better name consisted of Jim Cardin (it was he who spilled the beans to the Glenpatrick News but wasn't given much option), Eddie Bell, Michael Stewart, Leala Smith, Andy Beattie and John Turnbull.
Team ‘B’ with the big guns fielded John Stewart, Ian McCulloch, Eddie Docherty, Anne Raitt, Roberto Calierno and Garry Cowan.
There was much discussion still going on as to the final score with team ‘A’ credited with 16 points and team B either with 7 or 11.
Either way team A, everyone agrees, was the winner.
THE BUCHANAN TROPHY INTERCOMPANY GOLF TOURNAMENT 1993
The 1993 Buchanan Trophy was hosted by Lyle Carpets in early June at the recently built Westwood Hotel and Country Club, Cumbernauld.
Thirty two individuals took part in making it a large competition where endurance was required as much as playing skill.
For five and a half hours, competitors in teams of four, battled it out finishing in time for lunch late in the afternoon.
Eight games were played — each individual score counting towards the final result with Douglas Reyburn the clear winner at the end of the day.
Runners up were BMK with Lyle Carpets third and Stoddard in fourth position.
The course, designed and built to competition standard, proved testing for most.
There was a wide range of scores with the best individual score going to George McCallum of Douglas Reyburn with 37 points.
Presentation of the cup was made by Ian Proudfoot, Group Finance Director to Halbert Oliver, Captain of Douglas Reyburn's team as everyone gathered in the hotel after the match.
Buchanan Trophy — Stoddard Team
Ian McCulloch
Danny Sproull
Buchanan Trophy — BMK Team
Buchanan Trophy — D.R. Team
Buchanan Trophy — Lyle Team