

SPRED STANDARDS
1 PARISH CHAIRPERSON
Each group must appoint one person who will liaise with parish, families, volunteers and drivers.
He/she will also be responsible for replacing/recruiting volunteers and for the premises used.
2 PREPARATION PERIOD
Each integrated session must begin with a period of preparation lasting approximately 45–60 minutes.
3 SYMBOLIC CATECHESIS
Using only SPRED materials, the group leader will assume responsibility for this celebration within the small community of faith.
4 AGAPE
Each SPRED session will be brought to a gradual conclusion with the sharing of food.
5 ADULT PREPARATION SESSION
All integrated sessions must be preceded by an adult preparation session.
6 LITURGICAL EXPERIENCES
The ultimate goal of SPRED is the integration of handicapped people into their local parish community.
7 CO-ORDINATION BETWEEN SPRED GROUPS
This should be undertaken from time to time with assistance in recruiting, training expansion of groups and also with Liturgical experiences.
8 AGE GROUPS
Attention must be paid to the age of persons with a mental handicap so as to house them in a group which respects this.
The maximum number of persons in each group must be fourteen i.e. six handicapped persons and eight helpers.
Information for: PARENTS
About SPRED
SPRED exists to teach your child about FAITH.
You may wonder how this is possible?
How can it work?
It works because Christian faith is a lived reality — it is more caught than taught.
SPRED works by giving your son/daughter an experience of our faith life together rather than simply talking about it.
How does it work?
By forming relationships.
Your son/daughter will have a special relationship with one particular person who will always be there for him/her.
This bond of friendship ensures a climate of acceptance and warmth throughout the entire SPRED group.
Your son/daughter will experience joy, peace and togetherness.
How often are SPRED sessions?
The SPRED session for your son/daughter will be once a fortnight.
The sessions run from September through to June.
A calendar with dates as to when your son/daughter is due to attend will be issued to you.
How will your son/daughter get to the sessions?
DRIVERS
A member of the local parish community will collect your son/daughter from home, bring him/her to SPRED then bring him/her home at the end of the session.
When are the sessions?
Usually on a week night lasting from 7.00 p.m. — 9.00 p.m.
The session for children aged 6–10 is on a Saturday, 10.00 a.m.–12 noon.
How long does SPRED go on for?
The SPRED programme is life-long as we can never stop growing in our relationship with God.
How many people are in each SPRED group?
A total of 14.
Eight helpers and six friends (mentally handicapped persons).
The small numbers are to keep the groups manageable.
What is the aim of SPRED?
SPRED has the twofold aim of teaching your child the ways of your own faith, and integrating him/her into the local parish community.
GOAL OF PREPARATION TIME
to make the journey inwards
to relax
to be present to your friend
to be yourself
to create
to empty yourself
1
LIST what activities you have used in the past two sessions.
2
In what area do you need to be adventurous?
3
What area (sensorial, art etc) needs most development in your group?
4
Together, as a group, target and plan to put some new activities out next session.
Write your plans below and evaluate at the next C.P.S.
ACTIVITIES
List under the headings below what activities you put out at your last session.
Sensorial
Art and Craft
Tactile
Household
TODD
Todd is a fourteen year old boy who is moderately retarded, has cerebral palsy and is non-verbal.
At the time he prepared for and received Eucharist, he was the oldest of 32 residents of a home for severely handicapped children under Catholic auspices.
The home is also a residence for unwed mothers.
My first contact with Todd, was through a teacher in the program who had been providing catechesis for Todd.
She called the Diocesan Office of Special Religious Education to request help in preparing Todd for the Sacrament and mentioned the chaplain's reluctance to give Communion because of Todd's lack of verbal ability.
The chaplain called our office a few days later and seemed to be open to information offered regarding preparation for Todd's First Communion.
It was also noted that there was little family concern for Todd and since his coming to the home his parents had been divorced.
His catechist was also providing outings to parishes where liturgies adapted for mentally retarded persons were being held.
A very caring atmosphere exists in the home and this was observed in Todd's interaction with various staff members.
Catechesis oriented towards the eucharist lasted six months.
The catechist communicated with Todd by way of simple communication and a flannel board.
Todd showed delight in simple songs and reverence when invited to pray.
Attending Sunday Mass each week, he began motioning to receive the eucharist by reaching toward the alter and pointing to the picture of Jesus adhered to his communication board.
The celebration was planned by Todd's catechist, volunteer musicians and the administrator at the home.
It was held in the chapel of the home on a Sunday morning and attended by the staff, a couple of the older children, several unwed mothers and Todd's mother.
The songs chosen were simple and appropriate for the occasion.
Some of them had been used in the catechesis.
The readings were those of the Sunday and the lector was a member of the staff who proclaimed them well.
The pace of the celebrant was fast and his manner of celebration impersonal.
He did not make any effort to adapt any aspect of the liturgy and did not even mention the occasion.
The most beautiful part of the ceremony was the delight on Todd's face as he was wheeled close to the altar to receive the Eucharist with his arms outstretched.
Following the ceremony, a specially decorated cake and punch were served to staff and friends.
Todd's mother left immediately after the Liturgy despite efforts on the part of the staff to encourage her to stay.
Todd enjoyed the singing and the small gifts which he opened with his catechist's help.
Following this celebration he continues to receive catechesis and participate in the Sunday Eucharist.
I have come here today to call to mind our brothers and sisters who have special needs/who are mentally handicapped.
These people have spiritual needs as real as ours are, so we need to ask ourselves in this parish what are we doing to help them?
I work in a Programme called SPRED — Special Religious Education — which reaches out and welcomes handicapped children and adults into the life of the parish community.
We would like to set up a SPRED group in this area but we need helpers.
If you would like to know what is involved in being a helper, or if you would just like to know what SPRED is all about, come along to the information evening in the sacristy on Monday Evening at 7.30 p.m.
Using slides we will share with you what happens at a SPRED session.
You do NOT need to have had any previous experience of working with mentally handicapped people as training is given, but you do have to be over the age of 21.
Experience of starting groups in other parishes has shown that men are very shy about offering their services but some of our handicapped friends are men, and some of them are very physically handicapped, so we need some strong people in each group.
Each helper only works with one handicapped person.
If you are interested perhaps you would give me your name at the end of mass.
No commitment involved — just ‘come and see’.
DRIVERS
This is another way of offering your service.
We need drivers to bring people to and from a session.
This commitment is only once a fortnight so it is not too demanding.
If you have a car and feel that you might be able to help, please give your name and telephone number to one of the people you will see at the back of church with a board and pencil.
It is also helpful to have the names of any handicapped people in the area so if you are a parent or an aunt or a friend, again give the name of the person to someone with a board at the back of the church — age does not matter (our oldest handicapped SPRED friend is 70).
Our Psalm today said ‘God, in your goodness, you have made a home for the poor,’ but God needs people like you and me to make this home for everyone.
PLEASE RESPOND BY GIVING YOUR TIME GENEROUSLY.
THANK YOU.
There are three leadership roles within the SPRED community:—
1
The LEADER CATECHIST
2
The Activity Catechist
3
The Parish Chairperson
THE LEADER CATECHIST
guides the catechesis in the celebration room
directs the sharing at the agape
brings the group to a close
leads the adult session
THE ACTIVITY CATECHIST
prepares the preparation room and all the activities
guides the preparation session
prepares for agape
presents new activities at the adult session
THE PARISH CHAIRPERSON
visits the homes of the handicapped people
collects information
visits the homes of volunteers
speaks at masses or meetings writes for the newsletter
communicates with the parish priest
keeps files
keeps the finances
finds a place to meet
LITURGY
If one is seriously to provide catechesis for those handicapped in mind as well as body, one has to think through the implications.
Ironically enough, the most important pedagogical implication is hinted at in Canon 777 itself, in its statement that children are more fruitfully and deeply instructed through catechetical formation after the reception of First Communion.
The pedagogical principle that seems to  underlie this statement is that one must have an experience before one can adequately talk about it.
This is all the more true if one has a mental handicap.
One knows, but according to a concrete mode.
One appreciates, but according to a felt meaning.
And so the catechist who talks but does not relate, who explains but does not feel is faced with a handicapped person like the person described by St. Augustine in his First Catechetical Instruction .
‘It often happens that one who at first was listening gladly becomes exhausted and now opens his mouth no longer to give assent but to yawn, and even involuntarily gives signs that he wants to depart.
When we observe this, we should either refresh his mind by saying something with becoming liveliness or something calculated to arouse great wonder and amazement, or even grief and lamentation.
And preferably, let it be something concerning himself .’
One can only catechize a developmentally disabled person on the basis of the experience the person has.
If the person has been prepared for First Communion by being helped to develop a sense of belonging with others who believe, by being helped to develop a sense of the sacred, and by being helped to develop a sense of the presence of Jesus, and a desire to be in communion with Him and in communion with the others present, the experience of First Communion will be rich and powerful.
That experience recalled and evoked gives the clues for a more explicit catechesis that can last years, enriched always by participation in the Eucharistic Celebration.
The sine qua non , the absolute requirement, is the opportunity to belong to a community of believers and this is the reality of the parish community.
The main pastoral work is to provide small communities of faith where the experiences celebrated in the larger community can be reflected on and named.
In this small community the adjustments can be made for the handicapping conditions of the persons involved.
There has to be a rhythm between the small group where specialized catechesis can take place, and the large group where the sense of belonging in a broad and powerful manner can be experienced.
This is the rhythm that exists between catechesis and liturgy.
Catechesis is an initiation into liturgy.
It is global and awakens desire.
Liturgy is the experience of praise and communion that nourishes our spirits.
Catechesis takes the experience of liturgy, and evokes it to enrich the meaning of what has been experienced, and in its own way to express praise and thanksgiving.
When there is a rhythm between experience and insight, between catechesis and liturgy, those who are handicapped in mind and body can grow into contributing members of the community of faith.
TASK PREPARE A LITURGY
You are given the readings.
1
Decide what hymns you will use.
2
Work out gestures for the responsorial psalm and practise these as a group.
3
Talk about the readings and decide what you want to communicate through mime.
Practise the mimes for the two readings.
4
Think of the place where you have SPRED.
Work out how you would do the entry procession using as a guide the accompanying paper.
5
Work out the presentation of gifts deciding how you will change the focus from the Word to the Table.
6
Work out the communion procession or would you just remain seated?
EVOCATION OF THE HUMAN EXPERIENCE (E.H.E)
E.H.E. is considered under the three dimensions of:
1
Evocation
2
Human
3
Experience
1
Evocation is the name given to the work of drawing out the life experience of each person by using the symbol.
The symbol is the key used to unlock a life experience that is related to the goal of the session.
The evocation for both the CPS and Integrated Session is always guided.
Evocation is work.
For the work to flow smoothly at the integrated session the homework of the leader catechist, activity catechist and the helper catechists must be done well.
This means that each one of them must know what human experience they each must share when it comes to the time of evocation.
The quality of the story shared, in relation to the goal, is the hinge on which the door of the symbolic progression hangs.
Each of the catechists must be in touch with their own life experience, and in particular the helper catechists need to know something of the life history of their friends so that a real historical event can be shared when it comes to the time for each one to share parts of their personal story — for that is where God speaks to each one of us.
In this regard it can be seen that in order for the catechesis to work effectively the various members of the group have to work as a team — the L.C. is responsible for presenting the symbol well; having a good story that echoes the goal clearly; and providing the opportunity for EACH person to share their story.
The A.C. is also to share a relevant simple story that is clearly related to the goal.
The H.C. 's, while also sharing a goal orientated human experience, must also be in a position to tell a story from the life of their friend that also ties in with the goal.
The success of the E.H.E. is therefore dependent on a number of factors:
1
Knowing that the evocation is to be worked at.
2
L.C. knowing the goal and directing the evocation towards it.
3
L.C. having a good story to open the door to the path of the symbolic progression.
4
L.C. presenting the symbol well i.e. display, handling, quality of symbol.
5
A.C. to also share a goal-related story.
6
H.C.
to also share a goal-related story.
7
H.C.
to know story from life of friend that is authentic and clearly related to the goal of the session.
8
Each person in the group to share story.
The L.C. is not responsible for finding out relevant life stories of our friends — that is the responsibility of each particular H.C.
The L.C. is responsible for creating a caring, listening environment that yields an opportunity for each person to share their own unique story.
2 Human
The Experiences evoked are human ones i.e. experiences that all of us can relate to and share because we are all ‘Jock Thampson's bairns’.
The experiences the catechists have are not different from those of our friends i.e. being cared for, sharing together etc.
The secret is to be in touch with one's own life experience so that one may value and appreciate the life experience of the other members of the group.
God is revealed through or human experience.
The more in touch we are with our own life experience, the greater chance we will have of listening to God screaming his love for us in the ordinary events of our lives.
3 Experience
What is evoked comes from the past.
Only evocation of an experiential event will be the seed that will flower into knowledge of Jesus Christ.
This is because our friends do not possess the capacity to project into the future or understand concepts.
As such, knowledge of each person's personal experience is the field where the treasure of Jesus christ will be ‘discovered’.
It is perhaps obvious to state that it is essential for all stories shared to be authentic i.e. not to make up stories — for if stories are fabricated the work of passing on the flame of faith will not happen.
Each of us must feel the evocation touching our hearts — for this is where God reveals his presence among us.
BREAD OF LIFE
To become aware that Jesus is our Bread of Life.
In the Eucharist we receive nourishment and strengthening for our lives.
A loaf of bread.
Evocation of the human experience
Have an uncut loaf of bread under a cloth.
Uncover the loaf and let everyone admire the bread.
Carry it around so that each one can touch and smell it.
Talk about the kinds of bread each likes — ways they like to eat it.
Talk about being hungry e.g. —
When I am hungry I love to eat a piece of bread.
Do you? etc.
After I have eaten it I feel satisfied.
Encourage children and adults to share their experiences.
Interiorization
When we are hungry we love to eat bread.
when we eat bread we feel happy.
We are not hungry any more.
We feel satisfied.
We are not hungry any longer.
Liturgical Evocation
At Mass we gather around the Lord's Table.
The Priest [or Eucharistic minister]gives us the Holy Bread to eat.
When we eat the Holy Bread, Jesus is with us.
Biblical Evocation
One day Jesus said to his friends: I am the Bread of Life I am the living Bread which has come down from heaven Anyone who eats this bread Shall live for .John 6:48,51
Message
blank space , Jesus says to you today:
I give you my Bread to eat.
JOY TO THE WORLD — THE LORD HAS COME
Introduction
a.
Feedback from previous session
The goal of this session is to become aware that the coming of Jesus to our lives — not only at Christmas, but throughout the year — can transform us, so that we can live more fully and joyfully.
With His Spirit we are enabled to praise God and say with the heavenly host, ‘Glory to God in highest heaven’.
Initiation into the sign of the mystery
Joy to the world — the Lord has come a.
Literary selection: ‘Without You’ by Adrian Henri.
Deepening of the sign of the mystery
Joy to the World — the Lord has come.
Interiorization
1.
Adrian Henri ponders on what life would be like without his loved one — how colourless, dull and ordinary it would seem.
How different it is when someone, perhaps someone close to us, perhaps someone we have never met, helps us to view the world through different eyes.
Our awareness of the simplest thing or event is heightened and we feel joyful and full of thankfulness.
Has there been a time when someone has helped you to see the world in a different way?
Silent reflection.
Liturgical Evocation
1.
A time of sharing.
When we gather together in Church on christmas Day around the alter with the priest we are full of joy.
With our family and friends we sing our praises to God and in our prayers we say thank you that Jesus has come into the world to be with us for ever and ever.
Biblical Evocation
We are transformed because Jesus came into our lives at Christmas.
The Book of God's Word tells us about Jesus' birth:
‘The angel said, ‘Do not be afraid, I bring you good news of great joy that will be for all people.
Today in the town of David a Saviour has been born to you; he is Christ the Lord.’’
(Luke 2:10,11)
Action and Message
Jesus says to you today, Rejoice…for I have come to be with you, now and for ever.
Personal Expression
A song of praise and joy —‘Joy to the world’, or ‘Hark the Herald angels sing’ or similar.
Preparation for the integrated session (including symbol)
WITHOUT YOU by Adrian Henri
Without you every morning would be like going back to work after a holiday.
Without you I couldn't stand the smell of the East Lancs Road.
Without you ghost ferries would cross the Mersey manned by skeleton crews.
Without you I'd probably feel happy and have more money and time and nothing to do with it.
Without you I'd have to leave my stillborn poems on other people's doorsteps, wrapped in brown paper.
Without you there'd never be sauce to put on sausage butties.
Without you plastic flowers in shop windows would just be plastic flowers in shop windows.
Without you I'd spend my summers picking morosely over the remains of train crashes.
Without you white birds would wrench themselves free from my paintings and fly off dripping blood into the night.
Without you green apples wouldn't taste greener.
Without you mothers wouldn't let their children play out after tea.
Without you every musician in the world would forget how to play the blues.
Without you Public Houses would be public again.
Without you the Sunday Times colour supplement would come out black-and-white.
Without you indifferent colonels would shrug their shoulders and press the button.
Without you they'd stop changing the flowers in  Piccadilly Gardens.
Without you Clark Kent would forget how to become Superman.
Without you Sunshine Breakfast would only consist of Cornflakes.
Without you there'd be no colour in Magic colouring books.
Without you Mahler's 8th would only be performed by street musicians in derelict houses.
Without you they'd forget to put the salt in every packet of crisps.
Without you it would be an offence punishable by a fine of up to £200 or two months imprisonment to be found in possession of curry powder.
Without you riot police are massing in quiet side streets.
Without you all streets would be one way the other way.
Without you there'd be no one not to kiss goodnight when we quarrel.
Without you the first martian would turn round and go away again.
Without you they'd forget to change the weather.
Without you blind men would sell unlucky heather.
Without you there would be no landscapes/ no stations/ no houses/no chipshops/ no quiet villages/ no seagulls on beaches/ no hopscotch on pavements/ no night/ no morning/ there'd be no city no country
Without You
JOY TO THE WORLD — THE LORD HAS COME
Goal
The goal of this session is to become aware that the coming of Jesus to our lives — not only at Christmas, but throughout the year — can transform us, so that we can live more fully and joyfully.
With his Spirit we are enabled to praise God and say with the heavenly host, ‘Glory to God in highest heaven.’
Preparation
A box with beautiful decorations inside — e.g. shiny garland, tinsel strand, a silver star and a Christmas candle; also a nativity scene for showing later in the session.
Celebration Room
a.
Evocation of the human experience
Let's see what I have in the box —(bring out the decorations one by one, letting everyone admire them).
Aren't they lovely?
See how they shine.
What beautiful colours.
When we put them up in our house, they make everything look quite different.
When we see the shops and the streets with their decorations and shining lights everything is transformed.
Share stories about places and people being different at Christmas time, how lovely everything looks and how happy people are.
b.
Interiorization
Light the Christmas candle and bring in the nativity scene, with perhaps everyone sharing in setting it up.
Quietly look at the scene.
‘When we see the lights at Christmas time we are reminded that Jesus is with us, we are happy for we find new life.’
c.
Liturgical Evocation
When we gather together in church on Christmas Day around the altar with the priest we are full of joy.
With our family and our friends we sing our praises to God and in our prayers we say thank you that Jesus has come into the world to be with us for ever and ever.
d.
Biblical Evocation
We are transformed because Jesus came into our lives at Christmas.
The Book of God's Word tells us about Jesus' birth:
‘The angel said, ‘Do not be afraid, I bring you good news of great joy that will be for all people.
Today in the town of David a Saviour has been born to you; he is christ the Lord.’’
(Luke 2: 10, II)
e.
Action and message
Jesus says to you today, Rejoice…for I have come to be with you, now and for ever.
f.
Personal Expression
A song of praise and joy —‘Joy to the world’ or ‘Hark the Herald Angels Sing’or similar.
CATECHIST PREPARATION SESSION
For this session the Celebration room has to be the sacred place it is at the integrated session.
1
Do I see the connection between the catechist and integrated sessions?
2
Have I prepared reading the story before the session?
3
Have I written out the Word of God before the session?
4
Do I appreciate that I have to lead my group to see the story as symbol?
5
Do I understand that it is a HUMAN EXPERIENCE the symbol evokes?
6
Do I guide the Feedback Session so that we grow from one session to another?
7
Am I aware that each catechist shares in the feedback?
8
Have I a good tape of quiet music for the reflection time?
9
Does the reflection time last 15–20 minutes?
10
Does each person in my group share?
11
Do I stop any discussion that may happen at the sharing?
12
Have I prepared gestures for the hymn?
A QUICK CHECKLIST FOR A LEADER CATECHIST
THE INTEGRATED SESSION
1
Is the Celebration Room a SACRED SPACE?
2
Is my symbol for the integrated session of good quality and well presented?
3
do I KNOW the interiorization?
4
Do I PROCLAIM the word of God with reverence?
5
Do I give the message slowly, carefully, prayerfully?
6
Is my Liturgical Evocation based on experience the group have shared?
7
Is my tape ready at the right place for the hymn?
8
Have I QUIET MUSIC ready to REST in at the end of the hymn?
TERMS USED
catechist — person who helps another to understand the good news of God's revelation.
Helper Catechist — in SPRED, the person who befriends a mentally disabled person and assists that person, as an equal, to receive and respond to God's revelation.
Activity Catechist — the person who ensures that all friends and helpers in the group have what they need to prepare themselves for the sacred experience — both in equipment and atmosphere.
Leader catechist — the person who presents to the whole group the symbol, the teaching (catechesis) of the session, the sacred experience and the Word of God.
Parish Chairperson — one of the helper catechists who undertakes to be the link with the clergy and the parish community.
Catechist Preparation Session — the first week of each session — when the group of eight helpers gathers together to prepare, reflect and share about what will be presented to the whole group.
Integrated Session — the second week of each session — when the whole group — friends and helpers — gathers together for the sharing of a sacred experience as the family of God.
Preparation room — the first room (or space) in which we gather and in which we do our quietening activities: it is also the place where we conclude our session round the table, preparing to go forward
Celebration room — the room (or space) in which the catechists and sacred experience take place: where we gather round the Word of God and receive his message through symbol and example.
Agapé — the word used in the New testament for the gathering of the community around the table to share food, friendship, care and the presence of Jesus.
Used in SPRED to enrich our understanding of our gathering together, and an important part of both sessions.
THE FORM OF A SESSION.
Week 1: Helpers Preparation Session
Discussion on previous session (‘feedback’)
Reflection on goal and message of present session
Evoking and sharing human experience;
Sharing liturgy, scripture, song and silence;
Preparation for the full session which follows;
Sharing food and friendship at table
Week 2: Session for the Whole Group
PREPARATION
Welcome and greeting for [and by]each individual;
Choice of activity to absorb, calm and create peace;
Silence activity — gathering of the group: a bridge between preparing and receiving, between individual and community; a personal invitation to move on to the sacred experience.
CELEBRATION — a Sacred Space, a Special Place
Presentation of the symbol, evoking and sharing human experience;
Identifying the common thread and acknowledging the presence of God in our lives;
Recalling specific moments of the worshipping community's relationship to God;
SCRIPTURE — an appropriate short reading followed by a personal message given to each individual;
Response expressed through song and gesture;
Silence for reflection, peace and absorbing the message.
AGAPE/1 — preparation of table shared by all, sharing of friendship, food and story.
G00DBYE — a song to express unity and promise of return.
A clear statement to each person about the next meeting.
Courteous farewells.
‘Every person no matter how handicapped, has been called by Christ to share in the Same divine life’(Pope Paul VI)
SPRED is a programme that reaches out and welcomes mentally handicapped children, adolescents, young adults, and adults into the local parish community.
SPRED groups are formed locally, and helpers are volunteers from the community.
No previous qualification or experience is required, as training is provided.
Helpers must be over the age of twenty-one.
When people with a mental handicap are offered relationships within a sacred context, they can grow both humanly and spiritually.
Growth in faith takes place.
To achieve this growth in faith, the SPRED programme communicates the Gospel message within small communities of believing people.
Within these small communities, each person with a mental handicap has a special friend.
We cannot EXPLAIN to the disabled person the presence of God among us.
We cannot EXPLAIN love.
This is something the disabled person will EXPERIENCE and KNOW through the atmosphere of peace, joy and unity present in the community.
The human development of the disabled person is highly respected, so SPRED groups are organised according to four age levels: 6–10 year olds; 11–16 year olds: 17–21 year olds: 22 and over.
Growth in faith is a life-long event, so there is no age limit.
A Message from Bishop Christopher
‘I would like to recommend very strongly the S.P.R.E.D. Programme and the Apostolate of those who are promoting the use across this diocese.
It is important that all handicapped people feel that they belong to our praying, believing and worshipping communities; S.P.R.E.D. enables that to happen.’
The sessions for the 22+ age group are based on the Biblical–Liturgical Axes of Salvation and Sanctification.
In reply to his own question, ‘What shall I render to the Lord for all his bounty to me?’ the psalmist can only receive with gratitude what Yahweh freely gives him and rededicate himself: ‘I will lift up the cup of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord, I will pay my vows to the Lord in the presence of his people.’
(Psalm 116:12)
This attitude of praise and thanksgiving is one that will become more vibrant within us as we experience the mystery of salvation through these catechetical sessions.
We will discover the saving power of Jesus in the simplest of human experiences.
We will sense the presence of Jesus within us and among us and like the psalmist want to rededicate ourselves realizing all that the Lord has done for us.
We identify with Luke's account of the change that came over Zacchaeus.
‘And Jesus said to him, ‘Today salvation has come to this house’…’
(Lk 19.9. 15:1–32 Our response is one of trust in which the exodus provides a pattern: ‘And Moses said to the people, ‘Fear not, stand firm and see the salvation of the Lord which He will work for you today…
The Lord will be with you: you have only to be still’’(Exodus 14:13)
We come to realise salvation and sanctification as gift from God.
We hope in the Lord's love and grace.
As Paul's letter to Titus reminds us, ‘But when the kindness and love of God our Saviour appeared he saved us: not because of any righteous deeds we had done but because of his mercy.
He saved us through the baptism of new birth and renewal by the Holy Spirit.
This Spirit He lavished on us through Jesus Christ our Saviour.’
(Titus 3:4–7)
Our task and privilege is to take the time and make a serious effort to reflect on our lives and to realise anew, the saving and sanctifying power of God.
We do so in trust, knowing the joy and fulfilment that comes to those who welcome the Word.
Jesus.
THE MESSAGE OF JESUS TO YOU GLASGOW LITURGY WORKSHOP NOV. '92
WORKING OUT THE MESSAGE
1
Read the passages aloud.
2
Discuss together…what strikes you about the readings?…
‘Isn't that interesting/ I was struck by…’
3
Write down all the verbs/actions words.
Jesus TOUCHED the eyes of the blind man.
The people were AMAZED…
NOTE WHAT IS MOST STRIKING.
DO THIS TOGETHER.
‘PLAY’ with the message…what is the essence of these passages?
What is Jesus saying?
Guidelines for writing the message
1
Must be PERSONAL —‘Jesus says to you today…’
2
Must be in the PRESENT TENSE 
I AM GIVING you life
I AM FILLING you with Love
NOT I will give you life
3
It is Jesus speaking.
4
Delivery…
Poetry.
Gestures must convey the message for those friends who cannot appreciate words.
Gestures…
Head, face, hands, arms, legs, body posture.
5
Quality of Presence.
GROUPS TO BE CO-ORDINATED AT PARISH MASS
1
ENTRANCE PROCESSION.
(One person responsible)
2
OFFERTORY PROCESSION.
(One person in charge)
3
MUSIC GROUP
4
MIME GROUP
5
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (The leader os the SPRED group doing this will be responsible)
6
COMMUNION (You may need to organise eucharistic ministers)
One person needs to have overall responsibility and to be ready to ‘nod’ to leaders of each of the groups when it is their ‘time’.
GUIDELINES FOR ENTRANCE PROCESSION
In procession you can carry a cross, the Book and candles for the altar.
This would involve four handicapped people and four helpers.
If you have not enough people, only use one candle…or none.
For each item, a friend and helper are involved and walk together.
1
Gather group at the appropriate place (whatever is usual in parish)
2
KNOW beforehand where to put the cross when you reach the sanctuary and where you are going to sit when you have put the cross in place.
3
Put the Book on the altar and again know where your places are in church.
4
Put candles on altar where they usually go and again know where your places are in church.
If priest/parish usually process at end of mass, be ready to go with friend for cross and book.
It is best NOT to use people whose handicap is so severe that they would be awkward being involved in this procession.
GUIDELINES FOR COMMUNION
The ideal is to eat and drink at the Lord's table.
(symbolic action should not have to be explained!)
However, in many of our parishes, we only receive the bread.
One of the elements in good liturgy is participation, so it is important that our handicapped friends do not lose the sacredness of this moment through long queues.
Have as many ministers of the Eucharist as possible to help.
GUIDELINES FOR MUSIC GROUP
1
Have words of hymns printed and handed out as people enter the church.
2
It is good to play quiet restful music as the parish assembles.
This calms and readies people for a sacred experience.
3
ENTRANCE HYMN: Choose something processional with a chorus.
4
RESPONSORIAL PSALM: Do not begin this until the group who are leading the congregation in gesture are assembled in the sanctuary and ready.
5
ALLELUIA VERSE: Allow a short space of silence after the psalm before beginning this.
6
PROCESSION OF GIFTS: As soon as the prayers of the faithful are finished, begin to play some quiet, peaceful music to accompany the procession of gifts.
7
If Eucharistic Prayer III for CHILDREN is used by the priest, there is a sung refrain.
The priest says, ‘We thank you and sing:’ The response is, ‘Father we adore you…’
OR ‘God is so good’ OR some other suitable short refrain.
The priest repeats this response twice more and the congregation respond in song.
8
COMMUNION.
Play quiet music all during the distribution of communion.
Only when everyone has received communion, begin the hymn.
9
RECESSIONAL: A joyous, rousing hymn is good to leave with.
GUIDELINES FOR MIME GROUP
1
When the priest has said the opening prayer and the congregation sit down, the mime group go forward to the altar and all bow together.
Then they take up their positions, the reader going to the  lectern .
When the reading is finished, the mime group and the reader come to the front and bow together again.
2
The same procedure is followed for the Gospel.
The Gospel comes after the Alleluia verse.
3
The gestures MUST communicate the MESSAGE of the Word of God for that day.
This therefore is a most solemn and prayer-filled moment.
To communicate the Word effectively, the mime group must be steeped in the WORD and be aware of what they are trying to communicate non-verbally.
4
It is the mission of the church to proclaim the Word and if some of our friends cannot receive the spoken word, we have a responsibility to find ways and means within a sacred context of doing this.
Faces, bodies, movement  s and gestures become the vehicle for passing on God's Word.
GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCESSION OF GIFTS
The procession of gifts takes place after the Prayers of Intercession.
The music group should play quiet music.
Have a table with gifts of BREAD AND WINE (CHALICE) not too far from the altar.
A very long aisle is too far for the friends to walk down.
On table have bread and wine (Chalice).
The Chalice can be empty if it is too difficult for friends to carry with wine in it.
Always have two people to carry each gift i.e. two for the bread and two for the chalice; a friend and catechist.
FRIEND and helper carry bread while all watch the procession.
The bread is being offered on behalf of the whole community so it should be held up that all may see.
The bearers of the bread should walk slowly.
Same for the chalice.
The slowness and deliberateness of the act of offering is symbolic of self-giving; if too rushed, the community miss what the action signifies.
It is best NOT to sing a hymn during this procession so that the emphasis is on the action of GIVING.
Use quiet music on a tape or played by the organ or music group.
GUIDELINES FOR GROUP DOING THE RESPONSORIAL PSALM
1
Allow a short period of silence when the first reading is finished.
2
Then the co-ordinator of the group should stand and the group follow.
They form a line at the front of the sanctuary and bow together.
3
The co-ordinator leads the group into the sanctuary and the group arranges itself in a semi-circle facing the congregation.
4
Gestures are used for the chorus of the hymn as at a SPRED session.
During the verses join hands and sway to the music.
5
The prayerfulness of the gestures draws the congregation to pray the psalm.
6
Leave the sanctuary slowly and reverently, remembering to bow again.
GLASGOW SPRED NEWSLETTER NUMBER 2 NOVEMBER 1986
In his book, MODELS OF REVELATION, Avery Dulles described symbolism as having four properties.
1
Symbolism gives PARTICIPATORY knowledge — that is it involves the self.
A symbol is never a mere object.
It speaks to us, opening up new horizons.
We engage with symbols.
2
Symbols have power to TRANSFORM.
They leave people different, shifting their centre of awareness and changing their values.
Whether it is just looked at or heard, acted out or painted, a symbol arouses not only thought but delight, fear, awe, horror and the rest
3
Symbolism has a powerful influence on COMMITMENT and BEHAVIOUR.
It stirs the imagination, releases hidden energies in the soul, gives strength and stability to the personality and arouses the will to consistent committed action.
For example, a national flag or anthem has symbolic power to instill sentiments of patriotism and to motivate citizens to heroic deeds on behalf of their country.
4
A symbol calls us into the realms of MYSTERY, introduces us into an awareness which cannot be attained by mere thought.
The symbol discloses, not by presenting its meaning for inspection, but by drawing us into its own movement, thereby carrying us out of ourselves.
With these four properties of symbol in mind, let us reflect on some of the objects we have used in our SPRED sessions — a loaf of bread, a picture, a key, an invitation, sounds of birds.
These symbols were doing in us, and in our friends.
the work described above — PARTICIPATION.
They changed us — TRANSFORMATION.
They influenced our BEHAVIOUR and they drew us into the realms of MYSTERY.
At the end of the adult session, when the group are considering the symbol to be used the following week, the catechists have the opportunity to allow the symbol to ‘do its work’.
Some of our friends have no speech, but if we have thought about the symbol, we will be able to speak on behalf of our friends.
They, in turn, will respond in their own way — a smile, a touch, a move of the head.
Those who can speak, are given time and encouraged to respond with their own story.
For example, John responded to the FUR with the story of his dog whom he loves.
Anne responded to the QUIET STILLNESS with the story of her father who is dead.
Each one PARTICIPATES and each one is CHANGED.
No one will BE the same from now on having been drawn into the realms of mystery and taken to new depths.
The symbol EVOKES or CALLS TO MIND or TOUCHES something that is in our subconscious, asleep in our memories.
We all know how the smell of such and such a flower or soap or tree conjures up memories of an incident in our past life.
It may even evoke a memory of a place.
What has happened is that something latent within us has been stirred to new life, and that scent, or whatever, has been the symbolic object for us, leading us beyond itself to a personal memory.
Why we store some things in our subconscious and discard others is part of the mystery of life but what stays there, must have some significance.
When the leader presents the symbol, we let this personal memory — our own story — come to consciousness, and we share that with our faith-community.
We share a part of our very selves.
This is a sacred moment.
At the adult session, the literary passage (story) is used as the symbol.
The story stirs something in our memory.
We take time to ponder and bring to consciousness whatever is evoked.
We remember a meal with our family; visiting an old person; ‘falling-out and falling-in’ with others — and we realise that these human experiences, so  trifling in themselves, were precisely the situations permeated with God's presence.
‘Remember, I am with you ALWAYS.’
(Matt.28)
We then share that memory with our faith-community in all simplicity.
No competition here.
What has been a human event is now seen as sacred.
How, therefore, can it be stupid or less good than another's experience?
We disbelieve in God's goodness in our lives if we persist in this thinking.
As both the adult and integrated sessions, this sharing of our stories is followed by the reading from the Word of God and the message.
The human experience evoked just previously, is like a colourful stone examined and enjoyed and played with by the group,.
but when held up in the light of the Word, it is shown to be not just merely a stone, but a jewel of great beauty.
Without the light of the Gospel, it would never be seen in its true depths, but would remain a coloured stone, beautiful, but not bright with a message of God shining within it.
The theology of SPRED is that every human experience contains a hidden truth about God, His plan, His world and our lives.