

a guide to the new simplified divorce procedure in scotland
WHAT IS SIMPLIFIED DIVORCE PROCEDURE?
You now may be able to get a divorce in Scotland using a simplified procedure — a ‘do-it-yourself’ method — if the divorce is not contested.
It is a simple and much cheaper method.
You can do what is necessary yourself or with free assistance from a Citizen's Advice Bureau (CAB) or Sheriff Clerk's Office.
You don't need a solicitor although you may consult one if you wish.
First, check whether you qualify.
If you think you do and you want to use the simplified divorce procedure please complete the tear-off portion on the last page of this leaflet and send it to the address shown.
If you think you don't qualify, you may need to apply for a divorce in the ordinary way and you should consult a solicitor.
If you have any questions about what is involved or whether you qualify ask your nearest Citizen's Advice Bureau, Sheriff Clerk's Office (at the Sheriff Court) or the Court of Session, Divorce Section (SP), Parliament House, Edinburgh EH1 1 RQ (Tel. 031 225 2595 Ext. 316).
DO I QUALIFY?
You may qualify for a ‘do-it-yourself’ divorce if all the conditions below are met:
Scotland
You or your husband or wife must either think of Scotland as your permanent home or have lived in Scotland for at least one year immediately before you apply for divorce.
Reason for divorce
Your marriage must have broken down irretrievably because you and your husband or wife have lived apart either for at least two years and your husband or wife will consent to the divorce in writing or for at least five years.
If you wish to apply for a divorce for any other reason, you should consult a solicitor or ask advice from your nearest CAB.
No children under 16
There must be no children of the marriage under the age of 16.
This includes adopted children or children accepted into the family.
No money problems
Neither you nor your husband or wife may claim for any lump sum or maintenance payment.
Think this over carefully and read the section overleaf headed ‘Money’ before you decide.
Divorce may result in the loss of certain property rights.
You should seek advice about this if you are in any doubt.
No mental disability
There must be no sign that your husband or wife is unable to manage his or her affairs because of mental illness or mental handicap.
No other court proceedings
There must be no other court proceedings under way which might result in the end of your marriage.
Important Note: The ‘do-it-yourself– procedure is only for uncontested divorces.
Your husband or wife must not object to the divorce for any reason.
If there is an objection at any stage the simplified procedure will stop.
OTHER POINTS YOU SHOULD CONSIDER BEFORE APPLYING
Money
You can only apply if money is not an issue at the time of the divorce.
This means that neither you nor your husband or wife wishes to ask for:
maintenance (called periodical allowance)— a regular weekly or monthly payment of money and/or
a lump sum (called a capital sum).
This could be either because you have reached a voluntary agreement between yourselves regarding money or because you have both agreed on a clean financial break.
Think it over carefully and if necessary seek advice on this question from a solicitor or CAB.
Your decision about a lump sum will be final once the divorce is granted.
However, if your financial circumstances change after divorce, you may be able to get maintenance with the help of a solicitor.
Separation
You and your husband or wife must have lived apart either for at least two years and your husband or wife consents to the divorce in writing or for at least five years.
This period must be completed before the application is made and must be without a break.
There is only one exception, if during the separation period you have lived together temporarily for not more than six months in all, in a final attempt to make the marriage work, you may still be eligible to apply for a divorce under the simplified procedure.
For example, if during the separation period you have attempted a reconciliation for five months then you must wait
either two years and five months from the date of the original separation (and obtain the consent of your husband or wife)
or five years and five months from the date of the original separation
before applying for a divorce.
Reconciliation
Is there a reasonable chance that you and your husband or wife can settle your differences and resume normal married life?
If you are satisfied that there is now no possibility of your marriage succeeding, you must state on the application that there is no prospect of reconciliation and that you consider that your marriage has broken down irretrievably.
Consent
(Two year cases only) If you are applying for a divorce because you and your husband or wife have lived apart for at least two years, your husband or wife must also consent to the divorce — IN WRITING (a form is supplied for this).
Financial Hardship
(Five year cases only) If you are applying for a divorce because you have lived apart from your husband or wife for at least five years, your application would not be granted if it meant that your husband or wife would suffer grave financial hardship.
Change of Mind
The proceedings can be stopped at any point before the divorce is granted if you change your mind, but you must tell the Court of Session without delay.
Refund of Court Fee
Once the application has been registered the court fee cannot be refunded.
Legal Advice and Assistance
You may be entitled to receive advice and assistance from a solicitor under the Legal Advice and Assistance Scheme.
Witness
In certain circumstances the Court may require a witness (not your husband or wife) to confirm the facts stated in your application.
Should this need arise, the witness must be prepared to sign a form (called an Affidavit) before a Justice of the Peace, Notary Public or Commissioner for Oaths.
WHAT WILL IT COST?
The cost of an application under the simplified procedure is £40.
An additional payment may be asked for if there are difficulties in posting forms to your husband or wife.
You may not need to pay these fees — for example, if you are on supplementary benefit OR on family income supplement OR receiving advice and assistance from a solicitor under the Legal Advice and Assistance Scheme.
Check the leaflet that comes with this one — FEE EXEMPTION (DO-IT-YOURSELF DIVORCE)— to see if you are exempt.
(Note: You may also have to pay a fee if you go to a notary public or commissioner for oaths to sign your affidavit.
This service is free if you go to a justice of the peace).
CAN I CLAIM EXPENSES?
You cannot claim from your husband or wife any out of pocket expenses you may incur under the simplified procedure.
WHAT WILL I HAVE TO DO?
If you qualify and wish to apply for a divorce: send for an application form using the tear-off part of this leaflet, but keep the remainder of the leaflet: it may be of help to you later
complete the application form (and in some cases, ask your husband or wife to sign the consent form included and return it to you)
fill out an affidavit and sign it before a justice of the peace (your nearest CAB, Local Authority or District Court will help you to find one) or before a notary public or commissioner for oaths.
send off the completed form and affidavit, your marriage certificate and either the court fee or a completed form claiming exemption from the court fee (this form comes with the application).
WHAT HELP CAN I GET?
Fuller instructions come with the application form.
However if you want advice, more information or help with the forms, contact your nearest CAB, Sheriff Clerk's Office or the Court of Session.
HOW LONG WILL IT TAKE?
You should know in about two months whether your application has been successful.
FEE EXEMPTION (DO-IT-YOURSELF DIVORCE)
It is possible that you may not have to pay court fees in a ‘do-it-yourself’ divorce application.
This leaflet explains who is exempt and how to claim exemption.
DO I HAVE TO PAY?
You need not pay court fees in a ‘do-it-yourself’ divorce application if you are receiving:
(i)
Supplementary Benefit (S.B.) or
(ii)
Family Income Supplement (F.l.S.) or
(iii)
Legal Advice and Assistance in connection with the application for divorce.
HOW DO I CLAIM EXEMPTION?
Fill in and sign the claim form SPI S which comes with the application and give details of
either the address of your local Department of Health and Social Security (D.H.S.S.) office if you are receiving S.B. and/or F.l.S.
or the name and address of your solicitor if you are receiving Legal Advice and Assistance in connection with the application for divorce.
(NOTE: The Court may ask the D.H.S.S.
or your solicitor to confirm that the information given in the claim form is correct.)
Edinburgh
APPLICATION FOR DIVORCE (WITH CONSENT OF OTHER PARTY TO THE MARRIAGE) HUSBAND AND WIFE HAVING LIVED APART FOR AT LEAST 2 YEARS
You are hereby served with an application by your husband/wife which asks the Court to grant a decree of divorce.
If you wish to oppose the granting of such decree you should put your reasons in writing and send your letter to the address shown below.
Your letter must reach the Court before
Assistant Clerk of Session
IMPORTANT NOTEs If you wish to exercise your right to claim a financial award you should immediately advise the Court that you oppose the application for that reason, and thereafter consult a solicitor.
Curatory Appointment
19 Lord The Lord Ordinary having considered the Petition and proceedings, no Answers having been lodged, Nominates and Appoints to be curator bonis to designed in the Petition with the usual powers and decerns; authorises the said after finding caution to enter on the duties of his office upon a certified copy of this interlocutor with a schedule of the curatory estate annexed thereto;(*Finds the expenses of this application and procedure following thereon to form a proper charge upon the curatory estate, and remits the account thereof, when lodged, to the Auditor of Court for taxation).
(*Delete if special powers required)
Prorogate time for finding caution 19 Lord The Lord Ordinary, on petitioner's motion and on cause shown, prorogates the time for lodging the Bond of Caution (*until)(*by days from the date hereof.)
(*Delete as appropriate)
Curatory Appointment of curator furth of Scotland
19 Lord The Lord Ordinary having considered the Petition and proceedings, no Answers having been lodged, Nominates and Appoints to be curator bonis to designed in the Petition with the usual powers and decerns; authorises the said after finding caution to enter on the duties of his office upon a certified copy of this interlocutor with a schedule of the curatory estate annexed thereto; and that upon condition that before issue of a certified copy interlocutor of his appointment he shall lodge in the hands of the Accountant of Court a bond binding himself to lodge Accounts annually with the Accountant of Court and otherwise to conduct the affairs of the curatory estate in all respects in conformity with the laws and practice of Scotland; to appear before the Lords of Council and Session in Scotland to answer for his conduct as curator aforesaid or in connection with any matter arising out of said curatory; to submit himself to and prorogate the jurisdiction of the Court of Session for said purposes and to assign an address in Scotland where he may be cited, and decerns (*Finds the expenses of this application and procedure following thereon to form a proper charge upon the curatory estate, and remits the account thereof, when lodged, to the Auditor of Court for taxation).
(*Delete of special powers required.)
Curatory — Discharge of Curator — Ward Deceased Exoneration and discharge
19 Lord The Lord Ordinary, having resumed consideration of the Petition No of process and proceedings together with the report by the Accountant of Court No of process, exoners and discharges the petitioner as curator bonis in terms of the prayer of the petition and decerns.
Authorises the Accountant of Court to deliver up the petitioner's Bond of Caution.
Dear
HIGH COURT OF JUSTICIARY OPINION
I enclose for your attention a copy of the recently issued opinion in the above case which was heard in the High Court of Justiciary Appeal Court on and in which you were the sentencing Judge/Sheriff.
Yours faithfully
Dear Sir
HIGH COURT SITTING
I enclose herewith the principal, duplicate, Copy List of Assize and List of Assize to be summoned in conjunction with the instructions shown below together with a warrant for citation in respect of the above mentioned High Court Sitting.
Please note that should more than jurors be excused/unavailable on any of the undernoted days, you should contact this office immediately.
Yours faithfully
Dear Sir/Madam
HIGH COURT JUROR'S CITATION NO.
ON
I refer to your letter dated regarding the above.
I regret to advise however, that on this occasion it will not be possible to excuse you from attendance.
You should therefore attend for jury service per your citation.
Yours faithfully
Dear Sir/Madam,
HIGH COURT JUROR'S CITATION NO.
I refer to the above and your letter dated requesting excusal from jury duty at the High Court of Justiciary at Edinburgh, on
I am pleased to advise that, on this occasion, you have been excused.
Yours faithfully,
Dear Sirs
HIGH COURT SITTING
DATE
NO OF CASES
ESTIMATED DURATION OF SITTING
Please arrange for a shorthand writer to be in attendance at the above Sitting.
Yours faithfully
Dear Sir/Madam
JUSTICIARY APPEAL: YOU v PROCURATOR FISCAL
I write to inform you that the appeal is to be heard at the above address on
As you have no solicitor acting for you, you must be prepared to address the Court on your own behalf.
If you have not already done so, please lodge 6 copies of the papers previously sent to you on not later than 7 days before the above date.
Failure to do so or failure to attend Court on said date may result in the appeal being dismissed.
Yours faithfully
Dear Sirs,
JUSTICIARY APPEAL COURT
1
I enclose a copy of the Roll for the above Sitting.
2
If you are no longer acting for any of the appellants shown as being represented by you on the enclosed Roll, you should inform this office, in writing, at least seven days before the hearing date, enclosing a copy of your letter to the appellant informing him/her that you are no longer acting, giving him/her details of the date, time and place of the Appeal hearing and that he/she must attend to present his/her Appeal and that failure to appear may result in the Appeal being dismissed.
3
In Stated Cases and Bills of  Suspension /Advocation in which you act, where prints have not yet been lodged, you should ensure that either six copies of the prints are lodged with, or the reason for the failure to lodge said prints timeously, is intimated to the Justiciary Office, not later than seven days before the hearing date.
4
Counsel should be instructed for each case at the sitting and appellants who have been granted interim liberation are bound to attend the hearing of the Appeal.
Yours faithfully,
Dear Sirs,
STATED CASE — YOU v PF
I acknowledge receipt of the principal Stated Case at your instance.
As you appear to be without legal assistance the following instructions must be carried out forthwith:—
1.
Take the enclosed to a printing or duplicating Agency and arrange for at least 9 copies to be made.
2.
Send 3 copies to the Crown Office, 5/7 Regent Road, Edinburgh and 6 copies to this office.
You will be informed when the date has been fixed for the appeal to be heard in Court when you must appear personally before the Court in support of your Appeal.
Failure to comply with any of the foregoing requirements will result in your appeal being put to a Roll of the Court of Criminal Appeal when it may be dismissed.
Yours faithfully,
Dear Sir,
NOTE OF APPEAL AGAINST CONVICTION/SENTENCE/CONVICTION AND SENTENCE
I write to inform you that the above appeal is to be heard on
As your Solicitor is no longer acting for you, you must be prepared to address the Court on your own behalf.
Failure to attend Court on said date may result in the appeal being dismissed, and a warrant issued for your apprehension.
Yours faithfully,
Dear
As you are aware confidential recoveries were received by the General Department on at your instigation.
I should be obliged if you would now take the appropriate steps to have the recoveries examined or alternatively to authorise their return.
Please note that in the event of no action being taken within fourteen days of this date the documents concerned will be returned to source.
Yours faithfully,
Dear Sir/Madam,
against YOU
APPLICATION FOR TIME TO PAY DIRECTION UNDER THE DEBTORS (SCOTLAND) ACT 1987
I return herewith your application in the above action for the following reasons:—
It is important that you remedy this matter and return the Form 66 to me forthwith.
Failure to do so may result in decree being granted against you without a time to pay direction.
Yours faithfully,
Dear Sir/Madam,
against
APPLICATION UNDER SECTION 3 OF THE DEBTORS (SCOTLAND) ACT 1987
In terms of Section 3(3) of the Debtors (Scotland) Act 1987, I enclose herewith a copy of the interlocutor pronounced by this Court on
Please note that the variation of the time to pay direction comes into effect on the date of this letter.
Yours faithfully,
Dear Sir/Madam
I am in receipt of your letter of and have to advise you that I have searched my records from to and can find no trace of a divorce between and during that period in the Court of Session.
I can however advise you that as of 1 May 1984 Sheriff Courts were empowered to grant divorces and in order to check whether the divorce was granted by a Sheriff Court you should apply to the Registrar General, General Search Unit, New Register House, Edinburgh as this office only holds records of divorces granted in the Court of Session.
Yours faithfully
Dear
You marked an appeal to the Court of Session in the above case on and I write to inform you of the necessary steps you should now take.
You are strongly advised to consult a solicitor without delay to act for you in your appeal.
If you do not wish to be represented by counsel and solicitor then you must lodge here, in person, ten copies of your appeal as required by Rule of Court 269(b), plus ten copies for the Edinburgh solicitors acting for the other party, together with a Court of Session process in terms of Rule of Court 20.
The fee for lodging the appeal will be
Your appeal, in proper form, must be lodged here no later than Failure to do so will result in your appeal being held as abandoned.
If you intend to proceed with the appeal on your own, you should contact me for a copy of the relevant parts of the Sheriff Court process.
Yours faithfully