

Gases, Liquids and Solids
To a snowflake
What heart could have thought you?—
Past our devisal
(O filigree petal)
Fashioned so purely,
Fragilely, surely,
From what Paradisal
Imagineless metal
Too costly for cost?
Who hammered you, wrought you,
From argentine vapour?—
God was my shaper
Passing surmisal,
He hammered, He wrought me,
From curled silver vapour.
To lust of His mind:—
Thou coulds't not have thought me!
So purely, so palely,
Mightily, frailly,
Insculped and embossed,
With His hammer of wind,
And His graver of frost
Francis Thompson
Snow's Flaky Little Secrets
A microscopic speck of dust, trapped in a molecule of water vapour, rides the buffeting winds inside a winter storm cloud.
As the particle is frosted with droplets of supercooled water, it begins the six-mile plunge to Earth.
The falling ice crystal is then sculpted by the varying temperature and humidity-lengthening here, a spiky branch pushing out there -until it grows into a shape as individual as a fingerprint.
The resulting snowflake may look like Cleopatra's needle or a fern or a chunky hexagon, but it will be different from every other snowflake around.
And although such particulars are understandably meaningless to people digging out from billions of flakes, they are becoming crucial to scientists who are trying to predict everything from avalanches to metal failures.
Only now, after centuries of befuddlement, are scientists beginning to make sense of snow.
Who do the ice crystals that fall from the sky as snowflakes take on intricate six branched star shapes.
The best informed team of crystallographers, meteorologists, physicists and mathematicians in the world could not predict the shape of snowflakes from first principles
Crystal But Not So Clear
…
The problem is so difficult because a whole range of interrelated factors are involved: the rate at which heat is lost from different parts of the growing crystal, for example, depends on their curvature, but curvature also affects the melting temperature — and so on .
Solving all the necessary mathematical equations on paper is next to impossible.
Even with computers it is extremely difficult, as the slow progress shows.
As for the six arms of a typical snowflake, this arrangement is related to the shape and electrical charges on the water molecule…
In chapter 1 we saw how all matter is made up of atoms.
We also examined the electronic and nuclear structure of atoms.
In chapter 2 we turned our attention to the various types of bonding between atoms, ions and molecules and saw how the bonding related to the structure and properties of matter.
3.1 Gases and Liquids
States Of Matter
In this chapter we now look at the behaviour and properties of the three states of matter.
These are
gases
liquids
solids Some of the characteristics that distinguish these three states of matter are shown in table 3.1.
Gases
Most gases are covalent compounds, although, of course, the noble gases are exceptions.
The most notable characteristics of a gas are its compressibility and its ability to expand.
Gases do not have their own shape but rather expand to fill the shapes of their containers uniformly.
Since a gas assumes the shape of its container, a gas cannot have a fixed volume.
Its volume is the volume of the container.
A confined gas exerts a constant pressure on the wall of its container uniformly in all directions.
One final point worth noting about gases —gases may be mixed with each other in any proportion.
In other words, "there's always room for more!" 
Liquids may be metallic, ionic or covalent.
Examples are mercury, dilute hydrochloric acid and benzene, respectively Like a gas, a liquid does not have a fixed  shape.
A liquid takes the shape of its container as it finds it own level under the influence of gravity.
However, unlike a gas, a liquid does have a fixed volume.
Liquids can only be compressed a very small amount and then only under high pressures.
Liquids
Like liquids, solids may also be metallic, ionic or covalent.
We shall examine the arious metallic, ionic and covalent structures of solids in the second part of this chapter.
Solids distinguish themselves from liquids and gases in that they have fixed shapes and fixed volumes.
They also cannot be compressed even under quite high pressures.
Solids
The gas laws mathematically relate the temperatures, pressures and volumes of gases.
Their correct application depends on using the correct units.
So before we proceed further it is important that we look at the units and measurement of temperature, pressure and volume.
THE GAS LAWS
There are two scales of temperature used in science.
The absolute scale of temperature proposed by Lord Kelvin in 1848.
The unit of this scale, the kelvin (K) is named after him.
In any absolute scale of measurement, only positive values are permitted.
Zero on an absolute scale of measurement indicates the complete absence of the quantity being measured.
On the absolute scale of temperature, 0 K is called absolute zero.
Temperature
The Celsius scale of temperature is not absolute since negative values are possible.
Figure 3.1 compares the two scales of temperature.
The SI unit of temperature is the kelvin (see appendix A).
It should always be used for calculations involving temperature.
Note that the unit does not have the degree symbol, °.
Temperatures can be converted from the Celsius scale to the absolute scale by adding 273.15.
It is worth noting that a difference in temperature is the same for both scales.
For example, a rise in temperature of 10°C is the same as a rise in temperature of 10 K.
An atmosphere (atm) is often used as a unit of pressure.
It is the pressure of the atmosphere, equivalent to a height of 760 mm of mercury at 0°C when measured at sea level.
Pressure is also expressed in millimetres of mercury (mmHg).
For low pressures, the torr is often used.
It is equivalent to I mmHg.
Thus one atmosphere equals 760 torr.
Pressure
Although the atmosphere, mmHg and torr are all used in scientific work, they should strictly be used only for rough comparisons or as ratios.
The 51 unit of pressure is the pascal (Pa).
One pascal equals one newton per metre square ().
One atmosphere equals 101 325 Pa.
As we shall see in the section below, gas volume varies with temperature and pressure.
Thus, when comparing volumes of gases, the temperature and pressure
Volume
must be specified.
It is usual to quote gas volume and other physical properties under conditions of standard temperature and pressure.
By convention, standard temperature is 273 K (0°C) and standard pressure was, until recently, 101 325 Pa (that is, 1 atm or 760 mmHg).
However, it is now 100 kPa.
In 1984, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) formally approved and published a recommendation, initiated by the Commission on Thermodynamics, that the conventional standard-state pressure for thermodynamic data be changed from the traditional I atm (101.325 kPa) to 100 kPa (1 bar).
The change in SSP causes no change in standard enthalpy changes and the entropy values of solids and liquids.
However, it does result in small changes in the tabulated values of the molar entropies of gases.
As a result of this change, it has been suggested that the term "normal boiling point" (which refers to the boiling point of a liquid at 101 325 Pa be replaced with the term "atmospheric boiling point" or "a.b.n" .
The boiling point of a liquid at the new standard pressure (100 kPa) would then be referred to as the "baric boiling point" or "b.b.n." .
Standard State Pressure (SSP)
The quantitative relationship between the volume and pressure of a gas was first stated by Robert Boyle in 1662.
His law states that gas volume varies inversely with pressure at constant temperature.
The law applies to any fixed amount of gas.
It can be represented graphically in various ways (see figure 3.2).
The left-hand graph shows that at low pressure the volume of a fixed amount of gas is high.
The volume decreases as the pressure increases.
This is expressed mathematically as where V = volume and p = pressure.
Thus where k is a proportionality constant.
Boyle's Law
The usual way of expressing Boyle's law, however, is Thus, when a gas is allowed to expand (or is compressed) at constant temperature from an initial volume of V1 to a final volume of V2, the final pressure P2 can be calculated so long as the initial pressure Pl is known.
In 1787 Charles showed that gas volume varies directly with temperature at constant pressure.
This is represented graphically in figure 3.3.
The graph shows that gas volume increases linearly with temperature.
This can be expressed mathematically as where T absolute temperature.
However, Charles' law is more usually expressed in the form Charles' law was developed by Joseph Gay-Lussac who, in 1802, stated that the volume of a gas changes by 1/273 of its volume at 0°C for every 1°C change in temperature.
Thus, if we take any volume of any gas at 0°C and reduce its temperature by 273°C at constant pressure, the final volume will be zero.
This  corresponds to a temperature of -273°C or 0 K. This is the temperature called absolute zero.
In reality it can never be achieved.
Figure 3.3 shows how the volume-temperature plots of a gas all extrapolate back to zero volume at 0 K.
Charles's Law
By combining Boyle's law and Charles' law (equations (1) and (2)), the following equation is obtained;
The General Gas Law
This is called the general gas law or sometimes the combined gas law.
This law enables the volume of a gas to be calculated at a specific temperature and pressure so long as the volume of the gas is known at another temperature and pressure.
The general gas law can also be written as
The exact value of the constant depends on the amount of gas.
When the amount is one mole (see chapter 4) the constant is designated R. It is known as the molar gas constant or simply the gas constant.
When the pressure is expressed in atmospheres, the value of R is given by In SI units it becomes The general gas law for one mole of gas can now be expressed as where is the volume of one mole of the gas.
For n moles of a gas the equation is
or This is called the ideal gas equation.
The ideal gas equation is an equation of state.
For a gas, an equation of state relates pressure, volume and temperature.
A gas that obeys the ideal gas equation exactly is called an Idea) gas or perfect gas.
An ideal gas does not exist in reality.
Real gases obey the ideal gas equation closely at low pressures and higher temperatures.
We shall examine the deviation of real gases from the ideal gas equation in more detail below.
The ideal gas equation can be used to calculate the relative molecular mass,, of a gas directly.
So far we have not defined relative molecular mass, although we have defined relative atomic mass,(see section 1.1).
For a simple gas molecule, the relative molecular mass is simply the sum of the relative atomic masses for all the atoms in the molecule.
Thus, for carbon dioxide, The relative molecular mass expressed as grams per mole is called the molar mass (see chapter 4).
Thus the molar mass of CO2 is 44 grams per mole.
Two moles of CO2 have a mass of 88 grams and n moles a mass of n X 44 grams.
In general we can write where n is the amount of substance in moles (or more simply the number of moles), m is the mass of the substance in grams and M is the molar mass.
The units of n are grams per mole.
Using the gas equation to calculate relative molecular mass
We can substitute this expression directly into the ideal gas equation (4) to obtain Thus, if we know the mass and volume of a gas at a given temperature and pressure, we can calculate the molar mass, M. Since we can obtain directly.
A 512 cm3 sample of a gas weighed 1.236 g at 20°C and a pressure of one atmosphere.
Calculate the relative molecular mass of the gas.
().
Example
Solution
We are required to find the value of given In 1811, Amedeo Avogadro put forward his famous law which states that equal volumes of all gases at the same temperature and pressure contain equal numbers of molecules.
The law is known as Advogadro's principle, Avogadro's theory or Avogadro's hypothesis.
Avogadro's Law
The number of molecules in one mole of a gas is always 6.022 x 1023.
This quantity 6.022 x 1023 is known as Avogadro's constant, L. It used to be known (and still is in some quarters) as Avogadro's number.
However, strictly speaking it is not a number but a physical quantity with units of mol-1.
The constant can apply  equally to atoms, molecules, ions, electrons and even chemical bonds and equations.
Since one mole of any gas always contains the same number of molecules, it follows from Avogadro's law that one mole of any gas always occupies the same volume.
This volume, at s.t.p., can be calculated from the ideal gas e uation (4) by putting n = 1 and substituting values for R and standard temperature and pressure in SI units.
It works out at 22.4 dm3.
This is known as the molar volume.
Since one mole of any gas occupies 22.4 dm3 at st.p., the density of a gas is easily calculated.
For example, one mole (44 grams) of CO2 occupies 22.4 dm3.
The density of CO2 at s.t.p. is thus given by It should be noted that the calculation is based on the assumptions that (a) CO2 obeys Avogadro's law at s.t.p. and (b) CO2 is an ideal gas and thus obeys the ideal gas equation.
We shall see later that real gases-and CO2 is one —deviate from ideal gas behaviour markedly under certain conditions.
Gas Density
The density of gas can be obtained at temperatures and pressures other than s.t.p. by using a rearranged form of the ideal gas equation (5).
Thus
The density of a gas or vapour is often compared to that of hydrogen and expressed as the relative vapour density
The experimental determination of gas densities and the comparison of these with the density of hydrogen formed the basis of the early determination of molecular weights of many gases and liquids.
Hydrogen was always assigned an "atomic weight" of one.
The relative molecular masses of non-volatile substances can be determined experimentally by colligative methods.
These methods are described in chapter 6.
The relative molecular masses of gases and volatile liquids can be determined accurately by use of a mass spectrometer (see section 1.1).
Relative molecular masses of gases and volatile liquids can also be found by vaporisation methods.
These include syringe methods and the famous Victor Meyer's method.
Experimental Determination of Relative Molecular Mass
There are several variations of this method.
For gases the method originally devised by Regnault in 1845 is often used.
A large glass syringe of known volume is weighed with and without the gas whose relative molecular mass is to be determined.
Substitution of the values for the mass and volume of the gas together with those for temperature, pressure and the molar gas constant into equation (6) enables the molar mass and thus the relative molecular mass to be calculated.
The Syringe Method
For liquids a hypodermic syringe is used to inject the liquid through a rubber cap into a gas syringe heated so as to vaporise the liquid.
The mass of the hypodermic syringe before and after injection gives the mass of the liquid.
This equals the mass of the gas.
The volume of the gas is measured with the gas syringe.
Once again equation (6) is used to calculate the molar mass and thus the relative molecular mass.
Both methods rely on the accurate determination of the temperature and pressure of the gas.
The measurement of temperature and pressure can be avoided by using a comparative method whereby the gas density of the gas of unknown molar mass is compared with the gas density of a gas of known molar mass under identical conditions of temperature and pressure.
Trichloromethane (chloroform) and propanone (acetone) are often used for this purpose.
A schematic diagram of the method is shown in figure 3.4.
The unknown molar mass is calculated from equation (6) as follows:
where is the density of the gas of known molar mass, and where is the density of the gas of unknown molar mass,.
By eliminating the common factor p/RT from these two equations we obtain This method is used to determine the molar mass of volatile liquids.
It employs the same principle as the syringe method.
That is, the gas density is found by measuring the volume of gas obtained from a known mass of the liquid.
Equation (6) is then used to obtain the molar mass and thus the relative molecular mass.
Victor Meyer's Method
A diagram of Victor Meyer's apparatus is shown in figure 3.5.
The liquid under investigation is contained in a Hofmann bottle.
The bottle is allowed to rest on a rod.
The rod is then withdrawn and the bottle falls onto a bed of sand.
The heat from the steam jacket causes the liquid to vaporise and thus remove the stopper.
The volume of air displaced is measured by a graduated tube.
This is measured at room temperature and equals the volume of gas obtained from the known mass of liquid in the Hofmann bottle.
In 1801 John Dalton stated that the total pressure of a mixture of gases equals the sum of the partial pressures of the component gases.
This is known as Dalton's law of partial pressures.
The partial pressure of a component gas is the pressure the gas would exert if it alone occupied the total volume at the same temperature.
Dalton's Law of Partial Pressure
Dalton's law can be expressed mathematically where is the partial pressure of component a and so on.
The partial pressure of a component gas can be calculated if the masses of the component gases in a container are known.
The partial pressure of component a is given by the ideal gas equation as If we repeat this for all the components and substitute these expressions into equation (7) we obtain By combining equations (8) and (9) we obtain The quantity is known as the mole fraction of component a.
It is the ratio of the number of moles of gas a to the total number of moles of gas present.
We have seen that a gas or vapour does not have a definite volume or shape.
When it is placed in a container it spreads uniformly throughout the whole volume of the container.
This process is called diffusion.
The rates of diffusion of two gases may be compared by measuring the time taken for a given volume of each gas to diffuse through a porous surface under identical conditions.
Graham found that light gases diffuse through porous surfaces more rapidly than heavy gases.
In 1833, he summarised his results in the following law: the rate of diffusion of a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of its density.
This is Gram's lab of diffusion.
Graham's Laws
This can be expressed mathematically as where r is the rate of diffusion and d the gas density.
The ratio of the rates of diffusion of two gases a and b diffusing under identical conditions is given by From equation (6) we see that, under the same conditions of temperature and pressure, density is proportional to molar mass.
Thus Since the rate of diffusion is inversely proportional to the time taken for it to diffuse, we obtain the following expression: The process of effusion is similar to that of diffusion (see figure 3.6).
Effusion is the passage of a gas through a single very small hole.
Graham studied the rates of effusion of gases and found that the relative rates of effusion of different gases under the same conditions are inversely proportional to the square roots of their densities.
This is Graham's lab of effusion.
It is the same as his law of diffusion except that the word effusion replaces diffusion.
Effusion
The relative molecular mass of ozone, 03, which cannot be obtained pure, can be determined by application of this law.
The kinetic theory of gases is a mathematical model of an ideal gas.
The theory can be used to account for the gas laws described above.
THE KINETIC THEORY OF GASES
1.
The gas consists of particles of negligible volume.
ASSUMPTION
2.
The particles are in continuous random motion.
3.
The particles exert no attractive forces on each other.
4.
The particles are perfectly elastic.
Thus, no kinetic energy is lost on collision.
5.
The average kinetic energy of the particles is proportional to the absolute temperature.
The following equation forms the basis of the kinetic theory of gases.
It can be derived using the assumptions given above.
The fundamental equation of the kinetic theory
where N is the number of gas particles, m is the mass of a gas particle and Ct is the mean square speed of a gas particle, that is, the average value of 
The fundamental equation (12) of the kinetic theory can be used to account for  the ideal gas equation
Accounting for the gas laws
Boyle's law
Charles' law
Avogadro's law
Dalton's law of partial pressures
Graham's law of diffusion
We shall content ourselves with just two examples.
The ideal gas equation.
Assumption 5 of the kinetic theory can be expressed mathematically as where is the average kinetic energy of a gas particle and is the average kinetic energy for N particles.
By comparing equations (12) and (13) we obtain
and thus We have already seen how the ideal gas equation (4) can be derived from equation (14).
Boyle's law.
For a definite mass of gas N is constant.
For a given temperature is also constant.
Thus from equation (12) As we have seen, this is a form of Boyle's law.
The kinetic theory of gases assumes that a gas consists of particles of negligible volume.
The smallest particle of a gas is a molecule.
A molecule may be monatomic —as in the case of noble gases —or it may consist of two or more atoms.
Molecular Speeds
The speed of a gas molecule can be calculated using the following equation: where is called the root mean square speed (or r.m.s. speed).
This is the square root of Equation (15) can be derived from equation (12).
It follows from equation (15) that the smaller the molecule the faster it moves.
The hydrogen molecule, H2, which is the smallest of all molecules travels at approximately 4300 miles per hour at 25°C.
The root mean square speeds of some simple molecules are shown in table 3.2.
The speed of any particular molecule in a gas is always changing.
This is due to collisions and the resultant change in energy.
However, at any given instant the distribution of molecular speeds is always constant under the same conditions.
This is because of the large number of molecules involved.
Maxwell-Boltzmann Distribution
The speeds of molecules in a gas are spread over a wide range.
This spread is called the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution.
Figure 3.7 shows graphically the Maxwell-Boltzmann distributions of molecular speeds at two different temperatures.
Note that at the higher temperature there is a higher spread of speed.
Notice also that the distribution is shifted to higher speeds at a higher temperature.
The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution applies not only to molecular speeds but also to molecular energies.
Figure 3.8 shows a typical curve for the distribution of molecular energies.
The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of molecular speeds was first verified by Zartmann in 1931.
In the Zartmann experiment a narrow beam of vaporised metal atoms is directed at a rotating cylindrical drum (see figure 3.9).
The drum contains a fine slit.
Once, during each revolution of the drum, the beam of atoms enters the slit in the drum.
They deposit on the far side of the drum.
The fastest atoms deposit first and the slowest ones last.
All atoms with a particular speed thus deposit in the same place.
The greater the fraction of atoms with that speed the greater the intensity of metal deposited at that place.
The distribution of intensities thus corresponds to the distribution of speeds.
Measuring the distribution of molecular speeds
Real gases do not obey the ideal gas equation,.
The deviation from ideal gas behaviour can be shown by plotting against p.
For an ideal gas this is a straight line (see figure 3.10) parallel to the pressure axis.
The extent and nature of the deviation depends on
Real Gases
the gas
pressure
temperature.
Figure 3.10 shows the deviation for four different gases.
Notice that the deviation of a real gas from ideal gas behaviour is more pronounced at high pressures.
Real gases also deviate more from ideal gas behaviour at lower temperatures.
The deviations of real gases from ideal gas behaviour can be attributed to the attractive forces between gas molecules; the volume of a gas molecule (the kinetic theory assumes this is negligible).
In 1873 Johannes van der Waals modified the ideal gas equation to take account of the deviations of real gases.
The van der Waals equation is where a is a constant which corrects for the attractive forces between gas molecules and b is a constant which corrects the volume of the gas by allowing for the part of the volume occupied by the gas molecules.
Van der Waals equation is an equation of state.
Van der Waals equation
Values for van der Waals constants have been determined for many gases (see table 3.3).
A gas liquefies when the attractive forces between the molecules are sufficient to bind them together in liquid form.
Attractive forces are greater when molecules are closer together.
This occurs at high pressure.
Attractive forces are opposed by the motion of molecules.
The motion (and kinetic energy) of molecules is higher at higher temperatues.
Liquefaction is thus favoured by lower temperatures.
Liquefaction of Gases
A gas becomes more difficult to liquefy the higher its temperature.
As its temperature increases, a higher pressure must be employed to liquefy it (see table 3.4).
Above a certain temperature it is impossible to liquefy a gas.
This is called the critical temperature, Tc.
The minimum pressure required to liquefy a gas at its critical temperature is called its critical pressure, pc.
The volume occupied by one mole of the gas at its critical temperature and pressure is called its critical volume, Vc.
The values for and are constants for gases.
Critical constants for four gases are shown in table 3.5.
In 1863, Andrews studied the relationship between the pressure and the volume of a fixed mass of carbon dioxide at different temperatures.
He obtained a series of isotherms known as Andrew's curves (see figure 3.11).
An isotherm is a pressure-volume plot at constant temperature.
The isotherm for CO2 at 321 K shows that the gas does not liquefy whatever the pressure or volume at this temperature.
This is because 321 K is above the critical temperature of CO2.
The critical temperature of C02 is 304 K. The isotherm at this temperature is called the critical isotherm.
The point P represents the gas at its critical temperature, pressure and volume.
At this point it is in its critical state.
Figure 3.11 shows two isotherms below the critical temperature of C02.
Let us consider the one at 286 K. Along the curve from A to B the gas contracts as the pressure increases.
Between B and C there is a large change of volume but no pressure change.
This corresponds to the liquefaction of the gas at this temperature.
From C to D there is little change in volume as pressure increases.
The compressibility of liquids is very low compared to that of gases.
Liquids
Kinetic Concept of the Liquid State
Liquids are intermediate in character between solids and gases (see figure 3.12).
For example, the attractive forces between particles (atoms, ions or molecules) in a liquid are intermediate in strength between those of solids and those of gases.
As a result, the particles are held together in a definite volume.
However, unlike solids, the attractive forces are not sufficient to hold the particles together in a regular structure.
Liquids thus do not have shape.
There is experimental evidence, however, that small groups of particles in liquids do arrange themselves in small, ordered and short-lived clusters.
This is more pronounced in polar liquids than in non-polar liquids.
The particles in a liquid, like those in a gas, are in a state of constant motion.
The first experimental evidence for this was provided by Brown in 1827.
He examined small grains on the surface of water through a microscope.
He noticed that they continually moved in a zigzag fashion.
This is known as Brownian motion.
It is due to the collisions between liquid particles and the grains.
When left open to the atmosphere, some particles of a liquid escape into the gas phase.
This is called evaporation.
The rate of evaporation increases with increasing surface area
Evaporation
increasing temperature
decreasing external pressure
The pressure exerted by these escaping particles is called the vapour pressure of the liquid.
Figure 3.13 shows how the vapour pressure of water increases with  temperature.
Similar curves are obtained for other liquids.
The increase in vapour pressure with temperature can be explained in terms of the kinetic theory.
The kinetic energies of particles in a liquid follow a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution like that for gas particles (see figure 3.7).
Only those particles with kinetic energies sufficiently high to overcome the attractive forces between the particles in the liquid can escape.
This energy is indicated as in figure 3.14.
Since energy is lost from the liquid, it cools.
However, if liquids are exposed to the open atmosphere at room temperature, this energy flows back into the liquid from the surroundings.
The liquid thus continues to evaporate.
If the temperature of the liquid is increased, more particles achieve the energy or higher and the rate of evaporation thus increases.
Boiling occurs when the vapour pressure of the liquid equals the external pressure.
The temperature at which this occurs is called the boiling point of the liquid.
During boiling, bubbles of vapour are formed inside the liquid and it is these that cause the turbulence.
The boiling point of a liquid can be reduced by lowering the external pressure.
On the other hand, boiling can be suppressed by increasing pressure.
At constant pressure, the boiling point remains constant until all the liquid has boiled away.
Boiling
In a liquid the motion and thus the kinetic energies of particles are sufficiently high to prevent the attractive forces holding the particles together in a crystal lattice.
However, as the liquid cools, the attractive forces overcome the motions of those particles with low kinetic energies.
As a result, these particles are held in fixed positions in a crystal lattice.
The temperature at which the solid and liquid are in equilibrium is called the freezing point.
A full discussion of equilibrium between liquids and solids and liquids and gases is found in chapter 6.
Freezing
We have seen that liquids have a fixed volume and take the shape of the container.
We also saw that densities of liquids are much higher than those of gases.
In general, liquid densities are similar in value to the densities of solids.
The compressibility of liquids is very low since there is only little free space between liquid particles.
Properties of Liquids
There are three other important properties which we have yet to consider.
They can all be explained in terms of the kinetic concept of liquids.
Like gases, liquids can flow.
This property is known as fluidity.
Resistance to flow is called viscosity.
Fluidity and viscosity are influenced by a number of factors.
The most important are the attractive forces between molecules and the shape, structure and relative molecular mass of these molecules.
The fluidity of liquids consisting of large molecules is lower than those consisting of small molecules.
Viscosity of liquids is about 100 times higher than that of solids.
Fluidity and Viscosity
A molecule in the bulk of a liquid is pulled in all directions equally by the intermolecular forces.
However, at the surface of a liquid these forces are unbalanced, with the result that there is a net pull inwards.
The surface of a liquid is thus in a state of tension —it is always trying to contract.
The surface tension of a liquid is the minimum force needed to overcome this inward pull and thus expand the surface area.
Surface tension accounts for the spherical shapes of free-falling droplets of liquid.
Surface Tension
This is the process whereby a substance spreads from a region of high concentration or pressure to a region of lower concentration or pressure.
Diffusion is much slower through a liquid than through a gas.
This is because the particles in liquids are.
much more closely packed than particles between gases.
A particle diffusing through a liquid is subject to frequent collisions.
Its progress is therefore hampered.
In gases, there is plenty of space for particles to spread at a rapid rate.
Diffusion occurs between mutually soluble or miscible liquids.
It does not occur between immiscible liquids.
All gases are miscible and thus they can all diffuse through each other.
Diffusion
Solids consist of closely packed particles.
These particles may be atoms, molecules Or ions.
Most solids are crystalline.
This means that the particles are highly ordered in a regular three-dimensional arrangement.
3.2 Solids
The particles of some solids do not possess sufficient order to define a regular crystalline structure.
These solids are said to be amorphous.
Glass is amorphous.
Its atoms have a random arrangement.
Most polymers are amorphous.
Polymers have macromolecular chain structures formed from small molecules called monomers (see chapter 20).
Polymeric macromolecules have variable dimensions and thus cannot pack closely together in a regular arrangement.
At one time charcoal, coke and soot —all forms of carbon —were thought to be amorphous.
However, X-ray analysis has shown that all these forms of carbon consist of small graphite-like crystals.
The structures of crystals can be analysed by a technique variously known as X-ray analysis, X-ray crystallography, X-ray diffraction or X-ray spectrometry.
X-RAY CRYSTALLOGRAPHY
Diffraction
When an advanced front of water waves hits a barrier with a narrow slit, the waves emerge as circular waves (see figure 3.15).
This is called diffraction.
Diffraction occurs with all types of radiation, including radio-waves, light waves and X-rays.
Where there are a series of slits, each slit acts as a source of spherical or circular waves.
These interfere with each other, cancelling each other out or reinforcing each other to produce bigger waves.
The result is bent or diffracted waves.
When X-rays strike a crystal some are absorbed whilst others are not absorbed and pass straight through the crystal.
The absorbed X-rays cause excitation of the electrons in the atoms of a crystal.
As electrons return to the lower-energy states, X-rays are re-emitted.
Those that are in phase reinforce each other and can be detected.
Those that are out of phase destroy each other and cannot be detected (see figure 3.16).
The re-emitted X-rays thus produce diffraction patterns.
The Braggs showed that the absorption and emission of X-rays by crystals is mathematically equivalent to the reflection of light from parallel planes.
X-rays of wavelength impinge on a crystal at an angle of incidence 8.
The path length a an X-ray (path A in figure 3.17) which strikes the top layer of atoms in a crystal is shorter than that of an X-ray which strikes the second layer (path B).
If the two emitted waves are to be in phase and reinforce each other, their path lengths must differ by a number of wavelengths.
This difference is nh where n is the whole number and the wavelength.
The Braggs thus showed that the angle of reflection of X-rays could be related to the distance d between the two layers of atoms: This is the Bragg equation  A crystal may have several planes from which reflection can take place.
The X-ray spectrometer thus directs a beam of X-rays at a crystal mounted on a turntable.
A photographic plate, ionisation chamber or Geiger counter is positioned to detect the reflected rays (see figure 3.18).
The crystal is rotated.
As angles are passed that satisfy the Bragg equation, signals flash out.
The intensity of the flashes and the angle of rotation enable values for n and) to be determined.
The Bragg Equation
X-RAY SPECTROMETRY
Analysis of the diffraction pattern can thus provide detailed information about the spacing between layers in a crystal.
However, such analysis is often complicated and time-consuming.
Nowadays computers are used extensively in X-ray analysis.
Powdered specimens can also be used for X-ray analysis.
The diffracted X-ray beams are cones.
They show up as curved lines on a photographic film.
The arrangement of atoms, molecules or ions in a crystal can be depicted as a crystal lattice.
This is sometimes called a space lattice.
The particles in the; lattice are joined by imaginary lines called lattice lines.
The crystal lattice is composed of a basic unit called a unit cell.
The unit cell is repeated throughout the crystal.
CRYSTAL STRUCTURE
There are only seven types of unit cell.
These are simple cubic
simple tetragonal
simple orthorhombic
simple monoclinic
hexagonal
rhombohedral
triclinic
These unit cells are sometimes called primitive unit cells or crystal systems.
Each of these crystal systems is represented by a primitive lattice.
In addition, there are seven multi-primitive lattices.
There are thus 14 types of crystal lattice in all.
The multi-primitive lattices fall within the seven crystal systems.
Simple cubic, for example, is a primitive unit cell.
It forms three types of crystal lattice (see table 3.6).
The simple cubic unit cell and simple cubic primitive lattice are both shown in figure 3.19.
The face-centred cubic lattice consists of a system of intersecting simple cubic unit cells.
The corners of each one coincide with the face centres of others (see figure 3.20).
There are similar intersections in all faces.
The body-centred cubic lattice consists of interpenetrating simple cubic unit cells.
Each corner of each cube coincides with the centre of the body of another.
Crystalline solids may be divided into three classes: metallic
ionic
covalent
Crystals in each class have one or other of the 14 crystal lattices referred to above.
We shall now examine each class in turn.
We shall start with metallic crystals, since these provide examples of the simplest crystal structures.
Metallic Crystals
The metal ions in a metallic lattice may be regarded as spheres.
In solid metals, these spheres are packed together as closely as possible.
The most efficient arrangement in a single layer of spheres is hexagonal packing (see figure 3.21).
Each sphere is surrounded by six other spheres (in the same plane).
The centres of any three adjacent spheres form a triangle.
Less efficient is square packing where the centres of four adjacent spheres form a square.
Hexagonal layers of spheres can be closely stacked on top of each other in two ways: hexagonal close packing (hcp) or face-centre cubic packing (fcp).
Fcp is also called cubic close packing.
Both types are called close packing since they are very efficient in the use of space.
In both cases 74% of the available volume is occupied by the spheres.
In hexagonal close packing, a second layer sits on top of the first layer so that each sphere in the second layer is in contact with three spheres of the first layer (see figure 3.22).
The third layer is directly above the first, the fourth directly above the second, and so on.
The hexagonal layers are thus arranged in the    sequence, ABABABABA…
The sequence of layers in face-centred cubic packing is more complicated, the sequence being ABCABCABC…
Layers of spheres in the square formation can build up to form the body-centred cubic structure.
This structure is not so closely packed as the other two.
Only 68% of the available volume is occupied by the spheres.
Three-dimensional views of all three structures are shown in figure 3.23.
Almost all metals have one or other of these three crystal structures.
Examples are shown in table 3.7.
Each sphere in a body-centred cubic structure is at the centre of a cube with spheres at each corner (see figures 3.20 and 3.23).
Each sphere is thus in contact with eight other spheres.
The number 8 is called the coordination number of the lattice.
The coordination numbers of the two close packing lattices are both 12.
Coordination number
Ionic Crystals
Ions in an ionic crystal are held together by electrostatic forces.
The structure of the crystal lattice must therefore preserve electrical neutrality.
Details and diagrams of four of the most important types of ionic crystal are shown in figures 3.24 to 3.27.
Each type of ion in an ionic lattice has its own coordination number.
Thus, in the caesium chloride lattice (see figure 3.24) each Cs+ is in contact with eight ions.
Its coordination number is thus 8.
Similarly, each Cl ion is in contact with eight Cs+ ions.
Its coordination number is also 8.
The caesium chloride lattice is thus said to have 8:8 coordination.
The coordination of the sodium chloride lattice is 6:6 (see figure 3.25).
Notice that in each case electrical neutrality is preserved.
The coordination and crystal structure of ionic lattices is largely determined by two factors: the ratio of cations to anions the radius ratio of the ions
The ratios of cations to anions in the caesium chloride (CsCl), sodium chloride (NaCl) and zinc blende crystal lattices are all 1:1.
They are said to have an AB-type       stoichiometry.
Fluorite (calcium fluoride,) has an AB2-type stoichiometry.
Stoichiometry is dealt with in detail in the following chapter.
The ratio of the ionic radius of the cation (A) to the ionic radius of the anion (B) is called the radius ratio .
In general, the higher the value of the radius ratio, the higher the coordination of the lattice (see table 3.8).
It is often easier to view the structure of ionic crystals as two parts —one for the anions and one for the cations.
The caesium chloride structure, for example, consists of a cubic structure of cations and a cubic structure of anions.
Together they form two interpenetrating body-centred cubic structures (see figure 3.24).
The sodium chloride or rock salt type of structure also consists of two cubicstructures —one for the cations and one for the anions.
Together they form two intersecting face-centred cubic structures.
Each type of ion in this structure also has an octahedral arrangement (see figure 3.25).
The zinc blende type of structure has a face-centred cubic structure (see figure 3.26).
If we view this as a cubic structure of cations, then the anions have a tetrahedral structure inside the cube.
Alternatively, if we view the anions as the cubic structure then the cations have the tetrahedral arrangement.
The fluorite structure (see figure 3.27) differs from those described above in that its stoichiometry is AB2 and also in that it has two different coordination numbers—and 4.
Each Ca2+ ion is in contact with eight F ions and each f ion is in contact with four Ca2+ ions.
The fluorite structure can be viewed as a face-centred cubic arrangement of cations within which the anions are arranged  tetrahedrally.
Alternatively, the structure can be thought of as a body-centred cubic arrangement with the cations occupying the body-centre positions.
Covalent crystals may be broadly classified into two types: molecular and macro-molecular.
Covalent Crystals
Molecular Crystals
Molecular crystals consist of molecules held in lattice sites by weak intermolecular forces such as van der Waals forces or hydrogen bonds.
We have already met examples of such crystals in the previous chapter.
Ice, for example, consists of a lattice of water molecules held in position by hydrogen bonds (see figure 2.26).
The iodine crystal: iodine has The iodine crystal is another example.
It has a face-centred cubic structure (see figure 3.28).
The lattice positions are occupied by diatomic iodine molecules,.
The lattice is held together by weak van der Waals forces.
Solid carbon dioxide has a similar structure with the C02 molecules occupying the lattice sites.
Naphthalene also forms molecular crystals.
Its flat molecules are arranged in a monoclinic lattice (see figure 3.29).
These are also known as giant molecular crystals.
In contrast to ionic and metallic crystals, which consist of ions, and to molecular crystals, which consist of molecules, macromolecular crystals consist of lattices of atoms.
They are also known as atomic or network crystals.
Macromolecular crystals may be grouped into three types: chain structures, layer structures and giant three-dimensional structures.
Macromolecular
Chain structures.
We have already seen that amorphous materials such as polymers have chain structures.
We shall deal with organic polymers in chapter 20.
Many silicate minerals also have polymeric chain structures.
Asbestos is an example.
Some inorganic compounds with covalent characteristics also have chain structures.
Palladium chloride (see figure 3.30) and copper(ti) chloride are notable examples.
These chain structures may be regarded as one-dimensional macromolecules.
Layer structures.
These may be regarded as two-dimensional macromolecules.
Graphite is the classic example of a substance with a layer structure.
Each layer consists of carbon atoms covalently bonded together into hexagons (see figure 3.31a).
Adjacent layers are held together by weak van der Waals forces.
The layers readily slide over one another.
This accounts for its greasy texture.
Graphite conducts electricity in the plane of the layers but not at right angles to them.
This is due to delocalised n orbitals extending between the layers.
Delocalised   electrons are thus free to move through the layers.
Other examples of substances with layer structures are cadmium iodide, CdI,(see figure 3.31b), and aluminium chloride, AlCl3.
For example, the bonding of the cadmium and iodine atoms within each layer of CdI, is intermediate between ionic and covalent.
The layers are held together by weak van der Waals forces.
Like graphite, cadmium iodide has a greasy texture.
Three-dimensional covalent structures.
Diamond has a giant three-dimensional structure (see figure 3.32).
Each carbon atom is covalently bonded to four other carbon atoms in a tetrahedral arrangement.
It has the same structure as zinc blende but with each zinc and sulphur ion replaced by a carbon atom.
The whole diamond structure is, in fact, one giant molecule.
Substances which have the same type of chemical formula and which crystallise with the same crystal lattice are said to be isomorphous.
For example, sodium nitrate, NaNO3, and the calcite form of calcium carbonate, CaCO3, exhibit isomorphism.
They both crystallise as rhombohedra.
ISOMORPHISM, POLYMORPHISM AND ALLOTROPY
A compound which can exist in two or more crystalline forms is said to exhibit polymorphism.
Silica (silicon(iv) oxide,) is a polymorphous substance.
It has a giant molecular structure with the silicon atoms covalently bonded to four oxygen atoms in a tetrahedral arrangement (see figure 3.33).
Quartz is a crystalline form of silica.
It has a hexagonal structure.
Silica also crystallises in the orthorhombic and cubic forms at higher temperatures: The temperature at which one form converts to another is called the transition temperature.
An element which can exist in two or more solid forms (crystalline or amorphous) is said to exhibit allotropy.
The different forms are called allotropes.
About one-half of all elements are allotropes.
Carbon, for example, exists as diamond or graphite.
Sulphur exists in two crystalline forms —orthorhombic or monoclinic —depending on the temperature   (see also chapter 6).
Both crystalline forms are examples of molecular crystals.
The molecules are puckered rings containing eight covalently bonded sulphur atoms (see figure 3.34).
Solid sulphur can also exist in a third allotropic form-plastic sulphur.
This form is unstable.
It consists of long chains of sulphur atoms which, at room temperature, break up and reform to produce S8 molecules crystallising in the orthorhombic lattice.
Phosphorus can exist in three allotropic forms.
The most stable form is red phosphorus (see also chapter 6).
This exists as a giant molecule with each phosphorus atom covalently bonded to three other phosphorus atoms.
White phosphorus exists as molecular crystals.
Each molecule contains four phosphorus atoms covalently bonded in a tetrahedral arrangement (see figure 3.35).
A third allotrope, black phosphorus, is only formed under high pressures.
It exists as a macromolecular layer lattice.
Compared with the other two states of matter —gases and liquids —solids have the highest degree of order.
It is this high degree of order which accounts for many of the physical properties of solids.
PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS
The compressibility of solids is zero.
All solids thus have a fixed volume.
One of the most familiar properties of solids is their ability to retain their shapes.
Compared to gases and liquids, solids can withstand considerable external stress.
For a particular substance, the density of the solid is much higher than that of the gas and slightly higher than that of the liquid.
Water is an exception since the density of ice is lower than that of liquid water.
Most solids have sharp melting points although some, such as glasses, soften over a range of temperature.
All solids have vapour pressures although they tend to be very low.
This is particularly the case with ionic solids.
Enthalpies of fusion are much lower than the enthalpies of vaporisation of the corresponding liquids.
Solids exhibit a wide variation in rigidity.
Some solids —ionic solids, for example tend to shatter under stress.
This is called brittleness.
Others —such as rubbers are elastic.
They return to their original shape once the stress is removed.
Many metals are malleable and ductile.
A malleable metal can be beaten into a sheet whereas a ductile metal can be drawn out into a wire.
The conducting properties of solids vary widely.
All metals conduct heat and electricity.
Non-metals tend to be insulators although, as we have seen, graphite is a conductor of electricity.
Graphite is an anisotropic material.
This means that its properties depend on direction.
For example, graphite only conducts electricity in the direction along its layers.
Crystals may also be anisotropic.
Their refractive index, for example, may vary depending on direction.
When the properties of a material are uniform in all directions, the material is said to be isotropic.
Cubic crystals are isotropic since they are fully symmetrical.
The physical properties of solids depend, to a large extent, on the type of bonding and the structure of the solid.
The relationship between bonding and properties was discussed in chapter 2.
Table 3.9 summarises the trends for solids.
1.
(a) State Avogadro's law.
Examination Questions
(b) What can you do to deduce from the fact that at s.t.p. 22.4 dm of carbon dioxide contain rather more than (c)(i) State Graham's law of diffusion. (ii) The ratio of the rate of diffusion of a gas Y to that of nitrogen was to be 0.366.
Calculate the relative molecular mass of Y.
2.
Describe an experiment by which you would determine the relative molecular mass of a gas or vapour.
State Dalton's law of partial pressures and show how it may be derived from the ideal gas equation.
A mixture of oxygen and nitrogen, in which the mole fraction of oxygem is 0.25, is at a pressure of 1.0atm.
Calculate the partial pressure of each gas in the mixture (assumed to be ideal).
3. (a) Define the terms relative atomic mass and relative mass.
Does relative molecular mass have the same significance when applied to potassium chloride as it has when applied to benzene?
(b) What two variables determine the average velocity of the molecules of an ideal gas?
State concisely how this velocity depends on these variables.
(the derivation of formulae is not expected.)
(c) On reacting potassium chlorate (vii)(potassium perchlorate), with fluorosulphonic acid a gas X is evolved
(i) 0.245g of X are found to occupy 122 cm at 293 K and at a pressure of 5.20 Calculate to three significant figures the relative molecular mass of X.
(ii) By mass spectrometry, X is found to contain only the elements Suggest a molecular formula for X.
4. (a) State Graham's law of diffusion.
(b) Calculate to four significant figures the ratio of the rate of diffusion through a porous membrane of hydrogen chloride gas composed wholly of molecules to the rate of diffusion of a gas composed wholly of molecules, both gases being at the same temperature and pressure.
(For this calculation use the following values for the relative atomic masses of the isotopes involved: 5. (a)(i) Use the basic assumption of the kinetic theory of gases to derive the expression for an ideal gas.
(ii) What do you understand by the terms real gas and critical temperature?
(b)(i) Sketch a plot of against p for gas Y (critical temperatire approximately ) at 273K as the pressure increases from 0 to showing ideal and real behaviour.
(ii) Explain the difference between the plot for the real gas and that for the ideal gas.
(iii) What changes, if any, would you expect to see in the real plot at 223 K and 323 K?(c) 0.10000g of gas Y at 273 K had the following pV values at the stated pressure p:(i) Estimate graphically the value of pV at zero pressure.
(ii) By means of the expression find the relative molecular mass of Y.
6. (a) Uisng the kinetic concept of matter, explain the following:(i) the melting of a solid;(ii) the evaporation of a liquid;(iii) the saturated vapour pressure of a liquid.
(b)(i) Calculate a value for the gas constant, R stating the units given that the density of argon atom at s.t.p. is (ii) Use your value from (i) to estimate the average kinetic energy of an argon atom at 273 K, given that for 1 mole of gas the total kinetic energy of the gas molecules equals 
(iii) Draw curves to show how the distribution of kinetic energies of the molecules in a sample of argon gas changes when the temperature of the gas is raised.
State the relationship between the areas under the curves you have drawn.
7. (a) 5g of a substance R (boiling point 40 °) occupies a volume of at 50° and 102.0 kPa.
(i) Describe briefly an experiment that could be carried out to obtain these results in the laboratory.
(ii) Calculate the relative molecular mass of compound R.
(b) The critical temperature and critical pressure for butane are 425 K and & math; respectively.
What is meant by these terms and explain why butane can be convieniently stored as a liquid in a can, whereas methane cannot.
(c) A compound shows significant deviations from the ideal gas law at normal conditions of temperature and pressure.
(i) Write out the ideal gas equation indicating the significance of each term used in the equation.
(ii) What changes in conditions of temperature and pressure would result in further deviations from the ideal gas law?
Explain the significance of these changes.
(iii) Explain how van der Waals changed the ideal gas equation to allow for such deviations.
(iv) What can be deduced about the molecular and intramolecular bonds in this compund at normal temperature and pressure to account for these deviations?
STOICHIOMETRY
Seven Million — and Growing
Whilst the world's energy and material resources are declining, there is one resource which is growing rapidly, if not explosively.
That resource is information.
This is particularly the case with chemical information.
In 1984 over seven million compounds were documented in the chemical literature.
The Ninth Collective Index to Chemical Abstracts (a journal which provides synopses of chemical publications throughout the world —including publications in German, Chinese, Japanese and Russian) lists about 100000 entries under "aluminium" (and its compounds).
Each year almost half a million new compounds are documented.
This is about one a minute.
The compounds include about 1500 pesticide chemicals, 4000 drugs, 38 000 potentially toxic substances and 50 000 commercial or potentially useful chemicals.
This presents formidable problems.
For a start, there is the problem of determining and monitoring the environmental safety of these chemicals.
There is also the related question of the storage and retrieval of information on these compounds.
This in turn depends on an accurate system of naming compounds.
The most widely used system of nomenclature of chemical compounds is that recommended by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC).
It is a comprehensive system — and still developing.
In the UK the Chemical Nomenclature Advisory Service (CNAS) of the Laboratory of the Government Chemist has produced a Euro-list of about 20 000 chemical names showing their correct IUPAC nomenclature and their classification under the European Common Tariff Rules.
This is used by HM Customs and Excise.
This list, which was published in 1981, is available in the six official languages of the European Community (Danish, Dutch, English, French, German and Italian).
In recent years, computer technology has played an increasingly important role in storing and retrieving chemical information (see figure 4.1).
Much of the information is stored in databases.
Each database may contain hundreds of thousands of references to the scientific and patent literature (see table 4.1).
There are now well over 20 million patent documents in existence.
About 800 000 new ones are published each year (see figure 4.2).
That means an average of 15 000 each week or one every 10 seconds.
INPADOC has over 10 million of these patent documents stored on computer.
To classify them, it uses the International Patent Classification (IPC) system.
This subdivides the whole field of science and technology into about 60 000 subdivisions.
To produce information, INPADOC uses COM, Computer Output on Microfiche, as one output medium.
One microfiche contains 207 pages of information and one index page.
Patents
Each Tuesday, at noon, about 1200 American patents are issued.
But only about 20 (1.7%) bear the name of a woman.
Since the US Patent Office opened in 1790 over four million patents have been issued — yet women have received only about 60 000 (or 1.5%).
Women Inventors
4.1 Stoichiometry and Nomenclature
Introduction
Stoichiometry is the study of the quantitative composition of chemical substances and also the quantitative changes that take place during chemical reactions.
The word "stoichiometry" was coined in 1792.
It derives from two Greek words: stoicheion meaning "elementary constituents" and metrein meaning "to measure." 
Much of the chemistry of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries was concerned with determining the weight ratio of elements in compounds.
This work led to our modern knowledge of atomic masses and also led to the discovery of new elements.
The largest single source of energy in most plants and animals is the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle).
This is also known as the citric acid cycle or Krebs cycle.
The cycle operates in the mitochondria of animal cells.
The Stoichiometry of Slimming
During the cycle, "energy-rich" phosphate esters are produced.
One of the most important of these is adenosine triphosphate (or ATP for short).
The ATP is converted to adenosine diphosphate (ADP), releasing energy.
The ADP is then recharged by adding another phosphate to form ATP.
Most of the energy needed by the body for functions such as muscle movement come from these processes.
The complete oxidation of one molecule of glucose to form carbon dioxide and water provides sufficient energy to recharge 38 molecules of ADP.
In mammals, about 50% of the carbohydrates consumed are normally oxidised to carbon dioxide and water to produce energy and about 30 to 40% are converted to fat.
Stoichiometry is of fundamental importance in modern chemistry.
It is the basis of quantitative chemical analysis, for example.
In the chemical industry, a knowledge of stoichiometry is essential for the calculation of the yields of chemical products and the efficiency of chemical processes.
In the aerospace and transport industries, scientists and engineers use stoichiometric procedures to calculate fuel needs.
Stoichiometric procedures also help the biochemist to follow the metabolic processes that take place in organisms.
The process of energy production in living cells is an example.
Each Tuesday, at noon, about 1200 American patents are issued.
But only about 20 (1.7%) bear the name of a women.
Since the US Patent Office opened in 1790 over four million patents have been issued — yet women have recived only about 60000 (or 1.5%).
Women Inventors
All matter is composed of chemical substances.
Chemical substances may be divided into two types: pure substances and mixtures (see figure 4.3).
Chemical Substances
Pure substances have a fixed composition and well defined chemical and physical properties.
They are always homogeneous (see below).
There are two types of pure substance —elements and compounds.
Pure Substances
An element is a pure substance which cannot be split up into any simpler pure substance.
Elements are usually classified as metals or non-metals (see chapter 11).
A compound is a pure substance composed of two or more elements combined in fixed and definite proportions.
For example, the compound carbon dioxide, C02, is composed of the two elements, carbon and oxygen.
Carbon dioxide invariably contains 27.37% carbon and 72.73% oxygen, by mass.
This is equally true whether we take our sample of carbon dioxide from the North Pole, the South Pole, the Sahara Desert or from the Moon.
Thus carbon and oxygen are invariably combined in a fixed and definite proportion in carbon dioxide.
Mixtures are substances consisting of two or more pure substances.
They have variable compositions and may consist of a single phase in which case they are called homogeneous.
A solution is a homogeneous mixture.
They may also exist in two or more phases.
They are then called heterogeneous.
Soil is an example of a heterogeneous mixture.
Mixtures
All chemical substances, whether elements, compounds or mixtures, are made up of three types of particles.
We have already met these in the previous chapters.
They are: atoms — an atom consists of electrons, neutrons and protons (see chapter 1); an atom is characterised by the number of protons in its nucleus, and this number is called its atomic number
Types of Particle
molecules — a molecule consists of two or more atoms combined in a whole number ratio
ions — an ion is an electrically charged atom or group of atoms; the charge is due to the gain or loss of electrons
An entity is any chemical or isotopically distinct atom, molecule, ion, radical, complex, etc., capable of identification as a separately distinguishable entity.
A set of chemical identical entities is known as a chemical skies.
Chemical names and formulae may refer to either chemical species or entities depending on the context.
The term chemical substance used above refers to matter capable of preparation in sufficient quantity to show distinct chemical behaviour.
Entities
During chemical reactions, one or more substances change their chemical composition to form one or more new substances.
The substances undergoing the change are called reactants and the substances formed are called products.
Thus Reactants Products The composition of chemical compounds and the changes in composition that take place during chemical reactions are governed by four important laws.
These are called the laws of chemical combination.
Laws of Chemical Combination
This law states that matter cannot be created or destroyed in a chemical reaction.
For example, if 4 grams of hydrogen burns in oxygen to form 36 grams of water, the mass of oxygen involved in the reaction must be 32 grams. 
The Law of Conservative of Matter (Lavoisier 1774)
The Law of Constant Composition (proust 1797)
This states that a pure compound always consists of the same elements combined in the same proportion by weight.
This law was implicit in the definition of a compound given above.
This states that when two elements A and B combine to form more than one compound, the weights of A which combine with a fixed weight of B are in the proportion of small whole numbers.
For example, since Ar(N) = 1 and Ar(O) =16 the weight ratio NO in water, H2O, is 2:16, and the weight ratio H:O in hydrogen peroxide, H2O2 is 2:32 or 1:16.
Thus, the weight ratio of hydrogen combined with a fixed weight of oxygen (say 16 grams) in water and in hydrogen peroxide is 2:l.
The Law of Multiple Proportions (Dalton, 1803)
The Law of Reciprocal Proportion (Richter, 1792)
This states that the weights of two or more substances which chemically react separately with a fixed weight of a third substance are also the weights which react with each other or simple multiples of them.
For example, consider the following two reactions.
On the basis of this information, the law of reciprocal proportions tells us to expect that carbon and hydrogen combine in the weight ratio, 12:4.
This is indeed the weight ratio of carbon and hydrogen in methane, CH4.
The four laws of chemical combination form the basis of stoichiometry.
They were first stated in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries in terms of combining weights.
Nowadays it is common to use the term mass instead of weight.
This is because weight is variable.
Weight is the gravitational force of attraction exerted on a body.
Mass on the other hand is invariable.
Mass is a measure of quantity of matter.
Mass is measured in kilograms and weight in newtons.
Weight and Mass
The formulae (or formulas) and in many cases the names of pure substances (elements and compounds) indicate the stoichiometry of the substance.
The naming or nomenclature of chemical substances falls broadly into two categories: inorganic nomenclature and organic nomenclature.
In this section we shall confine ourselves mainly to inorganic nomenclature and leave a more systematic treatment of organic nomenclature until chapter 17.
Both treatments will provide no more than outlines and in no way can be regarded as exhaustive.
NAMES AND FORMULAE
Every element has a symbol.
A full list is given in appendix C. Some symbols derive from the Latin names of the elements (see table 4.2).
Notice that these are all metals.
The first parts of these Latin names used to be used in naming cations.
For example, Cu+ was called the cuprous ion and Cu2+ the cupric ion.
We shall look at further examples of this older system below.
Latin names are still used for naming metals in some complex anions (see below also).
Symbols
The formula of an element or compound which exists as molecules consists of symbols of the element(s) in one molecule and shows the number of atoms of each element in one molecule.
This is also called the molecular formula.
For example, one molecule of oxygen contains two atoms of oxygen.
Its formula is Oz.
One molecule of ammonia contains one atom of nitrogen and three atoms of hydrogen.
Its formula is NH3.
Formulae
The formulae of metallic, ionic or covalent network substances show the simplest ratios of the atoms or ions in the lattice.
A formula of an ion shows the ratio of atoms of each element present in the ion.
In the fluorite (calcium fluoride) lattice, for example, there are two fluoride ions to every calcium ion.
The formula is thus CaF2.
The structural formula of a covalent element or compound shows how the bonds in one molecule are arranged (see table 4.3).
When all the bonds are fully displayed, the formula is called a displayed formula.
The empirical formula shows the simplest ratio of the number of atoms or ions in a substance.
For network substances, there is no difference between formula and empirical formula.
However, for covalent substances consisting of simple molecules, the formula is often a simple multiple of the empirical formula (see table 4.3).
There are two important systems of nomenclature as far as we are concerned.
One is that of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) and the other is that of the Association for Science Education (ASE).
Both systems have much in common.
However, the IUPAC system relies more heavily on the use of trivial names.
Many substances have trivial names.
These names often are traditional and well-established but do not comply with any system of nomenclature.
More importantly, they do not provide information about the chemical composition of the substance.
Water (H2O) and ozone (03) are examples of trivial names.
INORGANIC NOMENCLATURE
The ASE system relies much more on systematic names.
These names are based on well defined rules.
In this book we shall use ASE nomenclature, although for many substances this will be the same as the IUPAC nomenclature.
The most important rule of nomenclature is that the name of a substance should be unambiguous.
For example, magnesium oxide is an unambiguous name since magnesium only forms one oxide, MgO.
However, carbon oxide is an ambiguous name since carbon forms two oxides, CO and C02.
These are thus named carbon mono monoxide and carbon dioxide respectively.
Systematic names-particularly in IUPAC nomenclature-rely heavily on the use of numerical prefixes to indicate the number of atoms or number of groups in a substance (see table 4.4).
The prefix mono is often dropped.
For example, nitrogen monoxide, NO, is also called nitrogen oxide.
These are used extensively in both ASE and IUPAC nomenclature.
The oxidation number of an element is equal to its combining power with oxygen.
Elements in both ionic and covalent compounds can have oxidation numbers.
There are a number of rules for calculating oxidation numbers.
The three most important are: 1.
The oxidation number of uncombined elements = 0 one-atom ions = charge each hydrogen atom = +1 each oxygen atom = -2 2.
The sum of the oxidation numbers of the elements in a compound is zero.
3.
The oxoanions (also known as oxyanions) the oxidation number of the element in the ion is given by (2 x no. of oxygen atoms)— numerical value of charge
Oxidation Numbers
As a general rule, when an element has more than one oxidation number the numerical value is written as a Roman numeral after the name.
Examples are shown in table 4.5.
Oxoanions are given the numerical value of the oxidation number of the element which combines with oxygen in the ion.
Elements are not named in any systematic way.
They are thus trivial and provide no chemical information about the element (see table 4.6).
Names of Elements
The number of atoms in one molecule of a simple covalent element is often called the atomicity of the element.
For example, all noble gases are monatomic.
Their molecules consist of one atom only.
Hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and chlorine are all diatomic.
Their molecules consist of two atoms.
All the isotopes (see section 1.1) of an element have the same name.
The only exception is hydrogen which has a name for each isotope: Isotope; protium deuterium tritium Symbol:
Many allotropes (see section 3.2) have trivial names (see table 4.7).
A binary compound contains two elements.
Binary compounds can be named systematically as follows.
The name of the element closer to the bottom or to the left-hand side of the Periodic Table is usually given first.
The suffix "-ide" is added to the name of the second element.
For covalent compounds, a prefix is often added to the first and-or second name to indicate the ratio of atoms in the compound.
For example sulphur troxide dinitrogen tetroxide diiodine hexachloride Alternatively, where a binary compound contains an element which may exist in more than one oxidation state, the oxidation number is indicated.
For example 
Naming Binary Compounds
The hydrides, particularly those of non-metals, tend to have trivial names (see table 4.8)
Cations of elements which only form one stable ion are given the same name as the element.
All elements in Groups I and II fall into this category.
For example d-Block elements often form more than one stable cation.
Such ions take the name of the element followed by a Roman numeral in parentheses indicating the oxidation number of the ion.
Naming Cations
The older system of naming such ions is still used nowadays.
This distinguishes between the two most common oxidation states.
The ion with the higher oxidation number is given the suffix -ic and the one with the lower oxidation number -ous.
These are often but not always added to a segment of the Latin name of the element (see table 4.9).
Polyatomic cations often have the suffix -ium (see table 4.10).
Monatomic and some polyatomic anions end in -ide (see table 4.11).
Naming Anions
The most common oxonanions end in -ate.
Those with an element in a low oxidation state end in -ite.
The prefix hypo- is used for an ion with an element in a very low oxidation state and the prefix per- for an ion with an element in a high oxidation state.
The prefix thio- is also used for sulphur analogues of oxonanions (see table 4.12).
In the ASE system of nomenclature, the oxidation number of an element in an oxoanion is sometimes used instead of or together with a prefix of suffix.
The list shown in table 4.13 is not exhaustive.
Other examples of polyatomic anions will be encountered in this book.
A complex ion consists of a central atom to which are bonded atoms, ions or groups of atoms.
These are called ligands.
Names and Formulae of Complex ions
The formula of the complex ion is enclosed in square brackets.
The charge on the ion is put outside the closing bracket.
Inside the bracket the symbol of the  central atom is placed first.
This is followed by the formulae of the anionic ligands and then neutral ligands in the alphabetical order of the donor atom (see chapter 14).
Polyatomic ligands are placed in curved brackets.
In naming complex ions, the names of the ligands are cited first.
They are placed in alphabetical order —ignoring the numerical prefixes.
The name of the complex ion terminates with the name of the metal together with the oxidation state of the metal in parentheses.
For complex cations, the English name of the metal is used (see table 4.14).
For complex anions, a segment of the English or Latin name of the metal is used together with the suffix -ate.
The names and formulae of some of the more common ligands are shown in table 4.15.
Table 4.16 shows the names of metals used in anionic complexes.
The name of a salt consists of the name of the cation followed buy the name of the anion.
The prefix "hydrogen" is attached to the name of the anion for acid salts.
Numerical prefixes are not used in naming salts except for some acid salts.
For double salts, the cations are given in alphabetical order.
For basic salts, the anions are given in alphabetical order (see table 4.17)
Naming Salts
Salt hydrates can be named in two ways.
When one or more water molecules are known to be coordinated to a central atom in a complex ion, the system for naming   complex ions described above can be used.
For the more common salt hydrates, the extent of hydration is indicated by the word "hydrate" preceded by a numerical prefix.
However, the ASE system of nomenclature prefers the use of an Arabic numeral and the word "water" .
thus, is copper (II) sulphate pentahydrate or, in the ASE system, copper (II) sulphate-5-water.
Acids are named after their anions.
The acids of anions with the suffix -ide become hydro -ic; those with suffix -ate become -ic and those with suffix -ite become -ous. the ASE system of nomenclature also uses oxidation numbers for the less common oxoacids (see table 4.18).
Naming Acids
Thioacids are sulphur analogues of oxoacids.
Thus sulphuric acid thiosuphuric acid
The formula of an ionic compound shows the simplest ratio of ions in the ionic lattice.
Since the lattice is electrically neutral, the formula must show this neutrality (see table 4.19).
Formula of Ionic Compounds
When writing the formulae of both covalent molecules and ionic compounds, it is often useful to use the valency of an atom, ion or group of atoms.
Valency is the number of electrons used by an atom in bonding.
For a cation, the valency is the number of electrons lost in forming the ion.
For an anion, the valency is the number of electrons gained in forming the ion.
The valency of an atom in a covalent molecule is the number of electrons shared by the atom in forming the bond.
Valency
Valencies are always small whole numbers.
Some common valencies are shown in table 4.20.
Inert gases such as helium have zero valencies. they do not normally form compounds.
Some elements, particularly d-block metals, have multiple valencies (see table 4.21).
Table 4.22 gives examples of how valencies can be used to find the formulae of simple compounds.
Valencies sometimes have the same numerical values as oxidation numbers — but not always.
Carbon, for example, always has a valency of 4 whereas its oxidation number varies from -4 to +4.
In organic chemistry it is thus more convenient to describe carbon in terms of its valency than its oxidation numbers.
Table 4.23 compares the valency and oxidation numbers of carbon in five compounds.
Most compounds are stoichiometric.
This means that the ratio of atoms or ions in the compound is a simple whole number ratio.
However, some compounds do not have constant integral ratios.
The exact ratio may vary depending on the method of preparation.
The following are examples.
iron (II) sulphide iron (II) oxide copper (I) sulphide These compounds are often called non-stoichiometric compounds.
Non-Stoichiometric Compounds
The non-stoichiometry of these compounds arises from defects in their crystal lattices.
In some cases atoms take up interstitial positions between the ions in a crystal.
In other cases atoms take the place of ions in regular lattice positions.
This results in ionic vacancies in the lattice, thus preserving electrical neutrality.
Strictly speaking non-stoichiometric compounds are not compounds since they do not have a constant composition.
For this reason, the term non-stoichiometric solid is often preferred.
4.2 Stoichiometric Calculations
The Mole
Amount of Substance
The amount of substance is a physical quantity.
It has the symbol n and its base unit is the mole.
The mole requires careful definition.
The following definition and passage is taken from Chemical Nomenclature, Symbols and Terminology published by the Association for Science Education (ASE) in 1985:
The mole is the amount of substance of a system which contains as many elementary entities as there are carbon atoms in 0.012 kilogram of carbon-12.
The elementary entities must be specified and may be atoms, molecules, ions, electrons, other particles, or specified groups of such particles.
The amount of substance is proportional to the number of specified elementary entities of that substance.
The proportionality factor is the same for all substances; its reciprocal is L, the Avogadro constant [(6.022 045 + 0.000 031) X 1023 mol 1].
Note that the Avogadro constant is a physical quantity with the dimension [amount-of-substance]1, and is not a pure number.
The term "Avogadro number" should not be used.
For example(taking the Avogadro constant to be ): By turning these statements around we can show that the Avogadro constant is a physical quantity and not a pure number.
For example, there are 6.02 X 1023 oxygen molecules, 02, per mole of oxygen molecules, 02.
Notice that in each of these examples we are careful to specify exactly the entities or particles to which the amount of substance refers.
This is essential if the statement is to be unambiguous.
For example, "one mole of hydrogen" is ambiguous since it could mean either "one mole of hydrogen atoms, H" or "one mole of hydrogen molecules, H2" .
Mass is a physical quantity.
Its base unit is the kilogram although in chemical calculations it is often more convenient to use grams.
Molar Mass
Molar mass is the mass per unit amount of substance.
It is normally expressed as the number of grams per mole.
The molar mass of atoms of an element is related to the relative atomic mass (see section 11) of the element by the equation where M denotes the molar mass of atoms of the element and Ar is the relative atomic mass of the element.
This expression can also be used to relate the molar masses of monatomic ions to the relative atomic masses of the elements.
For example, since 
The molar mass of a molecular substance has the same numerical value as its relative molecular mass (see section 4.1).
Thus where is the relative molecular mass.
This expression can also be used to calculate the molar masses of polyatomic ions and ionic compounds.
The values of for polyatomic ions and ionic compounds are calculated in the same way as for molecular compounds.
EXAMPLE What is the molar mass of carbonate ions,?
SOULTION Note that neither Ar nor Mr have units.
The mass of several moles of a substance can be calculated using the following relationship: where m denotes the mass of the substance in units of grams, fl denotes the amount of substance in units of moles and M denotes the molar mass of the substance in units of grams per mole.
Similarly, the mass of a substance can be converted to the amount of substance using the following relationship: Example Calculate the amount of methane molecules, CH4, in 8.0 grams of methane, CH4.
Solution We substitute these values into equation (1) above.
Thus 
The number of particles of a substance can be calculated from either the amount of the substance or the mass of the substance using the following equations: where N denotes the number of particals and L is the Avogadro constant.
EXAMPLE Calculated the number of water molecules, H2O, in 100g of water.
SOLUTION 
Number of Particles
We saw in the previous section that the formula of a molecular compound shows the number of atoms of each element in one molecule of the compound.
The formula also shows the number of moles of atoms of each element in one mole of molecules.
For an ionic compound, the formula shows not only the ratio of the different ions present in the lattice but also the ratio of moles of the different ions present in the compound.
The moles in these ratios can be converted to masses as shown above.
In this way the formula of a compound can be used to calculate the percentage composition by mass of a compound.
Percentage Composition
EXAMPLE Calculate the percentage composition of benzene, C6H6.
SOLUTION The formula C6H6 shows that one mole of benzene molecules contains 6 moles of carbon atoms and 6 moles of hydrogen atoms.
Thus 
This shows the simplest ratio of atoms of each element or the simplest ratio of the different ions present in a compound.
Empirical Formula
The empirical formula can be determined from the composition ofa compound.
There are two stages in this determination: Stage 1: the number of moles of each element present in a known mass of the compound is found; Stage 2: the simplest whole number ratio of moles is found; this gives the empirical formula.
Example A sugar was found to contain 40% by mass of carbon, 6.7% by mass of hydrogen and 53.3% by mass of oxygen.
What is its empirical formula?
Solution The percentages show that 100 grams of the sugar contain 40 grams of carbon, 6.7 grams of hydrogen and 53.3 grams of oxygen.
We can thus find the empirical formula as follows: The empirical formula of the sugar is thus 
The Avogadro constant is a molar constant.
We have already met one other molar constant.
That was the molar gas constant (see section 3.1).
This is equal to There is one other molar constant we shall need to use.
This is the Faraday constant.
This is the electric charge associated with one mole of electrons or one mole of singly charged ions (see chapter 10).
It has a value of 96 480 coulombs per mole, that is 
Molar Constants and Molar Quantities
Molar mass is a molar quantity.
Another example is the molar volume of a gas, which at s.t.p. is 22.4 dm3 mol 1.
We shall meet some more molar quantities in the next chapter when we come to consider thermodynamic quantities.
For example, molar heat capacity is an example of a thermodynamic molar quantity.
It has the units .
Note that molar constants and molar quantities almost invariably include "mol" in their units.
This is because the word molar means "divided by the amount of substance" or "per unit amount of substance" .
In chemical calculations this unit is almost invariably the mole.
Concentration is the amount of substance per unit volume of solution.
It is usually expressed as the number of moles of solute in one litre (that is, one cubic  decimetre) of solution: where n(X) denotes the amount of solute X, Vdenotes the volume of solution and [X]denotes the concentration of solute X in solution.
[X]is sometimes called the "molar concentration" of X. The term molarity is not recommended by IUPAC or ASE.
EXAMPLE Calculate the concentration of a solution obtained by dissolving 0.53 g of pure anhydrous sodium carbonate, in water to make 250 cm3 of solution.
Composition of Homogeneous Mixtures
The term mass concentration is also used in chemical calculations.
Using grams as units of mass and dm3 as volume units, it is given by In the above example, the mass concentration of the sodium carbonate solution is 2.12 g dm3.
The term molality is also used for the composition of solutions (see chapter 6).
It is not a concentration term since volume is not involved.
Molality can be expressed as the number of moles of solute in one kilogram of solvent.
Its units are thus .
The composition of a homogeneous mixture can also be expressed in terms of the mole fraction of the components in the mixture (see section 3.1).
The mole fraction of component A in a mixture of A and B is given by where denotes the number of moles of denotes the number of moles of B and XA denotes the mole fraction of A.
A chemical equation is a representation of a reaction in terms of the symbols and formulae of the elements and compounds involved.
The relative amounts of reactants and products, measured in moles, are indicated by the coefficients in the balanced equation.
These coefficients are sometimes called the stoichiometric  coefficients.
Nowadays, there is a growing tendency to include the physical states of the reactants and products in equations.
These are (g) gas (l) liquid (s) solid (aq) aqueous, meaning dissolved in water
CHEMICAL EQUATIONS
Chemical equations describing reactions can be deduced experimentally by identifying the reactants and products and measuring the relative amounts of each reactant and product involved in the reaction.
This involves four stages: Stage 1: The word equation is written.
For example Magnesium + Carbon dioxide Magnesium Oxide + Carbon Stage 2: The words are replaced by the formula of the reactants and products Stage 3: The equation is balanced This is called the balanced equation or stoichiometric equation.
Balancing is required by the law of conservation of matter.
Thus, in our example, no magnesium, carbon or oxygen atoms can be created or destroyed.
The number of atoms of each element on either side of the equation must therefore be equal.
Stage 4: The physical states are finally put in 
WRITING A CHEMICAL EQUATION
Let us consider the following balanced equation: This equation represents the reaction system as a whole.
The reaction can also be represented by an ionic equation: In this equation the sulphate ions, have been removed since they do not take part in the reaction.
They are called spectator ions.
Types of Chemical Equation
The reaction between iron and copper(ii) is an example of a redox reaction (see chapter 10).
It can be split up to show separately the reduction and the oxidation taking place in the overall reaction: These two equations are called half-equations.
They are particularly useful in electrochemistry in showing the processes that take place at electrodes (see chapter 10).
The following simple stoichiometric equation can be interpreted in two ways:
Interpreting Chemical Equations
First of all we can take this equation to mean that, overall, one mole of hydrogen molecules, H2, reacts with one mole of bromine molecules, Br2, to produce two moles of hydrogen bromide molecules, HBr.
This is sometimes called the molar interpretation.
We could also say that, overall, one molecule of hydrogen, H2, reacts with one molecule of bromine, Br2, to produce two molecules of hydrogen bromide, HBr.
This is sometimes called the molecular interpretation.
Both the molar and molecular interpretations are valid.
However, we could not conclude from the equation that one molecule of hydrogen, H2, collides with one molecule of bromine, Br2, to produce two molecules of HBr.
This is because the reaction, like most other reactions, takes place in a number of steps.
These steps are called the reaction mechanism (see chapter 9).
In the example above, the steps include This is, in fact, an example of a chain reaction involving reaction intermediates called radicals (see chapter 9).
Other reaction steps and side reactions are also involved in this reaction mechanism.
The stoichiometric equation thus only shows the overall reaction.
It does not provide information about the reaction mechanism.
Chemical equations are the starting points for many types of calculations in chemistry.
In this section we shall consider a few examples of these calculations.
We shall meet further examples later in the book.
Calculations Using Chemical Equations
We have seen that a balanced chemical equation shows the relative amounts of reactants and products, measured in moles, involved in a reaction.
Once we know the amounts involved we can calculate the masses of reactants and products.
Calculating the Masses of Reactants and Products
EXAMPLE Calculate the mass of silver chloride formed when excess sodium chloride solution is added to a solution containing 0.1 moles of silver, Ag+.
SOLUTION The first step in any such calculation is to write the equation for the reaction: Since excess chloride ions are used, we can assume that all the Age ions are converted to AgCl.
The equation shows that one mole of Age ions produces one mole of AgCl(s).
We can now calculate the mass of AgCl(s) produced as follows:
Calculations based on stoichiometric equations form the basis of quantitative chemical analysis.
The following is an example of how the concentration of  solution can be determined from the mass of a product formed in a reaction.
This form of quantitative chemical analysis is known as gravimetric analysis.
Finding the Concentration of Solutions
EXAMPLE Sufficient potassium iodide solution was added to a lead(ii) nitrate solution to precipitate all the lead as lead (I,) iodide.
The mass of lead(II) iodide produced was 2.305 g.
The volume of lead(II) nitrate solution was 250 cm3.
What was the concentration of lead(II) nitrate?
SOLUTION We have already met the equation for the reaction: The equation shows that one mole of lead(II) iodide can be produced from one mole of lead(II) nitrate.
Thus 
Stoichiometric equations can be used to calculate the volumes of gaseous reactants or products of a reaction.
EXAMPLE Calculate the maximum volume of C02 at s.t.p. that can be obtained when dilute hydrochloric acid is added to 10 grams of calcium carbonate.
SOLUTION The equation is The equation shows that one mole of C02 is produced from one mole of CaCO,.
Thus 
Calculating the Volumes of Gaseous Reactants and Products
The reactions that take place at electrodes can be represented by half-equations.
For example, the following reaction shows that one mole of lead(II) ions are discharged at a cathode by two moles of electrons: In chapter 10 we shall see how such half-reactions form the basis of calculating the mass of substances discharged at electrodes during electrolysis.
Electrolysis Calculations
The mass of product formed in a chemical reaction is called the yield.
The yield of a product calculated from the chemical equation is called the theoretical yield.
The yield actually obtained in an experiment or in an industrial process is called the actual yield.
Yield
When the actual yield equals the theoretical yield, the yield is said to be quantitative.
A chemical reaction which produces a quantitative yield is often called a stoichiometric process Many ionic reactions produce quantitative yields.
Neutralisations and ionic precipitations are examples.
However, many yields of chemical reactions are not quantitative This is particularly the case with Organic chemical reactions.
It is then often necessary to calculate the percentage yield.
This is given by the following relationship:
The percentage yield is a measure of the efficiency of the reaction.
A chemical reaction which produces a quantitative yield is thus 100% efficient.
Chemical reactions which do not produce quantitative yields are sometimes called non-stoichiometric processes.
However, this is really a misnomer since the laws of chemical combination require that all chemical reactions are stoichiometric, that is, that combinations must involve exact whole numbers of particles (atoms, ions or molecules) in fixed, characteristic ratios.
The non-stoichiometry of a reaction can be due to a number of factors such as impurities in the reactants, side reactions and practical factors such as loss on crystallisation.
Percentage yields of non-stoichiometric processes can often be increased by using an excess of one or more of the reactants.
In this case the theoretical yield is calculated from the amount of reactant which is not used in excess.
This reactant is called the limiting reactant.
EXAMPLE Bromobenzene can be prepared by the reaction of benzene with excess bromine in the presence of iron (ii,) chloride.
In one experiment, 230 grams of bromobenzene were obtained from a 20.0 gram sample of benzene.
Calculate the percentage yield.
SOLUTION The equation for this reaction is The equation above shows that, assuming 100% conversion, one mole of C6H6 produces one mole of C6H5Br Thus 
The overall economic objective of a production department in the chemical industry is to produce chemicals of sufficient quality and in sufficient quantity that they can be sold at a profit.
This requires that all resources should be used as efficiently as possible.
This cannot be achieved unless the chemical process itself is efficient.
INDUSTRIAL STOICHIOMETRY
The starting point for considering the efficiency of a chemical process is the stoichiometry of the process.
In theory, but not usually in practice, the total mass of products of a chemical process should equal the total mass of reactants used in the process.
This is called the mass balance.
It follows directly from the law of conservation of matter.
In practice, an excess of one or more reactants is used in a process.
In addition, side reactions may produce by-products.
The term "mass balance" is thus often taken to mean that the total mass of materials used at the beginning of (and during) the process must equal the total mass of products, by-products, unused reactants and solvents at the end of the process.
A distinction is usually made between the theoretical mass balance and the actual mass balance.
The theoretical mass balance includes the predicted yield of desired product.
This is based on calculations performed by chemical engineers and also on experimental trials carried out in a laboratory or pilot plant.
In many processes the actual masses do not balance due to unavoidable and sometimes avoidable wastage of material.
This wastage can be shown up by comparing the theoretical mass balance with the actual mass balance.
In industry the terms starting materials, raw materials or feedstock are used instead of reactants.
For a process to be economically viable it is essential that the optimum yield of desired product is obtained from the raw materials.
The optimum yield is not necessarily the theoretical yield or even the maximum possible yield.
Production of the maximum possible yield might, for example, require too high a consumption of an expensive starting material or the process might take too long and thus prove uneconomic.
A number of factors have to be considered when determining the overall efficiency of a process and expected yield is only one of them.
In many industrial processes the optimum yield of a desired product is only a fraction of the mass of starting materials.
The actual yield of a chemical process can be influenced by a number of factors.
These include temperature pressure rate of agitation (stirring) presence of a catalyst purity of starting materials effectiveness of isolation procedures.
We shall examine the influence of such factors on chemical reactions when we come to consider chemical equilibria (chapter 1) and chemical kinetics (chapter 9).
These show the flow of materials during an industrial chemical process.
Many flow diagrams also include the quantities of materials flowing in and out at each stage of the process.
The masses of materials used at each stage must equal the masses of material produced.
These materials include wash water, solvents and effluent (discharges).
The overall mass balance for the process is shown as a total of the materials used (in) and a total of the materials produced (out).
The two totals must balance.
Flow Diagrams
Figure 4.4 shows a simplified flow diagram for the manufacture of batches of caustic soda, NaOH, from sodium carbonate by the bossage process.
The flow diagram is based on the following process.
Manufacture of Caustic Soda, NaOH, From Sodium Carbonate,
1.
An 88 800 kg batch of sodium carbonate solution containing 8480 kg of Na2CO3 is added to an agitated vessel called a causticiser.
2. 4480 kg of quicklime, CaO, are then added.
This is the stoichiometric amount.
The mixture is then heated in the agitated vessel.
The result is a mixture of solids and liquid called a slurry.
3.
The slurry is first decanted to remove most of the liquid.
The resultant sludge is washed with twice its weight of water and then filtered.
The wet solids left in the filter are called the filter cake.
The equations for the process are 
Laboratory tests show that under the conditions in the reaction vessel, a 90% yield is obtained after 2 hours.
ENERGETICS
Solar Fuels
The Hydrogen Tree
A radical new approach to solar energy may come from biotechnology — a broad class of systems that have at their core photosynthetic and biological energy conversion processes.
Plants have long "known" how to use the energy of sunlight to split water, but they do not evolve hydrogen explicitly, since it is needed only for internal energetic processes within the plant itself as a means for reducing carbon dioxide.
However, it may be possible to develop new biological structures that in fact evolve hydrogen.
At IIASA [The International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria], Cesare Marchetti considered the concept of   hydrogen-producing trees.
The concept is essentially one of replacing expensive solar collectors and solar cells with tree leaves.
Swollen plant tissues, so-called galls, located at the tree trunk would be genetically programmed to use the solar energy captured in the leaves for generating hydrogen gas as a by-product of photosynthesis.
The hydrogen gas would be collected within the galls and piped to a central storage system.
The essential features of such a system already exist in nature.
Many insects and bacteria induce the formation of galls in different types of plants.
These various kinds of galls, which number in the tens of thousands, then provide the shelter or nutrients needed by the organism that caused them.
In at least one case, that of Rhizobium bacteria in symbiosis with leguminous plants, substantial hydrogen is produced in the galls, though currently it simply escapes to the atmosphere.
It has been estimated that in this way US soybean plantations leak about 30 billion cubic metres of hydrogen annually.
Adapting this potential so that the plants can be easily integrated with some sort of collection system will depend on advances in the techniques of genetic engineering.
The gall actuates a reverse of photosynthesis and makes hydrogen (or methane) available in an enclosed cavity that can be tapped by a collector pipe.
Eighty-six per cent of all the wood consumed annually in the developing countries is used for fuel, and of this total at least half is used for cooking.
Nearly everywhere, reliance on charcoal as a source of fuel is increasing.
In Tanzania, for example, the charcoal share of the wood fuel burned, which was 3% in 1970, is expected to rise to 25% by the year 2000.
In principle this is discouraging, because in preparing the charcoal more than half the wood's energy is wastefully burned away.
But charcoal makes wood energy easier and cheaper to transport, and the growing reliance on it is a result of the increasing distance from harvest site to the user.
Also, charcoal is preferred because of its steady and concentrated heat, its smokeless burning, and because it can easily be extinguished when the fire is no longer needed.
Charcoal can also substitute for fossil fuels, which in some places is an urgent need.
Regardless of overall inefficiency, it seems clear that more meals will be cooked over charcoal in the future.
Wood
The most popular but not necessarily the most economic biomass conversion process is undoubtedly the production of ethyl alcohol (ethanol,) from sugar-cane and maize.
The world's leading producer is Brazil, producing 3.2 billion litres of alcohol from sugar-cane, sorghum and cassava.
The alcohol can be blended with petrol to a proportion of up to 20% alcohol and run in a conventional car engine without adjustment.
However, in case of need, cars can run on pure alcohol after adjustments.
Ethanol
The cost of alcohol in Brazil is higher than most gasoline sold in Europe in 1980.
Nevertheless, the indirect benefits are judged very beneficial to Brazil.
They include the saving of foreign exchange, the creation of new employment, the encouragement of domestic technology and industry.
The United States is also deeply involved in the promotion of ethanol production and has set a target of approximately 3477 million litres a year of alcohol for fuel use by 1982.
Most of the distilleries use corn as feedstock.
Other countries known to be interested in bioconversion to ethanol include Australia (cassava) and New Zealand (beet).
Some economists feel deep disquiet at the use of food grains to produce motor spirit.
They feel that it will lead to the rich getting transport and the poor getting starvation with land currently used for food production being used for fuel.
Several situations can be envisaged in which production is economic.
The developing countries with a surplus agricultural production but an energy deficit, such as Brazil, Sudan, and Thailand, are likely to have the strongest incentives to develop large biomass energy programmes in order to reduce their dependence on imported energy.
Most of the countries with viable alcohol programmes are likely to belong to this group.
Many of the large developing countries, such as Bangladesh and Pakistan, however, are net importers of both agricultural products and energy.
In most of these countries ethanol production is likely to be attractive only if based on surplus low-cost biomass materials such as molasses and agricultural crop residues (or sugar-cane during periods of world sugar surpluses).
In countries with surplus energy, such as Mexico, Nigeria and Venezuela, there is little incentive to launch major biomass energy programmes.
5.1 Thermodynamics
Thermodynamics is the study of energy.
It is concerned with the forms energy can take, how efficiently it can be used and to what extent energy can be made available for useful work.
Classical thermodynamics is the study of energy and work in macroscopic systems.
This means it is concerned with the bulk properties of a system.
These include pressure, volume and temperature.
It is not concerned with the motions, forces and interactions of individual particles.
The study of the energy relationships and the statistical behaviour of large groups of particles is called statistical thermodynamics.
This branch of thermodynamics applies the laws of statistics to component microscopic particles.
It relies heavily on the mathematical implications of quantum theory.
Chemical thermodynamics focuses on energy transfer during chemical reactions and on the work done by chemical systems.
Chemical thermodynamics is an important branch of chemistry.
For example, it can be used: to predict whether or not a chemical reaction is likely to occur when two different substances are mixed; to enable the amount of energy theoretically required by or released during reactions to be calculated; to predict the extent to which a reaction will proceed before reaching a condition of equilibrium.
A system is that part of the world which we are interested in or which we are investigating.
We might be investigating it with an experiment or we might be doing some calculations on it.
A system might be a beaker containing a known amount of water or it might be a heat exchanger used in a chemical plant.
Systams And Surroundings
The rest of the world —outside the system —is called the surroundings.
The surroundings include all other objects which might act on the system under investigation.
An isolated system is completely insulated from its surroundings.
There is thus no energy transfer between an isolated system and its surroundings.
An isolated system is an ideal system.
It cannot be achieved in practice.
However, although it cannot be achieved in practice, the concept of an isolated system il important in estimating the maximum theoretical energy differences between a system and surroundings.
The macroscopic quantities that describe the state of a thermodynamic system are called state variables or state functions.
State functions are connected by mathematical relationships called equations of state (see section 3.1).
For example, the pressure, volume and temperature of n moles of an ideal gas are related by the following equation of state: This is, of course , the ideal gas equation (see section 3.1).
Pressure, volume and temperature are all state functions.
When the state of a system is altered, the change in any state function depends only on the initial and final states of the system.
It does not depend on how the change is accomplished.
For example, if the temperature of a beaker of water is raised from an initial temperature T1 to a final temperature T2, the change in temperature is given by The Greek letter (called delta) is used to refer to a change in a quantity.
The change is always found by subtracting the initial value of the quantity from its final value.
STATE FUNCTIONS
Energy is the capacity to do work.
The unit of energy is the same as that for work.
It is the joule and it has the symbol J.
THE ENERGY OF A SYSTEM
There are numerous different forms of energy.
For example chemical energy electrical energy mechanical energy nuclear energy solar energy Each of these forms of energy relates to a specific system or type of system.
For example, chemical energy relates to chemical systems and solar energy relates to the energy of the Sun.
All these forms of energy consist essentially of two types of energy.
These are kinetic energy and potential energy.
Kinetic energy is the energy of a body due to its motion.
The kinetic energy is related to the mass m of a body and its velocity v by the relationship: Potential energy is the energy stored by a body.
A chemical system may consist of atoms, molecules and ions or any combination of these.
These particles all have kinetic energy and potential energy.
The combined kinetic energy and potential energy of all the particles in the system is called the internal energy of the system.
INTERNAL ENERGY
The kinetic energy is due to the motions of the particles.
These motions may be translational, rotational or vibrational (see figure 5.2).
The potential energy of the particles is due to the electrostatic forces of attraction between the particles and within the particles.
For example, the electrons in an atom have potential energy with respect to the other electrons in the atom as well as with respect to the positive charges on the nucleus.
The  potential energy of a particular electron with an electrical charge 4, in the vicinity of other electrical charges q2 is given by: where r is the distance between the electron and the centre of the other charges.
Bond energy is also a form of potential energy (see figure 2.1).
Temperature is, as we saw above, a state function.
It is a measure of the average kinetic energy of all the particles in a system.
If we transfer energy to a system, the kinetic energy of the particles in the system increases.
The temperature therefore rises.
This, in fact, is the fifth assumption of the kinetic theory of gases (see section 3.1).
Temperature
Internal energy is a function of the state of a system.
It is given the symbol U. The absolute value of the internal energy of a system cannot be determined experimentally.
What can be measured, however, is the change in internal energy of a system.
This is given by AU has a negative value if Ufinal is smaller than Uinitial This occurs if the system loses energy, that is, if energy is transferred from the system to the surroundings.
TRANSFER OF ENERGY
There are two fundamental ways of transferring energy to or from a system.
These are heat and work.
The transfer of energy caused by a difference in temperature between a system and its surroundings or between a system and another system is called heat.
The amount of energy transferred in this way is written q.
Heat is proportional to the mass m of the system and the temperature change AT associated with this transfer of energy: For a system consisting of a particular substance, this becomes where c is the specific heat capacity of the substance.
HEAT
The specific heat capacity of a substance is the energy required to raise the temperature of one kilogram of the substance by one kelvin.
For example, the specific heat capacity of water is 4184 J kg-1 K-1.
The molar heat capacity of a substance is the energy required to raise the temperature of one mole of the substance by one kelvin.
It is denoted Cm
Heat is not a property of a system.
It is therefore not a state function.
For example, a beaker of water may have a temperature of 50°C but it does not have heat.
To get to 50°C energy may have been transferred to the system-assuming that it was previously at a lower temperature.
Alternatively, if the beaker of water was previously at a higher temperature energy would have been transferred out of it in order to reach a temperature of 50°C.
Thus, the energy transferred to or from the system —that is, the heat —does not describe the system.
It only describes what happens to the system before it reaches its final state, which in our example was 50°C.
Work is also a form of transfer of energy from one system to another or to its surroundings.
Work is done by a system when the system exerts a force to overcome resistance.
Work can be expressed in terms of force and distance: Work = Force x Distance moved in direction of force
Work
The type of work we most commonly meet in chemistry is expansion.
For example, expansion can occur when a gas is evolved during a chemical reaction (see figure 5.3).
In this case, the work w done by a system is given by where P is the external pressure and V the change in volume.
For many chemical reactions performed in a laboratory, the external pressure is simply the atmospheric pressure.
The negative sign in the equation is necessary because work is done by the system.
The system therefore loses energy.
We have seen that a chemical system has an internal energy, U. This energy can change by an amount AU if energy is transferred in to or out of the system.
The transfer of energy in to or out of the system can take the form of heat q or the form of work w.
The quantities U, q and w are related by the equation This mathematical relationship is called the first law of thermodynamics.
If q has a positive value, the system has gained energy.
If w has a positive value, the system has also gained energy.
This means that work has been done on the system.
If w has a negative value, the work has been done by the system.
The system has thus lost energy.
has a positive value if, overall-that is, taking account of both q and w-the system has gained energy.
has a negative value, if overall, the system has lost energy.
q and w all have energy units-that is, joules.
THE FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
The first law of thermodynamics is no more than one expression of the law of conservation of energy.
This states that energy cannot be created or destroyed, although it may be converted from one form into another.
A system thus cannot create or destroy energy.
The changes in energy of system (U) is due to the transfer of energy in to or out of the system.
This can only be done by heat or work.
We saw above that the work done by a chemical system frequently results in expansion.
We can thus substitute equation (1) into equation (2) and obtain For a chemical system which involves only solid and/or liquid reactants and products, the expansion V of the system is often negligible or zero.
If the expansion is zero, the work done by the system is also zero.
We can express this mathematically as follows: since where qV is the heat absorbed at constant volume.
Reactions Carried Out at Constsnt Volume
The change in internal energy AU of a system is thus the heat absorbed by the system when the reaction occurs at constant volume.
Chemical reactions are commonly carried out in open vessels such as beakers and test-tubes.
During these reactions the pressure of the system is constant.
It usually equals the atmospheric pressure.
We saw above that the heat absorbed at constant volume equals the change in the thermodynamic state function U or internal energy.
So does the heat absorbed (or lost) by a system at constant pressure equal a change in any thermodynamic state function?
The answer is yes.
The thermodynamic state function is enthalpy.
It is denoted by the capital letter H and defined by the following mathematical relationship: where U is the internal energy of the system and pV is the energy of the system due to the space it occupies.
This term is sometimes called the external energy.
Reactions Carried Out at Constant Pressure
We should note that the small letter p is used for pressure and not the capital P. We use P for external pressure-that is, the pressure acting on a system — whereas p is used for internal pressure.
Internal pressure is the pressure of the system acting on its surroundings.
Since p, V and U are all properties of a system, that is they are all state functions, it follows from the above equation that H must also be a state function.
The change in enthalpy that occurs when a process is carried out at constant pressure is given by We can substitute equation (3) into this equation to get: where qP is the heat absorbed by the system when the pressure of the system is constant.
In open vessels the internal pressure of the system equals the external  pressure, which is, as we have seen, usually the atmospheric pressure.
We can thus assume that 
The enthalpy change, H, of a system is thus the heat absorbed by the system when the reaction occurs at constant pressure.
It is this quantity which is normally determined during calorimetric experiments (see below).
We should finally note that for reactions involving solids and liquids only the term CAV in equation (4) is negligible or zero.
Thus, for such reactions,
5.2 Enthalpies
The branch of chemistry concerned with the enthalpy changes that occur during chemical reactions and phase changes is called thermochemistry.
The experimental technique used for the determination of enthalpy is calorimetry.
Many chemical reactions are accompanied by a change in enthalpy.
This means that the total enthalpy of the products of the reaction is different from the total enthalpy of the reactants.
The enthalpy change is given by where H1 is the enthalpy of the reactants and H2 is the enthalpy of the products.
H is sometimes called the heat of reaction.
ENTHALPY CHANGE OF REACTION
If the enthalpy of the products is lower than the enthalpy of the reactants, the reaction is said to be exothermic (see figure 5.4).
Since there is a drop in enthalpy, H has a negative value.
The energy that is lost during an exothermic reaction is first transferred to the reaction mixture.
The temperature of the reaction mixture therefore increases.
This energy is then transferred to the surroundings.
Thus, once the reaction is complete, the temperature falls.
If the enthalpy of the products is higher than the enthalpy of the reactants, the reaction is said to be endothermic.
Since there is an increase in enthalpy, H has a positive value.
The energy absorbed during the reaction is first taken from the reaction mixture.
The temperature of the reaction mixture therefore decreases.
Since the temperature of the surroundings is now higher than that of the reaction mixture, energy flows into the reaction mixture from the surroundings.
Thus, once the reaction is complete, the temperature increases.
The enthalpy changes that occur during a chemical reaction or phase change vary depending on temperature, pressure and the physical states of the substances involved.
The enthalpy changes also depend on the amount of substances involved in the process.
It is therefore normal to quote the standard molar enthalpy change for a process.
The word "change" is usually dropped from this term.
STANDARD ENTHALPY CHANGES
The standard molar enthalpy of a reaction is the enthalpy change under standard conditions per mole of the reaction as specified by a balanced chemical equation.
The standard conditions usually chosen are 298 K and one atmosphere pressure.
Under these conditions, the reactants and products are said to be in their standard states.
For example, the standard state of hydrogen is a gas whereas the standard state of water is a liquid.
The standard molar enthalpy of a reaction is written It is essential that should refer unambiguously to a specific equation or formula.
For example, This shows that where two moles of hydrogen gas, H2(g), combine with one mole of oxygen gas, O2(g), two form two moles of liquid water, H2O(l), at a pressure of one atmosphere and a temperature of 298 K, the enthalpy change is -571.6 kJ.
The negative sign means the reaction is exothermic.
If the same reaction is represented by the following equation, the n the standard molar enthalpy of reaction is half the above value:
It is important to specify the states after the formulae in the equation.
For example, compare the standard molar enthalpy for the following reaction with that for the reaction represented by equation (b) above: In reaction (b) above the water formed in the liquid state but in reaction (c) it is a gas (steam).
The difference of in the standard molar enthalpies between the two reactions is the standard molar enthalpy (change of vaporisation of water.
We should thus avoid using phrases such as "the standard molar enthalpy of oxidation of hydrogen" as they are ambiguous.
The standard molar enthalpy of oxidation of hydrogen could refer to any of the three balanced chemical equations shown above and thus have any one of the three widely differing values shown above.
Standard Molar Enthalpy of Formation 
The standard molar enthalpy of formation of a substance is the enthalpy change per mole of the substance when the substance is formed from its constituent elements in their standard states at 298 K and one atmosphere pressure.
Let us relate this statement to the example above.
We saw that the oxidation of hydrogen can be represented by at least three different balanced chemical equations.
We thus have at least three different standard molar enthalpies: Which of these is the standard molar enthalpy of formation?
The value in (c) can be ruled out since the standard state of water at 298 K is not steam, H2O(g).
The standard molar enthalpy of formation could have two different values depending on how we write the equation.
However, since the definition given above specifies the enthalpy change per mole we must choose (b).
Thus, the standard molar enthalpy of formation .
Table 5.1 gives the standard molar enthalpies of formation of some common substances in their standard states.
Note that these include not only compounds but also ions.
The ions and many of the compounds cannot be made by direct combination of their constituent elements.
However, by application of Hess's law (which we shall deal with in section 5.3 below) it is possible to calculate them.
Most compounds have negative enthalpies of formation.
They are said to be exothermic compounds.
A few have positive enthalpies of formation.
They are called endothermic compounds.
Benzene is an example of an endothermic compound.
Notice that the enthalpies of formation of solid compounds tend to be more negative than the enthalpies of formation of gases.
The standard molar enthalpy of formation of a compound or ion is a measure of its stability relative to its constituent elements.
The more negative the value, the more stable the compound or ion.
By definition, the standard molar enthalpy change of formation of an element in its standard state at 298 K is always zero.
For example,
Standard Molar Enthalpy of Combustion 
The standard molar enthalpy of combustion of a substance is the enthalpy change per mole of a substance when the substance in its standard state is completely burnt in oxygen at 298 K and a pressure of one atmosphere.
For example, the standard molar enthalpy of combustion of propane is per mole of propane.
We write this as 
The standard molar enthalpies of combustion of a range of compounds are shown in table 5.2.
The standard molar enthalpy of neutralisation is the enthalpy change per mole of water formed in the neutralisation between an acid and an alkali at 298 K and one atmosphere pressure.
Standard Molar Enthalpy of Neutralisation 
For the neutralisation of a strong acid such as hydrochloric acid, HCl(aq), and a strong alkali such as sodium hydroxide, NaOH(aq), the standard molar enthalpy of neutralisation is almost invariably -57.1 kJ mol-1.
The reason is that the
following ionic reaction is common to all neutralisations of strong acids with strong alkalis:
An exception is the neutralisation of chloric(VII) acid, HClO4(aq), with potassium hydroxide.
This neutralisation is more exothermic than the others due to the precipitation of potassium chlorate(VII), KClO4.
The precipitation is an exothermic process.
So far we have only considered enthalpies of chemical reactions.
Enthalpy changes also occur with other types of change.
We have just met one example immediately above.
That was the enthalpy of precipitation.
Enthalpy changes also occur when a substance is dissolved and a solution is diluted.
We shall consider the enthalpy of solution in section 5.3.
Enthalpy changes also accompany the transformation of one allotrope to another (see section 3.2) and the process of isomerisation (see section 17.1).
OTHER ENTHALPY CHANGES
A change in phase-melting, vaporisation or sublimation, for example-always results in an enthalpy change.
The temperature at which a phase change occurs is called the transition temperature (see section 3.2).
Phase Changes
The standard molar enthalpy of fusion, is the enthalpy change that accompanies the fusion of one mole of a substance at its melting point at one atmosphere pressure.
The standard molar enthalpy of vaporisation, is the enthalpy change that accompanies the vaporisation of one mole of a substance at its boiling point at one atmosphere pressure.
These two terms are sometimes called the molar heats of fusion and vaporisation respectively.
Some standard molar enthalpies of fusion and vaporisation are shown in table 5.3.
We have already noted (in section 2.2) that the value for the molar enthalpy of vaporisation of water is anomalously high.
This is due to hydrogen bonding.
The standard molar enthalpy of fusion is a measure of the energy needed to overcome the forces of attraction that exist between particles in the solid state.
Similarly, the standard molar enthalpy of vaporisation is a measure of the energy needed to overcome the forces of attraction that exist between particles in the liquid state.
A calorimeter is an insulated vessel used for measuring the quantity of energy released or absorbed during a chemical or physical change.
It is useful for determining changes in internal energy, changes in enthalpy and heat capacities, for example.
CALORIMETRY
In a typical calorimetry experiment the energy evolved during a chemical change is transferred to water or to the reaction mixture itself and the temperature increase determined.
The energy evolved in the reaction is given by the following relationship: where 4 is the energy transferred to the vessel and contents as heat; Cvessel is the heat capacity of the vessel; m is the mass of the contents (water or reaction mixture); Ccontents is the specific heat capacity of the contents; and T is the temperature change of the contents.
Approximate measurements of the enthalpy change for reactions in solution can be made using a simple calorimeter such as a polystyrene beaker.
The heat capacity of this is negligible and so the term Cvessel in equation (5) can be ignored.
Thus EXAMPLE 40 cm3 of hydrochloric acid with a concentration of 2.0 mol dm3 were poured into a polystyrene beaker.
The same volume of sodium hydroxide with the same concentration was then added to the acid.
The temperature rise was found to be 13.7 K. Calculate the approximate enthalpy of neutralistion for the reaction given that the specific heat capacity of water is 4.184 x 10-- kJ g-1 K-1.
SOLUTION The enthalpy change for the neutralisation is given by where qp is the energy evolved in the experiment; and n is the number of moles of water formed in the experiment.
The negative sign is necessary because energy is evolved in the process.
The reaction system thus loses energy.
There are three stages in this calculation: Stage 1: Determination of The reaction is carried out at constant pressure and so we can put 4 qP.
Since the heat capacity of the calorimeter is negligible we can use equation (6).
This is an approximate calculation so we can assume that the density and specific heat capacity of the reaction mixture are the same as that for water.
Thus Substituting these values into equation (6) we obtain Stage 2: Determination of The reaction is Thus, one mole of HCl(aq) produces one mole of H2O(l).
The amount of H2O(l) produced in the reaction thus equals the amount of HCl(aq) consumed in the  reaction.
The amount of HCl(aq) consumed in the reaction is given by Stage 3: Determination of The molar enthalpy change for this exothermic reaction is found by substituting values for qp and n(H2O) into equation (7): In more accurate calorimetric determinations the value for T has to be corrected for cooling losses (see figure 5.5).
For the calorimetric determination of enthalpy changes or internal energy changes (but not heat capacities), the term [Cvessel + (m X Ccontents)]in equation (5) can be eliminated altogether.
This is done by carrying out two experiments.
First of all the reaction is carried out as normal to find the corrected temperature rise T1 due to the energy 41 evolved in the reaction.
In a second experiment the calorimeter is calibrated by heating it and its contents electrically.
The amount of electricity 42 required to raise the temperature of the contents by T2 is given by where I is the current in amperes, Vis the potential difference in volts, and t is the time in seconds.
This value for 42 is used in the following equation to obtain: This equation can be derived directly from equation (5).
This type of calorimeter is used to determine the energy changes that accompany chemical reactions such as combustion.
The calorimeter consists of a strong sealed vessel enclosed by an insulated water jacket (see figure 5.6).
A known mass of the sample is held in an atmosphere of pure oxygen at about 25 atmospheres.
The sample is then ignited electrically.
The energy released during the combustion is transferred to the water jacket and the temperature rise is measured.
The temperature rise is often no more than a degree or two.
Some modern bomb calorimeters are so sensitive that they require only very small amounts of sample.
This is particularly important where the sample is expensive and only very small amounts are available.
A Bomb Calorimeter
Since the combustion in a bomb calorimeter is carried out at constant volume, the energy released is the internal energy change, AU.
A separate control experiment is then carried out to calibrate the calorimeter.
This can be done electrically as described above.
In this case it is necessary to correct for the electrical energy supplied to ignite the sample.
Alternatively a second material can be used to calibrate the calorimeter.
The molar change of internal energy under the conditions of the experiment of this second material must be shown accurately.
Benzoic acid is often used for this purpose.
This is used to determine the enthalpies of combustion of volatile liquids such as alcohols and liquid hydrocarbons (see figure 5.7).
The liquid is burnt in a plentiful  supply of air and the temperature rise in the surrounding water bath is measured.
The mass of liquid burnt can be found by weighing the bottle containing the liquid before and after the experiment.
A second experiment is then performed to calibrate the calorimeter.
EXAMPLE The combustion of a 1.6 g sample of methanol in a flame calorimeter resulted in a temperature rise of 7.8 K. When a 12.0 V supply of electricity with a current of 2.0 A was passed through the contents of the calorimeter for 20 minutes, the temperature rose by 6.2 K. Calculate the molar enthalpy of combustion of methanol under the conditions of the experiment.
SOLUTION The molar enthalpy of combustion of methanol is given by The negative sign is required since combustion is exothermic.
As before, the calculation breaks down into three parts: Stage 1: Determination of We use equation (9) to calculate .
Since the combustion is carried out at constant pressure,.
Thus, We an now substitute values for into the above equation: Stage 2: Determination of 
A Flame Calorimeter
The use of relative molecular mass (Mr) and molar mass (M) to calculate the amount of a substance in units of moles is explained in section 4.2.
Stage 3: Determination of We can now substitute values for qp and n(CH3OH) directly into equation (10):
We all consume energy in the form of food and drink.
Energy transferred to our bodies as heat-by sitting by a fire or by drinking a hot beverage for example-is negligible in comparison.
Figure 5.8 shows the approximate energy value of some common foods.
There are three components of food that provide this energy.
These are fats, proteins and carbohydrates.
Ethanol in alcoholic beverages also provides energy.
The energy values for these are shown in table 5.4.
THE ENERGY VALUE OF FOODS
The energy value of a particular food can be determined experimentally by burning a measured mass of the food in a bomb calorimeter (see figure 5.6) and determining the temperature rise as described above.
Essentially three things can happen to the energy we consume: 1.
Some of it is wasted-through our faeces.
In a healthy adult the amount lost in this way is negligible.
2.
If we consume more energy than we expend, the surplus is stored as fat.
We put on roughly a pound of fat for every 15 000 kilojoules we consume in excess.
This is equivalent to about 3500 kilocalories.
3.
Most of the energy we consume is used up by our bodies.
The exact amount we use depends on our age, sex, height, weight and the amount of activity we do.
For men, the range is usually between 9200 kJ and 12 100 Kj per day although for manual workers it can be more.
For women, the range is 6700 to 8800 kJ per day.
Energy is essentially expended in three ways: Energy is needed for the chemical changes that go on inside our bodies.
These changes come under the name "metabolism" .
For example, energy is needed to metabolise the food we consume.
Energy is needed to keep us warm in cold weather.
Energy is needed for muscular activity.
Table 5.5 shows approximate energy requirements for four common activities.
Many reaction enthalpies cannot be determined experimentally because the reactions cannot be brought about in the laboratory.
For example, it is not possible to determine the enthalpy of formation of ethanol in the laboratory because it is not possible to synthesise ethanol form carbon, hydrogen and oxygen.
Such reaction enthalpies can be calculated from the enthalpies of other reactions by an application of the first law of thermodynamics.
The application is called Hess's law of constant heat summation.
It states that if a given change can be brought about in more than one way, the overall enthalpy change is the same for each way.
HESS'S LAW
This means that if a reaction, in theory, can be divided up into a number of steps the enthalpy change for the overall reaction equals the sum of the enthalpy changes for each step (see figure 5.9)
Let us take the combustion of graphite as an example.
The following are both conceivable routes: The net result is the same by either rate.
That is, one mole of graphite combines with one mole of carbon dioxide.
By Hess's law we have Route A is, in fact, the formation of carbon dioxide from its elements in their standard states.
Thus Step B1 is the formation of carbon monoxide from its elements in their standard states.
Thus When these standard molar enthalpies of formation are put into equation (11) we obtain On rearrangement this equation becomes Thus, the standard molar enthalpy change for step B2 can be calculated from the standard molar enthalpies of formation of the reactants and products.
The standard molar enthalpy of formation of an element is zero and so the standard molar enthalpy of formation of oxygen need not be included in the above expression.
It is possible to derive a similar relationship for any chemical reaction.
Expressed in general terms this relationship is: where is the standard molar enthalpy of reaction.
Equation (12) is the most useful form of Hess's law.
EXAMPLE Calculate the standard molar enthalpy of formation of carbon monoxide from the following informtion: SOLUTION We can apply Hess's law in the form of equation (12) to the second reaction, and obtain Thus by rearranging the equation above we obtain The information in the example above can be summarised in the form of an enthalpy diagram (see figure 5.10).
the top line in this diagram is called the datum line or datum level.
It corresponds to H = 0 and represents elements in their standard states.
For an endothermic reaction, the datum line would be at the bottom.
Enthalpy Diagrams
EXAMPLE (a) Calculate the standard molar enthalpy of formation of ethanol form the following experimental data:(b) Draw the enthalpy diagram for the combustion of ethanol.
SOLUTION (a) We must first write the equation for the complete combustion of ethanol: Applying equation (12) to this reaction and remembering that the standard molar enthalpy of formation of elements in their standard states is zero we obtain By rearranging this equation and substituting the above values for the standard molar enthalpies, we obtain (b) The enthalpy diagram will show two routes to the formation of the combustion products of ethanol from the elements in their standard states: route A is the  overall reaction: route B is divided into two steps, B1 —the formation of from its elements in their standard states, and B2 —the combustion of .
Thus, we can proceed as follows.
Route A: Note that the term mol -1 refers to the reaction as specified by the equation, that is, two moles of C02, three moles of H2O.
The term mol -1 thus means per mole of this specified equation.
Route B: Note once again that refers to "per mole of the specified balanced chemical equation" .
thus need not be included in the symbol.
However, if the equation is not specified, the entity to which the enthalpy change refers must   be included in the symbol.
For example, refers to "per mole of formed from its elements in their standard states" .
The standard molar enthalpies for route A and steps B1 and B2 can now be included in an enthalpy diagram (see figure 5.11).
This is the enthalpy diagram for the combustion of ethanol.
5.3 BOND ENTHALPIES
The standard bond dissociation enthalpy is the enthalpy change that accompanies the breaking of one mole of bonds with the molecules and resulting fragments being in their standard states at 298 K and a pressure of one atmosphere.
A bond dissociation enthalpy refers to a specific bond in a molecule.
Its value depends on the local environment.
For example, in the methane molecule there are four CH bonds and thus four bond dissociation enthalpies.
These are referred to as the first, second, third and fourth bond dissociation enthalpies respectively.
Notice that bond dissociation enthalpies are endothermic.
Energy must he absorbed to break a bond.
If we average the four standard bond dissociation enthalpies for the methane molecule, we obtain a value of +412 kJ mol-1.
The average CH standard bond dissociation enthalpy for all types of molecule including the methane molecule is +413 kJ mol-1.
This is called the average or mean bond enthalpy, the bond enthalpy term or simply the bond energy.
A list of some mean bond enthalpies is shown in table 5.6.
The mean bond enthalpy of an element or compound which exists as diatomic molecules is exactly the same as its bond dissociation enthalpy.
For such elements and compounds, the bond dissociation enthalpy has twice the value of the enthalpy of atomisation.
The standard enthalpy of atomisation of an element is the enthalpy change which accompanies the production of one mole of isolated gaseous atoms from the element in its standard state at 298 K and one atmosphere pressure.
For example, the standard enthalpy of atomisation of hydrogen is given by whereas the standard bond dissociation enthalpy for hydrogen is given by 
For solid elements the enthalpy of atomisation is equal to the enthalpy of sublimation of the solid.
Sublimation is the change from solid to gas on heating and from gas to solid on cooling without passing through the liquid phase.
Bond enthalpies can be determined by spectroscopic methods (see section 17.1), by electron impact methods (see section 1.2) or by thermochemical methods.
Thermochemical methods involve the calorimetric determination of the enthalpies of combustion, formation and other processes.
These data are then used to calculate bond enthalpies.
Bond enthalpies cannot be determined directly by thermochemical methods.
Determination of Bond Enthalpies
Experimental evidence for the consistency of bond enthalpies over a number of compounds is provided by the standard molar enthalpies of combustion of alkanes  in their homologous series (see section 17.1).
When these are plotted against number of carbon atoms, a straight line is obtained (see figure 5.12).
The difference in the standard molar enthalpy of combustion between each successive member of the series is about 660 kJ mol-1 (see table 5.7).
The difference in the structure of each successive member of a homologous series is CH2-.
The value of 660 kJ mol-1 thus corresponds to the dissociation and formation of bonds in the combustion of one mole of the entity -CH2.
The combustion of each -CH2 involves the dissociation of two CH bonds; the dissociation of one CC bond; the formation of two CO bonds to produce a molecule of C02; the formation of two H-O bonds to produce a molecule of H2O.
The consistent value of 660 kJ mol-1 suggests that the bond dissociation enthalpies for the CH and CC bonds are fairly consistent for all alkanes.
The mean bond enthalpy of the C-H bond can be determined from experimental data by first finding the standard enthalpy of atomisation of methane: The standard enthalpy of atomisation is four times the mean CH bond enthalpy: The standard enthalpy of atomisation is four times the mean CH bond enthalpy: mentally.
However, it can be calculated by application of Hess's law to three standard enthalpies which can be determined experimentally.
These are: 1.
The standard enthalpy of atomisation of graphite This enthalpy is found by measuring the temperature dependence of the vapour pressure of graphite.
2.
The standard enthalpy of atomisation of hydrogen This enthalpy can be determined spectroscopically. 3.
The standard enthalpy of formation of methane This value can be calculated from the standard enthalpy of combustion of methane and the standard enthalpies of formation of carbon dioxide and water.
All three of these enthalpies can be determined experimentally by calorimetric methods.
Determination of the Mean Bond Enthalpy of the C — H Bond
We can now apply Hess's law (equation (12)) to the atomisation of methane: Applying question (13) we obtain 
The information required to calculate the mean bond enthalpy for CH can be summarised in an enthalpy diagram (see figure 5.13).
A knowledge of bond enthalpies can help us to understand the structure of covalent compounds and also the mechanisms (see chapter 9) of their chemical reactions.
Interpretation and Uses of Bond Enthalpies
In section 2.1 we saw how the Pauling scale of electronegativities of elements was based on bond enthalpies.
In general, as the difference in electronegativity between two elements forming a bond decreases, so does the bond enthalpy.
This is illustrated by comparing the electronegativity differences between hydrogen and the halogens with the bond enthalpies of the hydrogen halides (see table 5.8).
The data in table 5.9 show that bond enthalpies increase as the number of bonds between two atoms decreases.
This follows since the strength of a bond depends on the number of bonding electrons.
As the number of bonding electrons increases, the bond length decreases and the bond becomes stronger.
The size of atoms also influences bond enthalpies and bond lengths.
Table 5.9 also compares values for the bonds in the diatomic halogen molecules as the group is descended.
On descending the group, the atoms become larger, with the result that bond lengths are increased due to increasing repulsion between the atoms.
The bond thus becomes weaker and the bond enthalpies decrease.
Bond enthalpies can also be used to calculate the enthalpies of reactions involving covalent molecules.
As an approximate guide, the following relationship can be used: EXAMPLE Use the data in tables 5.6 and 5.9 to calculate the standard molar enthalpy change of the hydrogenation of ethene. SOLUTION Bonds broken: C==C, H--H Bonds formed: C--C, 2(C--H) By applying equation (14) we obtain 
The required data are found in tables 5.6 and 5.9: In the above example the experimental value for the standard molar enthalpy of hydrogenation of ethene is –137 kJ mol-1.
This is slightly larger than the calculated value of –119 kJ mol-1.
For the hydrogenation of benzene, however, there is a much larger discrepancy between the experimental value and the value calculated from bond enthalpies.
The Stability of Benzene
We can see this by looking at the hydrogenation of cyclohexene.
The calculated standard molar enthalpy of hydrogenation of this compound is virtually the same as that calculated for ethene.
This is because exactly the same bonds are broken and formed.
Thus Benzene contains three double bonds and so we can calculate the standard molar enthalpy of hydrogenation of benzene by just multiplying the value for cyclohexene by 3.
Thus The experimental value for the standard molar enthalpy of hydrogenation of benzene is -208 kJ mol".
The difference is thus 155 W mol-1.
This is a measure of the stability of benzene due to the delocalisation of its electrons (see section 2.1).
For this reason it is sometimes called the delocalisation enthalpy, resonance energy or stabilisation energy.
We have seen how bond enthalpies provide a measure of the strength of covalent bonds.
For ionic compounds the comparable enthalpy is the lattice enthalpy.
This is also called lattice energy.
LATTICE ENTHALPIES
The standard molar lattice enthalpy is the enthalpy change which accompanies the formation of one mole of the solid ionic compound from its gaseous ions under standard conditions.
Lattice enthalpies cannot be determined directly.
However, they can be calculated from experimentally determined enthalpies by application of Hess's law.
Let us take the sodium chloride lattice, for example.
The formation of the lattice from its elements in their standard states can be broken down into five steps.
The overall reaction we called route A.
Route A: where is the standard molar enthalpy of formation of sodium chloride.
Route B: This is broken down into five steps, one of which is the formation of the lattice from its gaseous ions.
This process is the atomisation or sublimation of sodium.
This is the ionisation of gaseous sodium.
The enthalpy change is the first ionisation energy of sodium (see section 2.2).
This is the atomisation of chlorine.
The enthalpy of atomisation of chlorine is half its bond dissociation enthalpy.
This is the ionisation of chlorine.
The enthalpy corresponds to the first electron affinity of chlorine (see section 3.1).
This is the formation of the lattice from its gaseous ions.
is the standard molar lattice enthalpy of sodium chloride.
We can now calculate its value by application of Hess's law.
The following equation is analogous to equation (11): By rearranging this equation and substituting the values shown above we obtain This is the standard molar lattice enthalpy of sodium chloride.
The information used in the above calculation of lattice enthalpy can be summarised in an enthalpy diagram known as the Born-Haber cycle.
The Born-Haber cycle for sodium chloride consists of route A and the five steps of route B (see figure 5.14).
The cycle can be used to determine the lattice enthalpy of sodium chloride.
Experimental values for the enthalpies of route A and steps B1 to B4 are put into the cycle.
The enthalpy needed to complete the cycle is the lattice enthalpy.
The Born-Haber Cycle
We have seen that bond dissociation enthalpies are endothermic since energy must be absorbed to break bonds.
Lattice enthalpies, on the other hand, are exothermic.
This is because lattice enthalpies relate to the formation of bonds and energy is released when bonds are formed.
Interpreting Lattice Enthalpies
Table 5. 10 shows the lattice enthalpies of a number of compounds.
Notice that, as the electronegativity of the halogens decreases down the group (see section 2.2), so does the lattice enthalpy.
Lattice enthalpies determined through the Born-Haber cycle can be regarded as experimental values since the lattice enthalpies are calculated from experimental values.
Lattice enthalpies can also be calculated using a theoretical model.
The model is based on the geometry of the crystal lattice.
It assumes that the ions are point charges.
The potential energy V required to bring two ions with charges q, and q2 from an infinite distance to a distance r from each other is given by The exact calculation of lattice enthalpy from this potential energy expression is quite complicated.
However, for compounds such as the alkali halides, it does    give theoretical values of lattice enthalpies which are in good agreement with experimental values.
For example, the theoretical value of the lattice enthalpy of sodium chloride is -766 kJ mol -1, whereas the experimental value determined through the Born-Haber cycle is -776 kJ mol -1.
There is a far greater discrepancy for other compounds, however.
For example, the theoretical value for silver chloride is -769 kJ mol -1, whereas the experimental value is -921 kJ mol -1.
This shows that the bonding in silver chloride is stronger than in sodium chloride.
This is because the bonding is partially covalent in character.
Agreement tends to be far better when the electronegativity difference between the two ions is high.
A comparison of the theoretical and experimental values of lattice enthalpies thus enables us to assess the degree of ionic character of a compound.
The enthalpy change that occurs when one mole of solute is dissolved in a solvent to form an infinitely dilute solution is called the enthalpy of solution — or quite often the heat of solution.
It is easily measured experimentally.
Enthalpies of Solution and Hydration
The enthalpy change that occurs can be attributed to two factors.
First of all the bonds that hold the particle together in solid have to be broken.
Secondly, the particles become solvated.
Let us take the case of an ionic solid.
First there is an enthalpy change when the ionic lattice in the solid breaks down.
Secondly, the ions become solvated in the water, that is, they become hydrated.
The overall process can be exothermic or endothermic.
For example, when sodium chloride dissolves in water, there is a small net gain in energy.
The process is thus endothermic.
The breaking down of the lattice is obviously the reverse of its formation.
Thus, the energy required to break down one mole of the lattice into isolated gaseousions is equal to the reverse of the energy change which accompanies the formation of one mole of the lattice from its gaseous ions.
The latter energy change is the lattice enthalpy.
For sodium chloride its value is -776 kJ mol -1.
We can therefore write The enthalpy change that accompanies the hydration of one mole of both these gaseous ions is called the enthalpy of hydration. 
Values for hydration enthalpies cannot be found experimentally.
However, they can be found by application of Hess's law: As usual, the relationship between these three enthalpies can be displayed in the form of an enthalpy diagram (see figure 5.15).
The datum line is omitted from the enthalpy diagram since the enthalpy of formation from elements in their standard states is not involved in the calculation.
Furthermore, since we are only considering enthalpy changes, we can omit the absolute scale of enthalpy, H.
The enthalpy of hydration for sodium chloride is the sum of the individual hydration enthalpies of the sodium and chloride ions: The hydration enthalpies of individual ions can be estimated by comparing the hydration enthalpies of a range of ionic compounds with a common ion.
For such estimations the hydration enthalpy of the hydration ion, H, is usually taken as a standard.
Its value is -1075 kJ mol -1.
The hydration enthalpies of some alkali metal ions and halide ions are shown in table 5.11.
Note how the values decrease as each group is descended.
The first law of thermodynamics states that whilst energy may be transferred between a system and its surroundings, energy is never created or destroyed.
It therefore imposes the conservation of energy as a restriction on chemical and physical changes.
At one time it was thought that all chemical reactions were exothermic.
In other words, a chemical reaction could only proceed if the system lost energy.
However, many chemical and physical changes are now known which are endothermic.
Thus, energy or enthalpy change alone cannot help us to predict whether a reaction will occur or not.
To predict whether a reaction will occur spontaneously or not it is necessary to introduce another thermodynamic state function called entropy.
Entropy is given the symbol S.
ENTROPY
Entropy can be thought of as a measure of the chaos, randomness or disorder of a system.
Gases, for example, are relatively disordered compared to solids.
The entropy of gases is much higher than the entropy of solids.
But how does entropy help us to predict whether a change will take place or not?
To answer this, let us consider a system consisting of two bulbs joined by a stopcock (see figure 5.16).
The two bulbs contain different gases.
When the stopcock is opened, the gases will mix spontaneously by a process called diffusion (see section 3.1).
After mixing the gases have a higher state of disorder than before mixing.
They therefore have a higher entropy after mixing.
During this spontaneous process, the entropy of the system therefore increases.
There is no energy change in process, the entropy of the system therefore increases.
There is no energy change in this process.
The overall enthalpy of the gases before and after mixing is exactly the same.
However, mixing does result in the more random dispersal of energy.
In many chemical reactions, energy is also dispersed.
For example, combustion reactions are exothermic processes.
During combustion, energy is released and dispersed to the surroundings.
Entropy can thus be viewed as a measure of the dispersal of energy.
During chemical reactions, there is always a dispersal of energy either from the chemical system to its surroundings or from the surroundings to the chemical system.
Thus during a chemical reaction there is always an entropy change.
It is this entropy change which, along with the enthalpy change of the reaction, we must consider when attempting to predict whether a chemical reaction will proceed spontaneously or not.
However, before we consider the relationship of entropy change and enthalpy change to the feasibility of a reaction, we must first look at the second law of thermodynamics.
This states that the total entropy of a system and its surroundings increases during all spontaneous processes.
The second law is, perhaps, one of the most comprehensive generalisations in the whole of science.
There are many statements of the second law.
The essential theme of them all is that disorder is all the time increasing.
The Second Law of Thermodynamics
Some Statements of the Second Law of Thermodynaamics 1.
Every system which is left to itself will, on the average, change toward a condition of maximum probability.
(G. N. Lewis) 2.
The state of maximum entropy is the most stable state for an isolated system.
(Enrico Fermi) 3.
When any actual process occurs it is impossible to invent a means of restoring every system concerned to its original condition.
(G. N. Lewis) 4.
Every physical or chemical process in nature takes place in such a way as to increase the sum of the entropies of all the bodies taking part in the process.
(Max Planck) 5.
Heat cannot flow spontaneously from a colder to a warmer body.
6.
Gain in information is loss in entropy.
(G. N. Lewis) 7.
Entropy is time's arrow.
(A. Eddington)
It follows from the second law of thermodynamics that, for spontaneous processes.
where the change in entropy, during a chemical or physical change is given by The entropy of one mole of a substance in its standard state at a specified temperature is called the standard molar entropy.
It has the symbol,.
Its units are J K-J mol-1.
The standard molar entropies for a number of elements and compounds at 25°C are given in table 5.12.
Notice that the entropies of gases tend to be high whereas those of solids are generally much lower.
The entropy of a fixed amount of matter increases in the order Solid Liquid Gas
Entropy Changes of Chemical Reactions
Standard molar entropies are sometimes called absolute entropies.
They are not the entropy changes when a compound is formed from its constituent elements.
It should be noted that standard molar entropies of elements are not zero.
The standard molar entropy change of a reaction, is given by EXAMPLE Calculate the standard molar entropy change for the complete combustion of one mole of methane gas at 25°C.
Use the data in table 5.12 for your answer.
SOLUTION The equation for this reaction is Applying equation (15) we obtain Substituting values at 298 K from table 5.12 gives us 
You will notice that the entropy change for this reaction is negative.
This might have been expected since the total amount of reactant gases shown by the equation is four moles whereas only three moles of gaseous product are formed.
The amount of gas therefore decreases during the reaction.
On the other hand, we know that combustion reactions are exothermic.
Energy is thus dispersed and so we might expect an increase in entropy and not a decrease.
Furthermore, once initiated, the combustion of methane gas at 25°C is very spontaneous.
Should not the entropy change for the reaction therefore be positive-as required by the second law of thermodynamics?
The answer is nor not necessarily so.
The second law requires that the total entropy of a system and its surroundings increases during a spontaneous process.
The entropy we have calculated is for the system only-the system being the reactants and products involved in the combustion of methane gas at 25°C.
So how do we calculate the entropy change of the surroundings?
By means of thermodynamic arguments it is possible to show that entropy change is equal to energy transferred as heat, q, divided by the temperature, T, thus The change in entropy can, relate to either the system or the surroundings.
However, there is one condition.
The energy q must be transferred reversibly.
In thermodynamics a reversible process is one that is carried out infinitely slowly and carefully so that it is virtually in a state of balance at all times.
Entropy Changes in the Surroundings
In an exothermic process the energy lost by a reaction system is equal to the energy gained by its surroundings.
Similarly, in an endothermic process, the energy absorbed by the system is equal to the energy lost by the surroundings.
We can thus write We saw above that at constant pressure the energy transferred as heat during a chemical reaction is equal to the enthalpy change, H. Thus We can now use equation (18) to rewrite equation (17) as 
We saw earlier that the total entropy change of a spontaneous process equals the entropy change of the system plus the entropy change of the surroundings (see equation (15)).
The entropy change of a chemical reaction system is given by equation (16) and the entropy change of the surroundings is given by equation (20) above.
We are thus able to calculate the total entropy change which accompanies a chemical change and see whether the result obeys the second law of thermodynamics.
EXAMPLE Calculate the total entropy change that accompanies the combustion of one mole of methane gas at 25°C.
Does the result obey the second law of thermodynamics?
SOLUTION The total entropy change accompanying a process is given by equation (15).
If we insert equation (20) into this we obtain This equation applies to the combustion of one mole of methane gas under standard conditions as specified by the equation in the previous example.
We are given The value for , was calculated in the previous example as The standard enthalpy of combustion of methane is given in table 5.2 as 
The Total Change of a Chemical Reaction
In conclusion, although the enthalpy change for the reaction system is negative, the total entropy change which accompanies the reaction is positive.
The result thus obeys the second law of thermodynamics.
We have seen that there are two factors which determine whether a reaction will proceed spontaneously or not.
These are: 1.
Energy.
Systems tend to a minimum in potential energy.
For example, when a ball is placed at the top of a hill, it will roll downwards.
It loses potential energy until it reaches a minimum at the bottom of the hill.
In reaction systems at constant pressure the change in energy is given by the enthalpy change.
In exothermic reactions the system loses energy until the total enthalpy of the system reaches a minimum.
2.
Entropy.
Systems tend to maximum disorder.
If we look back at the previous example of the combustion of methane, we see that the enthalpy term was far larger than the entropy term.
The driving force of the reaction was thus the enthalpy change.
In endothermic reactions, however, the entropy term dominates.
In these reactions the reaction system can gain energy and still proceed spontaneously.
GIBBS FREE ENERGY
How then, do we balance these two factors?
The answer lies in a thermodynamic state function known as free energy or the Gibbs function, G. This function is related to equation (21) which, expressed in general terms, is If we multiply this equation through by — T we obtain
The term is equal to the free energy change of a reaction system: thus on rearrangement, equation (22) becomes where all refer to the reaction system.
The Gibbs free energy change therefore takes into account the enthalpy change of a reaction system and its entropy change.
Note that the entropy term includes temperature as a factor.
This is necessary since at low temperatures systems are more ordered than at high temperatures.
We have seen that for a reaction to be spontaneous must be positive.
Since temperature is always positive on the absolute scale of temperature, it thus follows from equation (23) that 46 must be negative for a spontaneous reaction.
In other words, when a spontaneous reaction occurs at constant temperature and pressure, the free energy of the system decreases.
We express this mathematically as 
The standard molar Gibbs free energy of formation is the free energy change that accompanies the formation of one mole of the substance from its elements in their standard states.
Gibbs free energy has the usual energy units, kJ mol.
Some standard molar Gibbs free energies of formation are shown in table 5.13.
Notice that the magnitudes of the values for solids are much greater than those for gases.
We saw earlier in this chapter that the enthalpy change of formation was a measure of the stability of a compound.
However, a much truer indication of its stability is the free energy of formation.
Its value for a compound represents the work that has to be done to return it to its elements in their standard states.
And   like enthalpies of formation, the standard free energies of formation of elements in their standard states are zero.
The standard free energy change of a reaction can be calculated in two ways.
It can be calculated from the free energies of formation of products and reactants using the following equation: Alternatively it can be calculated from standard molar changes in enthalpy and entropy for the reaction using equation (24).
EXAMPLE (a) Calculate the standard Gibbs free energy change at 25°C for the thermal decomposition of calcium carbonate given that, for this reaction,(b) Is the reaction spontaneous at 25°C?(c) At what temperature would the reaction become spontaneous —assuming that are independent of temperature?
SOLUTION The balanced chemical equation for this reaction is (a) To find we use equation (24).
Thus (b) Since positive at 25°C (298 K), the reaction is not spontaneous at this temperature.
(c) The reaction is spontaneous when The reaction is thus spontaneous at temperatures above 1106 K.
The standard Gibbs free energies of four reactions are shown in table 5.14.
All of these except reaction (c) are spontaneous since they have negative G values.
Reaction (c) does not occur spontaneously since its value is positive.
We have already seen that Gibbs free energy is useful in two ways.
First of all, the Gibbs free energy of formation of a compound is a measure of the stability of the compound.
Secondly, the free energy change of a reaction is a measure of the feasibility of a reaction.
Only reactions with negative 4G values can take place.
Gibbs free energy is also important for a number of other reasons.
IMPORTANCE OF 
When a system is in dynamic equilibrium, If a reaction has a large and negative value for 4G, then the equilibrium will lie strongly to the right-that is in favour of the products.
If the value is large and positive the equilibrium lies in favour of the reactants.
Equilibrium
We have already seen that when a system undergoes a change at constant pressure the energy transferred as heat is called the enthalpy change.
If we rearrange equation (24) we can see that this enthalpy change can be split up into two parts,: is part of the enthalpy change which is available for doing useful work (see figure 5.17).
The other part cannot be used to do work.
This corresponds to the entropy term.
Useful Work
Metals can be extracted from their oxides by reduction (see section 10.5).
Reducing agents used for this purpose include carbon or other metals.
How can we tell whether carbon or another metal will reduce a metal oxide?
Let us consider the following two cases.
Case 1: Metal + Oxide of carbon — Metal oxide + Carbon For example In this case the metal acts as a reducing agent.
It reduces the carbon in carbon dioxide.
Case 2: Metal oxide + Carbon — Metal + Oxide of Carbon For example In this case the carbon acts as a reduces the metal oxide.
We see immediately that case 2 is the reverse of case l.
For some metals case 1 applies, and for others case 2 applies.
So how can we predict for a given metal which case will apply?
In other words, which is feasible, case 1 or case 2?
Extraction of Metals from Oxides
The answer lies in the stability of the oxides.
We saw above that the free energy of formation of a compound is a measure of its stability.
We also saw that, for a reaction to occur spontaneously G must be less than zero.
We can now apply this condition to equation (25) and obtain the following condition if a reaction is to occur spontaneously: In both of the cases above, one of the products and one of the reactants are elements.
Since the standard molar free energies of formation of these are zero, the following condition must apply if these reactions are to occur spontaneously: The more stable oxide-that is, the oxide with the more negative value-must therefore be the product and not the reactant in both cases.
The standard molar free energies of formation of the oxides in our examples are shown in table 515.
These values show us that, in the first example above, magnesium oxide is more stable than carbon dioxide.
Magnesium oxide is therefore a product and not a reactant.
The forward reaction as shown above occurs spontaneously and not the reverse.
In other words, case 1 applies.
In our second example we have a problem.
According to the values listed above for the product of the reaction in our example for case 2 should be NiO(s) and not CO(g).
Who then, does case 2 apply?
The answer is temperature.
The reaction does not occur at 298 K.
The standard molar free energies of formation of metal oxides increase with temperature whereas that for carbon monoxide decreases.
The variation of standard molar free energy of formation with temperature can be shown on an Ellingham diagram (see figure 5.18).
In this diagram the higher the lines the less stable the oxide.
Thus carbon monoxide is less stable than nickel(II) oxide at temperatures below about 680 K whereas above this temperature it is more stable.
And it is at temperatures above 680 K that this reaction is normally carried out.
Ellingham Diagrams
Ellingham diagrams show at a glance which oxide will be reduced.
At a given temperature, the oxide with the higher line will be the one that is reduced.
Thus, at 1000 K magnesium will reduce aluminium oxide, whereas at 2000 K aluminium reduces magnesium oxide.
On the other hand, the diagram shows that magnesium will reduce zinc oxide at any temperature below 2000 K. The "elbows" in the lines indicate phase changes-melting or boiling —of the metals.
These result in increases in entropy and thus a more negative value for G. Notice also that the free energy of formation of silver oxide is negative at lower temperatures but becomes positive as the temperature increases.
The crossover point (where is at 440 K. 
5.4 SUN, EARTH AND MOON
We have already discussed or referred to various forms of energy in this chapter and earlier chapters.
The most important forms are chemical energy (enthalpy, internal energy), electrical energy, electromagnetic energy (light), thermal energy (energy transferred as heat), mechanical energy (motion), nuclear energy.
In addition we have seen that the energy of a body due to its motion is called kinetic energy and that energy which is stored is called potential energy.
In effect, since energy is the capacity for doing work, all energy may be considered to be stored energy.
The first law of thermodynamics tells us that energy may be converted from one form to another without any of it being destroyed.
The store remains complete.
However, when energy is converted from one form to another, some of it is wasted.
In other words the amount of useful energy is always less after a change.
Thus, as the energy of the Universe changes, the amount of useful energy decreases, and the amount of useless energy increases.
A measure of the uselessness is entropy.
It always increases after a change.
There is little danger over the next few million years that we shall exhaust the store of useful energy.
The problem is that some stores of energy are easily tapped whereas others are exceedingly difficult.
And as we "progress" towards the twenty-first century we are rapidly consuming all the stores of energy that are easily consumed and thus becoming more and more reliant on the less accessible stores of energy.
Figure 5.19 shows the most important sources of energy and their origins-the Sun, the Earth and the Moon.
Of these, the Sun is by far the most important source of energy.
About 30% of the Sun's energy hitting the Earth is reflected back into space by dust particles and cloud.
Another 47% is used to heat up the Earth's surface and 22% is consumed in the evaporation cycle which makes rain.
No more than 0.1% drives the wind, waves and ocean currents and a minute 0.03% is consumed in photosynthesis.
Yet it is through photosynthesis that we have our principal forms of stored energy-fossil fuels and biomass (see below).
Renewable energy sources replenish themselves naturally in a relatively short space of time.
They will thus always be available.
They include biomass, geothermal energy, hydroelectric power, solar energy, tidal energy.
Renewable and Non-Renewable Forms of Energy
Non-renewable sources of energy are those which cannot be replaced once used up.
They are fossil fuels: coal, oil and natural gas, nuclear fuels: uranium ores.
An energy source which could potentially supply up to ten times our energy needs for several thousand years is called an indefinitely sustainable energy source.
Such energy sources include nuclear fission, nuclear fusion, solar energy together with biomass, controlled thermonuclear fusion and, finally, geothermal energy.
These are the non-renewable sources of energy that have been used predominantly in the past.
They are the fossil fuels —coal, gas and oil and more recently uranium.
We discussed the nuclear fission of uranium in chapter l.
In chapter 18 we shall look at oil and natural gas in some detail.
In this section, therefore, we shall confine our attention to coal (see figure 5.20).
Conventional Energy Sources
Coal is one of mankind's primary energy sources.
It is a rock formed from vegetable matter by the process of metamorphism.
Metamorphic rocks are those which have undergone changes in composition under high pressure and/or high temperature (see section 13.3).
The first stage in this process is the formation of peat.
This is decomposed organic matter.
Coal is formed from peat which has been covered with sediments.
These sediments are called overburden.
The overburden reduces the moisture content of the peat.
Coal is classified by three criteria: Purity-this relates to the percentage carbon content.
Type-this depends on the composition of the original vegetation.
Rank-this depends on the degree of metamorphism.
The lowest rank of coal is brown coal or lignite (see table 5.16).
It is closely related to peat and has a relatively low carbon content and high moisture content.
Bituminous coal has less moisture and is used in industry.
The driest and hardest coal is anthracite.
This is used as a domestic fuel.
In recent years coal gasification has become increasingly economically viable due to technological developments.
The products of coal gasification include carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, methane and nitrogen.
They are used as fuels or as raw materials for the manufacture of chemicals and fertilisers.
These are sources of energy that are currently being developed to"replace conventional energy sources.
The most important are nuclear fission, wind, wave and tidal energy sources and solar energy by direct conversion and biomass.
We dealt with nuclear fission in chapter l.
In the two sections below we shall consider the direct conversion of solar energy and biomass.
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SOURCES
We saw in figure 5.19 that the various forms of solar energy include fossil fuels, biomass, wind and water power.
All these provide indirect means of converting solar energy to forms of energy which are useful to us.
How can solar radiation be directly trapped and used?
The Direct Conversion of Solar Sources
The most important method of trapping solar energy is by means of solar panels.
These are made of metals since they are good conductors of heat.
Copper is most commonly used.
It is covered with a black surface to absorb the sunlight.
Solar panels are usually mounted on the roof of a house and used for domestic heating.
The photovoltaic cell also provides a means of collecting the Sun's energy.
The problem with photocells is their low efficiency.
They are no more than about 20% efficient.
At present, much research is being carried out to improve the efficiency of photocells.
One possibility is the use of a glass panel treated with uranium oxide and the rare earth element neodymium in order to increase the absorption of light
The use of solar energy to produce hydrogen as a fuel from water has aroused much scientific interest over recent years.
Hydrogen is the most abundant element in the Universe although it is not so on Earth (see chapter 12).
Most terrestrial hydrogen occurs in the form of water.
Once the hydrogen is produced it can be converted to other fuel forms such as methanol.
The easiest method of producing hydrogen from water is by means of electrolysis.
The efficiency of this process is about 83%.
However, at present, the economics of using solar-produced electricity to produce hydrogen from water by electrolysis are poor.
A more attractive long-term possibility is the direct solar production of hydrogen from water by photochemical conversion.
This process is known as photolysis.
Two approaches are currently being investigated.
These are the biological approach and the biochemical approach.
In the biological approach, living organisms are used to decompose water into hydrogen and oxygen (see "the hydrogen tree" at the beginning of this chapter).
This process is called biophotolysis.
In the biochemical approach, enzymes obtained from biological organisms are used.
Hydrogen has already been produced from water using this approach.
But the rate and duration of production is low.
There is also much experimental interest in the use of artificial chloroplast and synthetic chlorophyll for the photochemical conversion of water.
The use of solar collectors which can concentrate solar radiation sufficiently to generate the high temperatures needed for the thermochemical conversion of water is also a long-term possibility.
The equation for this process is 
Biomass includes all animal and plant materials-both dead and alive.
Food, wood, the organic wastes of animals and plants are all forms of biomass.
Biomass is an important form of stored energy.
The carbohydrates, fats and proteins in food all provide us with energy, for example(see section 5.2).
Wood, of course, has long been used as fuel by mankind (see the beginning of this chapter).
In recent decades biomass has become increasingly important as a source of fuels such as biogas and alcohol.
Biomass
Biogas —like natural gas —is predominantly methane.
Biological processes are already used extensively at sewage works and on farms to convert domestic and agricultural sewage into biogas.
A biogas plant uses animal wastes and plants as raw material.
These are allowed to rot in a biogas generator or digester.
The digester excludes oxygen.
Under these conditions, certain species of bacteria break down the waste to form methane gas.
The gas is collected and can be burned directly for domestic heating and cooking or used to produce electricity in a generator (see figure 5.21).
Biogas production is growing rapidly in Third World countries.
China has about 4.3 million biogas production plants installed over the country and about 100 000 personnel trained in biogas production.
India has over 60 000 and South Korea 30 000 biogas production plants in operation.
The use of "green waste" in developing countries is attractive for several reasons.
First of all, it can be produced in rural areas.
Secondly, waste can be used as fertiliser-the residue from such processing has a high nitrogen content.
Land which is unfit for food crops can be used to grow crops for biogas production.
Aquatic weeds such as the wild hyacinths which choke canals and reservoirs in some parts of the world can also be used to produce biogas.
Finally, the increased use of biogas serves to reduce the use of wood as a fuel.
Another bio-fuel is alcohol.
Alcohol has long been used as a fuel-in spirit lamps and as methylated spirits, for example.
Alcohol can be produced from plants such as sugar cane and cassava by fermentation and distillation.
Brazil, in its Proalcohol programme, extracts ethanol from crops and has designed and manufactured cars to run on the fuel (see the beginning of this chapter).
There is also considerable potential and interest in the extraction and use of vegetable oils as diesel fuels.
Oils extracted from soya beans, sunflowers, peanuts, rapeseed, palms, castor beans, eucalyptus, squash and coconut have all been tested for use as fuels and lubricating oils over recent years.
One of the problems of supplying energy is matching supply with demand.
The body, for example, consumes energy in the form of carbohydrate, fats and proteins.
If we supply ourselves with too much of this energy we store the surplus as fat.
If the demand for energy outstrips the supply, we use up the fat and become slimmer.
Carbohydrates, proteins and fats are called fuel nutrients.
ENERGY STORAGE
A fuel is a source of energy which can be readily converted into thermal energy when required and stored when not required.
Conventional fuels such as coal, wood and oil are all readily stored when supply exceeds demand.
However, other forms of energy cannot be stored directly.
Electricity is an example.
Electricity is one of the most useful forms of energy.
It can be generated from conventional fuels.
But when supply exceeds demand, it  cannot be stored directly.
It has to be converted into other forms.
Three methods of doing this are: Pump storage.
At times of low demand, electricity can be used to pump water from a low reservoir to a high reservoir.
Electricity is regenerated by returning the water to a low reservoir through a turbo-generator.
Compression of air.
Excess electricity can also be used to compress air in an underground store.
The electricity can then be regenerated by allowing the air to expand in a turbine.
Production of hydrogen.
In the future it may be possible to convert water to hydrogen on a large scale by electrolysis, for example.
At present such storage is not economically viable.
These allow a store of chemical energy to be converted to electrical energy as required.
Batteries and Fuel Cells
A battery is a portable source of electricity.
It consists of an electrochemical cell or several electrical cells connected in series (see section 10.5).
A distinction is usually made between primary cells and secondary cells.
Primary cells cannot be recharged whereas secondary ones can be recharged.
The lead-acid accumulator used in cars consists of secondary cells.
Unlike in a battery, the chemicals in a fuel cell are continuously replaced as they are used up.
The most common type of fuel cell is the hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell (see section 10.5).
This has been used in space and conveniently produces not only electricity but also water.
It has been estimated that the amount of fossil fuels that will be consumed between AD 2000 and AD 2050 will be over three times the amount consumed between AD 1 and AD 2000.
Even in the second half of this century almost twice as much energy will have been consumed as in the preceding 1950 years (see table 5.17).
The major portion of the consumption of energy over the past 100 years has been due to the industrialisation of what is now called the Developed World.
Figure 5.22 shows that developing countries such as Nigeria, Indonesia and Egypt consume a mere fraction of the energy consumed by countries such as the UK and Australia.
Amongst the largest consumer of energy per capita is the United States.
It consumes more than twice as much as the United Kingdom.
PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE
The primary energy source of industrialised countries has always been fossil fuels.
However, as we have seen, these are non-renewable and rapidly running out.
The so-called energy crisis is really a fossil fuel crisis.
Estimates suggest that there may be enough coal left to last a few more hundred years, enough oil to last   perhaps 70 or so years and natural gas could run out within 50 years.
The need to tackle and solve the energy problem is becoming increasingly urgent.
The urgency of the problem is compounded by three factors: the increasing world population; social, economic and political pressures for economic expansion in industrialised countries; increasing awareness in Third World countries that their economic situation could be improved by increasing their energy consumption.
In pursuing a solution to the energy problem, a number of factors have to be taken into consideration.
The most important are the following.
To what extent can or will industrialised countries moderate their demand for energy through appropriate social, economic and political policies?
Demand
The efficiency of energy conversion is variable.
The electrical generator is about 98% efficient.
Yet the overall efficiency of converting fossil fuels to electrical energy is about 35 to 40%.
Much energy is lost in its transmission and distribution for example.
In Europe only 42% of the energy produced is converted into useful energy.
The ordinary domestic household in the UK wastes about 50% of its energy (see figure 5.23).
Efficiency and Wastage
Typical conversion efficiencies for various converters are shown in table 5.18.
Note that the solar cell has an efficiency of only about 10%.
The question, then, is to what extent can these efficiencies be improved and to what extent can the wastage be reduced?
Figures produced at a World Energy Conference showed that oil and gas production should reach a peak between 1985 and 2000.
The production of energy   from coal, nuclear fuels and solar and geothermal sources on the other hand should steadily increase over the next 30 years or so (see table 5.19).
In the very long term it is probable that nuclear fusion and nuclear fission together with solar energy will become the predominant sources of our energy.
Meanwhile the major problem is to what extent can suitable, safe and cost-effective technologies be developed to produce energy from these sources.
Alternative Energy Sources
One of the major problems of fossil fuels and particularly coal is pollution.
We are all familiar with news items concerning marine pollution due to oil spills.
The combustion of fossil fuels also results in the pollution of the atmosphere.
Every minute of every day, hundreds of millions of tonnes of coal are burned.
The product part from useful energy-are smoke, grit, soot, carbon dioxide and  sulphur oxides.
In the modern coal-fired power station, dust and grit are removed by filtering devices called "arresters" .
Chimneys then take the remaining gases to the upper atmosphere.
The consequent increase in concentration of carbon dioxide in the upper atmosphere is thought to result in what is known as the greenhouse effect.
This limits the amount of thermal energy escaping from the Earth (see figure 5.24a).
On the other hand, the accumulation of dust in the upper atmosphere results in cooling since the solar radiation is reflected away from the Earth (see figure 5.24b).
Environmental Considerations
Nuclear fission also has its own environmental problems (see also section 1.3).
There are two major dangers.
Accidents.
No major accidents have occurred in the West although the incidents at Brown's Ferry, Harrisburg and Three Mile Island in the United States are well known.
These were near misses.
The Chernobyl accident in the USSR has already been described in chapter 1.
Leakage and disposal of radioactive waste.
This issue has become increasingly controversial in recent years.
The general public is constantly exposed to radiation.
About 78% of this comes from natural sources such as granite rocks and cosmic rays.
Less than one-half of one per cent derives from nuclear power stations and atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons.
The remainder-about 21%-arises from medical X-rays (see section 1.3).
The problem of providing enough energy for our increasing needs is not only how to conserve the environment and minimise damage to it but also how to use our environment most effectively.
In some Third World countries there is an increasing danger that fuel crops are replacing traditional food crops.
To put it crudely, the poor are going without food so that the rich can drive cars.
Although developing countries are generally increasing their use of oil, many of the poorest and non-oil-producing countries of the Third World are, of necessity, still using wood as their main fuel (see the beginning of the chapter).
For some countries, wood accounts for 90% of energy production, with consequent detriment of the environment.
PHASE EQUILIBRIA
Whisky
Whisky, from the Scottish Gaelic uisge beatha, "water of life" , is one of the distilled alcoholic beverages.
Other distilled alcoholic beverages include brandies, rums and vodkas.
Percentages of alcohol commonly range from 40% to 50%, expressed as proof.
In the United States a spirit with 50% alcohol by volume is termed 100 proof.
Scotch, Canadian and American whiskies combined account for about one-half of the distilled spirits sold in the United States.
The percentage of whisky sold has been decreasing as the sale of vodkas and light rums has been rising.
Whisky, like the other distilled spirits, is generally distilled from a fermented, or alcohol-containing, mash of grains, which may include barley, rye, oats, wheat, or corn.
Because distillation requires an alcohol-containing liquid, it is necessary to ferment the grain.
Part of the process of whisky production includes converting the starch in the grain to sugar so that fermentation and ultimately distillation can take place.
The grain is first milled, or ground to a meal.
It is then cooked until it becomes gelatinous, releasing the starch from its tough coating.
Barley malt is added because it is rich in amylase, an enzyme that enables starch to be converted to sugar.
The mash is now ready for fermentation, and laboratory yeast is added.
It ferments for 72 hours, creating an alcoholic liquid known as beer.
The beer undergoes selective distillation to become whisky.
Certain desirable secondary products called cogeners, or flavourings, are collected with the alcohol.
Production
Distillation may be carried out in either a batch process, using a pot still, or a continuous process, using a patent or Coffey still.
The pot still is uniquely suited for full-flavoured spirits, such as malt whisky and Irish whiskey.
The continuous process is best suited for light whiskies.
The product of either process is colourless and of varied flavour.
Fuller-flavoured whiskies mellow with wood maturation.
This ageing will vary with the spirit (higher-distillation-proof spirits need less age because they have less flavour), the material of the cask (whether it is new or used and how deeply the interior is charred), the size of the cask (which determines the wood-to-liquid ratio), and the storage conditions (which are affected by temperature and humidity).
The common amber colour and some of the flavour of the matured whisky are acquired from the storage cask.
Straight whiskies are flavourful.
They are made from at least 51% of a particular grain.
Water may be added to reduce the proof to a bottling strength of 80 proof minimum.
Straight whiskies are aged in new, charred white-oak barrels for at least two years.
Types
The predominant ingredient in light whisky is corn; the higher the amount of corn, the lighter the flavour.
Bourbon, the most popular whisky made in the United States, must have at least 51% corn in the mash; it may have as much as 79%.
Other grains present are rye and barley malt, which also contribute flavour.
Light whisky is stored in seasoned charred oak casks, which impart little colour or flavour.
Blended whisky, erroneously known as rye whisky, is a combination of straight (at least 20%) and light whisky.
The final product may have as many as 40 to 50 different components.
Tennessee whisky is usually made from corn, but any grain may be used.
A bourbon-type whisky, it is very full because it is treated with maple-wood charcoal to remove the lighter flavours.
Canadian whisky is always distilled in the patent still and is always a blend.
Most Canadian whisky is at least six years old when sold.
Delicate and light bodied, it is often confused with American blended whisky and thus called rye.
Nearly all Scotch whiskies are blends.
They are usually distilled from barley malt cured with peat, giving the spirit a smoky flavour.
Alcohol (Ethanol)
Status
Legal for adults.
A drink produced by the fermentation of fruits, vegetables or grain.
Nature
Alcohol is absorbed into the blood stream via the stomach and takes effect within 5-10 minutes.
Effects vary according to individual health, weight and sex but, as a rough measure, three single whiskies drunk in one hour might result in 0.05% alcohol content in the blood —this would lift spirits and lessen inhibitions (a single whisky is equivalent to one glass of wine or half a pint of beer).
Six double whiskies in an hour might produce uncontrollable behaviour and impair the functioning of the central nervous system; and 12 double whiskies in an hour might produce profound anaesthesia, near coma and death.
Women get drunk more easily than men because they have less water per body weight.
They also stay drunk longer if they are on the pill but get drunk slower during menstruation.
Hangovers are actually the body's response of shock at being subjected to a substantial dose of a poisonous substance.
Effects
Frequent intoxication damages the mouth, oesophagus, stomach and especially the liver, where overloading of the metabolising process can cause hepatitis and cirrhosis.
Heavy drinking affects the heart and is linked to brain disorders.
Alcoholic drink provides calories, giving energy and thus reducing appetite.
But it contains no vitamins, minerals, amino acids or other essential nutrients.
So if food consumption decreases there is a danger of malnutrition and if it continues one of obesity (with attendant heart problems).
Alcohol is particularly dangerous when taken with barbiturates or tranquillisers, causing deep sedation, a drop in blood pressure and possible breathing failure.
Dangers
Highly addictive.
Severe withdrawal symptoms (delirium tremens) are acute panic, delusions, exhaustion and trembling to the point of seizure.
This lasts 3-10 days.
Severe delirium tremens has a fatality rate of 20%, higher than any drug except the barbiturates.
Addictiveness
6.1 Equilibria and Phases
Static Equilibria
The Concise Oxford Dictionary defines "equilibrium" as "state of balance" .
It also defines "a body in stable equilibrium" as "tending to recover equilibrium after a disturbance" .
A ball at the bottom of a ditch is in stable equilibrium (see figure 6.1).
It soon recovers its stable position if it is pushed to one side or the other.
On the other hand, a ball lying on the edge of a ditch is in a position of unstable equilibrium.
Even a slight push means that it falls and cannot recover its original position of equilibrium.
Both these examples of stable and unstable equilibria are also examples of static equilibria.
In other words, the system at equilibrium is not in motion.
It is static.
There are many other types of equilibrium.
Mechanical equilibrium, for example, is a form of static equilibrium.
It exists when the pressure is constant throughout all parts of a system.
In chemistry, we are not so much concerned with static equilibria as dynamic equilibria.
A dynamic equilibrium exists when two reversible or opposite processes are balanced.
An example of this is walking up an escalator at the same speed that the escalator is moving downwards.
The overall change in position is zero.
The two opposing motions are balanced.
Another example is a fish swimming up-stream at the same speed as the stream (see figure 6.2).
The fish appears to be static.
It is in dynamic equilibrium with the stream.
Dynamic Equilibria
Dynamic equilibria can be divided into two categories: physical equilibria.
chemical equilibria.
From our point of view the most important types of physical equilibria are phase equilibria —that is, the equilibria that exist between the phases of a system.
The dynamic nature of phase equilibria can be understood by considering them in the light of the kinetic theory.
Consider the equilibrium between a liquid and its vapour for example(see figure 6.3).
The two phases are in dynamic equilibrium when the rate of evaporation equals the rate of condensation.
In other words, in a given time, the number of particles leaving the liquid equals the number of particles entering it.
A system is in chemical equilibrium when the rate of the forward reaction is equal to the rate of the reverse reaction.
For example, when the rate of the following reaction, equals the rate of the reverse of this reaction, the system is in dynamic equilibrium.
We call this a reversible reaction and write it with the sign.
Thus We shall look at chemical equilibria in detail in the following chapter.
The rates of chemical reactions are dealt with in detail in chapter 9.
Dynamic equilibria, whether physical or chemical, are characterised by a number of features: the dynamic equilibria consist of forward and reverse processes; the forward and reverse processes are balanced; the overall properties of a system in dynamic equilibrium are constant; the equilibrium can be achieved from either the forward or reverse direction; dynamic equilibrium can only be achieved in a closed system.
A closed system is a system in which there is no net gain or loss of matter in the system.
Thus, in the ammonia example above, if ammonia, NH3, is allowed to escape from the reaction system, the reaction cannot achieve equilibrium.
We saw in chapter 3 that there are three states of matter: gas, liquid, solid.
However, the states of some matter do not fall conveniently into these categories.
What's the Matter Plasma Plasma's properties are sufficiently different from those of gases, liquids and solids for it to be considered the fourth state of matter.
Plasma consists of positive ions and unbound electrons.
It occurs in the Earth's lower atmosphere.
Over 99% of the matter in the Universe appears to exist as plasma.
The Sun and stars are highly ionised plasmas formed at very high temperatures.
Phases And Components
States of Matter
Glass This is also a substance which does not fall conveniently into any of the three categories of gas, liquid or solid.
Glass is an amorphous substance which has properties of a solid and the structure of a liquid.
It is in fact a liquid cooled below its freezing point without crystallising.
It is thus a supercooled liquid and may be considered as intermediate between liquid and solid.
Liquid Crystals These are more or less the opposite to glass.
They have the properties of liquids —they flow for example —yet their structure has some order like that of crystals.
Liquid crystals are used in calculators and watches.
Like glass, they may also be considered to be intermediate between liquid and solid.
A phase is defined as a portion of matter which is homogeneous.
Subdivision of a phase will only produce smaller portions indistinguishable from one another.
A phase may consist of two or more substances.
A solution is a single-phase substance for example.
Gases always mix freely with one another in any proportion to give a fully homogeneous mixture-that is a single phase.
Both solids and liquids may exist in more than one phase.
Phases
Phases are separated from one another by physical boundaries known as phase boundaries (see figure 6.4).
Equilibria which occur within a single phase are called homogeneous equilibria.
Ionic equilibria in solutions (see chapter 8) are examples of homogeneous equilibria.
Equilibria which occur between physically distinct regions, that is between phases, are called heterogeneous equilibria or phase equilibria.
A phase system may be classified as one-component, two-component (or binary) or three-component (or tertiary).
The number of components in a phase system is  the smallest number of chemical species needed to define all the phases of the system.
The ice-water-water vapour phase system is a one-component system.
The single component is water, H2O.
Components
We saw above that the equilibrium between a liquid and its vapour is a dynamic equilibrium.
The equilibrium can be presented as Lquid — Vapour This equilibrium is a balance between two phase transitions, that is, the transition from liquid to vapour and the transition from vapour to liquid.
Upsetting the Equilibria
Similarly the equilibrium between solid and liquid can be represented by Solid — Liquid The equilibrium between solid and its vapour is represented by Solid — Vapour In each case the two phase transitions are the reverse of one another.
All these equilibria can be disturbed by changes in temperature and pressure.
For example, the equilibrium between liquid and vapour is upset if the temperature is increased.
An increase in temperature results in particles in both the liquid and vapour phases gaining kinetic energy (see section 3.1).
More particles in the liquid phase will thus have sufficient energy to escape into the vapour phase.
As a result, the equilibrium shown above shifts to the right.
Experimental data on the influence of temperature and pressure on phase equilibria can be represented by phase diagrams.
Some of the most important features of phase diagrams are shown in the phase diagram of water.
This is shown in figure 6.5.
The regions bounded by the curves represent conditions where a single phase is stable.
For example, at any temperature and   pressure enclosed by the curves BT and TC, water exists in the liquid state.
At any temperature and pressure below the curves AT and TC water exists in the vapour state.
The Phase Diagram Of Water
The curves represent conditions under which two phases are in equilibrium.
For example, along the curve TC water and water vapour are in equilibrium.
This is the vapour pressure curve of water (see figure 3.13).
At point X on this curve, liquid water and water vapour are in equilibrium at a temperature of 373 K (100°C) and a vapour pressure of one atmosphere (101.325 kPa).
This is the boiling point of water at one atmosphere.
Curve AT is the vapour pressure curve for ice.
This is often called the sublimation curve.
Curve BT is the melting temperature curve.
This shows the effect of pressure on the melting point of ice.
It shows that as pressure increases the melting point decreases slightly.
This is unusual.
Increase of pressure usually favours the formation of the solid-as we shall see in the carbon dioxide phase diagram below.
In the case of water, higher pressures result in breaking down of the hydrogen bonds which bind the water molecules in ice together in an open structure.
As the hydrogen bonds break down the denser liquid phase is thus formed (see section 2.2).
At point Y on curve BT ice is in equilibrium with water at a temperature of 273 K (0°C) and a pressure of one atmosphere.
This is the freezing point of water at one atmosphere.
The curve ST represents the vapour pressure of water below its freezing point.
Since water does not normally exist as a liquid below its freezing point, any point on this curve represents water in a metastable condition.
This means that water is not in its most stable state at this temperature and pressure.
The phenomenon represented by points on this curve is known as supercooling.
There are two points on the phase diagram of particular interest.
First of all note that the vapour pressure curve terminates at point C. This is called the critical point of water.
At temperatures and pressures above this point water vapour cannot be converted into liquid water no matter how great the applied pressure (see also section 3.1).
In other words the vapour and liquid forms of water are indistinguishable above this point.
The critical temperature of water is 647 K and the critical pressure 220 atmospheres.
Point T is known as the triple point.
At this point, ice, water and water vapour are in equilibrium.
It occurs at 273.16 K and 6.03 X 10-- atmospheres.
These are the only temperature and pressure values at which all three phases can exist together in equilibrium.
This is shown in figure 6.6.
It is similar to the phase diagram of water although there are two important differences.
THE PHASE DIAGRAM OF CARBON DIOXIDE
First of all, the triple point occurs well above one atmosphere, at 5.11 atmospheres.
Thus, at all pressures below this point carbon dioxide cannot exist as a liquid.
If solid carbon dioxide (dry ice) is warmed at one atmosphere it sublimes at 195 K (-78°C).
This means it passes directly into the gas phase without becoming a liquid.
The other notable difference is the curve BT.
This slopes to the right.
Molecules of carbon dioxide in the solid phase are packed more closely than in the liquid phase.
Thus, unlike water, the solid carbon dioxide is denser than the liquid.
This is typical for most substances.
An increase of applied pressure thus favours formation of solid carbon dioxide.
Consequently, as pressure increases the melting point also increases.
In section 3.2 we saw that compounds which exist in more than one crystalline form are said to exhibit polymorphism.
Elements which exist in more than one crystalline form are said to exhibit allotropy.
Sulphur, for example, can exist in two allotropic forms: a-sulphur which has a rhombic crystalline form and B sulphur which has a monoclinic crystalline form.
The S8 molecules in a-sulphur are more densely packed than in B-sulphur.
THE PHASE DIAGRAM OF SULPHER
The variation of free energy (see chapter 5) of the two allotropes of sulphur and also its liquid form with temperature is shown in figure 6.7.
The free energy of any substance decreases with increasing temperature.
For sulphur, the a-allotrope has the lowest free energy at temperatures less than 268.5 K and is thus most stable at these temperatures.
At temperatures between 368.5 K (95.50C) and 393 K (1200C) the B-allotrope is most stable.
Above 393 K, the liquid is most stable.
When an element can exist in two or more allotropic forms each of which is stable over a range of conditions, it is said to exhibit enantiotropy.
The temperature at which two enantiotropes are in equilibrium is called the transition temperature.
For sulphur, the transition temperature at one atmosphere is 368.5 K.
The effect of pressure on transition temperature is shown by the curve AB in the phase diagram of sulphur in figure 6.8.
As pressure increases, the transition temperature increases.
Sulphur has three triple points —A, B and C. At A, for example, two solid phases and the vapour phase are in equilibrium.
The two solid phases are the two enantiotropes of sulphur.
The dotted curves represent metastable conditions.
The dotted curve AD, for example, is the vapour pressure curve of a-sulphur above its transition temperature.
Sulphur is not the only element to exhibit enantiotropy.
Tin, for example, has two enantiotropes-grey tin and white tin.
The transition temperature at one atmosphere is 286.2 K (13.2°C).
Enantiotropy of Other Elements
Iron is another example.
It exists in three enantiotropic forms, u-iron, Y-iron and-iron. 
When an element exists in more than one crystalline form only one of which is stable it is said to exhibit monotropy.
THE PHASE DIAGRAM OF PHOSPHORUS
Phosphorus exhibits monotropy.
We saw in section 3.2 that phosphorus has three forms.
The stable monotrope is red phosphorus.
At one atmosphere this is stable up to 690 K (see figure 6.9).
White phosphorus and black phosphorus are both metastable monotropes.
Black phosphorus only occurs at high pressures-this is not shown in figure 6.9.
Phosphorus has a triple point at 862.5 K (589.5°C) and 43.1 atmospheres.
At this point, red phosphorus, liquid phosphorus and its vapour are in equilibrium.
Multicomponent Systems
We saw in chapter 4 that mixtures may be homogeneous, in which case they exist as a single phase, or they may be heterogeneous.
A heterogeneous mixture consists of two or more phases.
In this section we shall be examining phase equilibria of some heterogeneous mixtures.
However, we shall be principally interested in phase equilibria involving homogeneous mixtures-that is solutions.
In particular we shall be looking at three types of solution: gases in liquids, liquids in liquids, solids in liquids.
A solution consists of at least two components.
The component in the greater quantity is called the solvent.
The minor component is called the solute.
A solution which cannot dissolve more solute at a given temperature is called a saturated solution.
A saturated solution is in dynamic equilibrium with undissolved solute.
If we take the case of a saturated solution of sodium chloride for example, solid sodium chloride is in dynamic equilibrium with dissolved sodium chloride:
The composition of a solution can be expressed in various ways including molality and mole fraction.
These were discussed in section 4.2.
The solubility of a gas in a liquid can be expressed in terms of its absorption coefficient.
This is the volume of the gas, converted to s.t.p. (see section 3.1), which dissolves in unit volume of the liquid at the temperature and pressure specified.
GASES IN LIQUIDS
The absorption coefficient depends on four factors: the gas, the liquid, temperature, pressure.
Values for the absorption coefficients of several different gases in water at s.t.p. are shown in table 6.1.
The values range from very low for the virtually insoluble helium to very high for the highly soluble ammonia.
Examples of the influence of the liquid —or solvent —on the solubility of a particular gas are clearly shown by the values for the solubility of oxygen in table 6.2.
In general, the solubility of a gas decreases with increasing temperature.
The solubility of ammonia in water is a clear example of this (see table 6.3).
Let us take the following equilibrium for example: At 273 K the absorption coefficient of oxygen in water is 0.05 whereas at 293 K it is 0.03.
This is because the reverse reaction in the equilibrium is endothermic.
Thus, as temperature increases, heat energy is absorbed shifting the equilibrium to the left.
Conversely, the process of dissolving a gas in a solvent to form a saturated solution is an exothermic process.
There are exceptions to this.
For example, the solubility of noble gases in liquid hydrocarbons increases with increasing temperature.
The process of forming a saturated solution in this case is endothermic.
Influence of Temperature
The relationship between gas pressure and solubility is given by Henry's law.
This states that the mass (m) of a gas dissolved in a given volume of liquid with which it  is in equilibrium is proportional to the pressure (p) of the gas at a particular temperature.
Thus K is a constant of proportionality.
It is an equilibrium constant for dissolving the gas.
Thus, the solubility of a gas increases with the pressure of a gas.
It is for this reason that divers must avoid rapid decompression when they rise to the surface.
The phenomenon is also important in industry.
In the industrial manufacture of hydrogen by the Bosch process (see section 12.1), carbon dioxide is removed from hydrogen by bubbling the gaseous mixture through water at high pressure.
At about 50 atmospheres the carbon dioxide readily dissolves in water thus removing it almost completely from the hydrogen.
Inflience of Pressure
We shall consider three categories of two-component liquid mixtures: completely miscible liquids water and ethanol partially miscible liquids water and butan-1-ol immiscible liquids water and oil
TWO_COMPONENT LIQUID MIXTURES
These are liquids which completely dissolve in one another in all proportions, forming a homogeneous mixture or solution.
As a starting point in our treatment of such systems we shall develop a model of an ideal solution and then show how real or non-ideal solutions deviate from this model.
Although no solution is completely ideal, some approach ideality.
Examples are: a solution of benzene and methylbenzene (toluene); a liquid mixture of nitrogen and oxygen; a mixture of alkanes, in crude oil for example.
An ideal solution has the following properties: 1.
Intermolecular attractions between like molecules and unlike molecules are equal.
There is thus little or no tendency for molecules of one component to hinder or help the escape into the vapour phase of molecules of the other component.
2.
There is no enthalpy change on mixing of the two components.
3.
There is no volume change on mixing the two components.
COMPLETELY MISCIBLE LIQUIDS
Ideal solutions obey Raoult's law.
This states that the partial vapour pressure (pa) of component A in a solution equals the vapour pressure of the pure component (pa°) multiplied by the mole fraction (XA) of the component in the solution.
For an ideal solution consisting of two components A and B, Raoult's law may be expressed mathematically as The vapour of an ideal solution may be considered to be an ideal gas, and Dalton's law (see section 3.1) therefore applies.
Thus the total vapour pressure (o) of the solution is given by 
The total pressure of the two components and the partial pressure of the more volatile component increase as the mole fraction of the more volatile component increases.
The partial vapour pressure of the less volatile component decreases at the same time.
This is shown in figure 6.10.
The more volatile component is the one whose molecules have a greater tendency to escape into the vapour phase.
The more volatile component is thus the one with the higher vapour pressure.
Note that the mole fraction of either A or B can be used to express the composition of the solution.
This is because The top line in figure 6.10 is the total pressure curve for an ideal solution consisting of two components A and B. At all vapour pressures and compositions above the line, the mixture is a liquid.
At all vapour pressures and compositions below it, the mixture is a vapour.
At all points on the line, the liquid and vapour are in equilibrium 
Phase Diagrams of Completely Miscible Liquids
Let us now consider the conditions under which three mixtures in this system boil.
Mixture C is a liquid at one atmosphere (see figure 6.11).
To make it boil without increasing its temperature, its pressure would have to be reduced from one atmosphere (point C) to point C"on the line.
This corresponds to the boiling pressure of C at this temperature.
At this point the liquid and vapour are in equilibrum.
Mixture D is a vapour at one atmosphere.
This is represented by point D. To condense it without reducing its temperature, its pressure would have to be increased to point D"on the line.
This corresponds to the boiling pressure of D at this temperature.
Mixture E boils at one atmosphere at the temperature of the system.
Point E represents the vapour pressure and the composition of the liquid when the vapour and liquid are in equilibrium.
But what is the composition of the vapour at this point?
The vapour is a mixture of the more volatile component A and the less volatile component B. The particles of the more volatile component have a greater tendency to escape from the liquid than the particles of the less volatile  component.
The vapour mixture is thus proportionately richer in component A. The mole fraction ofA in the vapour is thus greater than the mole fraction of A in the liquid.
The composition of the vapour is represented by point E"in figure 6.11.
If we plot the vapour pressure of the liquid mixture (that is the solution) against Vapour Composition over the complete range of compositions, we obtain the lower curve in figure 6.12.
The top line is a plot of vapour pressure of the liquid mixture against liquid composition.
It corresponds to the line in figure 6.11 and the top line in figure 6.10.
When temperature is increased, the partial pressures of both components and the total vapour pressure of the mixture increase.
This follows from Charles' law (see section 3.1).
Figure 6.13 represents the vapour pressure liquid composition lines for three different temperatures As the temperature increases, the slope increases.
A mixture with composition XA(F) boils at one atmosphere pressure when the temperature equals T3.
Similarly, a mixture with composition XA(C) boils at T2 and so on.
If we plot boiling point against composition we obtain the type of boiling point curve shown in figure 6.14.
Point C represents a liquid with composition XA(C) at its boiling point T(C).
At this point, the vapour pressure of the mixture equals the   external pressure and is in equilibrium with the liquid.
For the reasons given above, the vapour will be richer in the more volatile component.
This is the component with the lower boiling point.
The vapour at this boiling temperature is represented by point D. If we plot all such points for compositions over the complete range we obtain the upper curve in figure 6.15.
Liquid-vapour phase diagrams at constant pressure are of crucial importance in the study of distillation.
If, for example, we distil a mixture with composition XA(C), the distillate will have the composition XA(D).
If we then redistil the distillate, the new distillate will have the composition XA(E) and so on.
By repeated distillation, it is theoretically possible to separate components A and B completely.
This is the basis of fractional distillation.
Fractional distillation has a number of important applications, for example the manufacture of oxygen, nitrogen and the noble gases from liquid air, the refining of petroleum, the production of whisky and other alcoholic drinks (see introductory reading at start of this chapter and also below).
Fractional Distillation
A diagram of a typical laboratory apparatus used for fractional distillation is shown in figure 6.16.
The vertical column is filled with glass beads or randomly orientated short pieces of glass tubing.
Alternatively, the column may have bulbous surfaces.
The column allows the ascending vapour to come into contact with the descending liquid.
Let us consider what happens when we fractionally distil a two-component mixture with composition XA(C) (see figure 6.17).
As we heat up this mixture, its temperature increases to point C. It then boils.
The vapour produced is richer in the more volatile component A. At the boiling point, this vapour and the liquid are in equilibrium.
This is represented by the tie-line CD in the phase diagram.
The vapour rises in the fractionating column.
As it does, its temperature decreases until it condenses.
This temperature drop is represented by the vertical line DD' in the phase diagram.
At point I)"a new equilibrium is established between the condensate, which has the composition XA(D), and its vapour, which has the composition xA(E).
The liquid condensate descends the column whilst the vapour ascends.
Thus, at various stages in the column the descending liquid and the ascending vapour are in equilibrium.
These equilibria are represented by the tielines.
As the vapours rise in the column through each successive equilibrium, they become richer in the more volatile component.
Eventually, they pass out of the column at the top, are condensed and collected.
At the same time, the liquid in the flask becomes richer in the less volatile component and consequently its boiling point increases.
Since vapour is removed from the top of the column the equilibria in the column are continuously changing.
Good separation is only achieved if the flask is heated slowly to allow time for the equilibria to become established.
Enguli In Uganda a spirit called "enguli" is made by the fractional distillation of beer in home-made stills.
The beer is obtained by the fermentation of molasses and banana juice.
Three fractions are collected during the distillation of the beer.
The first fraction contains toxic bower-boiling aldehydes ketones and alcohols.
For example: This fraction is discarded.
The second fraction is the "enguli" .
It contains water and ethanol.
Ethanol (also known as ethyl alcohol) has a boiling point of 78°C and is harmless if consumed in small quantities (see introductory reading at start of this chapter).
The third fraction contains alcohols with boiling points ranging from 120 to l30°C.
This fraction is also discarded.
In Uganda, licensed "enguli" producers sell their product to industrial distilleries which produce a spirit known as "waragi" .
Home-made enguli and similar home-made drinks in other East African countries can be dangerous since the second fraction is often contaminated with the toxic first and third fractions.
For this reason, most East African countries discourage or ban the production and consumption of such drinks.
In practice fractional distillation is normally used to separate multicomponent liquid mixtures into several fractions.
All liquid mixtures deviate from ideal behaviour to a greater or lesser extent.
However, only those which deviate to a lesser extent can be separated by fractional distillation.
Such mixtures are called zeotropic.
Benzene and methylbenzene form a zeotropic mixture.
Non-Ideal Solutions
Deviations from ideal behaviour may be positive or negative.
A mixture which exerts a vapour pressure greater than that predicted by Raoult's law is said to show a positive deviation.
Figure 6.18 is a typical vapour pressure-composition diagram for a non-ideal solution showing positive deviation.
The curves should be compared with the broken lines.
These represent ideal behaviour.
Figure 6.19 is the corresponding diagram for a non-ideal solution which exhibits negative deviation from Raoult's law.
Examples of two-component liquid mixtures which show positive and negative deviations from Raoult's law are listed in table 6.4.
Positive deviations occur for two reasons: First of all, attractions or bonding between molecules of components A and B are weak.
Bonding between molecules of components A and B can be represented bby A…
B. Secondly, bonding of the A…
A and B…
B types are broken on mixing the two components.
These bonds are often hydrogen bonds.
As a result of these two factors, molecules of both A and B have a greater tendency to escape from the liquid phase into the vapour phase.
The liquid mixture thus has a higher vapour pressure.
Negative deviations occur because A…
B attractions or bonds are stronger than A…
A and B. B attractions or bonds.
The molecules are consequently held back in the liquid phase and the vapour pressure is lower.
Liquid mixtures which deviate widely from ideal behaviour cannot be separated by fractional distillation.
They are called azeotropic.
The following are examples of azeotropic mixtures: hydrochloric acid/water, ethanol/water, trichloromethane/ propane and benzene/ethanol.
The reason azeotropic mixtures cannot be separated by fractional distillation is that they have maximum or minimum boiling points.
Those which exhibit positive deviation from Raoult's law have minimum boiling points.
Those which exhibit negative deviations have maximum boiling points (see figures 6.20 and 6.21).
Let us consider a liquid mixture of initial composition C in figure 6.21.
Fractional distillation results in pure B and a mixture having the composition X. This mixture is called the azeotrope, the azeotropic mixture or the constant mixture.
If the initial composition of the mixture is D, then fractional distillation would result in pure A and the constant boiling mixture.
Although such mixtures cannot be separated by fractional distillation, they can be separated by other means.
For example, ethanol can be separated from a liquid mixture of ethanol and water by shaking the mixture with silica gel.
The silica gel removes the water.
If the deviation from Raoult's law is sufficiently great, the mixture may no longer remain homogeneous over the complete range of compositions.
In this case the liquids are said to be partially miscible.
Figure 6.22 shows the three possible types of phase diagram for partially miscible liquids.
Partially Miscible Liquids
Let us examine type (a) in a little more detail.
If we add component A to component B at a constant temperature T4, A will dissolve in B to form a solution until point X is reached.
At this point B is saturated with A and a second phase appears.
This new phase is A saturated with B. On adding more A the proportion of this second phase increases until point Y is reached.
At this point the phase consisting of B saturated with A disappears resulting in a single phase consisting of A saturated with B.
Points X and Y thus represent the compositions of saturated solutions of A in B and B in A respectively at temperature T4.
At points on the tie-line between X and   Y the saturated solutions coexist in equilibrium.
Their compositions remain constant but the relative proportions of each change.
The mole fraction XA represents the overall composition of the two solutions.
The temperature at point C is the maximum temperature at which two phases can form.
This is called the critical solution temperature.
The composition at this point is called the critical composition.
Some pairs of liquids are insoluble in one another.
Thus, when mixed in any proportion, they form two separate layers.
Such liquids are said to be immiscible.
Examples include: mercury/water, carbon disulphide/water, chlorobenzene/ water, nitrobenzene/water and phenylamine/water.
lMMlSClBLE LIQUIDS
The total vapour pressure of a pair of immiscible liquids is found experimentally to equal the sum of the vapour pressures of the two pure components.
Thus 
Since the total vapour pressure is higher than that of either component, the temperature at which the mixture boils is lower than that of either component.
This is the principle of steam distillation.
Water boils at 100°C at one atmosphere pressure.
However, when steam is bubbled through a liquid with which water is immiscible, the vapour pressure is increased.
As a consequence the mixture boils at a lower temperature (see figure 6.23).
Steam Distillation
A diagram of an apparatus used for steam distillation is shown in figure 6.24.
The required product is collected in a flask and separated from water using a separating funnel.
Steam distillation is used to purify liquids such as nitrobenzene and phenylamine which have high boiling points.
Distillation at a lower temperature avoids the risk of thermal decomposition.
Nowadays vacuum distillation is usually preferred to steam distillation for this purpose.
to extract oils from plants, for example in perfumery.
The molar mass of a liquid which is immiscible with water can be calculated from steam distillation data.
From Raoult's law by substituting these equations into equation (1), we obtain We saw in section 4.1 that where m is the mass in grams and M is the molar mass in grams per mole.
Thus, from equation (2) we obtain This equation can be used to calculate the molar mass (MA) of liquid A. EXAMPLE A sample of phenylamine (aniline), C6H5NH2, was steam distilled at 98.6°C and one atmosphere pressure.
The distillate was found to contain 25.5 g of water and 7.4 g of phenylamine.
Calculate the molar mass of phenylamine.
SOLUTION To find the molar mass of C6H5NH, we use equation (3).
Thus Since the mixture boils at one atmosphere (760 mmHg), the sum of the two partial pressures must equal one atmosphere: Tables of data show that, at 98.6°C, Substituting this value and the experimental data into the above equation we obtain Note that the molar mass calculated from the formula is 93.13 g
Calculation of Molar Mass Using Steam Distillation
When a solute is soluble in two immiscible liquids, the solute distributes itself between the two liquids.
The ratio in which it is distributed is governed by the distribution law.
This states that a solute distributes itself between two immiscible liquids in a constant ratio of concentrations irrespective of the amount of solute added.
The Distribution Law
This is sometimes called the partition law.
It is based on experimental evidence.
Consider, for example, the distribution of iodine between the immiscible solvents, water and tetrachloromethane (see figure 6.25).
If we shake up iodine with these two solvents, some will dissolve in the water and some in the tetrachloromethane, CCl4.
Eventually a dynamic equilibrium is established.
At this point the rate at  which iodine passes from CCl4 to water equals the rate at which it passes from water to CCl4. 
No matter how much iodine we use the ratio of the final concentration is constant.
The constant is called the distribution (or partition) coefficient, K. It is given by 
At 25°C the value of K for this equilibrium is 85.
This means that the concentration of iodine in CCl4 is 85 times higher than in water.
This is because iodine is a non-polar solute.
It is thus much more soluble in non-polar solvents such as CCl4 than in polar solvents such as water.
The corresponding value for the distribution of iodine in benzene and water is about 400.
The law only holds under certain conditions: The temperature must be constant.
The two solutions must be reasonably dilute.
The solute must not react, associate or dissociate in the solvents.
For example, the distribution coefficient for benzoic acid in benzene and water increases with increasing concentrations in the two layers.
This is due to the formation of benzoic acid dimers in the benzene layer.
These dimers are formed as a result of hydrogen bonding (see figure 6.26 and also chapters 2 and 3).
The distribution law has a number of important applications.
Two of the most important are liquid-phase chromatography and solvent extraction.
We shall deal with chromatography in general in section 6.3 of this chapter.
Applications of the Distribution Law
Two immiscible liquids are sometimes used as selective solvents for components in a mixture.
The mixture is shaken with the two immiscible liquids.
The liquids are then allowed to separate.
Each layer is then subjected to a number of extractions with the other solvent.
Solvent Extraction
This technique is used to separate uranium salts from nuclear fission products.
For example, the uranyl salt, UO2(NO3)2, may be separated from NaCl by using butanol and water.
The uranyl salt is more soluble in butanol and NaCl more soluble in water.
The technique of counter-current extraction can be used for this purpose.
One of the solvents is passed over the solid mixture which is located in a column or tower.
The other solvent is then passed over the mixture in the opposite direction.
The process is repeated several times.
Perhaps the most common laboratory example of solvent extraction is ether extraction.
This is used to separate the products of an organic synthesis from water.
The aqueous solution is shaken up with ethoxyethane (ether) in a separating funnel and allowed to separate (see figure 6.27).
The product is thus removed from inorganic impurities which are soluble in water.
The solution may be subjected to several separations.
Finally the exothyethane is evaporated off, leaving the organic product.
The technique is particularly useful when the product is volatile or thermally unstable.
In this case the solvent has to be evaporated or boiled off at a low temperature.
Ethoxyethane with its boiling point of 34.5°C is thus a suitable solvent for this purpose-so long as there are no naked flames in the laboratory!
Repeated extractions using small portions of solvent are more efficient than using a single but larger volume of solvent.
Phase diagrams for two-component solid-liquid equilibria can be quite complex.
In this section we shall consider only the simplest type, that is temperature-composition phase diagrams of liquid mixtures which form a simple eutectic.
We shall explain the term eutectic below.
Temperature —composition phase diagrams for solid-liquid systems can be constructed from cooling curves.
To do so, the cooling curves are plotted for the two pure components and for mixtures with various compositions of the two components.
SOLID-LIQUID EQUILIBRlA
Figure 6.28 shows the cooling curves for pure benzene, pure naphthalene and a mixture of the two.
The first part of each curve represents the liquid cooling.
For the two pure components, the curve then flattens out.
This occurs at the melting point.
At this point the solid and liquid are in equilibrium.
The temperature remains constant due to the enthalpy decrease which accompanies freezing.
The small blip is due to supercooling.
When all the liquid has solidified, the temperature drops once again.
The curve in the middle shows what happens when a mixture of benzene and naphthalene is cooled.
Solid begins to form at point A. Depending on the composition of the mixture, the solid will be either benzene or naphthalene.
As the solid of one component forms the liquid becomes richer in the other component.
At point B, a mixture of both solids form.
The solid mixture is in equilibrium with the liquid.
Finally, the solid mixture cools.
If we plot points A and B for mixtures of benzene and naphthalene ranging from pure benzene to pure naphthalene we obtain the phase diagram shown in figure 6.29.
The cooling curves corresponding to mixtures with compositions a, b and c are shown in figure 6.30.
Let us consider the mixture with composition a (see figure 6.29).
The liquid mixture cools until point a'.
At this point solid benzene begins to form.
The liquid thus becomes richer in naphthalene.
Consequently, as the temperature   drops the composition of the liquid mixture travels along the curve a"-E.
All the time solid benzene is forming.
At point E a solid mixture of benzene and naphthalene is formed.
This mixture is called the eutectic mixture or simply the eutectic.
The point is called the eutectic point.
Let us now consider a liquid mixture of composition c.
This starts to form solid naphthalene at point c'.
The liquid composition then becomes richer in benzene and travels along the curve c'-E.
At point E, the eutectic is formed.
Solid-liquid phase diagrams are particularly important in the study of alloys and are thus of much importance to metallurgist An ordinary electrical solder is a  mixture of tin and lead.
The eutectic mixture melts at the relatively low temperature of 183°C.
The solder can be strengthened by using silver.
Alloys
Figure 6.31 shows the phase diagram for zinc and cadmium.
Note that the  eutectic mixture at point E always has the same composition.
Thus, to the left of E at temperatures equal to or lower than 270°C the solid consists of zinc and the eutectic mixture.
Microscopic examinations show that crystals of zinc are embedded in the eutectic mixture.
The zinc is formed whilst cooling along the line from A to E. To the right of E at temperatures equal to or lower than 270°C the solid consists of a mixture of cadmium and the eutectic mixture.
Small crystals of cadmium are interspersed in the finely divided eutectic mixture.
It should be stressed that the eutectic is a mixture and not a compound.
Inorganic salts such as sodium chloride, potassium chloride and potassium iodide form eutectic mixtures with water.
A typical phase diagram for such a system is shown in figure 6.33.
Along the line AE, ice is formed.
It thus represents the freezing-point curve of increasingly more concentrated solutions of salt in water.
Along the line BE, the salt is in equilibrium with the solution.
The line is thus the solubility curve for the salt in water.
Point E is the eutectic point.
For salt and water systems, this is called the cryohydric point.
The eutectic mixture formed at this point is called the cryohydrate.
Cryohydrates
Common salt and water form a cryohydrate which freezes at -21.2°C.
Since salt and water mixtures freeze at temperatures lower than 0°C, salt is spread on roads in cold weather to prevent the formation of ice.
Most pure solids have characteristic sharp melting points.
A glance at any of the solid-liquid phase diagrams above shows that the presence of even a small   amount of a second component can lower the freezing point or melting point.
This fact can be used to determine the identity of unknown organic compounds by the method of mixed melting points.
The unknown compound is matched with a known compound with the same melting point.
Approximately equal amounts of each are powdered and mixed together thoroughly.
The melting point is determined.
If it is not sharp and is lower than that of the two separate samples, then the samples are not identical.
If, on the other hand, the melting point is sharp and is not lowered then the two samples are identical.
Purity of Solids
6.3 COLLlGATlVE PROPERTIES OF SOLUTIONS
A colligative property is one which depends upon the number of particles of the solute but not on the nature of the solute.
In this section we shall be concerned with the following four colligative properties:
lowering of vapour pressure elevation of boiling point depression of freezing point osmotic pressure All four of these properties apply to solutions containing non-volatile solutes.
A non-volatile solute is one which exerts a negligible vapour pressure.
In a pure solvent particles can escape all over the surface of the liquid (see figure 6.34).
However, if the solvent contains dissolved solute particles the escape of the solvent particles from the surface is hindered.
If the solute has a lower pressure than the solvent, then the vapour pressure is reduced.
This follows from Raoult's law (see previous section).
The extreme case occurs with a solution containing a non-volatile solute.
In this case the vapour pressure of the solution is almost entirely due to the solvent particles.
The vapour pressure-composition diagram for this case is shown in figure 6.35.
This is hypothetical since in reality all solids exert a vapour pressure although it may be very small.
Lowering of Vapour Pressure
It is evident from figure 6.35 that, as the mole fraction of non-volatile solute B increases, the vapour pressure of the solution is lowered.
An expression for the  lowering of vapour pressure for dilute solutions can be derived from Raoult's law.
For solvent A Raoult's law is This shows that the lowering of the vapour pressure, given by PA° PA"is proportional to the mole fraction of the non-volatile solute, XB.
A solution containing a non-volatile solute is less volatile than the pure solvent.
It therefore boils at a higher temperature.
Figure 6.36 shows the variation of vapour pressure with temperature for a solvent and solution containing a non-volatile solute.
The increase in boiling point is proportional to the lowering of the vapour pressure: where is the increase in boiling point.
And thus 
Elevation of Boiling Point
By application of Raoult's law to this expression, it is possible to derive another expression relating to the composition of the solution, namly In this equation mB is the molality of the solute.
Molality is a term which we met in section 4.2.
It is the number of moles of solute in one kilogram of solvent.
Kb is called the ebullioscopic constant.
It is also known as the molal boiling-point elevation constant or simply as the boiling-point constant.
Some values for Kb are given in table 6.5.
The elevation of boiling point can be determined experimentally by Lands-berger's method.
Solvent vapour is passed through the solvent in a graduated tube (see figure 6.37).
The enthalpy change of vaporisation resulting from the condensation of the vapour causes the solvent to boil.
Superheating is thus avoided.
Superheating occurs if the temperature of a liquid rises above its boiling point.
Experimental Determination of the Elevation of Boiling Point
After the temperature of the boiling solvent has been measured, the solvent is cooled and a weighed amount of solute is dissolved in it.
Solvent vapour is then passed through the solution until it boils.
The temperature of the solution is then measured.
Since the temperature rise is usually small the temperature must be measured accurately.
A Beckmann thermometer is used for this purpose.
The concentration of the solution can be found from the mass of the solute and the final volume of the solution measured in the graduated tube.
The Landsberger method can be used to determine the molar mass of the dissolved solute.
There are three parts to this determination: 1.
The elevation of boiling point T is determined experimentally.
2.
The molality of the solute is expressed in terms of the unknown molar mass and the experimentally determined masses of solute and solvent required to give this elevation of boiling point.
3.
The ebullioscopic constant Kb can either be found from tables or be determined experimentally.
In the latter case the experiment is repeated using the same solvent but a solute of known molar mass.
The required expression for molality is derived from a mathematical definition of molality: where nB is the number of moles of solute and mA the mass of solvent in grams.
It follows that is the mass of solute in kilograms.
Since where mB is the mass of solute in grams and MB is the unknown molar mass of the solute, we can reformulate equation (7) as This is the expression for molality required for the second part of the determination.
We can now put it into equation (6) together with determined in part 1 and obtained in part 3.
Thus We can now rearrange this equation to give the unknown molar mass in terms of experimentally determined values, thus
Determination of Molar Mass Using Elevation of Boiling Point
EXAMPLE Propanone has a boiling point of 56.2°C. 1.00 g of a non-volatile solute was dissolved in 10 g of propanone.
The solution boiled at 57.4°C.
Calculate the molar mass and thus the relative molecular mass of the solute given that the ebullioscopic constant of propanone is 1.71 K mol kg.
SOLUTION When 1.00 g of the solute was dissolved in 10 g of solvent the elevation of boiling point was 1.2°C.
We can put this directly into equation (8): The molar mass of the non-volatile solute is thus 142.5 g mold".
Its relative molecular mass is 142.5.
We noted in the previous section that the addition of a second component to a liquid can lower the freezing point (see figure 6.33).
The depression in freezing point when a solute is added to a solvent is related to the molality m of the solute.
The relationship is similar to that for the elevation of boiling point: where is the cryoscopic constant.
This is also known as the molal freezing-point depression constant or simply the freezing-point constant.
Depression of Freezing Point
The cryoscopic constant is specific for a given solvent.
Some values are shown in table 6.6.
The depression of freezing point can be determined experimentally using the apparatus shown in figure 6.38.
The inner glass tube contains a known mass of solvent.
The solvent is cooled slowly with continuous stirring to minimise supercooling (see previous section).
A Beckmann thermometer is used to record the temperature every half minute.
A cooling curve is plotted and the freezing point determined.
The solvent is then warmed to melt it and a known mass of solute is added.
The solvent is stirred until the solute dissolves.
The solution is cooled, the temperature recorded every half minute and the new freezing point determined as before.
The depression of freezing point can be used to determine the relative molecular mass of a non-volatile solute.
Determination of Relative Molecular Mass Using Depression of Freezing Point
In Rast's method camphor is used as a solvent since it has a large cryoscopic constant (see table 6.6).
In other methods, ethanoic acid or other solvents are used.
EXAMPLE Ethanoic acid has a freezing point of 16.63°C.
On adding 2.5 g of an organic solute to 40 g of the acid, the freezing point was lowered to 15.48°C.
Calculate the relative molecular mass of the solute.
SOLUTION To solve this problem we need an expression comparable to equation (8).
The following equation can be derived from equations (9) and (7) in the same way that equation (8) was derived from equations (6) and (7): Osmosis is the passage of a solvent through a membrane from a dilute solution or the solvent itself into a concentrated solution.
The phenomenon can be demonstrated by using the apparatus shown in figure 6.39.
One end of a tube is closed with an animal membrane and the tube filled with sugar solution.
The tube is then placed in a beaker of water.
The water passes through the membrane into the sugar solution.
Osmotic Pressure
A membrane which allows solvent particles but not solute particles to pass through it is called a semi-permeable membrane.
A semi-permeable membrane allows solvent particles to pass in both directions.
However, since the concentration of solvent is lower when the concentration of solution is higher, there is a net flow towards the concentrated solution.
This results in a pressure difference across the membrane.
The pressure which must be applied to a solution to prevent this flow across the membrane is called the osmotic pressure.
It is given the Greek symbol .
Osmotic pressure is a colligative property since it depends on the number but not the nature of the solute particles.
Osmotic pressure is important in biological processes.
For example, some types of animal cells such as red blood cells are filled with salt solution.
The walls of These cells are lined with plasma membranes.
When red blood cells are put into water, they swell and burst due to osmosis.
However, if they are put into more concentrated salt solutions they shrink.
Plant cells contain salt solutions in spaces known as vacuoles.
A vacuole is surrounded by a thin layer of cytoplasm which acts as a semi-permeable membrane.
It controls the uptake of water by the plant cell.
When the pressure applied to a concentrated solution is greater than the osmotic pressure, solvent flows from the concentrated solution through the membrane into the dilute solution.
This process is known as reverse osmosis.
The process is used commercially to obtain drinkable water from sea water.
Experiments using sucrose solutions show that, at a constant temperature, osmotic pressure is directly proportional to the concentration difference across the membrane; at a fixed concentration, the osmotic pressure is directly proportional to absolute temperature.
The relationship between osmotic pressure and temperature is analogous to the ideal gas equation (see section 3.1).
It is given by the van't Hoff equation
where n is the osmotic pressure, V is the volume of solution, n is the amount of solute in moles, Tis the absolute temperature and R is the molar gas constant.
This equation can also be expressed as where c is the concentration .
The van't Hoff equation is only approximate and holds only at low concentrations.
The van't Hoff equation can be used to determine the relative molecular mass from experimentally determined values of osmotic pressure.
The method is particularly useful for determining the average relative molecular masses of polymers and other macromolecular substances.
EXAMPLE A sugar solution, with concentration 2.5 g dm3, gave an osmotic pressure of 8.3 x 10-- atmospheres at 25°C.
Calculate the relative molecular mass of the solute.
SOLUTION We can find a value for the relative molecular mass Mr of the solute directly from the van't Hoff equation (11).
We have the following data: Substituting these valus into the van't Hoff equation and rearranging we obtain 
Determination of Relative Molecular Mass Using Osmotic Pressure
We have seen that three types of colligative property can be used to determine relative molecular mass.
These are elevation of boiling point, depression of freezing point, osmotic pressure.
Anomalous Values of Relative Molecular Mass
Anomalous values are obtained if the solute associates or dissociates in solution.
Carboxylic acids, for example, associate to form dimers in organic solvents (see figure 6.26).
This is due to hydrogen bonding.
Electrolytes such as sodium chloride dissociate in aqueous solutions The colligative properties of electrolyte solutions thus depend on the number but not the nature of the solute ions present in solution.
In the case of sodium chloride, there are two moles of ions for every mole of NaCl(s).
The relative molecular mass of NaCl determined from the elevation of boiling point is thus approximately half that calculated from its formula.
Comparison of values of relative molecular mass determined experimentally from colligative properties with those calculated from the formulae of the solutes allow the degree of association or dissociation to be determined.
We saw in the previous section that a solution is a homogeneous mixture of at least two components.
Particles in solution are generally very small and cannot be seen.
These particles may be atoms, molecules or ions and their diameters are generally less than 5 nm (that is,).
COLLOIDS
A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture of two components.
It consists of particles suspended in a second medium.
Over a period of time the particles settle.
The suspended particles usually have a diameter of 1000 nm (that is 10-6 m) or more.
Intermediate between solutions and suspensions are colloidal dispersions or colloids.
Colloids consist of a discontinuous phase, that is a disperse phase, in a continuous phase, that is a dispersion medium.
Colloids are distinguished from suspensions by the size of the dispersed particles.
Colloidal particles are approximately 1 to 500 nm in diameter.
Colloidal particles do not settle and cannot be separated from the dispersion medium by ordinary techniques such as filtration and centrifugation.
Colloids are classified according to the original phases of their constituents.
The classification is shown in table 6.7.
When a beam of light is passed through a colloidal dispersion, some of the light is Consuming a colloid: jelly scattered.
This is called the Tyndall effect.
This effect is noticeable when a stream of sunlight passes into a darkened and dusty room.
It is also produced by the projector beam in a smoky cinema.
On close examination, tiny points of light can be seen bouncing in a random zig-zag motion.
This is known as Brownian motion.
It is observed with all transparent or translucent colloids consisting of a gas or liquid dispersion medium.
The Tyndall Effect
Chromatography is a technique used to separate the components of a mixture.
There are two types of chromatography.
Both depend on the partition of the  components of the mixture between a stationary phase and a mobile phase.
CHROMATOGRAPHY
In adsorption chromatography the stationary phase is a solid.
The solid adsorbs a portion of each component in the mixture.
In partition chromatography the stationary phase is a liquid.
The components are partitioned between the liquid and the mobile phase.
In both types of chromatography, portions of each component remain dissolved in the mobile phase.
The mobile phase flows continuously over the stationary phase and as it does so separates the components on the stationary phase.
Both chromatographic methods thus consist essentially of two steps: 1.
Distribution of the components between the two phases.
2.
Separation of the components on or in the stationary phase by a continuous flow of the mobile phase.
The distribution of a component between the two phases is given by the partition coefficient D (see also previous section) A component of a mixture with a high value for D remains largely dissolved in the mobile phase and thus passes over the stationary phase rapidly.
A component with a small value for D remains largely adsorbed on the stationary phase.
As the moving phase passes over it, this component moves slowly along the stationary phase.
Chromatography is particularly useful in organic synthesis in separating and recovering the components of a mixture.
It is used in both quantitative and qualitative analysis to identify separated components of a mixture and also to determine the purity of a substance.
This is the simplest form of adsorption chromatography.
It is used to separate mixtures of solids.
Column Chromatography
The stationary phase is a solid adsorbent such as alumina.
The moving phases is a solvent.
A glass column is first packed with a slurry of the two phases.
A pad of glass wool is used at the bottom of the column to prevent the slurry from running out (see figure 6.41).
The solid is allowed to settle and then the solvent is run off until its level is just above the level of the solid.
The solid mixture is then dissolved in a small amount of the solvent and added to the top of the column.
The solution is then allowed to run through the column.
Successive quant ties of solvent are added to ensure the solvent level remains above the stationary phase.
The process of passing the solvent through the column is called elution.
The solvent is called the eluent.
The various components of the mixture separate as they gradually move down the column.
If the components are coloured —as in the case of pigments and dyes —the components can be separated visually.
Figure 6.42 shows the separation of two components.
Component 1 has the higher partition coefficient and thus moves through the column faster.
The time taken for a component to pass through the column is called its elution time.
Successive portions of the eluted components are collected in flasks or tubes.
The solvent can be removed by distillation to leave the pure component.
Figure 6.42 is an idealised picture of the separation of the two components.