

Plan of Action
On Thursday March 9, Spare Rib hosted a forum to which we invited eleven women representing a broad range of positions within the women's movement.
The purpose was to begin a discussion which would launch a PLAN OF ACTION series in the 200th issue of Spare Rib, and it is hoped that an ongoing debate will ensue — dealing with some of the major difficulties facing the women's movement in this country and worldwide.
The series will have a very definite focus: ways for the women's movement to evolve action which will have an impact on the current desperate situation in this country and globally.
We are not expecting to come up with a definitive plan to seize power!! but rather to begin to discuss some of the issues which are reducing the impact we are having.
In an interview in Spare Rib (November 1987, No 184) June Jordan stated,’ I think we have to try to develop habits of evaluation in whatever we attempt politically.
People get set into certain ways of doing things and they don't evaluate whether its working or not.
Or if they do evaluate then it's to say it's not working but it's not our fault, there couldn't possibly be anything wrong with our thinking on this subject or this issue.
The problem invariably is that the enemy is simply inflexible or impregnable.
This is a doomed modus operanda.
We have to find out what works.’
This is very much what this forum and the Plan of Action series is about: to look at some of the problems we are facing as a women's movement and to evaluate our practice.
Some of the underlying assumptions of the discussion published below, are that before we begin to talk about an international/global unity/movement we need to look at our own situation in this country, at our own’ political’community, which is international in terms of its make up, and the ways in which we operate or fail to operate together.
This would be a first step in working towards forming international links and networks.
Further assumptions are that we are fragmented as a movement, and that unity, not a hollow unity which does not go beyond slogans, but an authentic unity established in a principled way, would enable us to have more of an impact in effecting change in our own communities and in turn worldwide.
At the same time, we recognise that unity is not enough and that we need to discuss strategies for action, ways of mobilising, organising etc.
We have spent a great deal of time recognising and analysing the political problems we face and comparatively less time looking at ways to get rid of them.
We know our oppressions well — but that is not enough.
Some of the topics we attempted to touch on were: The differences between conceptualisations of feminism in the’ West’and’Third World’historically and currently, while understanding that in the’West’and the’Third World’there is a diversity of women and ideological positions.
In a recent interview in Spare Rib (Dec/Jan, No 197), Toun Illmoka from Nigeria said that’ the attitude of certain Western feminists is just a new and alternative kind of imperialism’.
This imperialism continues to be an obstacle to unity
The fragmentation and lack of unity within the women's movement in this country and elsewhere, resulting in a severe lack of power, organisation and strategy in the face of a very powerful oppression.
To what extent feminism offers a new way of doing things, of organising for change.
What is feminism's potential to effect real change in this country and globally.
The prospects for an international feminism — for a way of overcoming differences and moving ahead — networking, dialogue, solidarity and organising for action — in the face of what is clearly an international enemy.
With eleven women plus the Spare Rib Collective we were not able to cover all of these topics, but as has been mentioned this discussion is to launch a series which hopefully will discuss all of these issues and more.
Due to lack of space we will be publishing the forum in two parts.
Below we publish the first part.
By the endof the evening some fairly concrete proposals were put forward and this part of the discussion will be published next month.
We welcome contributions to this PLAN OF ACTION series.
Taking part in the forum (in the order they spoke) were: Nadia Tarazi from the General Union of Palestinian Women; Celmira Salazar, from Chile, Fatima Babiker Mahmoud, from the Institute for African Alternatives; Savvy Hensman, from the Black Lesbian and Gay Centre;[lean Thomas, from the Jamaican Organisation for Women for Progress; Juliette Joseph, from the International Women's Day Planning Committee; Sarah Roelofs, from Women for Socialism; Noirin O'Riordan, from Women in Ireland; Elizabeth Carola, active in WAVAW and campaigns against child sexual abuse; Shaila Shah from the Outwrite Collective and Margot Farnham from the Trouble and Strife Collective.
Nadia: I am from the General Union of Palestinian Women and it's good that I am participating in this meeting at this time because I am having major problems with the British Feminist Movement and the Western feminist line.
Actually it's come to a point where as Palestinian women in this country whenever we hear the word feminism, it's very negative to us because we immediately identify it with Western feminism.
And in terms of unity there isn't a very good chance of unity with British feminists right now in this country because whenever we start discussing our issues, out comes the racism, out comes the attempts to monopolise our struggle.
This negative attitude towards Palestinian women in particular, and Arab women in general , originates from the Western colonial attitude which has in some ways permeated the Western feminist movement.
The worst things about this attitude is that the western method of development is’ best’and the constant subtle racism.
We understand that Israeli propaganda tries to denigrate us as backward people because it’ justifies’their occupation, yet unfortunately this attitude arises again and again among so called progressives and feminists.
On a positive note we hope that those British women, who have shown us solidarity with our fight for liberation, will continue their valuable work by making western women aware of just how liberated we actually are, particularly at this time of the lntifada.
Celmira: I've been in this country for fifteen years.
I came here as a Chilean refugee.
When I meet women from other countries and they talk about Western feminism and Third World feminism, I didn't see it that way at all I was looking for a political party and I found that I couldn't find any which suited my political beliefs and a party that combined Third World and British issues.
What I found was the Women's Movement and I dedicated myself completely to it at all levels from forming advice groups, demonstrating to reclaim the streets etc.
I remember feeling really satisfied that we were changing the world.
Until 1978 that is, when we had the first and last National Conference in this country and after spending about three days cooking rice and feeling very exhausted, I went up on the platform to speak on behalf of Chi lean women and I was made to shut up.
There were two women from the Third World on the platform in those days — from Chile and Iran.
They shouted at me’ Get off the platform — we don't want to know about your fucking problems’.
I thought, well they haven't understood.
They didn't know who I was or what the Third World was.
Fatima: I think the main difference between the Feminist Movement in Europe and Third World Countries is that they originated on the basis of different histories.
The history of the contradictions in the European context was different, they had a different recognition of class, different recognition of conflicts etc.
Think about the industrial revolution and the consequences of that.
Our history in Africa and the Third World is a history of colonialism and post-colonialism.
These differences in our histories are definitely reflected in what we call feminism.
If we define feminism as the consciousness of women regarding the fact that they are subjugated, exploited etc.
I think there is room to generalise so I will do it, even across classes, even bourgeois women who are not conscious of the fact that they are exploited, subjugated etc.
There is this minimum.
So given that kind of broad definition what is specific, or what is different.
The differences are that you have a feminist movement in Europe for example, which you can classify or they classify themselves, in terms of the origination of the politics Liberal, Radical, Marxist, Socialist and this is what happened in Europe.
What we have is an anti-colonial movement as a parallel.
Post-colonial problems, new colonial problems, multi-national dependency problems.
If you take that and try to place the feminist consciousness within that political scene then this is the difference.
That's why one difference for example, is that the feminist movement in Europe has got very weak ties to the political movement.
In Africa, because the Women's Movement started as part of the National Liberation Movement, then it was very close and tight as a whole movement.
One example of this is the fact that in Africa, we do not have this antagonistic relationship with men.
I mean men in Trade Unions, political parties, not individual men and their harassment.
I'm talking about a social thing — the image of a man in the National Liberation Movement.
The Industrial revolution gave a very sharp example of men antagonising women because they took their jobs etc.
That didn't happen in Africa.
The consequences or implications of that for the way the feminist movement is placed within the struggle in African countries has been very different.
We do not want to dictate our experience on Western European women or evaluate them.
What is important is to bring about areas of solidarity, areas of coming together.
One problem with that is that the feminist movement in Europe distances itself from the mass movement.
Maybe because of its bourgeois roots, maybe because of the class position of the kind of women working in it?
It became more academic than grassrooted.
We are not academic, we might not read The Origins of Family, Private Property and the State or this or that book, but you become a very active woman.
Savvy: I'm from the Black Lesbian and Gay Centre project in London and our members include lesbians of First Nation and Third World descent, both people who've grown up in this country and people who haven't, so we have a very diverse membership.
I think it's hard to generalise about western feminism and third world feminism.
I mean there are some broad patterns of difference but the situation from one Third World country to another varies.
I was thinking for instance in the context of Sri Lanka, where I was born, that there isn't a straight forward national liberation struggle, there are lots of problems such as militarism which the women's movement has taken on in various ways and played a major part in combating.
And I think that since feminism involves a belief in women's equality and of women organising and struggling on issues that affect our lives, that the emphasis will vary depending on where we are.
Certainly I and probably all the other lesbians in BLGC have come across racism in the predominantly white lesbian movement, for instance, the idea that race and issues of imperialism are irrelevant all that matters is the fact that we're women and lesbians and that's the only way that people are oppressed.
But we haven't been the only ones to combat that, there have been white lesbians as well who have taken offence at that particularly say working class white lesbians or white lesbians with disabilities who have also felt that particular issues affecting them have been marginalised.
Elean: I work with the Organisation of Women for Progress in Jamaica.
I have found as somebody who has worked for about a quarter century, in the national liberation movement, in building women's organisations, in building political parties and helping to build trade unions, that I have had to move from a position of seeing national liberation as solving the question.
I found, in practice, that it is not as simple as that.
I do think that the struggle for national liberation, certainly in my country at the times when we were most successful in that struggle, were the times when more opportunities were opened up for my own liberation and my own freedom of choice as a woman.
At the same time I dont think that the tremendous male power in the world, even within national liberation movements, can be ignored, because I think that the oppression is two-fold.
I mean we talk about the triple-one but when I say two-fold there is, I feel, the deeply rooted oppression of centuries of gender discrimination, the oldest form of discrimination.
I really think that as women we have to draw out all the holy cows and don't take anything for granted and begin to question everything.
Even as women involved in national liberation.
At the end of the day who is making the decisions?
And I find that we can't ignore that although the male sex is not the enemy — the male sex does benefit from the system.
Upper class males benefit most maybe, but also the working class male benefits from the system.
So that it seem to me that we have to take that into account in terms of how we are approaching our struggle.
In relation to my experience in the so called western feminist movement, I really feel that race and class is a major impediment to the unity of even us women operating in this country.
I recently had to speak firmly, harshly to a women's organisation here.
A group of sisters whose objectives and aims and struggles I support quite fully and been in fact fighting for those aims.
But they didn't realise how racist they were being to me.
I really support the idea of trying to come up with a plan of action because quite frankly I find that London and England is just so full of talk shops.
Just millions of conferences that just tire you out and exhaust you, and nothing change as you come out of the conference — it's the same thing.
So I'm a little tired of that and I was very happy to hear that we were going to be exchanging ideas about how we can go forward.
I think that first of all we have to recognise that there are differences.
To pretend as the sister said, that because she and another sister share lesbian sexuality, that that is the only thing, I think is living in a fools paradise.
But I think that the fact that she and another sister share lesbian sexuality, and me and Fatima share political struggles for the national liberation is a basis to begin to unite on.
While equally the white lesbian sister has got to understand that while she's unified with this Asian lesbian sister there are differences, there are differences some of which are good and some of which are bad, and we have to be frank about them and to struggle around them because we can't just pretend that they don't exist, then we're not going to reach anywhere.
I think that we have to start a movement first of all with a recognition of where we are united and a recognition of where we are different.
We have to make a bigger struggle to deal with the racial prejudices within the women's movement especially in white countries.
We need to make a bigger effort to respect each other, respect each other irrespective of differences, respect each other as women and as half of the human race.
I think that's the foundation that we need to move on.
Juliette: I've been active for about 3 years in the Black Movement.
My present position is that I'm a Black socialist, I'm not a feminist.
I try to involve myself as much as I possibly can in ongoing independent Black community struggles in particular, and giving support to overall working class struggles, which are actually putting the needs of ordinary women and ordinary people first.
This means giving support to on-going campaigns like for example, the Tottenham Three Campaign, we believe those three brothers have been framed for murder.
There's been The Black People's Campaign For Justice which arose after Cherry Groce was shot in the back by Kennington police and Cynthia Jarrett murdered by Tottenham police.
So my position is based on a sort of on going activity which I believe is rooted in what's happening in the Black community at the moment.
My position on what's happening in the women's movement at the moment is that it's really in dire need of reconstruction, and that there would be no possibility of having a sort of joint togetherness as it were with Black women and white women because of some of the things that have been mentioned already — the racism that exists, the fact that feminism as a guiding ideological force remains a sort of tool of imperialism.
I see no future really for feminism in terms of relating to ordinary Black women's needs.
I think this is for a number of reasons — feminism does tend to post racism as a sort of subsidiary of patriarchy for example.
It also tries to say that women's problems stem from either their sexuality or the family.
I believe that if feminism has got something to say then it's certainly not getting its message to the masses of ordinary women.
About two weeks ago I attended a conference, Women For Socialism.
This conference, going by its title, was organised by feminist/socialists who are supposed to represent a more progressive tendency in the white women's movement.
As far as I'm concerned it was a totally bankrupt conference.
It in no way addressed ordinary white women's needs.
It was very much done on a sort of personal basis, an individual basis, failing to look at any collective solutions to the many problems which women face.
The focus of the conference appeared to be putting forward some sort of motion to this conference which is coming up in June of this year, balled the Socialist Conference, this Tony Benn thing.
So at the end of the day, as I said, feminism as far as I'm concerned doesn't represent a progressive force, a progressive ideological force for Black women, for ordinary white working class women either.
It has never been able to serve as a unifying force and if anything has been more of a divider.
I'm not about to alienate Black men who are also involved in the struggle.
I am a socialist and I believe that socialism is the basic ideology that will serve the needs of the masses.
Sarah: I define myself as a socialist lesbian feminist, but of course that in some sense begs more questions than it answers.
I am white, I'm middle class in terms of my background and to that extent have had a certain degree of privilege and I'm also in some situations, easy enough to attack.
I have strong political disagreements with something which I think has dominated political discussion in the women's movement recently which is the politics of identity.
Which in some senses, defining it crudely, is that it matters more what you are than what you do.
And think that has become very problematic, and it has become very paralysing.
I think it has prevented more activity than it has allowed.
I feel you almost get into a system of brownie points sometimes.
An area of defensiveness is around the Labour Party because that's been one of my main arenas of political activity for the last eight, nine years or so.
It occurred to me that while we have, and I think it's very positive, such a wide breadth of views and differences represented around the table tonight, there are some areas that aren't represented.
And one of those is the British Labour Movement.
In talking of unity, how are we to build unity with, for example, the organisation Women Against Pit Closures, which developed out of the miners strike.
Very much based in the British Labour Movement.
Maybe the phrase that has become most well known in this context is’ I'm not a feminist, but…’and all the political content that that phrase may have.
But these are women who have not very much experience of a particular current within British feminism which sees men very much as the enemy, though they went through a tremendous process of political change during the strike and with the development of their organisation, many marriages, for example, split up and the women gained a whole new identity of themselves as individual women.
But even now, having gone through that process, they would not see men as the enemy, they feel that they do have a lot in common, for example , with maybe the conception of women organising in National Liberation struggles that was mentioned earlier.
And how we make alliances with women organising in the Labour Movement who have themselves maybe developed out of a Labour Movement that is steeped in the imperialism and racism of this British culture, as any other bit of it is.
And how are we to make alliances with those women or are we to say that we do not wish to do so until they've gone through a greater degree of learning process.
And it's that, it's maybe the conditions that we impose before we achieve an alliance or are able to enter into joint activity, that bothers me greatly.
I was interested in what Elean said.
At the Women for Socialism conference, for which I was one of the organisers, councillor, Martha Osamor, argued very much that the time for getting into groups and discussing the whys and where fors of the theory, had passed.
The example she took was Ireland and she said we know what to do about Ireland, we know what we want.
We want the troops out — the point is how are we going to enter into some kind of united action to achieve that.
And I think that is very pertinent.
But it does seem and the discussion here does seem to be that there are so many blocks to doing that.
I feel that in some senses it becomes almost about a certain strain of purity — that we would rather have a demonstration of 50 people on maybe a fuller, total political programme, than we would a demonstration of 50,000 people on maybe more limited aims but nevertheless political aims that we do feel carry us forward, but which could draw into activity a broader range of people.
Its reaching out to the people who've not been through the processes that we've been through and are still attached to ideas that are in essence racist, imperialist, sexist, heterosexist, and how we, nevertheless, draw those people into activity.
I think for me, one of the main questions is how we enter into joint activity with the British Labour Movement, or do we just turn our backs on it and say we can't do it, they are too racist, they are too imperialist.
I feel would never wish to give up or reject feminism, which I see as an insistence on putting women first, an insistence on women's autonomy and I think that the debates with National Liberation struggles, the debate in the Irish National Liberation struggle has seen the two things as going hand in hand.
The Women For Socialism Conference was an attempt to build some kind of an alliance or unity between left Labour women and women outside organising in Women's groups across a fairly broad spectrum and it didn't succeed in the totality of its aims certainly.
But again come back to the point that consistently troubles me, which is the degree of the totality of the demands that we would place on those that we have quite strong political disagreements with, before we're prepared to enter into an alliance with those women and with the Labour Movement or other organisations.
The degree to which we may have to, to use a fairly shoddy word, compromise.
I don't particularly see it as compromise because for me it is a method of going forward, if you can agree on something which is a basic principled demand around a particular issue and then pull into action a broader range of people around that.’
Elizabeth: I'm here not representing anything, but I do define myself as a revolutionary and radical feminist.
And I'll start backwards by saying what I'd like to see, and that is that I think with a group of women coming from such a broad spectrum, that the work we're going to do is never going to be the same and there are going to be large areas in which we may not be able to work together.
But what I want to echo is what Elean said about respecting each others work and respecting each others visions.
Because I think that all our visions are parallel and ultimately we are moving in a similar direction for liberation, for freedom of choice.
I can have a lot of respect for women in National Liberation struggles.
They can have a lot respect for the women who are working against male violence and we can just keep it in mind that we're moving towards, not the same place, but roughly speaking we have the same visions.
I personally don't define revolutionary feminism as that different from radical feminism, I see it as a kind of militant wing of radical feminism.
Radical feminism is that trend in the women's movement that sees the patriarchal system as the enemy and sometimes men as the enemy.
I think it's sometimes falsely represented as being academic or being unreal or as not relating to the masses of women's lives, and it's out of my own experience I just want to be clear about this, it's out of my own experience as an incest survivor, as a pornography survivor, my father worked in the porn industry, that I came to revolutionary feminism.
Reading about revolutionary feminism really grabbed me, reading about an analysis that saw male violence as crucial, and as one of the main issues for women and something that women die from all the time, many, many women.
It was something that gave me a framework for my experience, and in some ways kind of saved my life really because it gave me words to see that I wasn't isolated, that there was a movement — it was very real and it was very gut.
It can become academic but so can a lot of our work.
I would disagree with Juliette that feminism doesn't reach the masses of women's lives.
I think that when it's expressed in terms of the kind of real conditions of child sexual abuse and rape and sexual harassment and domestic violence and getting paid half the amount of money that men get paid and not having any reproductive rights and sterilisation abuse — these really basic issues that feminism has addressed.
I think what radical feminism has done is popularised that and taken it out on the streets and provided a core of anger and rage and has mobilized women.
I think to its detriment, it has been very white and it has been very historically specific, but the more I hear about what women are doing in Africa and India I think that the visions are very similar even though the words sometimes are different.
Next month there's going to be an international conference around reproductive technologies and genetic engineering specifically to bring together the work that women in India are doing against sterilization abuse and population control with the work the women in the West are doing around genetic experimentation and invitro fertilization and egg farming — some of the anti-women scientific advances.
And so this will be bringing it together world wide for the first time.
And more and more we're hearing news of women working on a whole range of issues, including male violence in Africa, all parts of Africa, and the more I hear that, the more I realise that what has come out of England as revolutionary feminism is a parallel movement and doesn't need to be sectarian at all in the way that maybe it's been seen.
And I just want to repeat that I do think that some of the writing that's come out of it has saved women's lives.
Niorin: I come from Ireland, and I've been living in England since last summer.
Before that I was involved in women's groups in Ireland and since I've come here I've been involved in the Women in Ireland group in London.
I was interested in what people were saying about differences between feminism in the Western world and the Third World because I think Ireland epitomises that very well.
I would say that Ireland is very definitely a Third World country even though we're geographically in Western Europe and we're white.
We certainly have the colonial history, our economy is very much a Third World economy and we're in a massive debt situation.
Part of our country is in a neo-colonial situation — you know it has its own government, but the government doesn't have economic control and the northern part of our country is under direct rule from Britain, under direct colonial rule.
The Women's Movement in Ireland has gone through a number of different phases.
There was a phase of the women's liberation movement in the 70s that just saw the kinds of things that affect middle class women, they were into things like equal pay.
I think what went wrong was that they took a lot of their ideas from western countries and they sort of felt because this was in all the other countries, we should bring it to Ireland as well.
And they transferred the ideas without seeing if the people really wanted them.
And of course they failed then.
And also they didn't take into account what was happening in the north, because they had too many different opinions on it.
So I think if anything is to happen that you have to take into account that there is a patriarchy but also that there s imperialism in the world.
A lot of countries don't have control over their own economies, they don't have control over things like whether of not people are going to have jobs, whether or not people are going to make a livelihood, whether or not people are going to even be able to live in the country, because in Ireland something like 1000 people a week are leaving the country in order to get work.
About 70% come to this country and the remainder go to America where they're illegal.
We have problems as women but there's no way we can overcome our problems as women unless we have jobs as well.
We have to, we want to live in our own country, and we have a right to live in our own country.
We've a right to govern our own country, and we've a right not to be told by other countries that we should be split into two, that we're two different nations because they decided to split us down the middle.
I would see myself as a feminist and a socialist and I think socialism is the only form of just government a just way of running any sort of society, that can give people any sort of dignity.
And I think as women we have to remember always that for whatever reasons, throughout history, all societies seem to be patriarchal.
I don't know whether there is a known example of a society that didn't have a patriarchy.
We should never decide, we should never get it into our heads, that we're okay now, we've got our freedom, that we're fine because we're never going to be fine.
We're going to always have to fight against it and we're always going to have to put ourselves on the agenda and put our issues on the agenda.
But the two struggles, for national liberation and against patriarchy, have to go together and I think that's what went wrong in Ireland, when we got our pseudo independence.
Women very quickly got left out of the picture and it was a very conservative state that took over.
The other thing want to say is that think you're in a special position in this country vis a vis the struggle in Ireland because Britain is the country which is ruling Ireland.
I think any feminist movement in Britain should take on board the fact that Ireland is a colony and the fact that there is a lot of denial that goes on, people pretending it isn't happening, and saying there's nothing that can be done.
As for routing how we could go forward as feminists, I think what's really important about feminism is that you have to start with people's own experience and people's grassroots experience.
Now whether that is that they are annoyed that there isn't childcare facilities, or whether they're annoyed that they have to make dinner for their husbands, or whether they're annoyed with what's on television, or at the kind of newspapers that are coming in the door or whatever.
I don't think it should become too academic, it should be whatever people want at the grassroots level, we have a couple of thousand years of patriarchy behind us and we're not going to change things overnight.
It's going to be a constant struggle and it's going to start at the grassroots and we shouldn't see anybody's experience as not worthwhile.
We should take everyone's experience and build up from that.
So I think every woman is a feminist.
I think the problem with feminism is that a lot of people think that somehow you have to understand an awful lot of things, you have to read a lot of books, and you've got to understand a whole lot of different theories, before you can call yourself a feminist.
But I think a feminist is somebody who knows that she wants a decent life, she wants to be in control of her own destiny, and who thinks she's entitled to that.
Shaila: Until very recently I worked with Outwrite women's newspaper and for those of you who don't know it, it was a monthly internationalist feminist newspaper which published for about 7 years.
The reason why that was founded was because we thought that the women's movement in this country and its channels of communication and its publications and so on, including Spare Rib at the time, just did not reflect the struggles of either Black women in this country or any other movements within other countries, especially within Third World countries.
So this is why Outwrite was set up.
So I've spent my recent years sort of learning about movements, about emerging feminisms in other countries and I suppose contributed my bit in imparting that information.
But we had to cease publication 2 months ago because we had no funding.
About feminism itself, I think that the way I would define it is women having some say, some control over how we're born, how we live and how we die.
And I think that's really sort of all encompassing, but I really see it in that way.
And the differences there between women in different countries are just enormous because there are still countries today where women aren't given a chance to be born — there's female infanticide still in many countries.
So I think if you take it through the life process that's how I see feminism.
And then of course I see great differences in feminisms in different countries — in first world, third world, whatever, and also principally between third world countries themselves and I think that's a point we haven't really touched on yet.
And that's because the third world is bigger than any other section whether you call it the first world or second world or whatever, and I think the first and second put together.
And in fact, I think in recent years what we know as the third world is the fourth, because those oil producing countries in the third world retained the status of being third and everyone got pushed to the fourth.
So I think I'm actually talking about the fourth world.
I think that section of the world is the largest, and those countries contained within that section of the world have huge differences and that's because of religion, culture, different economies, different kinds of governments and so on and so forth.
And I think that for me, having learnt quite a bit about these differences, I find what I want to do now is go forward to see how we can build some sort of unity and on what basis and whether in fact that is required.
And whether there are any points of unification at all and if so what they are to identify them and so on.
And I hope that in this discussion we start talking along those lines.
Other than that I do disagree with what Juliette was saying.
I feel very proud to be a feminist.
I think feminism has had a very rich past in this country as well as in other countries.
I think it has a rather shaky present here but it's got a very solid present in other countries at the moment, where I think feminism is one of the most dynamic movements.
I'm more familiar with Asia so I'm really talking about South Asia, South-East Asian countries, where the left is learning a lot from feminism, is changing a lot because of feminism.
And think really depending on what we all do, feminism here has got a very rich future as well.
It really depends on what sort of input we want to put in to make that a reality.
Margot Farnham: I'm involved in the Trouble and Strife collective which is a radical feminist British journal, it's our fifth birthday issue, we've been going since 1983 and I've been on the collective for two years.
Before that I've always been involved in women's journals, including Women's Report which is one of the early women's monitoring journals in this country.
I've always wanted to be involved in things that tried to somehow create a women's network.
In terms of my own personal history, I think that as a very young woman I faced some quite, to me, amazing contradictions.
When I was fifteen I was sitting at home and my dad was crashed out in the chair, my dad's a Fords worker, and the Miss World beauty contest came on the television and I just felt really overwhelmed by this vision.
On one hand this angry commentary about what these women protesters had done to outrage all the people involved in Miss World, and on the other hand, my dad sort of crashed out in a chair because he was so exhausted from his work.
And I think that this kind of contradiction really struck me even as this fifteen year old.
My dad was a domestic tyrant.
I think I took a lot of my ideas about class from my dad and not from my mum who was this very ladylike woman, who was involved in the church and never really wanted you to say anything nasty about class or anything like that.
You should just accept people how they are.
Peace and love and that sort of Christian thing.
When I was eighteen I had the very good fortune, think it was a miracle really, that I was able to join a local women's group in Stratford in East London.
And in that group, despite all the received wisdoms about British feminism, there were a lot of working class women, there were lesbian women in that group and those women really helped me a lot.
They gave me what I needed most of all, which was an analysis of my own life, which before then I hadn't had.
And I think that analysis allowed me, on personal terms, eventually to understand things like incest, like you were saying Elizabeth, sexual violence and things like that, that I think had really weakened me as a person.
That had held me back from being able to grow into a woman really.
I feel like in Britain the kind of history that I came into as an eighteen year old was a women's liberation movement whose context was anti-Vietnam, the counter culture, Vietnam solidarity, American radical feminism, irony of all ironies the Ford women's strike, and here I was living with this Ford worker, domestic tyrant.
And I think a lot of the things to do with the way we viewed men were to do with women experiencing profound and debilitating sexism within all those respective movements and this is why we had to really re-think things in a radical way and I'm very proud of that.
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY IN OCCUPIED PALESTINE
This year's International Women's Day had a special significance for Palestinian women and indeed all Arab women.
In the 16 months of the Intifada, and even in the space of one year since last International Women's Day, the role of Palestinian women within their own society has dramatically changed.
Um Khalid, a 48 year old agricultural cooperative worker from a village near the city of Ramallah, summed up the feeling in an interview with the Arab weekly Al-Fajr:’ The 8th March means something to me now.
Not long ago I thought that this date didn't concern me or Palestinian women in general’.
Um Khalid explained that she had never imagined that one year ago she would be speaking like this today.
’ Now I feel that I'm able to fight for my full rights as a woman and as a human being…
I'm part of the workforce which is creating the direct change in my society.
By being productive, I can also be a full partner in establishing the structure of our society.’
It is clearly acknowledged that without the work of the women's movement, the Intifada would be in jeopardy.
Women are part of the leadership of the Intifada and their organising and incredible display of unity is a major impetus to the Uprising.
One factor which has contributed to the role being played by women, is their major contribution to the autonomous social and economic structures developed by Palestinians in defiance of occupation.
This has been a powerful weapon of Palestinian resistance throughout the history of their occupation and in particular during the past 16 months.
Women have been central in the leadership, organisation and maintaining of these structures, dealing with health care, education, food production and distribution, the internal economy etc.
Co-operatives of women are in evidence all over Palestine.
With the establishment in July 1988 of the Palestinian Women's Higher Council, Palestinian women took a very important step in ensuring the consolidation of their advances.
In their first underground leaflet, the Women's Higher Council stated the following:’ To our great masses of women, to the steadfast mothers, sisters, to our women heroines behind the iron bars of the zionist jails and in the revolutionary camps — to women workers, peasants, students — You had a central, important and distinguished role in the great Intifada — had part in its continuity, escalation and in sparking its flame; this role has expressed itself in the wide participation of women in all fields of daily confrontation and resistance since the Uprisings first day.
In addition, there is also the significant role that women played in emphasising and reaffirming the strong bond and solidarity among the people.
Consequently, this unselfish and untiring determination has raised the women's movement to a new qualitative stage…
The clear recognition and respect of these efforts has been crowned in the Declaration of Independence which stated women's full equality with men.
Thus as a consequence of their history and experience, the Palestinian women's movement has become the vanguard of the women's movement in the Arab world.’
Underground leaflets issued by the Unified Leadership now refer to the Women's Higher Council and The Palestinian Declaration of Independence issued by the Palestine National Council on November 1988 includes a clear statement guaranteeing equal rights for women.
While clearly pointing out that these moves do not ensure women's rights, and that the struggle for women's liberation will carry on long after the setting up of an independent Palestinian state, Women's Committees are encouraged by these developments and determined to learn from the mistakes made by women involved in other national liberation struggles, for example, in Algeria, where gains made were lost after the revolution.
Women have paid a high price for their resistance.
One out of every seven Palestinians injured from live ammunition, beatings or teargas is a woman.
More than 55 females, from babies to elderly women, have been killed during the first year of the Uprising; shot dead with live ammunition, rubber and plastic bullets; suffocated with tear gas and some have been beaten to death.
A recent female casualty is a 4 year old child from Rafah who was shot in the head by soldiers on February 24 and is near death in an Israeli hospital.
In the past year an estimated 4000 women have suffered miscarriages or foetal deaths after intense exposure to noxious tear gases in their homes and neighbourhoods.
18 women have been put in administrative detention for 6 months without trial a measure that has not been used against women since 1979.
More than 1200 women have been arrested during the Intifada for varying periods, with and without charges being brought.
Women are imprisoned in intolerable conditions.
Torture and sexual violence to obtain’ confessions’from women detainees continues.
The Ramallah based group Al-Haq issued a statement on International Women's Day, calling upon international institutions concerned with human rights to take all necessary measures to protect the rights of Palestinian women in the Occupied Territories.
Al-haq has documented many instances of sexual violence ranging from the use of foul language to indecent exposure, urinating on women, molestation and rape.
And the hideous cases of torture continue to be reported.
Amuni and Hurieh El Darrawish were tortured by interrogators at the Russian Compound in Jerusalem in January of this year.
Amuni, who suffers from rheumatism and epilepsy, received severe beatings about the head (other detainees have reported damage to their eyesight as a result of systematic beatings about the head).
Amuni was subjected to the burlap sack torture: handcuffed and hooded in a sack, she was bound in a standing position to an iron bar for hours.
Since her torture she has been unable to stand or walk.
Therry Buleita spent a whole night in this position; each time her head dropped, a policeman kicked her in the face.
Detainees are also hosed down regularly with cold water throughout the night.
Hurieh El Darrawish, pregnant and suffering from renal colic and anaemia, was threatened with rape and beaten until she collapsed and had to be taken to hospital.
Another common form of torture at the Compound involves forcing the detainee to stand for hours on one leg, the other being tied to a door handle.
But one of the most brutal methods reported involves confining detainees in a tiny cubicle measuring 80 by 100 cm, referred to as the coffin'.
Inside the coffin it is pitch dark and fouled with faeces because women confined there are refused access to a toilet.
Miriam Ismail was held in the coffin for a full week, her hands and legs cuffed.
The alternative to the burlap sack and the coffin at the Russian Compound is solitary confinement.
The detainee is held in a small cell equipped with a hole in the floor which serves for a toilet, a water tap (often dry), a thin mattress and a blanket.
The cell is kept filthy intentionally; should the detainee try to clean it, the warders take care to dirty it again.
Rats occasionally drop through the ceiling ventilation grate.
The detainee is not allowed to shower and her daily ration comprises two cups of tea and a quarter loaf of bread stuffed with scraps of unpalatable food.
In this atmosphere of unbearable repression, Palestinian women marked International Women's Day with demonstrations and sit-ins throughout Occupied Palestine.
A statement issued by the Higher Women's Council called upon all women to unify their efforts within the unified women's councils in various locations.
The demonstrations began on March 7, when 200 women representing organisations from all over the West Bank and Gaza held a sit-in at the Red Cross offices in East Jerusalem.
The women at the sit-in issued the following appeal:’ On the occasion of International Women's Day, we, the Palestinian Women have been on a hunger strike since February 23, 1989 in solidarity with our sons who have been holding hunger strikes in Israeli jails in protest against their inhuman prison conditions.
We appeal to our sisters all over the world to stand by us during these very difficult moments in order to help us put an end to oppressive Israeli measures imposed on us and our children which are affecting all human, social, economic, political, intellectual and cultural aspects of our lives.
Our young Men and Women are being killed and tortured, our children are being mutilated by explosive objects, our lands are being confiscated, our trees uprooted and our homes demolished only to be replaced by Israeli settlements…
We therefore urge our friends to press for inquiry commissions to investigate the terrible conditions of all Israeli jails.
We also urge our sisters to help us reopen our educational institutions so that we may rescue our future generations from the disasters of ignorance and illiteracy which are threatening our children.
We would finally like to assure our friends that we, Palestinian women are committed to peace and our acceptance of a Palestinian state proves beyond doubt our sincere intentions in achieving peace.
We also wish to declare that we are willing to pay the ultimate price for achieving our independent state and that our Uprising, the Intifada will not stop until we have achieved this goal.
In our sincere pursuit of peace we demand the following: 1.
Convening the international authoritative Peace conference with speed, with the participation of the permanent members of the Security Council and all parties to the conflict including the PLO on equal footing.
2.
The recognition of our Palestinian state on our land with Jerusalem as its capital, under the leadership of our representative, the PLO.
3.
Until then, we demand international forces to replace the occupation forces in order to protect our people from the oppressive measures which have become unbearable.’
The following day, March 8, actions took place all over Occupied Palestine.
In Ramallah, more than 300 women took to the streets.
The demonstration was attacked by the military, several women were arrested and at least two shot with rubber bullets.
In Beit Sahour, a women's demonstration of more than 1000 was disbanded with the use of tear gas and rubber bullets.
Several women were badly beaten.
In the Gaza Strip, hundreds of women held a sit in at Red Cross headquarters in Gaza City and in Khan Yunis.
Demonstrations followed and were put down with force.
The military also opened fire on a women's demonstration in the village of Beit Hanoun where a 70 year old woman was beaten by soldiers.
Other demonstrations were reported in Jabalya and Al Shate refugee camps.
On International Women's Day, 1989 Palestinian women made an appeal to women the world over for solidarity and action to end what is a fascist occupation.
For details of what you can do to support these sisters contact the Palestinian Women's Group, c/o 21 Collingham Road, London SWS ONU.
Marcel Farry
FREEDOM FOR NAMIBIA
On December 22 1988, the South African regime was forced to sign an agreement guaranteeing Namibia's independence.
After 105 years of struggle against brutal colonial rule, the Namibian people are about to begin a new chapter in their history.
The United Nations plan for independence will be set in motion from the beginning of this month, starting with a ceasefire between SWAPO and South Africa.
On June 24 the election campaign will officially begin, lasting four months until the voting in November for the Constituent Assembly.
And by 1990 Namibia should be proclaiming independence.
Since February, United Nations military and civilian personnel, who will make up the UNTAG (United Nations Transitional Assistance Group) peacekeeping forces, have been arriving in the country ready to monitor the ceasefire and elections.
Ros Young reports
Amongst Namibians reactions are mixed — from excitement to apprehension as the day approaches.
Excitement for many at the thought of returning home after the long hard years in exile.
For Ellen Musialela, Acting Secretary for the SWAPO Women's Council, this year it will be 21 years since she left her home in the Caprivi Strip to join SWAPO's armed struggle for liberation.
Now that things are actually moving, she said’ we can hardly believe it’.
For Ellen, the journey home will be unbelievable — the culmination of years of struggle, the chance to see family and friends again — and to see the capital, Windhoek, which she has never visited due to the racist restrictions against Black people travelling to other parts of Namibia.
’ But leaving Angola will be hard, leaving our Angolan friends and neighbours and starting a new life’, she said.
There is also a great deal of quite justified apprehension over what is in store in the coming months.
SWAPO personnel have an incredible amount of work to do.
Ellen, together with thousands of her comrades from SWAPO will soon be inside the country campaigning for the elections, and come independence will be leading the long hard struggle of reconstructing their country after decades of one of the most brutal colonial occupations.
The repatriation of the political exiles, organised by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in cooperation with SWAPO is due to start sometime in May/June.
And a major problem is where will all the refugees go when they arrive back in the country.
The Council of Churches in Namibia are responsible for setting up repatriation centres but South Africa's colonial Administration General lAG) in Namibia is trying to interfere in this process and has even suggested the use of South African military bases for this purpose!
At present some 80,000 Namibian refugees live in SWAPO settlements in Angola and Zambia, including the fighters in SWAPO's military wing, the People's Liberation Army of Namibia (PLAN).
School students will stay on in the few settlements that will be left and in schools in Cuba, West Africa and other countries.
Most of the SWAPO leadership in exile will start to arrive in Namibia as soon after April 1 as possible to begin their election campaign.
If the elections are’ free and fair’then SWAPO will win hands down — even the South Africans admit to this.
At the moment though there are many indications that the South African government and military and their Namibian supporters will try to sabotage any semblance of’ free and fair’elections.
Between April 1 and the elections in November a lot can happen.
In this period, all South African military forces must be disbanded and withdrawn from the country except for a residual force of 1,500 troops who will be confined to bases at Grootfontein and Oshivello.
But, the South Africans also have their own local military forces and a big question mark remains as to what is happening with them (see Spare Rib, No 197).
For example, the South West Africa Territory Force (SWATF), numbering around 30,000 has been confined to base on full-pay instead of being disbanded.
The notorious Koevoet death squads are being incorporated into the local police force to help keep law and order during the UN elections, which is a joke.
Aside from these two forces, Namibians will have to contend with white fascists who are threatening to set up their own militias to disrupt the UN independence plan.
There are also reports from the country that assassination squads are being formed to attack the SWAPO leadership during the elections.
On top of this, there are now large numbers of UNITA bandits from Angola stationed at South African bases in the north of Namibia.
It is reported that they are being given Namibian identity cards to enable them to vote for pro-South African parties in the elections.
The international community cannot afford to be complacent, assuming that if the United Nations peacekeeping force is there that everything will go according to plan.
Apart from the fact that they are not organising the elections — this is being done by South Africa's AG but only monitoring them, South Africa and their supporters started their campaign months ago.
The SADF are trying to persuade people that if SWAPO wins the elections they will starve and all their possessions will be confiscated.
South African soldiers are going into the villages asking people's forgiveness for past atrocities and to show their good intentions they are even ploughing fields.
Elderly people are being given food and water to persuade them not to vote for SWAPO and people are being shown videos of the Ethiopian famine and told that that is what is in store for them, according to Andimba Toivo ja Toivo, SWAPO's Secretary General.
SWAPO supporters continue to be beaten up at rallies and repression and intimidation in general has not abated since South Africa signed the peace agreement in New York in December.
Apart from the SADF's electioneering, South Africa and its puppets have at their disposal most of the media in Namibia, vast resources to mount their election campaign and a standing army in the form of SWATF and Koevoet at the ready if things don't go their way — which is to stop SWAPO gaining two-thirds of the vote for the Constituent Assembly.
It is really urgent that massive international support is built for SWAPO at this crucial time on the basis that there will be no free and fair elections unless there is: Total withdrawal of all South African military forces Complete disbandment of Koevoet, the SWATF and all other local South African-controlled military forces.
Repeal of all racist and repressive laws and regulations Release of all political prisoners and detainees Return of all exiled Namibians free of intimidation Proper UN-controlled nation-wide registration of all voters over 18 years
Total and immediate integration of all Namibia's territory including Walvis Bay (annexed by South Africa) and the offshore islands.
A Namibian Emergency Campaign has been launched by the Namibian Support Committee and the Anti-Apartheid Movement.
If you can help organise support for SWAPO and their election campaign fund in the coming months, please contact the NSC, PO Box 16, London NW5 2LW.
Tel:(01) 267 1941/2m
WE REMEMBER BLAIR PEACH
On April 23, 1979 Blair Peach was murdered by a member of the Special Patrol Group (SPG) of the Metropolitan Police, during a demonstration against a National Front meeting taking place in Southall.
The Southall Community faced two invasions on that day one by the fascists and one by the police, with over 700 arrests and 342 charged.
Hundreds more were injured when police attacked the demonstration and Clarence Baker spent weeks close to death.
For Southall, April 23, 1979 was the culmination of a history of struggle, community action and resistance against fascism, racial violence and police harassment.
10 years later, in spite of a massive police investigation which named the officers guilty of Blair's death, not a single policeman has faced prosecution or disciplinary action.
Black people continue to bear the brunt of racial violence, oppressive policing and fascist activity.
And the resistance continues.
Balvinder Gill from the Southall Monitoring Group reports.
The campaign to bring Blair Peach's murderer to justice and the demand for a full public inquiry into the events of ‘79 has been mounted for nine and a half years by the Friends of Blair Peach Committee.
A central figure in the campaign has been Celia Stubbs, Blair Peach's common law widow.
Every year April 23 has been commemorated.
This year to mark the 10th anniversary, a call is made to all anti racists and anti fascists to join us in a March through Southall.
It is important that women support this event because it is highly relevant to their experiences, especially Black women.
Ten years after the murder of Blair Peach, the experiences of women in Southall regarding policing and racial violence have remained disturbingly unchanged.
Although Southall itself may be deemed’ safe’from racial attacks, one has only to step outside the 4 sq miles to realise the extent to which women's lives are determined by the fear of violence.
Little is written about Black women and racist attacks, yet experience has shown that Black women in particular not only bear the brunt of racial violence but also of oppressive policing.
It is women who end up imprisoned in their own homes by the threat of racial and sexual violence on housing estates and the streets.
The women who are most vulnerable are still single women living alone with their children or those women who are at home all day.
Isolation, fear and suffering are a part of daily life for many Black women, and the local authorities, in their failure to recognise this, perpetuate the situation by housing Black women in large white council estates without the necessary support.
For example Ms X was rehoused, after waiting 13 years for a transfer, from a notorious council estate to a comfortable semi-detached house just outside Southall.
On her third day with the unpacking hardly finished, she returned to her new home after taking her three young children to school to find the walls, doors and windows of her house daubed with this kind of graffiti:’ wogs out’,’N.F. Rule’,’Kill Niggers’.
She fled the estate and left her new home to spend three months in B&B accommodation awaiting another offer.
It is not surprising that the most sought after properties and comfortable estates have become no-go areas for Black families.
Although the council is quite correct to attempt to redress this situation by targetting areas and moving Black families onto these estates-their attempts will inevitably fail and end in misery unless the necessary support networks and resources are available to the tenants, i.e. assistance to organise support groups, Tenants Associations, emergency help.
But most important the councils should listen to and take notice of those who have a track record of work on racial harassment, rather than just implementing paper policies.
Another crucial component for a successful campaign against racial violence is the councils ability to take action against the perpetrators, as an expression of its political will to combat racial harassment.
Unlike the common stereotypes, victims of racial harassment are not illiterate Black women unable to articulate their complaints.
Many women take action, they make complaints and write letters but they are often ignored.
Ms Y, a young widow with a 3 year-old child suffers racial and physical abuse from her neighbours as well as receiving threatening phone calls, hate mail, and disgusting substances pushed through her letterbox.
She has suffered this abuse for almost 9 months and has reported every incident to the police and council.
To date no action has been taken against the neighbours.
Neither are victims of racial harassment always poor women: Ms Z is divorced, lives on her own, and was fortunate enough to secure her home as part of the divorce settlement.
She works as a psychiatric nurse in a local hospital.
After suffering racial abuse, damage to her property, and physical attack from her neighbours and receiving no help from the police, she resorted to the installation of extreme security measures by covering every window and outside door with steel shutters, and an alarm system covering the whole house.
When she returns home from work she lives with the shutters down, with no natural light or air entering the house.
The police advised her to take out a summons against her neighbours.
We learnt later that they had also advised her neighbours to take out a summons against her for noise nuisance.
The police response to Black women and racist attacks is determined by the same factors which affect their response to racist attacks generally: Failure to recognise racial violence/attacks as such and to act accordingly; delays in their response to a call for help from victims of racial violence; refusal to recognise the seriousness of a racist attack, and if arrests are made, only the minimum of charges are imposed; avoiding responsibility for dealing with cases involving racist attacks — by advising victims to pursue civil action through the courts; the subjecting of those who are victims of racial violence to further racial abuse; the criminalisation of victims of racist attacks e.g. in Bradford, Newham and only recently two cases from Hounslow one involving 5 boys from Lampton School who defended themselves in a racial attack and were arrested and charged by the police.
The other involves a family from Feltham whose off licence was attacked by a gang of 15-20 youths.
Although one of the sons suffered severe injuries such as a black eye and damage to his kidney and spent 5 days in hospital it took the police over 6 weeks to decide whether to charge anyone.
During their investigation they repeatedly told the family that they must have provoked the attack.
These are well documented complaints — made repeatedly.
Combined with the sexual and physical abuse suffered by Black women, the situation is intolerable.
The police response to these complaints has taken the form of a much publicised propaganda exercise the launch of the Metropolitan Police guidelines on racial harassment.
The guidelines say’ Report racial harassment to the police’.
Black people have always known racial violence to be a criminal offence and Black people always reported incidents to the police.
They stopped reporting incidents to the police when repeatedly no action was taken, and they were subjected to racial abuse from police officers.
The problem has not been Black people's failure to report incidents, but police failure to act by providing support and protection to Black victims and taking action against perpetrators.
How can we as Black women have any faith in a police force which refuses to acknowledge our calls for help, refuses to provide protection, and refuses to take action against those who attack us?
Physical and sexual violence pervades the treatment of Black women by the police.
Nowhere is this better exemplified than by the rape of Jackie Berkley by police officers at Moss Side police station, and the shooting of Cherry Groce in Brixton and Cynthia Jarrett in Tottenham during police raids on their homes.
An identical picture presents itself in relation to police response to domestic and sexual attack.
Complaints of a lack of response and action by police, coupled with the extent of the fear of police violence, have been well documented (from GLC reports, PSI report 1983, to Ruth E. Hall's Ask any Woman).
Women's groups and other organisations have, over the years, mounted considerable campaigns to express their concern about policing and its effect on women.
In reply the Metropolitan Police has launched yet another campaign to convince women that they will get a serious and immediate response from the police.
But the reality is very different: police response is abysmal despite the fact that most cases involve criminal damage, and various forms of assault.
Police responce ranges from total inaction to deliberate delays, and a reluctance to press charges, even in cases where injunctions have been obtained.
Women are having to rely more and more on civil’ remedies’for protection.
These are themselves limited to the provision of various forms of injunctions, which are only effective if there is a power of arrest attached, and only enforcable by the police.
It is unacceptable that women and particularly Black women's demands and fears should be so dismissed by the police.
It is a stance which dismisses the needs of over half of the members of the community and sanctions major crimes such as rape, assault, actual or grievous bodily harm and murder.
Opting OUT OF THE NHS
At the beginning of this year, the Government unveiled its White Paper on the NHS’ Working for Patients’more appropriately titled’Working for Profits’.
It is simply a plan to privatise health care.
Rose Newbigging reports
Without doubt the White Paper is a thinly disguised blueprint for the privatisation of health care in this country.
Thatcher and her supporters’ seem intent on doing to the NHS what they have done to other public services such as gas and water.
Although the government has gone to great lengths (£1 million spent on marketing the proposals (in an attempt to convince us that the NHS will still remain a National Health Service and will still be free to those requiring health care the proposals clearly spell the future of a health service which will move away from being a public tax funded service to a two tier service, with those who can't afford to pay on the bottom level receiving inadequate and cash starved services.
The trend will be towards a privatised two tier system similar to the system in the US where health care is big business.
Millions of people in the US are not covered by health insurance and the amount of money you have determines the treatment you get that is assuming any treatment is given at all.
NHS plc??
It is quite obvious that the government have been gearing the NHS up for this plan for some time.
The continued cash starvation of the NHS, the insidious introduction of privatisation into the NHS via ancillary services, the increasing trend towards inadequately resourced’ community’care (the government is due to make a decision on the Griffiths review proposals on community care), the development of a’Sainsbury's’style management in the NHS and the encouragement given to the private sector, are all trends which have laid the ground for Thatcher's government to make the very damaging proposals contained in the White Paper.
The people who will suffer most will be those who have been hit so hard already by the attempted dismantling of the welfare state.
Women, as the majority of NHS workers and users, will undoubtedly bear the brunt of the White Paper proposals.
Competition in the NHS to date, largely in terms of ancillary services, has proved a failure with a major decline in standards and a major assault on the employment rights of NHS ancillary workers, the majority of whom are women.
Huge gaps in provision of health care in the less profitable areas such as care of the elderly and people with psychological problems and learning difficulties will affect women disproportionately as patients and as carers forced to fill in the gaps.
Although the White Paper is as yet just a White Paper and not law, it seems that certain hospitals are being pushed towards’ opting out’.
Guy's Hospital in London has been rumoured to be heading down the opting out path, although recently a group of consultants at the hospital expressed their opposition to the idea.
Last week, the Chief Executive of the NHS stated that there were already indications from Regional Health Authorities about potential hospitals for’ opting out.’
CURRENT PROGRESS ON THE WHITE PAPER
The White Paper is hugely unpopular with the vast majority of people and also with the vast majority of health service workers.
Opinion polls show 70% of voters oppose the White Paper — most people put the NHS at the top of their list of political concerns.
THE FIGHTBACK
Already thousands of GPs have pledged their opposition to the White Paper — GPs all over the country have been meeting and issuing threats of mass resignations in protest at the plans.
The British Medical Association has spoken out clearly and critically against the White Paper.
Some consultants have also expressed their opposition.
A major campaign called’ Hands Off Our Hospitals’, supported by London Health Emergency, has been launched.
The campaign aims to bring together all those opposed to the White Paper nurses, ancillary workers, GPs, junior doctors, community health council representatives, health campaigners and trade unionists attended the launch meeting in February.
The campaign is up and running-the aim is to link up the campaigns already flourishing in different districts.
For details, leaflets, advice, etc. phone (01) 833 3020.
The general view amongst campaigners is that there is no time to waste in organising to defeat the White Paper.
The massive lack of popular support for the government's plans for the NHS and the overwhelming popularity of a public health system (despite its many problems) over a privatised health system, mean that the government could be defeated on this issue.
The White Paper paves the way for even larger gaps in the provision of health Care in less profitable areas such as care of the elderly and people with psychological problems.
In the above photo, taken at St Edmonds Hospital in North Staffordshire, the already desperate situation is evident.
Inside the Belly of Apartheid
Miriam Tlali lives and writes in Soweto.
Elean Thomas talked to her about her new book Soweto Stories, in which she documents her people's unwavering resistance in the face of the shameful brutality, personal struggle, and systematic humiliation, a part of everyday life under apartheid.
Elean:Which language do you usually write in?
Miriam:Soto is my mother tongue but as a rule we don't use the African languages when we write because if you do so you run the risk of getting into the trap of the system.
We believe that we should be able to use our languages when we ourselves decide how to use them.
Elean:In your situation, you need a common language to help break down the divisions being both aggravated and imposed by the racist regime.
What is that common language?
Miriam:We prefer English rather than Afrikaans, which we see as the language of the oppressor.
The British of course, oppress us; they virtually handed us over into the hands of the Afrikaners, the descendents of the Dutch settlers.
But, there are 90% more of us than them, so the retention of our culture and our languages is not in any danger at all.
Fortunately, the languages were written down and they are well preserved.
Yet the regime tries to use these languages to tribalize us.
For instance Bantu Education which the government encourages, is an effort to re-tribalize us; to introduce an inferior kind of education which uses a lot of the African dialects, ostensibly to create a kind of pride in our culture, our languages.
But if you look deeper into it, you'll find that it's really calculated to give us inferior education and deny us full rights as human beings.
To try to educate us to remain docile, and what they call’ good natives’.
Elean:It seemed to me, reading your Soweto Stories, that you were faced with some difficulties as to how to portray the customs and traditions of your people.
How much of it was fundamentally affected by editing and/or translation?
For example, on the question of phrasing, rhythms, syntax and word-use; the English spoken and written in countries, such as the Caribbean and Africa, is substantially different from so-called’ Queen's’or’standard’English.
Writers in these countries use English, usually as a vehicle for exposure of the cultural roots of Caribbean or African people.
In this respect, many of us in fact reform and bend English to our needs rather than allow that language to impose itself on our realities.
For example in the story Vigil with the Flies and the Bedbugs, words like’ commuters’and phrases like’sleep as a god-given form of relaxation’, are used.
Quite alien words and phrases in our societies.
CUSTOMS TRADITIONS AND LANGUAGE
(Miriam at first listening intently, to follow exactly what was saying, now began to chuckle, her eyes literally flashing merriment, her’ motherly’body beginning a little, slow, rythmic rock.)
Elean:In contrast Mm'a Lithoto has the following phrasing:’ The foot does not have a nose.
It does not smell out.
The foot carries you even to the threshold of your enemies.
It takes you and deposits you at the edge of a precipice and you can watch helplessly as you dangle and your hopes for survival are sinking into the depths of despair’.
The point I'm making is that both extracts are written in English.
yet this one just uses the trappings of the language, the world view is totally different.
There is a tense contradiction in the use of language in this book.
Do you agree, and if so how do you explain it?
Miriam: I'm very happy that you've pointed this out.
There's only one other person here in this country, since I've been doing these interviews who has pointed this out.
African cadence, our way of expression is so beautiful.
It has so much depth, much more than if I were to express myself in other languages.
The best thing to bring it all out, would be to write in my own African language, but I have to write in another language.
And since I have that type of handicap, I try to interpret it as best as I can.
As you can see, it's not easy, and sometimes it really makes one unhappy that I cannot bring it out properly, since my primary audience hope) is writing for my own people.
Elean:Would you say that this’ technical problem’, which is a technical problem for many writers is made worse because you are writing, not from the relatively safe’exile’of a liberal-democratic, capitalist European country; but you are writing from inside the very belly of apartheid, where you do not have, at your disposal the support services and facilities, to help you to authentically reflect the true’spirit’of your people.
I notice in your’ dedication’, you spoke of some external, European friends who assisted you, for the first time, to write, without tears and pain.
What is it really like, writing from inside the very belly of apartheid?'
INSIDE THE BELLY
Miriam: Its really very difficult.
Because of the ever-present restlessness, the attempt by people who are in pain at all times, to overcome the pain or to reach out, to speak up, in demonstrations and protests — even just the manner in which the people have to carry themselves from one day to another.
Living in Soweto, for instance is like living in an occupied camp.
The soldiers are always there.
The police are always there.
The roadblocks and the helicopters.
It goes on and on.
I have schoolteacher friends, and we were talking about the impact of all this on our children; that they are becoming even more radical than we were and unavoidably so.
One of the teachers was saying that you give children pieces of paper to draw anything and most of them will draw a soldier carrying a gun or Caspers, or helicopters, something to do with war.
For a writer it's a hopeless situation.
Most of the times living in Soweto, I have police coming to pay me a visit, which they usually call’ routine’checks.
Sometimes when I try to’ escape’from the South African situation by travelling to Lesotho, which is the nearest neighbouring country.
(My mother left South Africa and went to Lesotho when Lesotho became independent because she had become really depressed with South Africa and she thought she would find a niche and peace there.)
I get to the border, and I am questioned for hours, endless interrogation, and if I am travelling in a car, they open it up and they search it.
All this kind of police intimidation which I experience, is very difficult.
Elean: So the story Devil at a Dead End, which deals with some of the experiences of a young Black South African girl crossing the border from Lesotho, was drawn from your own experiences?
Miriam: Yes, all the people who live in Lesotho and have to go over the border to South Africa, have a phobia of this contact.
The contact between Blacks and whites is a very precarious thing.
That's what I try to bring out in the story, and the eyes of the whites; their penetrating eyes, their hostile eyes.
Elean:Your stories are very strong on the hostile, uncaring, comtemptuous, apartheid apparatus — for example the traumatic experience for the Black African people just to travel on a train from A to B; you seem to contrast this, all the time, with the’ togetherness’, the solidarity among the suffering South African people, like in your story, Fud-u-u-, a, where you emphasize this togetherness, especially among the women.
How do you see this togetherness in relation to hope for change in the apartheid system?
You paint a very stark picture of the suffering but where is the hope?
THE HOPE
Miriam:What can bring about hope, is a combination of different factors.
Amongst them should be help coming from outside, things like diplomatic leverage by the’ superpowers’, such as sanctions.
The protest from South African people escalating, and the struggles of our people through such bodies as trade unions — all these factors coming together, should play a part in an attempt to put an end to Apartheid.
As far as I'm concerned, any one factor will not be able to shift this stubborn oppressive system.
Elean:Lauretta Ngcobo, another South African writer, in her introduction to your book, described you, as a writer coming out of the upsurges of your people's consciousness and activities of the 70s, and reflecting those upsurges going on to the 80s.
What is the connection, between your activities as a writer and the activities of the political liberation movement?
Miriam:They are interacting forces.
A writer in South Africa, especially a Black writer, has to bring out the sufferings of the people, and be actively engaged in the whole liberation struggle.
You cannot sit back in your little room writing a nice romantic story about loving couples.
Writers have to be relevant to what is taking place, whenever people are fighting for their self-determination.
They have to articulate in a manner in which others will understand.
In fact, Black South African writers are committed in trying to rewrite our history, our true history, because it has been so much misrepresented and twisted, and used against the people themselves.
There's a deliberate attempt by us to make the people remember their pride, and to appeal to their ancestry, their way of worshipping and all these things.
I am very involved in the People's Committees, and I am in the forefront of the struggle of my people.
I cannot afford to be some kind of armchair politician.
Elean:You are also involved in the training of young writers, why do you do this?
There are many writers I know, especially after they have made their name, who might not think this important, unless they got an important academic job to do it.
Miriam:That's out of the question.
I might be very well known, but to me it's really nothing.
My real aim is to one day see a lot of young people coming up to do exactly what I am doing.
I am not flattered at all by the fact that I'm the only one who has been a published novelist writing from inside South Africa.
It is a terrible, solitary kind of life, whereby I cannot for instance have people with whom I can discuss my writing, unless I leave the country and meet people like Bessie Head, who died, or Buchi Emecheta and Ama Ata Aidoo.
I work with a number of young people who are aspiring to be writers and we have put together an anthology of Black women writing about their experiences from inside South Africa.
We have called it, When the Caged Bird Sings, inspired by Maya Angelou.
Perhaps if we succeed it will be published by SquattervilIe Publishers later this year.
This is the only Black publishing house so far in South Africa.
We have been trying for years, centuries, to establish this and it is only because of help from outside that we have been able to do it now.
Elean: A theme that recurs in your Soweto Stories is the theme of keeping the families together, not allowing their innate sense of solidarity with each other to be smashed and replaced by rampant individualism — on the other hand you show very sharply the negative side in this tradition, for example how it impacts on women.
WOMEN IN PRE-COLONIAL AFRICA
Miriam: The Black woman in our original traditional society was a strong figure.
The older you became, the more you became an asset.
Rather than something to be relegated to nothingness, like we find today.
This tradition was first removed by the colonialists.
Under the white man's law the man makes all decisions, and has to be guardian so-called, over his wife.
Elean: The colonialists and other defendants of capitalism usually argue that they have brought women into a more advanced state, freeing them from being chattels and providing the labour power for their husbands, especially in polygamous relationships, to be waged workers.
Miriam: Even in the polygamous setting each wife had a strong position.
These second, third and fourth wives had their own property, their own land, their own cattle and sheep and everything.
They wouldn't decide to slaughter a cow without consulting her.
It was something like a hierarchy of sort, but never castrating the woman.
Elean: It has always been assumed, even by some feminists and left-wing individuals, that monogamy equals equality of women and polygamy equals oppression of women.
Now from what you say it isn't as simple as that at all.
APARTHEID'S SEXISM
Miriam: You couldn't oppress a woman in our traditional society, she had her place and her property.
But under the colonialist laws first, and secondly under the apartheid laws, a married woman is prevented from even getting her own house.
Even I today am handicapped, in spite of my position.
For instance, when I first started writing, and had completed my first novels, I was not allowed to sign a contract for it.
I have no contractual rights as a woman in my country.
I may not for instance sue somebody in a court of law.
My husband has to do it for me.
Elean: As a firm supporter of the South African People's struggle, it is not often that we see this side of apartheid oppression coming out in the liberation literature.
The deep sexism of apartheid.
Miriam: It is deep, I'm a victim of it myself.
My mother left me a property in Lesotho when she died, and they insisted that it must be in my husband's name.
These things weaken the position of the Black woman, and have been done deliberately.
A superstratum of slaves has been put above us, to keep everybody down.
Elean: Isn't it a sort of parallel with the situation in your story’ Dimomona’, where the husband Boitumelo is referred to as the’Boss-boy’.
Like the situation in the Caribbean during slavery, and even in the present, where some’ slaves’are put above the others, given a little bit more by the’slave-master’, and used to control the other’slaves’.
Miriam: It's the same situation, the men come to feel that it is their right as male persons to be over the woman.
Elean: What is the programme of the liberation movement in relation to this specific question of male supremacy and the position of women?
Miriam: That's a very important and very good question.
Most of the young people involved in the liberation struggle don't subject their girl-friends, their wives, to this kind of humiliation.
They carry babies on their backs in the streets.
In fact, the deeper you go into the struggle, the more you are liberated mentally, the more you do not want to have somebody cleaning your shoes, washing your clothes and so on.
They do it themselves.
They help around the house, but not so with our generation.
Elean: So you see hope for change in the younger generation.
Miriam: Yes, but you must remember that through the efforts of the older generation we have been fighting it, we haven't been tolerating it passively.
Since the Soweto uprisings of 1976 a lot has taken place for the younger people.
They are able to do a lot of things that former generations could not do; for instance a lot of them are able to study now in the legal field, become nurses and so on.
Even the control of birth has played a part in it, although we are not very much in favour of how it is done by the system.
The system is using it for itself, but you cannot run away from the fact that it has helped a lot of women to pursue careers rather than to sit down and nurse babies.
I belong to a Committee who call themselves Women Against Apartheid, and we have been engaged in campaigning a lot against these marital laws.
Because of our efforts, the marriage laws have been slightly amended to allow for equal responsibility over the property.
This will only apply to future marriages.
The man will then, at least have to get the consent of the woman before he goes off and sells their joint property.
Elean: I presume the sexist laws you have been describing also apply to white women in South Africa.
If this is so, is there a white feminist movement of any note in South Africa?
Miriam: A white feminist movement in South Africa Who should there be?
The Black woman is there to act as the’ shock absorber’.
The white woman just looks after herself, the Black woman is there to take her kids for a walk.
Even though the white woman is oppressed herself, she has a vested interest in apartheid.
If the husband's shirt has lost a button, he says,’ Mary, Mary, why is my shirt without a button’, to the Black’girl’not to his wife.
We not only have the male, patriarchal white apartheid system on our necks, we also have the white woman on our necks.
Elean: Some people say that since the Namibian independence agreement and the lessening of Botha's power in the government the situation in South Africa has gotten better; that there are renewed hopes for an amicable settlement with the liberation forces.
What do you say about this?
Miriam: As far as I'm concerned all that is nothing to write home about.
As long as the statutory racist laws inflicted on us remain, then all that is going on is rubbish.
The only way in which we can be convinced that the situation in South Africa is getting better is by abolishing all the racist laws, doing away with the whole system of apartheid, allowing every adult to be able to decide on their own future, in other words universal adult suffrage.
If that doesn't take place, all is nothing.
I appeal to the international community not to be flattered into believing that all these cosmetic changes are real changes, and to see to it that we, have a voice and a vote.
Elean: Miriam Tlali, I wish you all the best, not only for the rest of your stay here in London, but in Soweto itself, in that very difficult situation.
I hold your hand and you hold mine.
Miriam: Thank you, my sister.
We embrace.
WOMEN AS DEMONS
Tanith Lee Women's Press £4.95
This collection of science/fantasy short stories unfolds like a finely crafted patchwork whose recurring motif is the woman outsider.
With each story this image is restyled and shot through with many different textures and colours, making the final fabric rich and sensuous.
Each story explores an aspect of woman as demon, be she enchantress, temptress or sorceress, and cunningly reworks the negative male weave of such images into a pattern that is more positive, or at least potentially so.
By deliberately writing from a male point of view, Tanith Lee is able to explore the fear and loathing that underpins the traditional male characterisation of the woman who stands alone outside the pale of family and community life; such women are designated bitch, whore or dyke.
This is not to suggest that the book represents a feminist polemic.
On the contrary its critique of such representations are extremely subtle.
The stories work on a tension sustained by the construction of a male point of view.
There is ambiguity and therefore a choice of readings, or at least spaces where irony may be inserted.
For example, the men maybe chivalrous and valiant or vain and stupid depending upon the reader.
Similarly, the women may be isolated and destructive or glamourous and powerful; possible to be pitied, perhaps to be envied.
The complexity of Tanith Lee's project is echoed in the breadth of her vision and the elaborateness of her prose.
We meander across a continuum from ancient myth through medieval legend to futurist fantasy in a narrative space incandescent with colour and poetry.
It is an incredibly pleasurable journey.
The writer uses many of the cons of the genre; red and blue plumed knights, pale maidens in dark castles, full moons in star-washed skies, but her descriptions are so finely wrought that they transcend the fantasy formula.
Moreover there is an iron fist in the velvet glove and Tanith Lee packs a hard punch; for just below the surface of heraldic hyperbole and magical metaphor lurks the image of the monstrous woman.
Horror is at the heart of every story.
The female who inspires fear, the free woman, the witch, also inspire loathing; the site of this loathing being the body itself with its menstrual cycles and its insatiable sexual appetites.
Such women bewitch men and suck out their souls and their life blood.
Throughout the stories there is an opposition between human (family) love and vampirish female hunger, but as Tanith Lee shows, such ‘demonic' women are only those who exercise the power inherent in every woman.
In moving towards a reappraisal of the demon, through an appropriation of the negative naming, this collection of stories contributes not only to an extension of the possibilities of the horror/sci-fi genre but also to the continuing development of a herstory.
The writer enters the negative force-field and her steps are often tentative and painful; her conclusions often oblique or noncommittal However, having traversed a terrain full of snares, in the final story, Northern Chess the female hero emerges triumphant from the ashes of her sisters, who over the centuries have been burnt at the stake for their dangerous powers.
Beverley Alcock
INFERTILITY: Women speak out about their experiences of reproductive medicine
Ed.Renate D.Klein Pandora £4.95
As a collection of personal testimonies and feminist insights from all over the world, this book has many strengths.
It gives voice to women who may never have been heard except for Klein's encouragement.
They turn clinical description on its head, as they talk about the trauma of infertility treatments, the pain (emotional and physical), hopes and dreams, and anger at the medical world.
Klein describes her own feelings in doing this work and how it came about; Informed by her research in Australia and by talking to women who left in vitro fertilisation (IVF) programmes.
This book makes links, between the social and ‘medical' aspects of infertility, adding to the work of other women: an insensitive, sometimes outright demeaning, exploitative medical practice, and what one Dutch woman called the ‘lingering process' of infertility, the disruption of one's life, feelings about motherhood, and the social pressures.
Its unique strength is in showing how the ‘new' technologies follow on from ‘old' ones.
In Part I women talk about so-called conventional therapies which include years of swallowing powerful hormonal and fertility drugs, like Perganol and Clomid, both of which are known to be dangerous.
These same drugs, and ever appearing new ones, are also used in IVF programmes, which are explored in Part Il.
The sections give credence to the book-jacket quote, Reproductive technology fails women.'
it's a con.
An incredibly powerful Part introduced by Gena Corea (author of the ground-breaking The Mother Machine, Women's Press) turns to surrogacy, and how fertile women are being used ‘in the name of infertility'.
I was deeply moved by the story of Alejandra Munoz, a Mexican woman illegally brought into the United States by her cousins who deceived her into becoming a ‘surrogate mother'.
The stories are painful and shocking, but the book goes on to talk about the urgent need to’ resist the false promise of reproductive technologies’and on the positive side, re-thinking fertility and infertility, and working toward women-respecting alternatives.
In outlining a feminist model for infertility crisis counselling, Alison Solomon says that often feminists do not differentiate between the suffering caused by infertility and that caused by infertility treatment.
She agrees with Gnome Pfeiffer (coauthor of The Experience of Infertility, Virago) that feminists took a long time to put infertility on the political agenda, and she suggests that this is partly due to attitudes toward motherhood.
This book is courageous in exposing the violation of women at the hands of medical and scientific practitioners, in placing this medical malpractice n social and feminist contexts, and in showing that all women will be effected by reproductive technology if it is allowed to go on.
Pat Spallone
TALKING BACK: Thinking Feminist, Thinking Black
Bell Hooks Sheba Feminist Press £5.95
With this finely-crafted collection of essays, scholar and activist Bell Hooks makes another brilliant contribution to the growing archives of African-American feminist theory.
The collection includes 24 essays, several of which appeared earlier in Aurora, Catalyst, Discourse, Sage and Zeta (American magazines).
Now, however, integrated with never before published work, they provide a comprehensive view of the development and direction of one of the nation's strongest Black feminist voices.
Hooks takes the title, Talking Back, from her childhood, when it meant forgetting one's place and speaking as an equal to adults.
She now employs it to mean moving out of silence into speech for all of the oppressed, colonized and exploited.
For women, she says, talking back is an expression of’ our movement from object to subject — the liberated voice.’
Questions for feminists Hook's voice is truly liberated in this volume as she posts problems for the feminist community, both Black and white.
In one of the book's earliest essays, titled Feminism a Transformational Politic, Hooks argues that some white feminists incorrectly locate the roots of wide-ranging global crises such as third world famine, ecological devastation, industrial contamination and the possibility of nuclear destruction solely in the fact of patriarchal domination.
Too many white women, she contends, deny the importance of racism, class exploitation and the parent-child relationship (structured as it is along the lines of weak versus strong) and their own roles of domination within that construct — all major factors in creating classes of powerless people.
Meanwhile, the book's last essay, titled Black Women and Feminism, takes to task those African-American feminists who are reluctant to acknowledge that by ignoring sexism in the Black community they have left unaddressed the abuse and subjugation of Black women by Black men.
All too often, says Hooks, Black feminists fail to critically challenge the flawed assumption that the survival of Black people’ depends on creating a cultural climate in which Black men can achieve manhood within paradigms constructed by white patriarchy’Those are just two examples of the powerfully pungent analyses contained in Talking Back.
Other essays examine subjects such as white supremacy, Black homophobia feminist politicization and male violence.
But throughout the book Hooks stresses the importance of women talking back, speaking out, as’ a gesture of resistance and affirmation of struggle.’
Barbara Day
INVENTED LIVES: Narratives of Black Women 1860-1960
Mary Helen Washington Virago Press £8.50
’ It is always something of a shock to see black women, sharing equally (and sometimes more than equally) in the labor and strife of black people, expunged from the text when history becomes shaped into what we call tradition.
Why is the fugitive slave, the fiery orator, the political activist, the abolitionist always represented as a black man?
How does the heroic voice and the heroic image of the black woman get suppressed in a culture that depended on her heroism for its survival?’
The Darkened Eye Restored
Invented Lives: Narratives of Black Women 1860-1960 poses this question, and answers it.
This latest book by the author of Any Woman's Blues, Mary Helen Washington, presents itself on many levels.
It is at once an anthology of selected short stories and extracts of narratives often Afro-American women writers over 100 years; a scholarly treatise and critique of their work; and a highly politicized and womanist questioning of the reasons for their relative obscurity up until the recent’ renaissance’in Black women's writing.
Each writer is introduced by Ms Washington and placed for us against her proper contemporary backdrop, so that we can see and understand some of the pressures and concerns that shaped her writing, her style and her narrative voice.
Not only are we able to discern the commonalities between these writers, but also the important differences.
There is then a carefully chosen extract from the writer's work, followed by a bibliography, which not only includes references to critical responses done at the time of publication but modern reassessments as well.
Ms Washington shows the Afro-american woman writer as an insistent voice raised against the conditions and stereotyping of Black people, while fighting sexist condescension and attempts at silencing her not only from the white literary establishment but from Black male critics as well.
This book is not just about reclaiming what was written but the why and the how, and always the cost.
There is Harriet Jacobs, 20 years after abolition, working as a nanny to four children in a house with lB rooms writing: Poor Hatty's name is so much in demand that I cannot accomplish much; if I could steal away and have two quiet months to myself…
As yet I have not written a single page by daylight.
So much has changed, but for many women writers that cry is eternal.
The constant writing against stereotype, afraid to say a truth, or create real characters, for fear that this could be used as a justification for institutionalised racism, was also a constant source of constraint for these writers.
It remains so today.
Throughout a century of writing, Afro-american women writers were concerned about the uplift of the image of Black women, and trying to create positive role models against a powerful foreground of racial hatred that preached Black inferiority and Black immorality.
And there, ranged against them too were institutions like the American Negro Academy, formed in 1897, whose male founders (Black, lest we forget), decided that Black women were not competent for such an intellectual atmosphere, and excluded them from membership.
There is much in this book to feed and delight, and much to make a Black woman bare her teeth, sweep those damned dishes off the kitchen table and reach for her pen.
Mary Helen Washington's book is a formidable and elegant work of scholarship, a reference work to dip into time and time again, and a reminder that there is no such thing as a free or an easy book.
It is a timely reminder to us of the true value and cost of’ rediscovered’writers, and a challenge to Black women writers, not just in the USA, but throughout the Black Diaspora to get our act together and chronicle our lives and our times for ourselves.
Barbara Burford
MY FATHER'S HOUSE: A Memoir of Incest and Healing
Sylvia Fraser Virago Press £4.95
My Father's House is an important addition to the literature on incest written by survivors.
Each public account makes a return to denial that much more difficult, validates other survivors, and challenges those of us who are not incest survivors to listen and understand.
Sylvia Fraser's book has a particular importance though.
It, more than any book I know, demonstrates how women can suppress all memory of the assaults for years.
This survival strategy, however, does not prevent women being affected by their experiences: My life was structured on the uncovering of a mystery.
As a child I survived by forgetting.
Later the amnesia became a problem as large as the one it was meant to conceal Forgetting protects one from pain what at the same time prevents a knowing and understanding of the self.
The structure of the book reinforces the central theme of different levels of knowing: Sylvia's’ known’past is intercut with italicised text of’thoughts, feelings and experiences pieced together form recently recovered memories’.
The fragmentation of memory and self is represented through a naming of the three selves' Sylvia constructed: the child self,’ The Child Who Knows had to be kept apart from both the adolescent self, and the adult self.
The way this separation affects her childhood, adolescence and adulthood is chronicled in the h book.
When the abuse begins she has fits, slowly she finds a way of coping by living a double life; her life, the one she chooses and controls, exists outside her father's house.
As an adolescent when’ sex invaded my peer world’; Sylvia constructs’Appearances’— a’glamour puppet’who plays by the rules (except she doesn't because she drops her many boyfriends before it gets serious).
As an adult she appears to have the perfect marriage and builds a successful career as a novelist.
But…
Reclaiming buried memories, uniting the fragmented self, is painful and complex.
Sylvia's journey to truth begins when she writes a novel about incest in 1972, she gave herself a clue in calling the book Pandora.
It is, however, another eleven years before she is able to’ open her box’and remember that her father abused her.
The first explicit recognition comes, as for many women, with an apparently trivial event which provides route into the buried memories combined with hearing a story of a child who has been recently abused.
It requires even more time and a visit to a hypnotherapist until she can reclaim the knowledge that the abuse lasted for many years.
The short chapter My Mother is one of the most moving.
Within a few pages we move through a recognition and rejection of the fantasy of the Perfect Mother, an understanding of her mothers' reality and an account of telling her mother, who Is at this point 80.
Sylvia's mothers' response is: Of course I believe you.
You are my daughter.
My Father's House also demonstrates how hard it is to achieve a resolution outside patriarchal language and meaning.
There are ways in which Sylvia still feels implicated in the abuse: she talks of’ my sexual relationship with my father’;’sharing a house and a crime’; and’forgiving my father so I can forgive myself’.
Our journeys to and through survival take place within a culture that encourages women to take responsibility for themselves, men and children.
A culture in which those who are abused pay the price — twice, three and more times over.
It's time to turn the tables.
Liz Kelly
WORDS FROM THE SAME HEART
Eds.
Margaret Bradstock Louise Wakeling Hale & Iremonger £8.95
While lesbian visibility has increased, community acceptance has not kept pace with it.
This comment from the editors in their introduction to this book spells out the dilemma for lesbians the whole world over.
Books by, and about, lesbians have been in comparative abundance in the last 5 years or so but it's debatable whether this literary output has served as insular affirmations or taken lesbian sexuality a little further down the road of acceptance.
18 Australian women of different ages, classes and experiences tell their stories, linked by the common factor of all being lesbians.
Australian author Helen Hodgman has spoken of the misconception of Australia as a liberal country, saying that it's no good for women, gays or (come to that) lizards.
These women, from that most suburban of countries, tell their tales in a multitude of contexts: discovering feminism, participating in activism on sexual politics, sexual awakening, structuring relationships.
One of the most remarkable contributions opens the book: Monte San, born in the 1880s, in an age where the then sovereign, Queen Victoria, refused to believe lesbians existed anywhere, let alone in the British Empire's colonies) Bradstock and Wakeling have done an admirable job in putting together a collection of personal essays that explore the inner and outer ramifications of being a lesbian, in the last hundred years of the myth-shrouded place that is Australia.
Rose Coils
11th INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S FILM FESTIVAL: Creteil, France 11 — 19 March 1989.
Located in the Parisian suburb of Creteil, this Festival offers a cornucopia of pleasures for women interested in women's cinema.
The thousands of women (and handful of men) who attended had the choice between: eleven feature films, fifteen long documentaries and twenty eight shorts.
A self-portrait of the actress Delphine Seyrig; a retrospective of the early films of Liliana Cavani; images of black women; and a series of rare archive films.
Not to mention recent films by French women directors at a local cinema and women's videos from Quebec.
Those with stamina were also able to join in discussions with filmmakers after many of the screenings.
My personal favourites were the archive films.
Nell Shipman was a Canadian actress turned script-writer, who in the 1920s started producing, directing and starring in her own films.
The result is a silent melodrama with a comic touch, as the heroine pilots the wounded hero through the desert to safety or drives her sledge across the snowy Canadian wastes.
Matilde Landeta's films were equally absorbing.
Mexico's first woman director, she made three features from 1948 — 1951 before production conditions forced her to turn to making shorts.
La Negra Angustias is the stirring tale of a black woman who survives the vicissitudes of being young, female and attractive, to follow her father's example and lead a band of rebels.
She falls in love, but soon realises that her political role is more important, and ends up riding off into the sunset with her troops to join Zapata.
The film includes an extraordinary moment when she orders the punishment of a man who had threatened to rape her so that he might never threaten women again
The Festival judges awarded the prize for the best feature film to Celia by Ann Turner from Australia.
This is a tale of childhood based on the growing revolt of a young girl as she combats the forces which seek to deprive her of her pet rabbit and her closest friends (the communist family next door).
But the convincing portrayal of childhood fantasies, fears and rituals is marred by the unnecessary melodramatic final sequence.
A public favourite was Pen Gui Qing (The Actress and her Ghost) by Huang Shu On, one of the seven women filmmakers currently employed by the Shanghai film studios.
In this film, the central character is a spirited young woman who defies conventions and insists on playing the heroic male roles of the Chinese opera, aided by the spirit of the legendary Zhong Kui whom she incarnates on stage.
The film combines a heroic tale of a woman's courage, talent and endurance with the spectacular sights and sounds of the Chinese opera.
The more experimental works of the Festival came from Germany.
I recommend both Die Jungfrauenmaschine described by director Monika Treut as a study of romantic love, and Johanna d'Arc of Mongolia by Ulrike Ottinger.
This film is quite literally fantastic.
Fabulous to look at, it constructs the encounter between women from the West travelling on the Trans-Siberian railway and a band of nomadic Mongolian women who offer them hospitality.
The documentary prizes went to Cover Up.
Behind the Iran Contra Affair by Barbara Trent, recently shown on British television; and to the British film Hell to Pay by Alexandra Anderson and Anne Cottringer, a study of the effects of the international economic situation on the lives of women in Bolivia.
The prize for the best European short also went to a British entry, Perfect Image by Maureen Blackwood.
This is a witty, thoughtful, provocative film in which two women of colour exuberantly explore what it means to be black and beautiful.
Then there was the world premiere of the latest film by Cone Serreau, France's top-grossing director, due to her smash hit Trois hommes et un couffin, re-made as Three Men and a Baby.
Her latest film Romuald et Juliette is about the extraordinary goings-on in a yoghurt manufacturing company which brings together the white boss and the Black night-cleaner who saves his bacon.
This French comedy, bound to be controversial, depended on the very same stereotypes Serreau claims to be subverting.
For example, Juliette — a Black mammy' figure caring for five kids all with different fathers.
Yet in spite of this regression to the use of Hollywood racist images, it was still applauded at Creteil.
Ten days and more of women's films is a good way of recharging one's batteries, and women thinking of going to next year's Festival might like to know that the organisers will arrange accommodation with local families for 50F a night (approx £5.)
Carrie Tarr
WORKING GIRL
Director:Mike Nichols
Mike Nichols' comedy drama Working Girl considers talent and ambition hidden in the secretarial pool of a Wall Street Brokerage house.
But forget any notion you might have that sisterhood land secretaries) are powerful.
This film makes the sugar coated antics of Jane Fonda, Dolly Parton et al in Nine To Five look like the militant tendency.
The struggle of Melanie Griffith as Tess McGill — from sec to exec — provides the perfect scenario not only for power dressing but for the enactment of many dominant-5 mythologies about women, work and social class.
Sigourney Weaver plays Katherine Parker, Tess McGill's Harvard educated upper class boss.
Katherine is a seductive piranha who has got it all: an immaculate haircut, marvellous job, magnificent Manhattan apartment filled with designer clothes, opulent furniture and boyfriend in the background.
Katherine has the sort of confidence only privilege can buy:’ Watch me Tess, learn from me’.
(Improbable dialogue provides much of the comedy.)
The audience can't help being delighted when business whizz Katherine goes skiing and breaks her leg.
We wish she'd broken her neck especially when we learn that she'd planned all along to rip off poor Tess's best idea.
And so the masquerade begins.
The underdog cuts off her glamourous tresses for’ serious hair’and begins to impersonate the boss.
Tess manages to infiltrate the world of high finance with a fabulous proposal that has the potential of taking her to the top.
Along the way there is the possibility of winning the heart of Katherine's boyfriend Jack Trainer (the romantic interest played by Harrison Ford),
When Katherine returns unexpectedly to do battle for Jack as well as the Deal, Tess needs more than power dressing to win.
On one level Working Girl appears to offer encouragement to working class women to’ go for it’.
Obviously there is pleasure in watching Hollywood recognise intelligent life in the typing pool.
But its’ encouragement’is limited.
Narrow ideas about the feminine inform the film, as do male fears about powerful women.
The image of Tess, vulnerable and innocent despite the shoulderpads, develops as an antidote to scheming female sophistication.
Katherine is shown to be all artifice, a Superbitch in the traditional Hollywood mould and here the Divine Sigourney steals the show.
Melanie Griffith as Tess failed to impress me.
She never seemed to completely shake the dumb blonde image, perhaps because her squeaky little girl voice operated to remind us all along that she was a Working Girl rather than Woman.
Lorraine Gamman.
CHOCOLATE Director:Clare Denis
Chocolate begins with the return of a young white French girl, France (Mireille Perrier), to the Cameroons, country of her birth.
She is offered a lift by a Black man, and as she gazes at the countryside slipping by, she reminisces about her childhood.
The film concentrates on the daily lives of the colonisers, particularly the tedium of that of France's mother Aimee (Giulia Boschi).
It shows her discomfort being in Africa, very often alone.
Her husband is a district governor and spends much of his time away.
Unable to cope with her displacement, she tries desperately to hold on to her Frenchness.
Her Frenchness, and whiteness, seem very much under threat as she is always surrounded by Africans, and Africa.
To maintain her control she mercilessly orders her servants about — This power is also exercised by the young girl France.
Clare Denis, the director, demonstrates that even though white women's fates depended on those of their fathers and husbands, they still upheld the values of white imperialism and benefitted from them.
The tedium is broken by the arrival of the passengers from a plane that has been forced to land nearby.
Each passenger is a different face of white colonialism: the overt racist who cannot bring himself to use a Black doctor to treat his sick wife; the hypocritical racist who secretly has an affair with his Black housekeeper; the white liberal who alternates between’ slumming’it with the natives, and living with the whites, not quite willing or able to give up his white privilege.
Chocolate tries to explore the experiences of white colonialism through the eyes of a young white girl and her mother.
In this way it is different from the bulk colonial films which concentrate on white men's adventures and dramas.
By placing the drama in the past, however, the film is always teetering on the edge of the familiar nostalgic colonial narrative.
As usual Black people are on the margins, and seem to be animated props.
Even the manservant, Protee (Isaach de Bankole-Noir et Blanc gains prominence only in relation to France, as her’ friend’, and to Aimee, as a vessel for her repressed sexual desire.
When Black people speak to each other, their voices are silenced, as they are never subtitled.
The director may be trying to demonstrate the situation as it was then, but in not offering the viewer some entree into the little we see of the Black peoples interaction with each other, she colludes with it.
Inge Blackman
SEX CHANGE-SHOCK HORROR PROBE!
ELEVENTH HOUR
Channel 4
April 24th, 11.05pm
In Kristiene Clarke's film, four transexuals-three male-to-female, one female-to-male — share their diverse experiences of, and attitudes towards, what the medical establishment refers to as’ gender reassignment’.
It opens rather clinically, with a sound-and-vision sequence featuring heartbeats, hospital interiors and instruments and a how-its-done Idiot's Guide.
The sum effect of this is to prompt a cross-your-legs-and-cringe reaction.
The four people featured Rachel Webb, Stephanie Anne Lloyd, Mark Rees and Adele Anderson — all clearly have very different feelings towards the physical and emotional pain and prejudice that they have experienced.
In Rachel Webb's case this meant losing the right to see her daughter,’ The judge said I gave up my rights as a parent the day I had my operation’.
Mark Rees went to the European Court of Human Rights to get his birth certificate altered to read’ boy’instead of’girl’.
However, the film seems to opt out of tacking some of the thornier issues that arise whenever transexuality is discussed.
For instance, there is no exploration of whether gender identity can be constructed in this way or what told these people that they were not the’ right’sex.
Mark Rees' comments in these directions seem particularly confused and confusing;’ I was attracted to women but not as a lesbian I felt totally wrong in that role.
A transexual's one aim in life is to change roles, both socially and physically.’;
and towards the end of the film,’ If (transexuals) were normal, they wouldn't be transexuals.’
Words such as’ normal’and’roles’are so weighed down with morally conservative pressures no responsible film-maker should let them be thrown in so lightly and without challenge.
Mainly because of this, there is a failure to answer the question,’ Why?’.
It is only one of many questions which this programme poses but refuses to answer.
Rose Colls
STOP SAM BROWN A&M RECORDS
The first thing that struck me on listening to the new debut album by Sam Brown was her voice; no syrupy coyness here, just a warm direct immediacy which is absolutely winning.
Unlike many of her chart companions Sam can sing, notes are elongated and given fullness without a quiver.
Beautifully arranged and produced many of the tracks seem to have a full orchestral backing-the wonders of modern technology Never-the-less this album has great atmosphere evoked by the fact that the songs fit smoothly and easily within the singers' vocal range.
This may be attributed to the fact that Sam has co-written and produced this album, a standard which many women artist seem to be setting.
Gone are the days when women recording artists were tightly packaged and adorned with ribbons.
Indeed last year was a marked one for’ sisters doing it for themselves’.
Tracy Chapman, Tanika Tikaram, Michelle Shocked et al.
All of them showing that they can be trusted to write and sometimes' produce good music.
Full of surprises, the first side of the album ends with a 20 second operatic burst about of all things a cup of tea, sounds comical, but shows a command of vocal security on Sam's part.
The best track for me was This Feeling a clear and intricate guitar backing, topped with haunting melodious vocals.
The mix of strong bluesy ballads and a few rock numbers combine to present an original album.
Having come from backing singer to lead, Sam is now enjoying well deserved success with the title song Stop.
Elorine Grant
TONI CHILDS LIVE AT THE NEW MARQUEE
Originally from California, Toni has been striving to achieve musical recognition for the past ten years, playing in LA bands and doing backing vocals for Berlin.
Inspiration, she says, initially came from seeing Pink Floyd in concert back in the early 70s.
Union is the compelling debut album, that Toni took three years to write and record.
If there had been any apprehension involving the time taken to complete the recording, there is certainly none reflected in the finished product.
Union is comprised of a mixture of emotionally weighed melodies, involving interesting drum rhythms and brilliant backing vocals courtesy of New Generation and the Sibane Semaswati Singers, choirs from Zambia and Swaziland respectively.
From Stop Your Fussin, with a subtle reggae beat to the haunting Where's The Ocean and finally the memorable Let The Rain Come Down, insinuating animation and acquiescence from a failed relationship, the album is tremendously good and truely ambitious.
The European Tour began, surprisingly I thought, at The New Marquee,(now situated at Charing Cross Road, a far cry from the nights of perspiration experienced at the’ old’Marquee.
Shortly after 7.30pm it was announced that no support band would appear and Toni would be on stage at 9.00pm, the audience having to combat frustration and anticipation, for over an hour and a half, intensified sales at the two bars rapidly.
After overhearing comments surrounding Toni's gender and nationality — by fellow Americans, I was relieved when she finally appeared on stage at 9.15pm.
The predominant black surroundings of the Marquee walls made Toni's choice of traditional African dress in all black an unfortunate one.
In addition, the stage lighting appeared extremely dim,(a tasteful mixture of green and red) and desperately lacked direct spot lights.
The atmosphere, by now tense, began to’ warm’to the familiar intro of the re-released single Zimbabwe but where were the backing vocals?
None of the members of the bands mouths were even twitching, and I felt immensely deflated.
Toni's voice, which reminds me of Phoebe Snow's’ growled’through the opening song, as she moved gracefully across the stage barefooted, her hand extended out, portraying a dance of its own, twisting and turning almost in slow motion.
During the beginning of the first set, Toni feeling the desire to communicate with the audience, commenced with the question,’ How many of you took Ecstasy last year?’
Ecstasy?
Last year?
I failed to see the connection.
Finally after unnecessary cries of’ Get on with it’, they continued the brief first set with yet another track from the album, Tin Drum; during which Toni tried for an audience call and response.
Other members of the band remained quite tense.
Obviously having only played a couple of gigs, including Radio City (New York and appearing on The Grammy Awards, their inexperience showed.
Yet on returning to the stage for the first encore, after the first set which had lasted only 35 minutes, they all actually began to sound like a live band and you momentarily forgot about the keyboard player triggering off the backing vocals, and the percussionists aided by drum sequencers.
Toni's voice strongly improved and the guitarist could be heard For the final encore, singing The Dreamer, Toni crouched down at the front of the stage with a candle; personally I found this a bit dated.
During this short European tour I hope Toni can re-organise the visuals which are so important to live musicians.
Despite a minority of hecklers in the crowd, Toni Childs was well appreciated by the audience who I'm sure are looking forward to her return.
Carole Dwelly
REDEFINING THE WHORE
Artemesia Gentileschi was a painter of extraordinary talent, considered in the 17th Century as second only to Caravaggio.
At the age of 17 she was raped by her perspectives tutor, Tassi.
She was taken to court and tortured with thumb screws to prove her innocence, the trial’ sentenced’her even though her rapist was found guilty.
Tassi was jailed but by then the slander of Artemesia's name was complete: she was branded a whore, later married off to a stranger and banished from Rome.
Artemesia Gentileschi is the subject of Dei Treanor's new play Redefining the Whore which is part of the Soho Poly's Workstage programme to be performed in April.
The idea for the play came about while Dei was still at college, working at a women's refuge and writing a play about battered women.
She looked for a picture that would be suitable for a poster and came across the Suzannah and the Elder's painting.
This was the very first painting that Artemesia completed at the age of 17.
Dei based her final dissertation on Artemesia giving a feminist art perspective on her work and that of the 17th century writer Aphra Behn.
Her research on Artemesia continued and having her idea for this play excepted by Soho Poly's Blueprint young writers programme gave her the chance to take the play into its performance phase by Workstage
The play surrounds and only goes up to the time of Artemesia's rape.
As its title suggests.
it redefines the circumstance and repercussion of the rape.
’ There are two scenes after the rape which are split images of the aftermath of the rape from Artemesia's view point.
It includes a discussion between Tassi and his accomplice Cauley and how they conspired to make Artemesia believe herself betrothed to Tassi.
He also persuades Cauley into moving in on Artemesia now that she has been’ deflowered’.
It reveals how Artemesia's name was slandered.’
The final scene sets up the image of Suzannah and the Elders echoing the painting while reinforcing Tassi and Cauley's conspiracy against Artemesia in the scene before.
’ In the play there is the prostitute character who represents Suzannah in the sense that she modeled for Artemesia's painting; She is also a hint at Tassi's own murky past — he was tried for attempting to murder his wife (a prostitute'- proof of his duplicity since he would not have been able to marry Artemesia under any circumstance.
No less culpable was Artemesia's father,’ The trial only took place because Artemesia's father, Aratsio, considered the rape a violation of one of his household objects which was now devalued.This was the only reason Tassi was taken to court, this and the fact that he stole some of Aratsio's paintings.’
The fact that Tassi was already married only exacerbated Aratsio's belief in himself as the aggrieved party.
It was Artemesia who was tortured into proving that she was a virgin when she was raped and had to dispute all the’ witnesses’brought in by Tassi who claimed that they had had Artemesia too.’
The abuse of Artemesia has continued till today because as recently as 1977 many of her paintings including Suzannah and the Elders had been attributed to her father (a painter who was a close friend of Caravaggio since it was not uncommon for a male member of the family or tutor to take credit for any talent shown by a woman under their’ guidance’.
Many of Artemesia's paintings are’ lost’and are yet to be uncovered.
Using what little facts as she could chronologically find Dei then placed a perspective on this through’ reading about the time she lived in and finding out about women's lives in the 17th century Rome.
A lot of my work was based on M.D. Gerrand's essay on Suzannah and the Elders.
When I read essays by male Art Historians I had to knock out a lot of crap like when they talk about the rape in inverted commas…
The exploitation of women by men and the society they make-up is another facet of the play.
’ I am very interested in attitudes to women, how women are viewed because of the stereotypes perpetuated by men.
There are three stereotypes examined in the play.
there is Suzannah the whore in biblical legend and the prostitute who models as Suzannah, their stories parallel with that of Artemesia who because she was raped changes from virgin to whore all three were exploited and abused by men.
There is also a chaperone figure who is the mother/virgin figure.’
Artemesia pays dearly for a change of’ image’that is not of her own making or choice.
In redefining the events that occured, Dei Treanor's play redefines the truth of Artemesia's rape and her rightful place in Art History.
Ironically, it was Artemesia's horrendous experience that gave her talent focus, strength and direction — hence her paintings of heroic women and paintings that capture the disturbing sense of sexual threat and graphic display of woman's vengence — voicing Artemesia Gentileschi's own anger and rage.’
Perhaps fuelling Dei's own fervour,’ If the story's there and is worth telling then it doesn't matter if it's men or women involved in the telling — it's got to be told!’and I can hardly wait.
Jennifer Mourin
MY MOTHER SAID I NEVER SHOULD Written by Charlotte Keatley The Royal Court, London FROM MY POINT OF VIEW Written by Steve Berkoff) On Tour
Charlotte Keatley's My Mother Said]Never Should has been greeted with great acclaim by the male critical establishment who appear unable to apply their usual standards to the work of a young woman.
This is extremely patronising and helps no-one least of all the playwright.
Keatley's play deals with women across four generations order to show the way families in generate certain themes.
All four are, for example, victimised in different ways by the taboo of illegitimacy and the play focuses on Rose, who has been kept from the knowledge that Jackie is her mother by grandmother Margaret who has taken on the maternal role.
Keatley articulates well the mixture of possessiveness and resentment that motivates Margaret, and the denouncement. where Rose discovers the truth is sensitively handled.
But there are a lot of flaws: the idea of combining four generations involves weaving back and forth in time which works occasionally.
but leaves us with a sense of the characters inhabiting a kind of vacuum or time warp.
Rose's great-grandmother Doris is splendidly realised and Elizabeth Bradley gives her a heartening warmth and solidity.
Similarly Shirley Henderson as the bolshie young Rose is highly credible, and the relationship between the two is easily the most successful thing in the play.
The two women in the middle are the problem; here Keatley never really gets away from the stereotypical images of woman plus career (Jackie) and woman minus c (Margaret.)
These characters seem derived from abstract knowledge rather than lived experience.
Which cannot be said of Volcano Theatre's gritty down-to-earth production of Steve Berkoff's From My Point of View.
Berkoff portrays a lonely middle-aged woman who has had more than her fair share of gropes in corners and one-night stands.
Berkoff's customary disgust with the human race is here directed at male dominance and brutality.
Fern Smith and Stephen Fisher both act and direct with great energy and gusto; the choreography by Smith is good enough to stand or its own.
The change of role and gender in the second half is extremely disturbing; somehow Fisher's transformation into a mute, trembling wall-flower stresses the woman's vulnerability even more plaintively than she could do herself.
It also makes the point that our sexuality is squeezed arbitrarily into narrow forms, forcing us to suppress many elements of ourselves at great Shobana Jeyasingh is impressive both as a performer.
choreographer and for her challenges to sexual stereotyping within dance.
She presented two works at the Purcell Room (South Bank Centre against an impressive set of three long, transparent cloth strips in vibrant red, yellow and blue.
First was a classical Indian dance (Bharatha Natyam style entitled Thas Avatar in which Shobana drew the audience into the dance with her powerful.
expressive movement.
Her authoritative performance made the superb mime and rhythms invigorating to watch.
Miniatures…the second dance, was performed to Michael Nyman's score for a string quartet created from rhythmic structures of South Indian dance music devised by Shobana.
This East/West combination breaks new ground with breath-taking results.
Rape on Screen
Women tend to get a raw deal from the movies.
So when Hollywood makes a film about a brutal gang rape in the back of a bar, written and directed by men, the reaction tends to be why on earth would we want to put ourselves through that in the name of entertainment?
It's a question answered by The Accused.
It's hardly surprising that we should be deeply suspicious of any attempt to deal with a subject as charged as rape.
After all, rape and/or the fear of rape is a real and constant part of women's lives in a way that other cinematic staples, such as murder and mayhem, are not.
Since so much of our emotional energy, often subconsciously, is spent dealing with this fear, it's important to have control over how we choose to confront it.
The continuum of sexual threat and violence of which rape is one extreme, pervades the movies as it does life, but rarely takes centre stage.
Very few films are about rape, although it crops up all over the place — from the narrative device launching an endless cycle of Death Wish movies, to general’ scene-setting’in war movies and crime thrillers, or used with sublime insensitivity to illuminate (male) character: Robert De Niro raping his childhood sweetheart in Once Upon A Time In America, Bob Hoskins forcing himself on the maid in The Lonely Passion of Judith Hearne.
And of course, the sheer sadistic titillation of A Clockwork Orange or Julie Christie impregnated by a power mad computer in Demon Seed.
The films that have tackled rape directly have been a strangely mixed bunch, confused in their intentions and their execution.
They tend to fall within a broad category of exploitation, a genre characterised by a simplistic ethos of violent action.
Or even if not wholeheartedly within this tradition, to posit some form of violent action as the only solution.
It can be fun seeing the tables turned, but it is at best a mixed experience.
Quite apart from any ethical considerations of indulging in vicarious blood lust, the parameters of these films are staked out by men, they're the male view of what women want.
Tony Garnett's 1982 Handgun for instance, ends up celebrating gun lore, vindicating the vigilante ethos and subverting its heroine at every turn, finally implying that the way to redemption as a complete and fulfilled human being is through the absorbing and conquering of macho values.
Abel Ferrara's Ms 45 Angel of Vengance is at least a wittier variation on the same theme, played as straightforward exploitation entertainment, with men as most of its victims.
Even the forthcoming Australian film Shame, informed by feminism to an extent, conforms to this pattern.
Its attempt to combine serious social comment with an escapist action movie format cause it to fall heavily between two stools.
It's fun to see the no-nonsense, motor-bike-riding heroine beating up on the men in true fantasy-heroic style, but her attempts to encourage her young protege in self-defence end in disaster, making the messages it gives out totally confused and its solutions seeming no more realistic than Ms 45 storing her rapist in the fridge and blowing male scum off the street.
The movie that provoked most debate around rape and its representation before The Accused, was Lamont Johnson's 1976 film Lipstick, which at least did make some attempt to make connections between the rape and the wider social implications of how society constructs images of women.
Margaux Hemingway is the fashion model who is raped by her kid sister's music teacher in a brutal sequence that emphasises his desire to humiliate her.
Many women are unable to get beyond this sequence, finding It so graphic that the act of watching it becomes close to an act of violation in itself.
It certainly makes it quite clear that rape is about violence, power and control, and not a sexual act, but in doing so, it arguably indulges in a voyeurism equally sadistic.
When she prosecutes, she finds herself on trial, her profession equated with sexual provocation, and advertising images used to discredit her.
When her assailant is released and rapes again, her only recourse is yet again violent revenge.
Revenge, in fact, is the key to all these movies, and also pinpoints one of the things that makes The Accused so different.
The bullet in the groin at the end of Lipstick may be cathartic, and we may take a certain ghoulish delight in watching Farrah Fawcett in Extremities debate whether to bury alive in the garden the attempted rapist she has tied up in her house.
But the solutions posed by these films are strictly on the level of fantasy (for most of us), and moreover are individual solutions to a particular set of circumstances.
Each film is resolved with the events which take place neatly closed off and contained, and with a return to’ normality’.
The ending of The Accused, on the other hand, offers up the possibility of change.
The Accused engages with specific, widely held myths about rape in order to dramatically explode them.
For instance, deliberately setting Sarah Tobias (Jodie Foster) up in the extreme of a situation that many people — women and men — would say was’ asking for it’, and graphically giving the lie to that pernicious concept.
And by doing so, The Accused rejects the assumptions of the other films, saying in effect that if this cannot be said of this woman then it can never be said of any women in any situation.
We may know these things on an intellectual level, but there's nothing like having the emotional truth of them brought home on a gut level-none of us are free from some degree of the self-blame that makes so many women feel responsible for their own rape.
And the relief of seeing this woman out for a good time, smoking dope, getting drunk, flirting and still not deserving to be raped!
Yes, it is outrageous that we feel grateful for that, but the outrage should be directed at all the other movies that still imply the opposite.
Thelma Agnew in last month's Spare Rib, felt that The Accused’ isn't quite brave enough to treat (rape) as part of a continuum of sexual violence, experienced by women in their daily lives.’
In fact, I would argue that not only does it do this, but that it goes much further, indicting all men in complicity for rape and insisting that they share the guilt.
And linking this complicity with the way men operate at all levels of society, banding together, bolstering each other up to create and maintain their power base.
In fact it comes remarkably close to a conceptualisation of Susan Brownmiller's famous assertion that’ Rape is a conscious process of intimidation by which all men keep all women in a state of fear.’
It does this by having the men who encouraged the rape prosecuted as well as the attackers, but more than this by drawing connections.
Connections between the men's behaviour in the bar and the roomful of college boys who cheer a news report discrediting Sarah Bob, one of the rapists gets up and takes a bow — and crucially, with the male provenance of the District Attorney's office.
Katheryn Murphy (Kelly McGillis), who is assigned to the case, is clearly marked out as one of the boys to begin with: her brusque manner, her determination always to win (which leads to her plea-bargaining behind Sarah's back to ensure a conviction of the rapists, but on a lesser charge) and her interaction with the men from her office — discussing the case with them at the male territory of a sports match
When Sarah forces Katheryn to face up to the reality of the emotional impact the rape has had on her (Sarah's) life, Katheryn's allegiances switch.
She allies herself with Sarah, and rejects the men, who instantly close ranks against her.
When she insists on pursuing the case against the onlookers, her boss first ridicules her, then revealingly loses his temper, telling her she's finished — win or lose.
The switch from camaraderie to aggression in her working relationships subtly mirrors what we see happen in the rape.
And significantly, her boss and colleague sit in on the trial, revealing their emotional investment in what's at stake.
The Accused is a film about men versus women, for once, unequivocally expressing a female viewpoint.
Nowhere more so than in the rape scene itself, which, in marked contrast to the humiliation of Lipstick, makes the men the object of spectacle, focusing on their behaviour, not Sarah's suffering.
The end result is a radical and strongly challenging film, dominated by its two female stars.
A rare chance to see our experiences as women validated and endorsed on the big screen in a powerful and yes, entertaining movie about a subject that matters profoundly to us.
Now, that's a reason to go to the movies.
Penny Ashbrook
Genetic Engineering: Part Two
Last month saw the start of a three-part series by Patricia Spallone on genetic engineering (GE), which looked at some applications on plants, bacteria, viruses and animals and the need for feminists to put biotechnology, the industrialisation of life on the political agenda.
They were but a few examples giving testimony to campaigns against the commercial exploitation of living things for the creation of products and processes for industry, agriculture and research science.
The second part of this series investigates the new reproductive and genetic technologies, that is, developments in the sphere of human reproduction, and will look at how pro-fertility and anti-fertility technologies (such as hormonal contraceptives) are two sides of population control, and, how the use of science, scientific principles and technology are directly and indirectly being used to serve the aims of a whole host of interests at the expense of women.
New reproductive technologies — in vitro fertilisation (IVF, the’ test-tube baby’procedures), human embryo research, gene analysis of embryos, etc — are recent examples in a long line of high-tech medical interventions into women's fertility.
IVF AS INFERTILITY THERAPY
IVF was invented for research purposes to study eggs and fertilisation outside the female body.
As a medical procedure it was first used for women who could not become pregnant because of blocked or missing fallopian tubes.
It entails removing eggs from a woman's ovaries and then fertilising them with sperm in a laboratory dish.
egg removal is a surgical procedure, virtually always preceeded by the administration of fertility drugs and hormones to the woman so that multiple eggs will be produced during the menstrual cycle, and to control the time of ovulation.
It requires fertility monitoring with ultrasound, and blood or urine tests.
If all goes as planned, fertilised eggs are placed in the woman's womb in the hope that pregnancy will result.
IVF is a highly unsuccessful and dangerous technology.
Thousands upon thousands of women enter programmes, but few leave with babies.
The success rate' is well below 10 percent.
And possible harmful effects sink into the depths of the medical literature, such as: the serious condition of over stimulation of a woman's ovaries and other adverse effects from the powerful drugs and hormones used on women in earlier fertility treatments, as well as for IVF now; higher risks of miscarriage and ectopic pregnancy and damage to women's fertility from the invasive methods.
When a birth does occur, there is an above average number of Caesarean sections, multiple births, congenital (at birth) problems in babies, and more women seem to suffer from postnatal depression.
Two women are known to have died during egg removal, one in Brazil and one in Israel, and there is a fear of yet unknown long term health risks.
Yet for over a decade now, the media, medical scientists and the Government's Warnock Report (1984) on these developments, have promoted these and other so-called advances as benevolent products of a progressive science.
Though powerful and open to abuse, these authorities claim they can be offered to women as reproductive options, giving hope to the childless, to prevent unwanted pregnancies, and to screen for terrible illnesses it foetuses.
IVF AS EUGENIC TECHNOLOGY
This sort of rhetoric masks the policy impetus and philosophy behind these’ choices’: two theories of population which uphold the very exploitative social relations feminists are struggling against.
These twin population theories assert that 1.
Population growth in developing countries and by some (ethnic) groups in industrial countries is’ out of control’and needs to be decreased.
2.
Population’ quality’— the types of babies born — can and should also be controlled through genetic technologies, from genetic screening to perhaps even genetic engineering of human embryos.
There are other, related reasons why these technologies, and not other choices, are allowed to happen; for instance, the fascination for scientists in pursuing knowledge of women's fertility, with no appreciation that women are the human guinea pigs of such a science.
The word eugenics (’ good in stock’) was coined in the late nineteenth century by English scientist, Francis Galton, to mean a science of selective breeding based on biological theories about the influences of heredity on human characteristics and behaviour.
The eugenics movement was a dumping ground for racial, sexual and class prejudices, extending already existing social control and punishment of people identified as’ inferior’.
And eugenics was the scientific basis of horrific practices, from coercive sterilisation laws in some countries, to the Nazi racial hygienic programme aimed at Jewish people Black people, Gypsies, lesbians and gay men.
Racism is inherent in eugenics.
Population anxiety among the ruling classes was crystallized during the colonial periods of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
It began with the Malthusian theory that population quantity was growing out of hand, and was followed by Galton's addition, a perceived erosion of’ quality’population.
These theories became the basis of twentieth century population control programmes directed at limiting reproduction among Black people in developing countries as well as in industrialised countries.
In Women's Body, Women's Right: A Social History of the Birth Control Movement in America, Linda Gordon showed that the impetus for’ family planning’in the US was motivated by eugenicists' desires to stop Black women from reproducing.
Gregory Pincus, the’ father’of the birth control Pill (whose previous work had been in IVF), decided to go into family planning after he was convinced of a’population explosion’.
He and others were not pursuing the Pill on behalf of women's reproductive autonomy and freedom.
Theories of’ overpopulation’assert that the world would be better off if,(some) people reproduce less, despite the fact that starvation and poverty are the results of global economic exploitation, not lack of resources.
Similarly, hiding discrimination against disabled people, population’ quality control’thinking implies that many kinds of disability are inevitable and can only be eliminated by genetic control.
Genetic technology is changing the meaning of cause.
Genes become the cause, and genetic technologies the solution.
Yet genes do not act in isolation, and very little is known about social and environmental factors contributing to many illnesses and disabilities, including those tagged’ genetic’.
What is known is ignored in assessments of genetic technology.
Prevention becomes genetic screening or’ gene therapy’instead of the actual prevention of ill-health in the first place: good primary health care, cleaning the environment of reproductive health hazards (radiation contamination etc.), adequate nutrition and housing, attention to dangerous prescription drugs (a lesson learned from thalidomide), and so on.
Moreover, much disability is a social category.
Supportive social conditions enable some of us while disabling others.
The crux is this.
Alongside the medical/science pursuit, and promises of perfect babies, are all those other life-scorning technologies of progress that are destroying the environment and the health and fertility of ourselves and our children.
Genetic control is now at the forefront of medical, scientific and state enthusiasm over the new reproductive technologies.
Among its aims is a new eugenics: selective breeding.
For instance, IVF pioneer Robert Edwards spoke to the Eugenics Society of London (yes, they still exist) in 1982 about how the new technologies may serve their social aims.
And the prestigious science journal Nature endorsed the come-back of eugenics in a 1984 editorial entitled’ Artificial fertilisation made natural’.
Today, in the name of development aide, many Black women all over the world are being forced to accept Western anti-fertility technologies, or are being sterilised without realising it.
Finally, recent research by feminists and historians in the Federal Republic of Germany is unearthing the links between reproductive technology and experiments in obstetrics and gynaecology done during the Nazi regime.
Heidrun Kaupen-Haas of the Institute of Medical Sociology at the University of Hamburg, believes that the view that these technologies are new and positive is misleading.
’ Population control in Nazi Germany — to promote those’worthy of reproduction’and to eliminate those’unworthy of reproduction’influenced the international research in genetic and reproductive technologies’, she writes.
She pinpoints specific institutions, like the Institute for Research in Reproductive Biology, and how they were normalised after the war, showing that the work of researchers themselves, like Carl Clauberg, was continued and became part of present-day reproductive science.
The’ new’eugenics is being promoted as’better’than the’old’eugenics.
It is supposedly not oppressive, but about genes, health, medical benefits and reproductive options.
But there are extensive similarities.
Someone still has to make a decision about who should be encouraged to reproduce, and as in the past, women still carry the physical, social and emotional burdens of the eugenicists' plans.
IVF extended the range of medical science interference in women's fertility.
Removing many eggs at once from women's bodies, has led to’ egg donation’.
One woman can’ donate’her eggs (if they are judged good by medical scientists) to another woman who has no available eggs herself or to a woman whose eggs are considered’inferior’.
egg donors are’ matched’for their traits and race (as are sperm donors).
The first register of egg donors was recently established in England.
EGG DONATION
The eugenic application of’ egg donation’is important.
IVF, at first touted as a’ last resort’measure for women with blocked tubes, is now being promoted for another group of women, those who can become pregnant but who are’carriers’of inheritable conditions such as haemophilia, and who may give birth to a child with the condition.
So with another turn of the technological screw, more women are earmarked as needing technology to give birth.
The variations seem endless.
For instance, IVF embryos can be used for a kind of surrogacy where a woman bears a child for a couple with the embryo created from their egg and sperm.
In the US, Gena Corea, author of The Mother Machine, reports that John Stehura — president of Bionetics Foundation Inc., an organisation in the surrogacy business — predicted that in the future, the surrogate industry will hire poor women who will accept lower fees, and that women from Mexico and Central America could be procured if they are not donating their own’ genetic material’(eggs) to make babies for white, North American couples.
In Austria, certain IVF doctors have been buying eggs from women in the public at large.
The women are given fertility drugs to stimulate their ovaries, and are paid only if the doctor retrieves eggs for his programme.
One woman reported being paid US $10,000 (£450).
The doctors have recently agreed not to buy women's eggs anymore after they were exposed by two feminist journalists whom they threatened to take to court for libel.
Gena Corea, a co-founder of the National Coalition Against Surrogacy quoted from the American Fertility Society's ethical report,’ The primary medical indication for use of a surrogate mother is the inability of a woman to provide with the genetic (the egg) or the gestation component (the uterus) for childbearing’.
But Corca adds,’ A man's desire to conceive his own genetic child is transformed in the report into a’medical indication’for buying a woman's body’.
Genetic screening, a legacy of the eugenics movement, was invented after the second world war and brought to medicine by eugenicists eager to ease public acceptance.
It has become a common occurence, and its roots within eugenics have been hidden.
The fact of its history perhaps explains much of the ambivalence women feel towards it.
EUGENIC SCREENING
Genetic screening during pregnancy may be done on fluid or tissue samples surrounding the foetus which are obtained using amniocentesis or the newer chorion villi sampling (CVS) procedure.
IVF opened the door to genetic testing of embryos in the laboratory.
Such embryo screening is called embryo biopsy or preimplantation diagnosis.
At least two teams here, one at Hammersmith Hospital in London, and one at the University of Edinburgh, are about ready to screen 2-4 day old embryos.
Today, genetic screening is expanding due to genetic engineering technology.
In the past, testing was directed at proteins made by cells or at the structures of cells.
Genetic engineering allows scientists to directly analyse genes or genemarkers' (pieces of genetic material DNA, close to the gene of interest).
The gene or’ gene’marker might be associated with a condition like Huntingdon's Chorea.
Gene analysis also means that conditions such as cleft palate and cancer which are known to be caused by a number of social and environmental factors are being looked at for their’ genetic component’.
The capability of removing women's eggs and placing them in another woman's womb, has given rise to the question for the first time in human history who is the biological mother?
Is she the woman who gives her egg to another?
What about the woman who is pregnant, labours and gives birth, but not from her own egg?
This whole ethical dilemma — and the technology that produces it — has taken on a male viewpoint: egg, sperm and genes are centre stage.
Women, pregnancy, birth and parenthood are secondary.
WHO IS THE MOTHER?
The question arises again with surrogacy.
A major reason for surrogacy arrangements in Western countries today has been to allow men in heterosexual couples to continue their’ bloodline’when their partners, the women, have fertility problems.
In the US magazine Science for the People, Rita Arditti commented that while the sperm donor is continually called the’ natural father’, the woman who becomes pregnant is in fact being hired as a surrogate wife and is never called the’natural mother’, but the’surrogate mother’.
Although the Government's Warnock Report recommended banning surrogacy, many doctors and IVF scientists disagree.
Soon after the Surrogacy Arrangements Act 1985 outlawed surrogacy contracts, members of the British Medical Association at their annual meeting voted by a small majority, that surrogacy should be allowed as infertility’ therapy’for couples who could not have a biological child any other way.
A major US body, the American Fertility Society, feels the same.
Significantly, gene analysis tests are a new and lucrative money-making scheme for medical supply and pharmaceutical companies, and the new biotechnology industry.
Human geneticists in the FDR have used cost-benefits analysis to argue that eugenic abortion is cheaper than social support of the parents of disabled children and disabled people.
Genetic screening is also being promoted as a way to eliminate genetic (inherited) disability.
But its advocates fail to mention that, in the first place, most disabilities occur after birth from accidents or illness; secondly, much illness and disability in newborn babies is not inherited, but is the result of something that happened during pregnancy; and thirdly, that medicine is now moving towards a gene-oriented approach to reproduction and health an approach which increases the occasions for screening and raises the questions, who shall decide who s’ fit to breed’, with which genes, and who's’fit’to be born?
Feminists active in the disability rights movement have criticized the way many women have used the fear of disability to argue for abortion rights, and ask us to reassess our relationship to genetic screening.
At the 1985 Women's Hearings on Reproductive Technology at the European Parliament, Theresia Degener recognised the difficulty, saying’ fear of the birth of a handicapped child is all too justified because for mothers it usually means isolation and discrimination, giving up their jobs and/or poverty…
Only too often these economic and social conditions are confused with the disability itself’.
Now that scientists have access to human embryos, the question of genetic engineering arises.
After all, it has already been done on animals like mice and sheep.
GENETIC ENGINEERING
Despite many governments's hesitations about genetic engineering in human embryos and toetuses, it is an idea that has arrived in the form of’ gene therapy’.
For women, this again means another medical reason for interference in our fertility and pregnancy, and it also begs questions about risks to the resulting children, and the ethics of having scientists make such profound changes to human beings.
There are two types of gene therapy.
One approach alters the genetic composition in bodily cells, but not in the sex cells (eggs and sperm).
The second approach, directed at the fertilised egg, would affect all the cells of the growing embryo, including the sex cells eventually.
This means that the genetic change would be passed on should the genetically engineered egg become a person who reproduces.
Some policy commentators see the impact of embryo manipulation as a good thing, akin to the acquisition of language or putting men on the moon.
In general, though, it was considered taboo — a place scientists should not tread — until the tide apparently turned at the 1986 international conference of human geneticists in Berlin, where participants openly discussed the possibilities.
Gene manipulation of foetuses in the womb is yet another prospect.
’ It is already possible to apply (gene analysis) methods for the early foetal diagnosis of these disorders (haemophilia and other anaemias), and over the next few years it may even be possible to replace defective genes’, wrote the geneticist David Weatherall in an article on the new Institute for Molecular Medicine in Oxford.
Much has been left unsaid.
From the beginning, scientists have argued that they’ need’to conduct human embryo research for’basic’research in all sorts of areas, not just reproduction.
Indeed Nature predicted that the next big Nobel Prize winning question is’ how do the genes in the fertilised egg direct the course of human development?’.
This knowledge, the scientific quest about the’ mystery’of life, requires women's precious eggs.
Egg banks are appearing in Singapore and the United States, and with over 10,000 embryos in deep freeze around the world, even mainstream critics are worried about stockpiling and unscrupulous trafficking.
It is difficult to assess exactly what all these developments mean individually, but when you step back and look at them as a whole trend, the implications become clear.
Even as there is a movement among women towards women-controlling our own sexuality and reproduction, childbirth, and a return to midwifery principles, the new reproductive and genetic technologies are asserting a model for scientific control of reproduction, and one that is industrial: these methods are big money-makers for the biotechnology industry, the old and new pharmaceutical and medical supply companies.
IVF is already spreading to developing countries, and it is easy to imagine that other new methods will be introduced as well.
The Chinese government for example, are allowing IVF programmes to prove their sensitivity in the wake of the One Child Family policy, and also because researchers are bored with the same old contraceptive research.
Sex is a genetic trait, biologically speaking.
In humans, most females have an XX pair of chromosomes, while most males have an XY pair.
(Chromosomes are large structures in the cell where genes are packaged).
BOY OR GIRL: YOU CHOOSE
Sex can be determined during pregnancy with amniocentesis, CVS or ultrasound scanning.
In India, at least 78,000 female toetuses were aborted between 1979 and 1983 solely because of their sex.
The women's movement there formed the Forum Against Sex Predetermination, holding rallies and protests.
There have also been reports of selective abortion of girl babies in Britain, the US and Australia.
Screening IVF embryos in the lab adds another dimension.
The University of Edinburgh IVF team invented a test to identify the male Y chromosome in 4-8 day old embryos using a commercially available gene test.
They suggest it can be used on IVF embryos, or embryos flushed from a woman's womb before implantation takes place, in order to screen for sex-linked genetic conditions, for instance haemophilia, which mostly affects males.
The discarded embryos would not necessarily have the condition.
(To explain: some genetic conditions mostly occur in one sex, either male or female.
This kind of genetic inheritance is called’ sex-linked’.)
In sex-predetermination, sex is engineered before conception.
None of the many experimental techniques are foolproof, but the Ericsson method for separating girl-producing sperm from boy-producing sperm is for sale in a string of clinics in the US.
The implications are depressingly apparent in a study by Roberta Steinbacher and Helen B. Holmes which shows that young North American men and women who consider themselves sensitive to female inequality, would still choose to have male babies, at least as a first choice if sex-predetermination or sex determination with IVF would allow prospective parents in Western countries the opportunity to choose a preferred sex without the stigma that would be attached to using selective abortion.
The point is, infertility needs attention from feminists, and we all need women respecting alternatives in the health service.
It has become clear that IVF does not help.
In a report for the Greater London Association of Community Health Councils, Naomi Pfeffer and Allison Quick wrote,’ We gained a strong impression that…the quality of treatment that the majority of the infertile men and women receive within the NHS has deteriorated in some areas although, or even because, in vitro fertilisation and embryo transfer have been introduced’.
Ever increasing reproductive technologies are re-ordering social aspects of reproduction, specifically women's fertility, sexuality and pregnancies, by taking them to an industrial level, making them more and more scientific/medical procedures in need of’ expert’interference, and so moving them even further out of women's control.
Reproductive Engineering serves the fraternal interests of capitalists, the state, researchers eager to crack the’ secrets’of life, eugenicists and population controllers.
We never asked for these technologies, and in the long run they give us fewer choices, not more.
Resisting them is essential if we are to make any advance with our own life-respecting alternatives.
Next month: Designer weapons and the BIG gene project.
Female Mutilation Unsettled Issues
Genital Mutilation is the removal of a healthy vulva.
There are various types of mutilation: 1) Circumcision Proper which involves removing the hood around the clitoris.
This is the mildest form and the only one equivalent to male circumcision.
2) Excision which involves the cutting of the clitoris and of all or part of the smaller lips (labia minora) 3) Infibulation which involves the cutting of the smaller lips of the clitoris, at least the anterior two thirds of the inside part of the larger lips (labia majora) and the stitching together of the two sides of the vulva.
A small opening, sometimes as small as the head of a matchstick, is left for the passage of urine and menstrual blood.
The main purpose of the conference was to provide a forum for social, community and health workers to explore social, ethical and legal issues emerging from the practice of genital mutilation, which although prohibited in Britain, affects girls resident here whose families take them abroad to be circumcised.
The conference report condemned genital mutilation and provided practical strategies to combat the practice in this country.
The most critical of these was the suggestion that genital mutilation should be added onto the’ at risk’register of social services departments, and that a consultative body within these departments be established which would incorporate members from the Black communities.
The purpose of this body would be to bridge the gap between the professions and the community to bring about a coordinated, coherent response to the issue.
Other practical suggestions were that professional groups likely to come into contact with this issue need to be well informed and should be educated.
Equally important, campaigning work currently undertaken by African women at grassroots level should be expanded.
Of course, the recommendations from this report are unacceptable to many Black women and men who are involved in various other struggles to overcome oppression in society.
The double standards and hypocrisy surrounding this particular issue are incredible.
These are some of the arguments: first, the Black community is living in a hostile environment, therefore we should not wash our dirty linen in public as this would be used by racists against Black people.
Yet these same people do not deem it improper to call on white people to get involved in other Black national, local or personal struggles, some of which reveal nasty aspects of oppression.
The point I want to make is that racists are racists, with or without the exposure of genital mutilation.
Some would say that female mutilation is different as it is cultural.
This argument views culture as something accidental and static which cannot be analysed.
In this context, people are said to practice female mutilation as a habit.
Nothing can be further from the truth.
At a grassroots level people tell you freely that they want to curtail their daughters sexuality and if they feel that the appropriate method is castration then so be it.
In fact culture can be used as another guise under which one group can hide to oppress the other.
Black people have beaucoup de experience of this.
What is happening is that generally the Black movement for liberation is defined from a male perspective.
As a result, women's issues are often seen as irrelevant, or at best of low priority, and yet tacking women's needs is central to improving the status of the most deprived — most of whom are women.
Some people would say this is intellectualising.
The problem is at grassroots.
It is important to note that most campaigners have been working quietly in communities for years but despite this, attitudes on genital mutilation have not changed very much.
The reason for this is not, as is sometimes stated, to do with older women who insist on maintaining traditional rituals.
There are many young women and men in the Black movement who claim that the practice should go on in order to maintain African-traditions.
As one male journalist writes’ there is a need to consider the cohesion of African society in respect to this practice’.
What he forgets is that more than half of Africa's people do not practice female genital mutilation.
Some women argue that female genital mutilation is good because it suppresses sexuality, thereby preserving chastity and preventing promiscuity.
However, the idea of suppressing a child's sexuality through amputation of the most sensitive parts of her genitals for whatever reason, is a gross violation of human rights.
It is an abuse of a child's basic human rights.
A good document to get hold of for study and implementation is the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women, 1979, which is the international bill of rights for women.
Article 5 obliges state parties to take all appropriate measures to modify the social and cultural patterns of conduct of men and women, with a view to achieving the elimination of prejudice, customs and all other practices which are based on the idea of the inferiority or superiority of either sexes.
But there again it is argued by some that these United Nations Conventions are western inspired.
Desire is psychological and it cannot be amputated.
What this operation can do is to cause havoc with a women's sexuality, often provoking the very opposite to what was intended.
During the excisions the glands in the vagina walls that secrete the fluids which maintain the vagina's natural moisture balance is destroyed.
In some cases girls end up with many sexual partners in their attempt to find a partner who can satisfy them.
Women who are mutilated suffer short and long term health problems ranging from shock and haemorrhage to chronic infections of the uterus and major problems during childbirth.
In talking to women at grassroots level in this country, I have been alarmed by the number of women who have undergone caesarean sections.
Some see this as racism on the part of health workers.
The point is, if genital mutilation cannot be discussed by white social workers, health workers and teachers who have no knowledge of mutilation, how will they know how to handle it?
What we are faced with is a tiny facet of the complexities involved in Black women facing up to their oppression in a predominantly racist society.
On this particular problem it would be excellent if we could just go to the Black community and say’ Hi brothers and sisters We have a problem with this outmoded ritual’And they would respond in this way’good, let us all drop it’.
But no that is not the response.
Men must have their chastity and virginity even if it is make belief and at the cost of women's health.
Not to mention the profit being made by private clinics when rich girls are flown in to have an artificial hymen put in so that the rituals of defloration may continue.
It appears that two campaigning groups against genital mutilation have been developing in the last ten years within and outside Africa.
These are the’ softly, softly’campaigners and African feminists/human rights campaigners.
The latter are the trailblazers or what could be termed the’ baddies’.
They spill the beans, exposing the practice for what it is.
This creates debates which eventually lead to action.
The’ softly, softly’campaigners come behind the trailblazers and appease the people offering health education and unfortunately denouncing what they call radicals, activists, and militants.
In practice the trailblazers lack international support to assist them in developing serious education tools to further information and debates which would provide the right climate for social change.
It would be excellent if both groups could recognise their strengths and shortcomings and collaborate in this difficult campaign.
Awa Thiam from Senegal, a long time campaigner against genital mutilation and the guest speaker at the above mentioned conference, provided a progressive framework for women campaigning on this issue as far back as the 70's in her book La parole aux Negress, Denoel-Gonthier (ed) Paris 1978, English translation Let Our Black Sisters Speak Out, Pluto Press.
She wrote:’…essential, right now are groupings of women quite free of the practices of party politics dominated by the fascism inherent in their structures and phallocratic ideology.
At the same time, accepting the idea that the liberation of oppressed masses, to be effective, requires a struggle fought with and against women, with and against men.
If one just casts an eye over the history of the condition of women — marked by struggles, it has continued to evolve, but at such pace that it seems that women who struggle for their liberation and at the same time for that of their societies, are undertaking a long drawn-out campaign.
In other words, it's a question not of a sprint but a marathon.
So women should prepare with this in mind, in order to succeed.’
Awa is adamant that only international action and solidarity can help uproot this deep seated problem.
She runs an international campaign called CAMS (Commission for the Abolition for Sexual Mutilation) based in Senegal and France.
Women interested in supporting this campaign should contact CAMS F-36, Rue de Campo-Formio, 75013.
Women interested in joining FORWARD should contact us at 38 King St, WC2E 8JT.
On May 28, 1989 — International Day of Action for Women's Health we plan to hold a seminar/meeting to consolidate our gains and set up a support network for the genital mutilation campaign.
If you would like to know more about it please contact FORWARD at the above address.
The report of the Conference on Female Mutilation is also available from FORWARD, price £3.
Women for Socialism
At the end of February, Women for Socialism held their first Conference, with the declared aim of discussing how to build a socialist-feminist movement.
Below, the organisers talk about the Conference and the aims and objectives of the movement, while opposite Julietta Joseph and Pat Thompson, on behalf of Roots Revolutionaries and Black History for Action, raise some important issues and criticisms of the Conference and the movement's agenda.
’ Women for Socialism’, the conference organisers are a primarily labour movement based group of socialist-feminists.
The conference, the first general feminist-socialist conference for over a decade, attracted over 400 women from across the country.
Judged on the attendance, the almost complete lack of sectarianism, the productive political discussion in the workshops, and the constructive criticism, the event was more of a success than we had ever dared hope for.
The declared aim of the conference was to discuss how to build a movement for socialist-feminism, how to popularise socialist-feminist ideas, and how to make alliances between labour movement women and women active outside of the labour movement.
Breaking sharply with some of the dominant ideas of traditional labour movement socialism — but not with the necessity of having class politics — the conference leaflet stated that Women for Socialism ‘aims to create a socialism intrinsically feminist that is for all women including Black women, lesbians and differently abed women…developing an anti-racist, anti-imperialist feminist perspective which is inseparable from the struggle for socialism’.
Most of the women who attended the conference were Labour Party members.
For these women it seems to have been a breath of pure oxygen, heady with proposals for socialist-feminist action, at a time when Kinnockism is attempting to kill it off.
And many women who came who were not labour movement activists welcomed Women for Socialism initiative, considering the time somewhat overdue for labour movement women to reach out to other socialist-feminists.
Other women, especially some Black women, were more critical.
A workshop introduced by members of the Outwrite Collective put forward a resolution (endorsed by the final conference plenary) that’ noted the failure of the conference to attract a large representation of Black women and women with disabilities’and committed Women for Socialism to’developing links and discussions with Black women's organisations, to increasing Black women's involvement at all levels, to developing links with other women's and feminist organisations internationally, and to discussing a future women's federation’.
The conference organisers themselves felt that while Black women and anti-imperialist women, including women from national liberation struggles, were represented in the workshops and on the plenary platforms (Councillor Martha Osamor from Black Sections Campaign, Sinn Fein Women's Department Head Mairead Keane, Jamila Haddad from the Palestinian Women's Group, Ellie Hamunyela from SWAPO Women's Council, amongst others) it had been a serious omission not to have a specific workshop on anti-racism in this country, on the politics of state racism.
Ros Young, Women for Socialism's coordinator for International Liaison, has said,’ The idea was to integrate an anti-racist perspective into all the discussions such as on education, health, housing, child sexual abuse, lesbianism; but this presupposed too high a level of understanding for such a new organisation and made assumptions about white women's awareness of issues such as the policing of the Black community.
While we also had Black women only space throughout the conference it was felt by some Black women that this was a substitute for the conference discussing anti-racist strategies.
It was also a mistake not to have organised a separate workshop on Islamic fundamentalism and Salman Rushdie's book, because this ended up dominating discussion in the International workshops making it difficult to discuss other anti-imperialist issues.
However, white, British women were clear that their support for anti-imperialist struggles had to be unconditional’.
A special conference on building labour movement support for anti-racist, anti-imperialist feminism is to be organised, as well as a Women for Socialism delegation to Palestine after discussion with the Palestinian Higher Women's Council in the Occupied Territories and the Palestinian Women's Group in Britain.
Discussions have already started with members of the SWAPO Women's Council on how best to build support for Namibian women in this crucial period of Namibian independence.
Support for lranian women is to be raised in women's trade unions.
The International workshops were amongst the largest at the conference along with those on pornography, lesbianism and socialism, socialist-feminism and child sexual abuse.
Councillor Sandra Plummer from Camden and the Socialist Lesbian Group, speaking in one of the plenary sessions, argued that socialists have got to stop seeing lesbian liberation as just a civil liberties issue.
Heterosexism, compulsory heterosexuality, and the social construction of sexuality has to be an integral part of our socialist feminism.
The Committee of 100 Against the Poll Tax in Scotland was supported with a call for the setting up of similar groups across the country.
The explicit racism and sexism of the Poll Tax is to be exposed and campaigned against.
Women for Socialism developed out of the national Chesterfield Socialist Conferences as an autonomous socialist-feminist women's group.
Betty Heathfield, from Women Against Pit Closures and one of the original initiators of Women for Socialism told the conference that’ We are the women who are going to show the way forward in the labour movement.
Women for Socialism is all the more imperative given the labour movement's political crisis’.
It was made clear thoughout that Women for Socialism are not attempting to set the agenda for other women's groups.
Instead the aim is to contribute to constructing practical and supportive alliances with other socialist-feminists.
Women for Socialism particularly wants to raise and strengthen the demands of women organising outside the labour movement, within it.
As two Black socialist sisters involved in the independent Black movement we attended the Women for Socialism (WFS) conference.
Our initial response to the publicity was that we would like the conference organisers to define precisely the importance of feminism, as from our point of view it remains an ideological tool of imperialism, which creates division and disunity by it's reactionary reductionist theories.
Essentially we believe feminism to be bourgeois and pro-capitalist.
However, we acknowledge that being part of the struggle continually throws up contradictions, and that there can be no monolithic viewpoint; differences should be aired with the aim of understanding the basis of these differences and attempting to resolve these in an honest and principled way.
As Black women dedicated to the ordinary masses we believed we should attend the WFS initiative in order to both hear and contribute to the agenda.
We believe that WFS are unable to clearly define on their terms, the absolute necessity of Feminism (and even less so) of its purported relationship to socialism.
We do not say this lightly, nor have we absorbed right-wing media propaganda on this issue; our view is based on study and checking the original sources of feminism, whether this be radical, revolutionary or any other variant.
We noted, amongst other things the following: 1) That WFS despite any (credible) protestations to the contrary, is very much part of the wider reformist (counter-revolutionary) Labour movement.
This is borne out by a) the incredible amount of time and energy being put in at the WFS conference to the forthcoming Chesterfield Socialist conference and bI the constant egotistical/individualistic remarks made by conference participants, who had no interest whatsoever in building support for women's struggle,(and in many cases continued unchallenged with these views) 2) That the conference had very few Black women in attendance, we saw around 12 out of the many hundreds (although we were over represented in the creche and began to wonder whether this was the’ Black women only’space created for us).
This either indicates the typical’ lip-service’paid to issues of racism, the overriding liberalism, the negation of our abilities to give a contribution, or it show that Black women are not prepared to involve themselves in a reactionary movement which takes no account of our needs.
Either way, it exposes WFS organisers as racists who are marginalising the Black struggle.
Further examples were that the’ Race and Poll Tax’workshop did not take place, and the patronising remarks we heard in the’Socialist conference’workshop, white women full of guilt and superiority, assuming that ordinary Black women would wish to join in their loose framework culminating at Chesterfield.
’ Women for Socialism’states that it is an’autonomous women's organisation affiliated to the Labour Party’(draft aims).
From our point of view the conference may as well have been organised by the Labour Party.
Certainly workshop space was set aside for women who are involved in the Labour Party.
WFS did not publically declare itself to be affiliated to any independent grass roots campaigns who are actually working on the ground with ordinary people — for example, the Tottenham 3 Campaign, Birmingham 6 Campaign etc.
We can only assume that it intends to gain acceptability and legitimacy within the ranks of the sold-out lackeys of the Labour Party, rather than working to organise the most exploited sections of ordinary people — women.
This, to us, highlights the opportunism of this conference in failing to address the pressing basic issues which confront women.
We believe the capitalist state and its institutions to be at the heart of this oppression, and that we must organise and educate women to deal with this on varying levels.
We attended between us five workshops and found all of them lacking in a clear overall framework/direction which would at least set an agenda for future constructive discussion (let alone action).
The workshop on lnternationalism although’ boasting’an array of speakers, was then hijacked by participants selling their campaigns, rather than using the information to broaden perspectives.
The whole workshop got progressively worse and almost out of control when one woman asked whether as women we could’ get an orgasm’out of this type of struggle This self-indulgent degenerative remark typifies the enemy within such broad-based movements.
Women such as this one have no interest in the legitimate aims and aspirations of working class women, and only become involved if there is a specific individual gratification.
The Trade Union workshop addressed some important issues, although women admitted to feeling apathetic and emotional about the various campaigns they were waging in their workplaces.
The workshop began the process of drawing up a charter which would be put forward to the June Chesterfield Conference (again, any positive work here is being channel led back into the system) The Reproductive Rights Workshop focussed on the issue of abortion, and individual women's experiences, and very little surfaced on how these so called’ rights’affect working class women, there was even a suggestion of wages for housework for women!
We oppose this on the basis that it reinforces our current oppression under capitalism — women being divorced from the means of production.
The Lesbianism and Socialism workshop raised many issues, but with few answers.
The idea that straight people’ benefitted’from lesbian and gay oppression was raised, also the need for a lifting of oppressive sexuality, and the question of how lesbian oppression differed from women's oppression.
None of these questions were dealt with or answered.
No one could actually articulate how heteros got’ privileges’from lesbian oppression, nor could anyone define a’liberated’sexuality, away from capitalist oppression, nor state the differences between women's/lesbian oppression.
To us, however, one of the most important questions or issues was how to counteract bourgeois ideas which opposed socialism within the gay and lesbian movement.
If sexuality is such a liberator why are there so few revolutionaries?
The answer to this and other issues surrounding the WFS conference at large, stems from the lack of a working class perspective.
So called’ Socialist’feminists, in true liberal style, fail to put forward a strategy to end capitalism, putting all their energies into the Labour Party who stand for the same redundant ideas which go nowhere towards real change.
Careerists in these positions hold no hope for us, we have seen the attacks from Labour as well as the Conservatives.
We acknowledge that individuals drawn to WFS's conference possibly had genuine intentions, but we have no confidence that the aims, objectives, and structure will set the path for building a women's movement.
The most it can do is’ raise issues’which go nowhere towards dealing with these.
We say loud and clear the masses of ordinary women are our inspiration, build an autonomous peoples movement!
News Shorts
TRAGEDY IN SOWETO
Recently there have been serious developments pertaining to the activities of the group known as the Mandela Football Club which have raised great concern within the mass democratic movement and struggling people as a whole.
The ANC shares the concern of the people and has, all the tame, tried to intervene to find an amicable solution to the problem.
In the light of reports about its activities in the recent past, our organisation, complementing the initiatives of leading personalities of the Mass Democratic Movement, tried to use its influence to bring about the disbanding of the group.
Unfortunately our counsel was not heeded by Comrade Winnie Mandela.
The situation has been further complicated by the fact that she did not belong to any structures and therefore did not benefit from the discipline, counseling and collectivity of the Mass Democratic Movement.
Under these circumstances she was left open and vulnerable to committing mistakes which the enemy exploited.
One such instance relates to the so-called Mandela Football Club.
In the course of time, the club engaged in unbecoming activities which have angered the community.
We fully understand the anger of the people and their organisations towards this club.
We have every reason to believe that the club was infiltrated by the enemy, and that most of its activities were guided by the hand of the enemy for the purposes of causing disunity within the community and discrediting the name of Nelson Mandela and the organisation of which he is the leader.
Our people should not allow this.
The ANC calls on our people to close ranks and exercise maximum vigilance against the vile machinations of the enemy.
Our position is that the problem arising from the activities of the Mandela Football Club can and must be resolved within the ambit of the democratic movement as a whole, both at local and national levels.
This must be done in the shortest possible time.
To realise this, it is necessary, that Comrade Winnie Mandela is helped to find her way into the structures and discipline of the Mass Democratic Movement.
it will be of paramount importance that she cooperates with all those involved in the resolution of the problem.
We are confident that the Mass Democratic Movement will open its doors to her in the interest of our people and the struggle.
There is a need to create a climate in which all problems facing the community, including the unfortunate death of Stompie Moeketsi Seipei la committed young lion who has made an immense contribution in the mobilisation of our youth and people in the struggle) will be discussed to foster unity rather then let the enemy use them to achieve its ends.
The ANC takes this opportunity to convey its heartfelt condolences to the parents, relatives and community of Stompie Moeketsi Seipei.
It is with a feeling of sadness that we consider it necessary to express our reservations about Winnie Mandela's judgement in relation to the Mandela Football Club.
But we should not forget what Comrade Winnie Mandela has gone through and her immense contribution to the liberation struggle.
She has not only suffered the anguish of over a quarter of a century of separation from her husband, but has also experienced unending persecution at the hands of the regime, such as banishment, Imprisonment, torture and sustained harassment over a period of more than two decades.
Bearing the name of Mandela, and in her own right, she increasingly became one of the symbols of resistance to racist tyranny both at home and abroad.
We firmly believe, without prejudging all the issues which have been raised in relation to the problem, that whatever mistakes were made should be viewed against the background of her overall contribution on the one hand and the activities of the enemy on the other.
Viewed in this light we consider it important that the movement as a whole should adopt a balanced approach to the problems that have arisen.
The ANC, for its part will continue to work for the unity of our people and we have no doubt that all those who have participated in attempting to solve this problem have done so in the best interests of our struggle.
The National Executive Committee of the African National Congress Lusaka, Zambia
FREE THE CAPE TOWN 16
On December 14, 1988, at the end of a 65 day trial, in Cape Town, South Africa, fourteen Black activists, all members of Umkhonto We Sizwe, the armed wing of the African National Congress ANC), were sentenced to jail, for the’ crime’of resisting the apartheid system.
And, in attempting to gag and shackle these activists, the apartheid state showed its fear of this new generation of young fighters.
24 year old Ashley Forbes, Commander of the unit was sentenced to 15 years imprisonment.
The Commissar, 22 year old Peter Jacobs and 21 year old Nicklo Pedro were sentenced to 14 years.
Anwa Dramat 120 years old) received a 12 year sentence.
Nazeem Lowe 125 years old) and Clement Baadjies 120 years old) received sentences of 10 years.
David Fortuin 123 years old), Jeremy Veary 125 years), Wayne Malgas 122 years) and Ashraf Karriem 125 years) will serve a two year sentence each.
Walter Rhoode 125 years), Coin Petersen 123 years), Leon Scott (30 Years) and Coin Cairncross 124 years) received five years suspended sentences each.
Ashley Kriel, a comrade-in-arms of the fifteen, paid the highest price-he was shot in the back by the security police.
An inquest into his death is currently in session.
The fifteenth activist, the only woman in the unit, 20 year old Jasmina Pandy was acquitted and released after spending over a year and a half in police detention.
All fourteen were the victims of incessant interrogation and brutal mental and physical torture, which in most cases included repeated beatings and electroshock treatment.
For Black people in South Africa, apartheid-capitalism means no political rights, starvation wages, unemployment, insubstantial education, inadequate housing and immense poverty.
When activists like the Cape Town Sixteen fight this system of oppression and exploitation, they are demanding a democratic say in the running of their lives and and the right to determine their own futures.
They are fighting one struggle with the youth in Palestine, the youth in Namibia, the youth in Korea.
The Cape Town Sixteen express the very demands of the youth in Britain, like Mark Braithwaite, Engin Raghip and Winston Scott, Trevor Monerville, the Guildford Four and the Birmingham Six.
The trials and convictions are particularly significant coinciding as they do with Botha's release of one generation of political prisoners, such as Govan Mbeki, Zephania Mothopeng and Harry Gwala, and amid speculations about the release of Nelson Mandela.
We cannot afford to overlook the cruel irony enacted by the racist regime of freeing one generation of fighters from the sixties and seventies, while proceeding to serve long sentences on a new generation of fighters of the eighties.
A campaign has been launched to defend the Cape Town Sixteen.
We demand:
The unconditional release of all South African political prisoners, including those on trial, those in detention and those on death row.
Unconditional freedom for those of the Cape Town Sixteen who received suspended sentences and the lifting of the severe restrictions placed upon them.
An independent inquiry into the death of Ashley Kriel, and for his killers to be brought to trial.
Drastic improvements to the inhuman conditions under which South African political prisoners are kept.
We are calling on all victims of capitalist oppression in Britain to: Join the campaign to defend the Cape Town Sixteen and give expression to the demands of youth in Britain.
Join the campaign to build a healthy, vibrant Anti-apartheid movement in Britain, with strong branches in every borough and in every country.
Delysia Forbes
The 1000th day of the State of Emergency in South Africa was marked by the resumption of the hunger strike by detainees in many of South Africa's prisons.
SOUTH AFRICA; HUNGER STRIKE RESUMED
More than 300 detainees embarked on the hunger strike in February in protest against their continued incarceration.
As their health deteriorated and many were hospitalised, the Minister of Law and Order promised to release’ a substantial number’within a fortnight.
So the hunger strike was suspended.
However, only 202 of the 900 detainees were released.
Detainees in Nylstroom said they had been offered their release on the condition that they agreed to become police informers.
In the Eastern Cape one-third of the detainees were released but almost all local UDF leaders remain in detention.
All but one of those released have been placed under heavy restriction orders.
Since the resumption of the hunger strike on March 6, striking detainees are being moved and separated.
Lawyers for the 35 hunger strikers in Pietermaritsburg, 30 of whom were hospitalised, were assured by the Minister that they would all be released or charged as soon as they left hospital.
The lawyers commented that the Minister was giving detainees the message that if they wanted their demand for freedom to be taken seriously they had to go on hunger strike and become very ill.
Hunger strikes by detainees have been a feature of emergency rule in South Africa since 1985 when 30 women and 2 men at Pollsmoor Prison demanded unconditional release and access to lawyers.
Early in 1986, there were hunger strikes in Diepkloof and Modderbee prisons in Johannesburg.
And in July 1986, 28 women were teargassed in their communal cell in Pollsmoor when they demanded to know why they were being held.
They were then transferred to solitary confinement.
The Hunger Strike Support Committee, representing more than 30 organisations, has called for the lifting of the State of Emergency and the release of the remaining detainees.
Ex-detainee and community leader from Kagiso township in Krugersdorp, Sister Bernard Ncube launched a nation-wide petition for the lifting of the emergency.
She herself was detained in June 1986 and held for nineteen months.
The Women's Section of, the African National Congress in Lusaka, supporting joint action, for the release of political prisoners and detainees, and against forced removals, issued a statement on International Women's Day, calling upon women of the world to insist on the right to know what is going on in South Africa; to intensify the campaign for sanctions; to fight for prisoner of war status for captured combatants; to support the Save the Patriots campaign and to remember Daisy Modise, the only woman patriot of the 62 prisoners on death row.
Domestic Workers Keep up the Pressure
The 70,000 strong South African Domestic Workers Union (SADWU) is encouraging its members to take their employers to court over unfair dismissals and low wages.
Last year 2,047 cases were heard in the Hillbrow small claims court, in Johannesburg, 90% of which were won by the workers.
Regional organiser, Selina Vilakazi estimates that 50% of employers pay less than half the minimum wage recommended by the Union.
Another burning issue is unfair dismissal.
Last year 1,075 such cases were reported to SADWU.
The union has also taken up the case of 50 workers who were fired for joining the union.
It is not only the government who is to blame for the poor conditions of domestic workers.
’ It is up to the individual employer to provide for her employee and see that she is well-protected and properly rewarded.’
says case officer, Roseline Nwapo.
’ Does an employer have to wait for the government to push her into saying’This is a human being?’
The union is also investigating a number of cases of child labour and the sexual abuse of children by employers.
In South Africa domestic workers are not covered by labour laws, but SADWU has drawn up a schedule of wages and benefits it believes employers should observe.
This includes a minimum wage for a five and a half day week, and daily and hourly rates for part-time workers, maternity rights, annual leave and sick leave, payslips and proper contracts of employment.
Mary Turok
It came as no surprise when the right wing Arena party won the presidential elections in El Salvador on March 19.
What had not been expected, however, was that Alfredo Cristiani, the Arena candidate, would win an outright victory in the first round.
ELECTIONS IN EL SALVADOR
Having had their peace plan (which included a six month postponement of the election a) rejected, the Farabundo Mart) Liberation Front FMLN) called on its supporters to boycott the elections and imposed a transport ban throughout the country.
Arena obviously benefitted from this, with both it and the army laying on transport for its supporters.
Army helicopters hovered over the polling stations, which were surrounded by soldiers, proving FMLN allegations that these elections were fraudulent and carried out amidst fear and intimidation.
The elections have also demonstrated the complete failure of US policy to prop up the Christian Democratic government of Napolean Duarte, backed to the tune of US $1 million per day.
Despite US rhetoric about’ democratisation’, El Salvador has remained at war, with kings and’disappearances’once more on the increase.
What remains to be seen now is whether the US will shift its economic and military support to Arena, the party behind the’ death squads’which have been responsible for the murder of thousands of Salvadoreans.
What many fear is that, despite negotiated settlements’ being fashionable in other parts of the world, the US will be more than happy to leave El Salvador to Arena, freeing it to step up aid to the Nicaraguan contras and removing, once and for all, any chance of success for the peace plan being negotiated by the five Central American presidents, which has never been supported by the US.
Fran Ellery
The lranian regime celebrated the tenth anniversary of the revolution on February 10 this year (see Spare Rib, February, No 198).
REPRESSION CONTINUES IN IRAN
No one knows the true number of political prisoners executed in the run up to the anniversary.
Amnesty International's list of over 1,000 has been accepted by the UN Commission for Human Rights.
As most relatives have been denied access to the graves, or have been brow beaten into silence the true figures are much higher, and some sources put the figure in excess of 5,000.
Among these names are those of 43 women.
One was Farah Farhang Rusta who was 12 years old when arrested.
When executed she was 19.
In December a further group of women prisoners were executed in the notorious Evin Prison of Tehran.
Conditions in Evin have been so appalling that three women prisoners committed suicide in December.
In a two-stage plan ratified in August, first those who had not been tried and next all those who were serving prison sentences were dealt with.
In summary trials all those who stuck to their views were eliminated.
And now, with mounting internal and international pressure to stop the massacre, the regime has ostensibly declared an’ amnesty’for those who’repent and their repentance can be verified’.
The regime's intolerance to any views other than its own and its savagery may best be illustrated by three recent events.
A women, interviewed for a radio programme, gave the name of a Japanese soap opera heroine as her ideal woman.
When pressed to give her views on Fatima, the daughter of the prophet Mohamad (whose birthday is Women's Day in Iran) she praised Fatima but added that she belonged to 14 centuries ago.
The hapless producers of the programme were given 50 lashes and sentenced to 4-5 years in prison.
Worse was to come when no less a person than Khomeini called for their execution should the deed prove to be deliberate.
They have since been pardoned.
In early February, in the city of Hamedan, a teenage couple talking in the street were picked up by the’ revolutionary guards.’
The two claimed they were engaged, since an lranian woman caught talking to a man not related to her by blood or marriage is considered a prostitute.
When the girl's parents denied the engagement, the boy was beaten unconscious and died a few hours later in hospital.
The last story — the’ death sentence’passed by Khomeini on Salman Rushdie for’blasphemy’.
Some western media regard the’ amnesty’, and the promise of freedom for political parties, as a sign that society is opening up.
This is a rather naive view of a regime which openly threatens those who hold different views with death.
We are deeply concerned for the fate of all those thousands of women and men who remain in prison.
This is no time for complacency.
We ask for help in our task of calling for an end to the executions and the release of all political prisoners.
Azadeh
The ceasefire in the Iran/Iraq war has put a stop to the bloodshed on the border battlefields but there is no end in sight to the Iraq regimes internal war against the Iraq people.
Women and children are bearing the brunt of the continuing terror and repression used to keep the Saddam Husain dictatorship in power.
EXECUTIONS CONTINUE IN IRAQ
On March 2, 1989 two women were hanged in a public square in Baghdad.
Their bodies were left for several hours to serve as an example of the fate awaiting people who oppose the regime.
They were victims of the upsurge in political executions which have occurred in Iraq since the end of the Iran/Iraq war.
Mothers, wives or other relatives who claim the bodies of executed loved ones have to pay 300 Iraq dinars (£600) as an execution tax.
Children have been tortured to force them to give information against their parents.
Babies have been kept in cells adjacent to their parents and denied milk to pressurise the parents into making statements.
Refugees from the Iraq regime's genocidal chemical weapons war against the people of Iraq Kurdistan are living in appalling conditions in Turkey, Iran or parts of Iraq outside their own region, in internment camps.
A year ago world attention focussed on the town of Halabja in Iraq Kurdistan after 5,000 people were killed and 10,000 were injured — mainly women and children — during a mustard and nerve gas attack on March 16, 1988.
Chemical weapons continued to be used by the Iraq regime against its own people.
The ceasefire with Iran in September 1988 was taken as an opportunity to concentrate the military offensive on those living in Iraq Kurdistan.
Most of the Kurdlsh villages which had survived earlier attacks were destroyed.
Over 100,000 civilians fled across the border.
There is still no sign of the 8000 Barzanl Kurds who’ disappeared’after being seized and driven away in military vehicles.
They included 315 children and youngsters aged between eight and seventeen.
The catastrophic eight year war between Iraq and Iran is over but the suffering of women and children under Saddam Husain's bloody rule continues mercilessly.
Amal Farouk
As women around the world celebrated International Women's Week, Tibetan women were reliving the anniversary of the 1959 Uprising, when thousands of unarmed Tibetan women defended their right to life and freedom with sticks and stones on the streets of Lhasa.
They protested in vain at the invasion of what was to become 3-500,000 Chinese soldiers, stationed on the pretext of’ liberating’Tibet from the’Feudal theocracy’enstated by the Dalai Lama and his followers.
TIBETAN WOMEN REMEMBER LHASA UPRISING
Ironic then, that this touching gesture precipitated thirty years of bloody slaughter and destruction, a genocide pointedly ignored by governments around the world even now, despite the recent reports of heartbreaking events in Lhasa.
Over 1.2 million Tibetans have died as a direct result of China's occupation, with countless more incarcerated in prisons and labour camps.
Torture renders many of those who survive unrecognisable, yet this pales against reports of children being forced to shoot their parents or watch while they are beaten, stoned, even buried alive.
Over 6,000 temples and monasteries were desecrated.
The Chinese economy is boosted with the gold bullion sold through Hong Kong onto the world market and the vast exploitation of Tibet's timber and mineral resources.
Replacing the policies of non-violence enshrined in Tibet's Buddhist culture, are 5 Chinese nuclear bases, allegedly used as testing-zones that will pose a direct threat to the security of South Asia.
Typically the women suffer further brutality.
The indigenous population is already a minority in its own land with over seven million Han Chinese colonists settled in Tibet to minimize China's population overspill.
Being's family planning policies have resulted in whole villages of Tibetan women being herded together in trucks and taken for enforced sterilisation or abortion.
Those giving birth in the Chinese-run hospitals often find that their babies mysteriously’ die’during the night, first-hand victims of lnfanticide.
The nucleus of the Resistance is formed by nuns and housewives in Lhasa.
Those who fled during the Cultural Revolution often did so alone, others carrying two children on their backs across the Himalayan mountains to join the 100,000 strong refugee communities in India, where today a committed group have devoted their lives to working for the Tibetan cause.
Recently in Lhasa, several women were shot and killed by the Chinese military, one teenager in her own home where she was preparing a meal.
Kelly Davidson
’ Buklod’means’bonding together’.
It is the name of a Women's Centre opened in February 1987 in Olongapo City in the Philippines.
Olongapo has the distinction of being adjacent to the US naval base in Subic Bay.
It is estimated that there are around 9,000 women who work on the streets or in the bars of Olongapo as prostitutes or’ hospitality workers’.
The Buklod Centre was set up to work with these women through educational courses, seminars and meetings.
Its aim is to empower women to control their own lives.
It is funded through donations.
PHILIPPINES; CENTRE FOR PROSTITUTES CLOSED DOWN
On January 13 this year, an announcement was made on the local radio station, which is owned by the Mayor of Olongapo, Mayor Gordon.
This announcement falsely accused the Centre of assisting and of being aided by communist insurgents.
As part of the Aquino governments crackdown on the 19 year old communal insurgency, there has been a drive to outlaw legitimate political groups, including GABRlELA.
These organisations are being labelled’ communist fronts’.
The radio report also threatened a military raid of the centre.
While the Centre was not actually named, it was clear that it was Buklod that was being referred to.
Some of the women who use the Centre have consequently stopped coming and some mothers have removed their children from the night care facility for fear of a raid.
In addition, staff have been harassed by armed plainclothes police.
These tactics may only be threats, but in the Philippines’ disappearances’are becoming all too common.
Death squads operate to remove those perceived as a threat.
A common tactic is first to brand the victims as’ communists’this has provided justification enough for murder in the past.
Some sources put the total figure of political murders and abductions since 1986 at 666, plus 11,300 arrests.
International support is needed for Buklod.
If you would like to help, please write a letter stating the following:’ Dear Mayor Gordon, I have heard about the work of the Buklod Centre and the programmes it runs for the hospitality women, including health education, English lessons, income-generating projects and night care for children.
I am concerned to hear that Buklod and its staff have been experiencing harassment.
I cannot understand why an organisation seeking to help hospitality women would be treated in this way.
I hope this situation will not continue and call upon you in your position as Mayor to rectify it.’
Please send your letters to: Mayor Richard Gordon, City Hall, Olongapo City 2200, Philippines.
And a copy to: Brendan Stolfus, Greenhllls PO Box 336, 1502 Metro Manila, Philippines.
lBuklod Coordinator of International Relations Helen Doyle
A renewed consumer boycott of Nescafe was launched in Britain on March 15.
Nescafe is made by the giant food multinational, Nestle, which has the largest share of the baby milk market in developing countries.
At the launch, Fillpina Primary Health Care Worker Susan Cueva described how her baby, Chisan was given free Nestle baby milk in a Baguio City hospital against her wishes.
Video evidence was shown of the devastating effects of bottle feeding where there is no access to clean water increased risk of diarrhoea, respiratory infections and malnutrition.
BOYCOTT NESCAFE
In response to the first Nescafe Boycott, Nestle agreed to abide by the WHO/Unicef International Code of Marketing of Breast Milk Substitutes.
They stopped advertising baby milks to the public on billboards and with radio jingles, and stopped dressing their sales representatives as’ milk nurses’.
But recent monitoring shows that Nestle are still pouring free supplies of baby milks into maternity wards in Asia and Africa.
This practice is condemned by the WHO because it routinises bottle feeding.
When babies are given bottles in the neo natal period, their mothers' breast milk is not stimulated and breastfeeding falls.
Free supplies are not charity, they area very effective marketing technique which deprives mothers of informed choice and increases corporate profits at the expense of infants health.
The boycott organisers in Britain are Baby Milk Action BMAC, part of the International Baby Food Action Network (IBFAN), a worldwide network of citizens' groups working to stop the unethical promotion of bottle feeding.
Boycotts are already underway in Germany and the US and are also being launched in Norway, Sweden, and Ireland.
Fourteen other countries pledged support.
Nescafe, the target of the boycott, is Britain's most heavily promoted food brand.
Nestle spends £18 every three minutes advertising Nescafe.
In that time another baby dies from unsafe bottle feeding.
The recent Indian Supreme Court judgement that the US Multlnational, Union Carbide, pay $470 million by way of compensation to the victims of the world's largest industrial accident, elicited sharply polarized reactions and set a dangerous international precedent.
Inevitably there was jubilation from Union Carbide whose pesticide plant had released a lethal cloud of methylisocyanate (MIC) over the city of Bhopal, causing devastation to thousands.
Equally inevitably, there was outrage and dismay in India.
BHOPAL:VICTIMS OUTRAGED WITH SETTLEMENT
Union Carbide got away lightly, and cheaply.
The judgment effectively absolved it of criminal and civil liability for causing approximately 3,500 deaths and injuries to thousands, and the final settlement was only a percentage of the orginial sum of $3.5 billion that the government was going to sue them for.
The final figure was, in fact, no more than the appreciated sum of what Union Carbide had originally offered in 1986!
The outrage in India stemmed from the very same reasons.
Former Chief Justice Bhagwati summed up the situation succinctly:’ The multinational has won and the people of India have lost.’
The judgement, rather settlement, had been effected with speed and secrecy, and begged several questions: Who the controversial compromise?
What prompted the court to transform what was an appeal against an interim relief order into a final settlement?
Who was the original claim of $3.5 billion dropped?
How had the new figure been calculated?
And finally, who stood to gain?
Not the disabled and destitute of Bhopal.
Who, some calculate, will each on average receive no more than the equivalent of £500 for loss of family, loss of earnings and permanent physical damage.
Two major petitions have been filed challenging the court's ruling.
The first, filed by The Lawyers Collective (Bombay) challenges the constitutionality of the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster Act 1985 which gives the government sole right to sue on behalf of the Victims and takes away the right of individuals to go to the Supreme Court.
The second, popularly believed to be more likely to succeed, challenges the constitutionality of the settlement on the basis that it went beyond the powers of the 1985 Act.
As mounting protest greeted the outrageously low value ascribed to Bhopal's victims who continue to (anguish in misery, Union Carbide's shares gained overnight.
What price life in the Third World?
Shaila Shah
The first comprehensive study in Britain that looks specifically at Black women's experience of domestic violence is currently nearing completion.
It was commissioned by the London Race and Research Housing Unit, to primarily investigate local Authority —(particularly the housing Departments), responses to Black women who have experienced domestic violence.
Within that, other statutory and non-statutory agencies' responses have been considered.
For example, voluntary sector organisations who solely or partly incorporate work on domestic violence as part of their brief,(eg Women's Aid) were investigated.
So too were the practices of State agencies leg Police).
THE SILENT STRUGGLE-BLACK WOMEN AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
In researching this complex and multi-faceted problem, we felt that it was of paramount importance to place this issue within an historical, international and political context.
It was decided to focus on women from African, Asian and Caribbean backgrounds, who had experienced domestic violence from a violent partner, be it emotional or physical.
These women were either married, cohabiting or were having some form of a relationship with these men.
The research was designed and conducted with this particular group of women in mind.
For example, interviewers were, as much as possible ethnically matched with the women.
From the outset we were aware of the lack of material looking specifically at Black women's experiences of domestic violence.
We strongly suspected that when these Black women sought assistance, eg from local authority housing departments, institutionalised racism plus the sexism they experienced, were compounded together and further exasperated their problems.
The research did illuminate that discriminatory policies and practices carried out within local authority departments etc., caused an obvious disparity in the way that Black women were dealt with.
For example it was highlighted that a disproportionate number of Black women remained in refuge accommodation for longer periods before they were rehoused.
It was also found that Asian women tended to be treated more sympathetically than African/Caribbean women.
This could be because of perceived notions of Asian families being restrictive and oppressive, for example, in cases such as arranged marriages, which may necessitate the’ rescue’of these women by state officials.
Immigration laws were also found to have an effect on some of the women's experiences of domestic violence.
For example, when Police intervention is requested, once on the scene, they often chose to focus on the woman's immigration status thus negating the actual reason for them being called initially.
These and other fundamental issues specific to Black woman are highlighted in this research.
The report will be available in the summer.
On February 28, Immigration officials together with 60 police officers raided a sweatshop in Dalston, East London.
Even though these kinds of’ fishing raids’take place in such factories at this time of the year, it is believed that this particular raid has marked the beginning of a new home office policy.
RAIDS ON EAST END SWEAT SHOPS
38 people were arrested, 16 of whom were women employees, most of them Kurds fleeing from repression in Turkey.
The number of arrests went up to 46 when the partners of those arrested were also taken in by police.
6 people were removed from the country when they signed a paper agreeing to leave the country voluntarily, however due to the fact that they did not speak English they were unaware of what they were signing.
At present 2 people are still detained, charged with being illegal immigrants.
On March 5, 3000 people marched through Hackney to protest the raid.
At the rally at Halkebi Turkish Community Centre, trade union officials from the Taylor's and Garment Workers Union and Transport and General Workers Union and MPs Diane Abbott and Jeremy Corbyn stated their support for the workers and protested the home office policy.
Most of the workers in these sweatshops are women, paid ridiculously low wages and being employed for over 15 hours a day.
They receive no overtime pay, nor do they get any holiday money or sickness benefit.
The garments being made are on order from stores such as C&A, Top Shop, and Wallace's.
Most of the workers are unauthorised, enabling employers to evade tax and British employment law, and make big profits.
The demand of the Campaign is amnesty to all unauthorised workers
New York: On January 30, 300 members of ACT-UP (Aids Coalition To Unleash Power) staged-a massive kiss-in in the waiting room of St. Vincent's Hospital, following a violent assault on a lesbian rape survivor and her lover by hospital security guards.
The women were beaten up and called’ fucking dykes’in sight of the Rape Survivors rape crisis counsellor.
The woman had earlier been refused permission to see her lover, a’ life partner’, as the catholic hospital refused to recognise their relationship as having’family status’.
They later had to receive medical treatment at the hospital following the assaults.
Security guards at the same hospital also verbally abused and assaulted a gay man with AIDS and his lover.
ACT-UP ZAPS LONDON AND THE US
San Francisco: On January 31, over 60 protestors successfully blockaded the Golden Gate Bridge stopping traffic for 48 minutes as Part of a movement to escalate the war on AIDS.
The group of demonstrators, calling themselves Stop AIDS now or else — Golden Gate Chapter, was made up of people from various sectors of the AIDS movement and members of ACT-UP, personal care givers and supporters of people with AIDS.
The protesters shut down the bridge to bring attention to the’ business as usual’attitude which has prevailed during the AIDS crisis.
Police arrested 26 demonstrators, over half of them women, for’ trespassing’and’causing a public nuisance’.
But as one protester, Dee Gold said’ We are disrupting this society to call attention to the government's murderous negligence in tacking AIDS.’
London: The newly formed ACT-UP has followed the successful demonstration against the drug company, Burroughs Welcome, with two more actions.
On February 3, Outside Pentonville Prison, pink and black condoms were inflated and released to float over the walls of the prison, in a protest against the government's refusal to issue prisoners with condoms and clean needles.
Following this, on March 9, a demonstration was held outside the London offices of Texaco — the multi-million dollar oil empire.
Texaco has introduced compulsory HIV testing for aft prospective employees.
Labour MP's Jo Richardson and Gavin Strang, are at present putting forward proposals in parliament to introduce a new clause to the proposed Employment Bill which would make such discrimination illegal.
People are urged to lobby their MP's on the issue and question Texaco on its Employment Policy by phoning (O1) 584 5OOO or by writing to Texaco, 1 Knightsbridge Green, London SWl.
Maureen Oliver
On March 18, hundreds of people marched through the streets of Tottenham, to mark the third anniversary of the false convictions of Winston Silicott, Enghin Raghip and Mark Braithwaite, for the murder of PC Blakelock during the Broadwater Farm Uprising in October 1985.
BLACK AND IRISH COMMUNITIES MARCH TOGETHER
The Irish in Britain Representation Group led a march from Whittington Park calling for the release of the Birmingham 6 and the Guildford 4, who have been protesting their innocence for the past 14 years.
The two groups of demonstrators converged on Ducketts Common for a joint rally, demanding civil rights and justice for Britain's Black and Irish communities, the repeal of the racist and anti democratic PTA, and the release of all political prisoners.
Relatives of the Guildford 4 and Birmingham 6 described the brutal and systematically degrading treatment the prisoners receive in jail.
Speakers reminded the demonstrators that last December the Tottenham 3 were refused leave to appeal, leaving all legal channels in this country exhausted.
Meanwhile Winston Scott has been transferred to Albany prison on the Isle of Wight, where he was on hunger strike for a week after being placed in solitary confinement.
His move to the Isle of Wight was part of a campaign of harassment, making it harder for him to receive visitors, and he is constantly being threatened with placement in the psychiatric wing of the prison.
The march and joint rally mark an historic coming together of the Black and Irish communities.
Twenty years ago Civil Rights Marches in the Six Counties took their inspiration from the Black Civil Rights Movement in the US.
Today the links between the Black and Irish communities are many, and the need for unity has never been more urgent.
Both communities suffer continual harassment from a blatantly racist police force, they face discrimination in courts and in prison.
The Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) used to silence the Irish community, is increasingly being, used against the Black community.
Police harassment and brutality towards the Black community in Tottenham continues at a shameful level.
In particular, prisoners families face continual harassment and attack.
George Scott, Winston's brother, has been arrested three times in the last three months, and Mark Braithwaite's brother Gregory is stopped and questioned constantly.
Hidden Dangers
Earlier this year The Women's Environmental network produced a report exposing the dangers we all face from using tampons and sanitary towels.
These pose a threat to our lives by virtue of how they are produced and what they are made of.
Caroline Harris looks at the facts in the wake of the Sanitary Protection Scandal.
’ Nappy Wars’hit the headlines in January, when Peaudouce and Procter & Gamble announced they were moving to unbleached paper.
Both companies denied this had anything to do with evidence that chlorine-bleaching produces dioxins (ie. extremely toxic, artificially produced chemicals implicated in cancer, birth defects and immune system breakdown).
’ The old bleaching process did not harm babies’, a spokesman for Peaudouce told The Standard.
The British government knows full well there are traces of dioxins in paper products.
But apart from some rhetoric about acting to protect human health, all it has done so far is commission a report from the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
As usual, it is lagging behind on an environmental and health issue.
In Sweden a combination of government concern and consumer pressure have already put a ban on the use of chlorine whose only purpose is to give soft paper products that pseudo-sterile’ whiter-than-white’look.
West Germany, Austria and Japan are also changing to alternative bleaching techniques.
But even in Sweden the whole campaign started with the emphasis placed initially on the dangers of’ disposable’nappies to children's health.
So what about sanitary towels and tampons: bleached products that also come into intimate contact with the human body?
In Britain, as was the case with the Alton Bill, women's health is seen yet again as a secondary issue.
On February 14, the Women's Environmental Network (WEN), a new organisation run by women and concentrating on issues affecting women particularly, launched their Campaign For Unbleached Paper.
And in that campaign they've made the links and made sure that sanitary products have a high profile:’ It is important to us that the words’sanitary towel’and’tampon’are being used publicly’.
Did you realise that even now there are no legal standards for the manufacture of either sanitary towels or tampons?
The Department of Health and Social Security's Good Manufacturing Practice, which covers maternity pads and hospital dressings, doesn't apply.
All we have to rely on is the Sanpro (Sanitary Protection) industry's own Code of Practice: a scanty document mainly concerned with sizes of lettering, multiples of goods and public relations.
Did you also know that in Britain neither sanitary towels nor tampons are sterilised, despite what their individual wrapping might suggest?
Apparently sterilisation would reduce absorbency.
This doesn't seem to have bothered women in Japan though, where commercial tampons have been subject to strict controls since 1969: no added deodorant; no super-absorbency chemicals or rayon; sterilisation in ethylene oxide gas.
Since they published the’ Sanitary Protection Scandal’(a report on the production of sanitary towels, tampons and’disposable’nappies and their health and environmental implications), the level of response has been almost too much for WEN's small City Road office.
Letters and calls have flooded in from health centres and individual women, queries and support from MPs urged on by anxious constituents and reports that all around the country women are meeting and organising.
The overall reaction, explains WEN director, Bernadette Vallely, has been anger.
Anger that for so long manufacturers have kept us in the dark and industry’ experts’continue to make vital decisions on our behalf.
WEN have had their share of reactions from the Sanpro industry too.
’ The tampon manufacturers are furious apparently,’reports Bernadette Vallely.
But responses have been mixed.
’ Some companies have been very conciliatory,’though they've still come out with lines like’if only you'd talked to us first…’.
Sanitary protection companies like to project themselves as caring and helpful.
Smith & Nephew suggests you write to’ Sister Marion’, a sort of Sanpro’agony aunt’, with any questions about their Lil-lets tampons.
But both Smith & Nephew and Procter Gamble, the major producers in this country, are massive multinationals with a large and profitable market to protect.
The Sanpro industry as a whole has been quick to wheel out the public relations machinery, and they've gone to great lengths to reassure women that there really isn't any danger at all.
On the day of the launch of The Campaign For Unbleached Paper, the Association of Sanitary Protection Manufacturers sent their own press release in response to the World in Action expose by courier bike — to all the women's magazines and papers.
Suggestions have been made too that WEN and TV's World In Action were somehow mistaken in their studies or misinterpreted their test results, even though World In Action's tests were undertaken by RECHEM, researchers who have carried out tests for the industry itself.
Such reactions are not at all surprising, given what has recently come to light — despite the sanpro industry's secrecy.
The findings in’ The Sanitary Protection Scandal’are shocking and very disturbing.
The information is all there — detailing the processes of soft paper manufacture and the chemistry that produces dioxins and organochlorines (another set of highly dangerous compounds).
It explains the constituents of sanitary towels, tampons and’ disposable’nappies, the dangers to our health both from dioxin and organochlorine contamination by the very nature and make-up of these products, and the threat posed to the environment by their manufacture and disposal.
WEN have taken the important step in their book too by outlining the basics of organic chemistry.
It is part of their attempt to take some of the mystique out of scientific knowledge that’ can be used, either intentionally or unintentionally, to prevent the public from questioning’(The Sanitary Protection Scandal).
’ We don't want to patronise women.
We want to admit that we are all really quite frightened and show that we're not satisfied’, says Bernadette Vallely.
In the past environmental campaigns themselves have all too often used scientific terminology that baffles and excludes.
If the sanpro industry in this country appears to put women's health low on its agenda, then the multinationals would seem to have even less regard for women in the’ Third World’.
Tests in Malaysia, the Philippines and India have found bacteria counts over 10 times the safety standard — a level that could lead to vaginal infections in some sanitary towels.
The worst culprit?
A Southalls brand made by Smith Nephew.
The tests in Malaysia came in response to complaints about foreign objects found in previously unopened packets: a fishing hook, a needle, cockroach eggs, rat droppings and various unidentified stains.
This contrasts with similar studies in Australia, where no significant contamination was found.
As The Sanitary Protection Scandal puts it, in very understated terms:’ The conclusion might be that international companies supplying’Third World’countries employ lower safety standards for those countries.’
Another case example of international big business creating new markets for itself, then using these countries as a dumping ground for substandard products it couldn't sell in Europe or the United States.
Here, in Britain, the soft paper industry has received a jolt, as WEN's Campaign For Unbleached Paper has raised public (and parliamentary) awareness of its dangers.
Wood pulping and bleaching involving chlorine, we now know, are major sources of dioxins.
And it is estimated that currently 87% of the 1,672,000 tonnes of pulp Britain imports each year has been chlorine-bleached.
Dioxins from the process may be discharged in factory effluent and some traces remain in the paper goods themselves.
Test results shown in the World In Action programme recorded 90 parts per trillion (ppt) for a brand of’ disposable’nappies, 130 ppt for a tampon and 400 ppt for a sanitary towel.
The following day, Dr John Greg of the Medical Research Council tried to tell us that contact with small quantities of dioxins was harmless when he stated in The Independent that 5,000 ppt is a safe level for bleached paper products.
But as Dr Andrew Gilman of Health and Welfare, Canada, has pointed out:’ There is no desirable level of dioxin, when you find a source, you act to diminish it right away.’
Faced with such evidence, supermarkets are clamouring for information to label their goods’ environmentally sound’, and there is an Early Day Motion in Parliament calling for a’chlorine free’paper industry (Sweden already makes 95% of its soft paper without the aid of chlorine).
WEN predict that in the next six months all soft paper manufacturers here will change their practices — labelling items according to their pulping and bleaching process and promoting’ chlorine free’.
But this is only the first stage of WEN's campaign, and one element of the findings in The Sanitary Protection Scandal.
Women's sanitary protection last came under scrutiny with the Toxic Shock Syndrome, a disease where 2,200 cases were reported in the United States up to June 1983 proving fatal in 5% of instances between 1976 and 1982.
While there was a strong impact in the United States, Britain seemed untouched by these discoveries.
This was because of the the smaller number of cases reported (99 by June 1984, with 5 deaths) and the fact that blame was laid mainly at the feet of absorbency, synthetic fibres and deodorising tampons (much more common in the States than here).
All this plus the lower level of media attention, defused the scare in a relatively short time.
Even with Smith & Nephew moving to oxygen bleaching for Lil-lets, and Tambrand's denial that they use chlorine bleaching (though Tampax do contain rayon, produced using chlorine), there are still problems with tampons and sanitary towels.
There's the whole question of disposal.
75% of blocked drains in public places are caused by sanitary products, while off-shore fishermen are increasingly angered by the number of’ buffers’(plastic liners from sanitary towels) clogging their nets and environmentalists worry about the hazard to marine life.
Used Sanpro products also pose a threat to public health as untreated sewage in our coastal waters.
In the case of tampons, apart from the still-present dangers of Toxic Shock Syndrome, doctors have found that many women suffer from drying and ulceration of the vaginal membranes, which itself can allow toxins to enter, and in the United States researchers found fibres from tampons embedded in the vaginal wall.
So we find that what women believed was an easy, imperceptible way of coping with menstruation isn't really the panacea we have been sold.
Talking about’ the trick of the modern menstrual ad campaign’in’Cashing In On The Curse’(from The Female Gaze, The Women's Press), Ann Treneman — writes:’Only a woman knows first-hand the effects of the (menstrual) taboo…
The ads prey upon this first-hand knowledge and exploit such concepts as’ liberation’and’freedom’to seduce us into thinking that there is a ready-made individual cure to what is, in fact, a societal curse.’
In The Sanitary Protection Scandal, WEN haven't told women’ don't use tampons’, but they urge us all to think very carefully before deciding to use them.
Women are something of a’ captive audience’for the Sanpro advertisers.
We will be menstruating for about 30 years of our lives.
And expectations that we work, be active, and conceal as far as possible the very existence of our periods, mean that the instant,’ disposable’,’invisible’products of the soft paper industry are the obvious choice for the vast majority of women.
In the supermarket and the local shop they are, at present, the only one.
But we do now have alternatives.
’ As major consumers’, WEN say in their campaign,’women are in a position of power to influence environmentally damaging manufacturing processes’.
As consumers we can demand a change in the manufacture of products that are threatening our health now.
However, their analysis goes beyond encouraging us to’ vote with our feet’, to a condemnation of consumerism itself: Both for the environmental destruction it causes and the damaging messages it sends women through ads that constantly tell us we're’not being discreet enough’.
It isn't only the British Sanpro industry that needs to be challenged, but the whole basis of industrialisation, our economic system and our notions of’ development’.
But Bernadette  Vallely is confident.
’ People are ready for it.’