

Portrait of the week
The City scandal surrounding the brewing company Guinness deepened.
Morgan Grenfell resigned as the company's merchant bankers, over allegations that it had helped Guinness secretly buy 2.1 million of its own shares.
Mr Roger Seelig, a director of Morgan Grenfell, also resigned and the future of Mr Ernest Saunders, chairman of Guinness, was put in doubt.
At Barlinnie Jail in Scotland, prisoners rioted and took three warders hostage.
Government documents released under the 10-year rule threw new light on Sir Anthony Eden's handling of the Suez crisis in 1956, but stopped short of confirming collusion between Britain, France and Israel in the affair.
In a letter to President Eisenhower, Sir Anthony compared Nasser to Mussolini, and it was revealed that he had felt that the Government should have resigned over the issue.
Lord Stockton, who as Harold Macmillan supported Eden's disastrous offensive, was buried after a private funeral at the church near his house in Sussex.
His grandson and heir, Alexander, revealed that Lord Stockton's dying words had been, ‘I think I will go to sleep now.’
Sir Woodrow Wyatt, chairman of the Tote, and Field Marshall Sir Edwin Bramall, the former Chief of the Defence Staff, were made life peers in the New Year's honours list, while the principal actors in the television series Yes Minister, Paul Eddington and Nigel Hawthorne, were made CBEs.
Violence marred a number of New Year celebrations.
In the worst incident, 100 youths rioted in Lincoln.
THERE was also New Year's violence abroad.
Thirteen people were killed and 1-500 injured as celebrating Filipinos took to the streets, and a further five were killed and 100 arrested in Sydney.
Students in China continued to rally in support of democracy despite government bans, threats and to deliberate flooding of Tiananmen Square in Peking, where protesters gathered on the ice which formed.
Ninety-six people were killed in a suspected arson attack on a hotel whose staff were disaffected in San Juan, the capital of Puerto Rico.
Forty-nine people were killed, but two survived, when a Boeing 707 crashed in the Ivory Coast, and there were nine deaths when a New York to Boston express train crashed near Baltimore.
President Reagan went into hospital for minor prostate surgery and, in a routine check-up, four benign growths were removed from his colon.
A Senate report which would have exonerated the President of any knowledge of the Contra link in the Iranian arms scandal was suppressed by Democrats.
The US administration imposed huge import taxes of up to 200 per cent on goods imported from the EEC.
There was renewed fighting in Chad when government forces captured the oasis town of Fada from Libyan-backed rebels.
Libyan bombers responded by attacking the government-held town of Arada.
In South Africa the Reverend Allan Hendrickse, who is one of only two non-white members of President Botha's Cabinet, led 300 followers onto a whites-only beach in Port Elizabeth and went swimming.
Mr Gorbachev refused to broadcast a New Year Message to America and there were US protests when President Reagan's message to the Soviets was jammed.
In West Germany there was some confusion after a television station accidentally broadcast Chancellor Kohl's 1956 New Year message instead of the 1957 version.
Explosive Justice
On Tuesday, a group of MPs and peers met the Home Secretary on behalf of 17 people convicted in connection with the first two great IRA outrages on the British mainland during the present phase of the Irish troubles.
These outrages were the Birmingham and Guildford pub bombings of the autumn of 1974.
Birmingham was the biggest mass murder in British legal history.
It claimed 21 lives.
It caused the Prevention of Terrorism Act, giving extensive new powers to the police to detain terrorist suspects, and making IRA membership illegal on the mainland for the first time, to be put through Parliament in one 17-hour sitting, by the Home Secretary to whom the description liberal' is most attached, whether in praise or blame: Mr Roy Jenkins.
Five people were killed at Guildford, a town chosen by the bombers because its pubs were frequented by servicemen from local army camps.
What is being suggested to the present Home Secretary should be baldly stated: that every conviction secured in two English courts in connection with two of the most dreadful recent crimes on English soil was a wrongful conviction.
The attitude of many people to such a suggestion must be: so what?
Among MPs and peers, enough dupes or worse are always available to say that such and such a revered British institution — in this case, British justice — is a sham.
Furthermore, Mr Chris Mullin, the author of the book which asserts the innocence of the six people convicted of the Birmingham bombing (Error of Judgement, Chatto and Windus, £10.95) is a former editor of Tribune, one of whose previous works was a novel about that tedious left-wing fantasy: a right-wing coup in Britain.
But the group who were seeing Mr Hurd this week, or who asked to be associated with the visit, included the Tory backbenchers Sir John Biggs-Davison, Sir John Farr and Mr John Wheeler.
There was Lord Scarman of liberal renown, but also Lord Devlin.
The two Home Secretaries of the period of the bombings and trials, Mr Jenkins and Mr Merlyn Rees, are involved.
So are Mr Gerald Kaufman, the shadow Home Secretary, and Mr Roy Hattersley, the deputy Labour leader.
However much those two may pander to the anti-police prejudices of the contemporary Labour Party, they are hardly subversive of the bourgeois order.
Others involved include Lord Fitt and Mr John Hume, who sits at Westminster for one of the IRA's many Irish enemies: the SDLP.
The author of the book Trio]and Error (Hamish Hamilton, £10.95) which puts the case for those found guilty of the Guildford-related offences is Mr Robert Kee, who might be described as an old-fashioned television-documentary liberal.
(Not that this is any reflection on the persuasiveness of Mr Mullin's book.
He too builds up at the very least a case to answer.)
The 17 defendants were convicted on the strength of two groups of evidence: their confessions made in police custody, and forensic tests which found that various of them had been handling explosives shortly before the bombings.
Broadly, and allowing for over-simplification of the two books, Mr Kee and Mr Mullin allege that the confessions were beaten out of them by the police interrogating them, and that the forensic tests were either doctored so as to appear positive, or were otherwise unreliable.
Terrorists always say that sort of thing, it might be objected.
True.
In which case, we must look at the books evidence on both matters, as well as on such matters as the prisoners previous links with the IRA — which in most cases amounted to none — and wether the IRA lauds them as its own.
(It does not.)
Reading these books, no reasonable person — that crucial figure in British justice — could fail to be persuaded that there is now a case for Mr Hurd to answer.
But it is nearly four months since they were published.
In that time, Mr Hurd cannot be said to have stirred himself.
Moreover, none of the allegedly violent police interrogators named in both books have sued for libel.
This is very unsatisfactory.
Perhaps the Home Office is relying on apathy towards a lot of Irish people behind bars.
Then there is the political aspect.
Every minister now looks at his biggest decisions in the light of how they will affect the general election.
Admitting that 17 people were wrongly imprisoned is something whose electoral consequences, if any, are difficult to calculate.
But they were imprisoned under Labour Home Secretaries.
Blame is wide-spread, if blame there be.
One thing, however, would certainly be damaging politically to a Home Secretary: stubbornness as evidence mounts that a great injustice may have been done.
That evidence will surely mount if Mr Hurd fails to cause to be reviewed the convictions in the cases arising out of the Birmingham and Guildford bombings, bombings whose victims should not be allowed to include anyone wrongfully imprisoned for them.
The Third Attempt to Rid Britain of Socialism
Peter Riddell
The end of the nightmare is still nowhere in sight, Professor Stuart Hall of the Open University concluded a recent analysis of Thatcherism in Marxism Today, the Tatler of the fashionable Left.
Mrs Thatcher agrees.
To her at least one, if not two, more Tory victories will be needed to get rid of socialism as a second force in British politics.
Such unprecedented electoral success could lead to further realignment.
But what would Britain be like after three, and possibly four, terms of a Thatcher-dominated government?
The 1983-87 period has in some ways been a wasted opportunity paradoxically perhaps, a period of consolidation between bursts of radical change.
The absence in 1983 of any need to think about, and justify, a second term given the disarray of the opposition not only produced a remarkably thin manifesto (Why take unnecessary risks?) but also, more significantly, led to a loss of momentum.
The 1983-84 session was largely occupied enacting Bills dropped at the election.
And there was insufficient thought about how to use the victory.
It has only been in the last year or so that the Government has started to grapple with major areas of social policy like education and housing.
But normal pre-election caution has led to the deferment until the next parliament of contentious measures like rent de-control, water privatisation and English rates reform.
This experience is why the current manifesto matters.
It is not so much a question of what is promised as of the attitudes of those who will implement the decisions if the Tories are successful.
And it is still if, not when though in this article I am assuming a working Tory majority in the Commons rather than a hung Parliament, which would change everything.
The probability is that in May or October (still a toss-up between them) Mrs Thatcher will offer more of the same, judging by what has been emerging from the dozen policy groups set up to produce ideas for the manifesto.
The groups of ministers, backbenchers and sympathizers have been meeting roughly once a fortnight — breakfast with Lord Young, tea or early evening drinks with Mr Kenneth Clarke and somewhat perfunctory discussions with Mr Nigel Lawson (who has already thought most thoughts).
The word is that there will be few surprises.
The essence of Mrs Thatcher's vision for the 1990s is negative to make it impossible to return to what she calls socialism or, more accurately, the interventionist welfare capitalism of the 1960s and 1970s.
By the early 1990s most of the remaining state-owned industry will have been sold to the private sector.
Electricity supply, steel and water will go quickly, to be followed by the partial privatisation of British Coal and British Rail.
I also doubt whether the BBC would survive a Tory victory in its present form.
Yet if the nationalised industries largely disappear as a’ problem’there remain the local authorities and the public services.
The result of Mr Kenneth Baker's current thinking on a national curriculum, on a new negotiating structure for teachers' pay and conditions ind on increasing the independence ind financial responsibility of individual schools would be to make local education authorities largely redundant.
Similarly, the increasing use of urban development corporations ind Whitehall grants in inner cities would further undermine local authorities.
Together with the community charge and national business rate all this indicates the need for a further change in local government structure to wards single-tier multi-purpose authorities.
A lot of the problems of alleged and actual extremism by local councils might, of course, be solved by changing the local voting system (not necessarily the thin end of a nation wedge) but Mrs Thatcher will never consider that.
On the economic side it is a fair bet that there will be a public spending squeeze (sooner rather than later), with defence and social security reviews (though neither will be given such titles).
Britain may at last fully enter the European Monetary System — and nothing much will change.
Higher marginal tax rates will be reduced, though current envious comparisons with the US can be misleading, given that what matters is the effective rather than nominal rate before various allowances.
Perhaps most intriguing of all there will be a further attempt to undermine union power in the public sector by moving away from national agreements towards increasing regional differentials in pay.
But will ill this produce a dynamic self-sustaining enterprise culture'?
Possibly, in some sectors and some parts of the country, though I am sure we will still be talking about unfavourable productivity and unit cost comparisons with West Germany and the US.
It will be the familiar story of the management of Britain's relative, if not absolute, decline.
The social consequences are also ambiguous.
The whole thrust of the current strategy whether to increase the number of shareholders or to extend parental choice in education is to strengthen the position of the existing middle class and to bring the ‘new' technological and service working class within the capitalist net.
It is like the 1867 Reform Act which enfranchised the’ respectable’working class and similarly it may benefit the Conservatives electorally.
But a sizeable minority may be left outside an increasingly alienated under-class, especially in the inner cities, who may exacerbate the very problem of law and order on which the Tories have placed such emphasis.
The fundamental question is whether a third or fourth Thatcher term would produce irreversible changes.
The intellectual tide is still with Thatcherism and the traditional bastions of Labour power, big-city local authorities, council estates, nationalised industries and trade unions, have been challenged and undermined.
By the early 1990s little may be heard of taking even British Telecom and British Gas back into public or social ownership.
The right of tenants to buy their council houses is already the new consensus and Mr John Patten's initiatives promise the end of Town Hall controlled estates and a revival of the private rented sector.
By the early-to-mid-1990s the landscape may have changed, as it did in the 1900s and 1940s.
But nothing in politics is forever and Mrs Thatcher's luck could run out.
The Westland crisis showed how even, or perhaps especially, the most self-confident Prime Minister can trip.
It was nearly fatal a year ago.
It could be so next time.
Health permitting, her early retirement would be out of character.
As a crusader Mrs Thatcher believes there are more battles to be fought and she will go on fighting them.
But when the end comes it may well, as so often in the past, be bloody, both for her and her party.
Peter Riddell is political editor of die Financial Times.
Diary
Having a programme suppressed the PR word is’ postponed’by the BBC is rather like having a book banned by the Clogthorpe Public Libraries Committee.
It is a bureaucratic process.
Spokesmen make statements but no one comes forward to say,’ I did it, for this and that reason.’
My film adaptation of Anthony Delano's richly comic book slip-Up’ How Fleet Street caught Ronnie Biggs and Scotland Yard lost him’cost the not unastronomical sum of £600,000 to make, so should it turn out to be money down the drain the BBC will have to face some embarrassing questions about why it embarked on it in the first place if it thought the story might be defamatory.
The fact is that the material has been around for nearly ten years and no one has ever sued.
Slipper of the Yard objected to some passages in Delano's book but did not resort to litigation.
He was shown my television script and took objection to some passages in that also Some amendments were made, not entirely to his satisfaction but certainly to the satisfaction of the BBC's legal department, since the thumbs-up was then given for the production to go ahead.
Why, then, the attack of cold feet when the programme was in the can and the billing in the Radio Times?
Our distinguished, and rightly furious, director James Cellan Jones s quoted in the Times as believing that the BBC has lost its nerve in the wake of the Panorama libel case, which ended in a £250,000 settlement.
For myself, I believe the BBC has gone generally chicken in the wake of Norman Tebbit's assault, and is simply keeping its head below the parapet.
A lot of creative people's time will have been wasted if the programme doesn't go out.
We could all equally well have been doing something else with those months of our lives, such as making a programme for Thames or decorating our front rooms.
The desire not to make waves is a particularly depressing and insipid form of self-censorship.
I have come across it on the American networks, where all script conferences are attended by a legal-looking chap whose only contribution is to say’ We do not want to offend any groups’from time to time.
By’ groups’he means not only ethnic persons but anyone who might cause trouble.
If that's how it is to be here the BBC might as well change its motto to’ Anything for a quiet life’.
If and when the Post Office is privatised, will our postage stamps continue to bear a portrait of the monarch?
If so, it will be the only privately owned business, outside the cheap souvenir trade, to make use of the Queen's likeness on its products.
While engravings of Queen Victoria were widely used to advertise Bovril, soap etc, most manufacturers drew the line at depicting the royal personage on their actual packaging.
It has subsequently been a convention that the royal family may not be used to puff commercial products, even (indeed, especially) by royal warrant-holders.
So where does that leave a privatised Post Office, particularly with its range of fancy commemorative stamps aimed at the philatelic market, each with its tiny silhouette of the Queen in the corner?
If British Telecom's catchpenny peripheral services — dial-a-sex-kitten and so on are any yard stick, we may expect special issue stamps to become even more gimmicky and tacky than they ire already, come privatisation.
Does Her Majesty wish to be involved in this tawdry merchandising?
I think Mr Michael Shea should tell us.
My modest prediction for 1957 is that the moral debate on Aids will spread from the pulpit and the banqueting suite to the courts.
London's chatterbox circles are a-buzz these days with the names of famous personalities who are supposed to have Aids.
Inevitably, one of these names is going to get into the public prints and he will sue for libel.
While, on the face of it, his case might rest on its being detrimental to his career to suggest that he is at death's door, it seems likely that much of the evidence, especially for the defence, will be called to no other purpose than to establish whether, to put it mor euphemistically than it will be put in court, he has been putting himself about.
Thus we shall be plunged into a show trial of the public morality every bit as much a barometer of our times as the Lady Chatterley case back in the Sixties.
If I were a publisher, I should give John Mortimer a fat retainer to stand by ready to cover the Aids cause celebre from day one.
One vanity I am rarely guilty of is name-dropping, simply because I can never remember a name long enough to drop it.
It is a condition that has so worsened over the years that I no longer dare perform introductions I simply mumble’ You two must know each other’and leave them to sort it out.
The more famous or familiar the name, the worse I am.
Recently during a radio interview about my play Mr and Mrs Nobody, I realised to my horror that the names of its two stars, Judi Dench and Michael Williams, had totally left my head.
My panic reduced the interview to waffle.
On another occasion, having been introduced to a pop personality at a cocktail party, his name — it was then not as celebrated outside his own world as it is now had left me within five seconds.
Convinced for some reason that he must be called Paul, I addressed him as such.
’ Bob,’corrected Mr Geldof, for it was he.
I recall, in my confusion, being inanely impressed by a pop star with enough upstairs to remember his own name.
I was peeved to see Robert Kilroy-Silk credited with inventing the egg trick in a recent colour supp. profile.
Not that he made the claim himself Mr Kilroy-Silk would readily acknowledge that he learned the egg trick from Mike Molloy, now editor of the Sunday Mirror, at a house party.
Molloy learned it from me at the Imperial Hotel, Blackpool, during one of the duller party conferences.
I in turn appropriated it from Charles Lyte, the Mirror's education correspondent, who used to perform it at NUT gatherings.
To do the egg trick you need a pint glass, a square biscuit tin lid, a matchbox, a stout shoe, an egg, and a large Scotch.
Fill the glass with water, then place the biscuit tin lid over it, lip uppermost.
Shape the matchbox sleeve into a funnel and position it in the exact centre of the lid with the egg perched upon it.
Next, drink the large Scotch to steady the nerves.
Then, grasping the shoe and using its heel as a club, smite the biscuit tin lid with such force that it flies across the room and the egg plops into the glass, unbroken.
Impressive though the egg trick is when successfully completed, it is even more spectacular when botched it is amazing how much floor and wall surface can be covered by one small cylinder of albumen and yolk.
The secret is utter confidence — a micro-second of self-doubt and you face a very large cleaning bill.
Mr Kilroy-Silk, a high flier on the egg circuit, tells me he can do the trick with three eggs simultaneously.
As some of his political enemies in Knowsley North might say, he would, wouldn't he?
The Reincarnated Sheriff of Nottingham Awaits the Return of Robin Hood
Auberon Waugh
A correspondent in Nottingham assures me that this year every police vehicle and every ambulance in the county carries on both sides a large photograph of the Chief Constable, Mr C. McLachlan, enjoining temperance.
If he is right, it may well be that this policeman has finally made the break from vulgar self-advertisement into the megalomaniac personality cult fantasies of a Kim Il Sung or a Robert Maxwell.
I know nothing about Mr McLachlan he does not appear in Who's Who: whether he hails from Scotland, Ireland, Korea or Czechoslovakia; whether he is Catholic, Presbyterian or Buddhist; whether he is married with children (sorry, kids) or celibate; whether there have been tragedies in his life, or whether it has been an uninterrupted progression to his present exalted situation.
Perhaps he is a merry, convivial sort of fellow in private life, who likes nothing more than to crack a bottle of wine with his friends when there is no possibility of having to drive a motor-car afterwards.
I do not know.
But having followed his behaviour over the past few Christmas seasons, I cannot help wondering what sort of cringing helot population is to be found in the County of Nottingham which is prepared to put up with such a Chief Constable.
Are there no controls over the extent to which a demented public servant can make a public nuisance of himself?
Failing such controls, is there nothing left of the spirit of Robin Hood and his merry men in Nottingham to tackle this monstrous reincarnation of the High Sheriff?
For the past four years, Nottingham has led the field in police harassment of motorists over the Christmas period, and come bottom of the league in the proportion of compulsory breath tests which proved justified.
For the previous three years, Nottingham police forced an average 2,561 drivers a year to stop their cars, get out of them and blow into a plastic bag.
An average of 52 drivers, or 3.2 per cent of those stopped and humiliated in this way were found to give a positive reading.
Compare this with Gloucester, for instance, which tested 300 drivers last year, of whom 75 proved positive; or Thames Valley police who this year recorded 332 breath tests in the ten days up to 30 December.
Of these 74, or 22.3 per cent, were positive.
However, the figures of 2,561 drivers humiliated for a 3.2 per cent return were only the average over the previous three years in Nottingham.
This year, the Year of the McLachlan Photographs, Nottingham police decided to have a field day.
They tested 5,600 drivers, and achieved a record score of 149 drivers over the limit 2.66 per cent of those who were stopped, humiliated and threatened.
The only squeak of protest so far has come from a Law Society spokesman, Mr Jeremy Allen, who is also a Nottingham solicitor:’ An enormous number of people had had their journeys interrupted and it has caused them concern.
I don't think that is good for police-public relations.’
Damn police-public relations.
It is time to call in the military.
How dare the Nottinghamshire police suppose they can throw their weight around in this way?
Out of every hundred drivers they stopped, they had no business to stop 97.
’ If this means fewer funerals and less hospital visits, it is to be greatly welcomed,’intoned Mr Peter Bottomley, Minister of Transport.
Of course he is right that funerals are often rather gloomy, and it can be quite a bore to visit people in hospital.
But both are things we must be prepared to do on occasion, and both are preferable to staying at home and watching a lot of odious rubbish on television.
Yet it is to this that the McLachlans and Bottomleys seem determined to condemn us.
I can well understand that the political and governing classes are unhappy to see citizens associating freely in each other 's homes, in pubs and private clubs.
They have no control of us there.
They do not know what we are getting up to, what we are saying about-them.
Far better condemn the whole nation to watching television.
What they are trying to achieve, these people, is to put an end to all social life for those who live in the country, and most social life for those who live in towns.
We shall then be the slaves of our television sets.
Perhaps it is the weakness of their cases which explains the hysteria, the over-blown rhetoric and bogus indignation used to justify these measures.
It is claimed that a fifth of road fatalities say 1,150 deaths a year can be attributed to’ drunk’driving: a driver has more than the permitted level of alcohol in his blood.
But that claim assumes that every such accident is attributable to this cause.
Even if one accepts the figures, it is apparent that four out of five fatal accidents are caused by people who are stone-cold sober.
The conclusion is inescapable that in a fair proportion of these fatal accidents where one driver is over the limit, the’ drunk’driver is the innocent party.
Perhaps it would be reasonable to assume that 550 deaths are caused in England, Wales and Scotland every year by drunken driving.
But rather than be accused of overstating my case, I will leave the figure at somewhere between 550 and 1,000.
Total annual mortality in England, Wales and Scotland hovers around the 630,000 mark.
Drunken driving therefore accounts for between 055 and .16 of one per cent of total deaths.
This means that the odds are between 630 to one and 1,176 to one against each of us dying as a result of drunken driving.
Since many drunken drivers succeed in killing only themselves, the odds against anyone being killed by another drunken driver are even longer.
Is this sufficient reason to force all citizens to cower in their homes, watching what proletarian rubbish has been chosen for them on television and being preached at, no doubt, by the likes of Esther Rantzen and Mr Donald’ Don’Mathews?
Donald, who describes himself as a Friend of the Earth, does not himself hold a driving licence, but has taken it upon himself to publish a list of prominent men and women who have had the misfortune to be caught driving over the limit a judge, a chief superintendent, various footballers, actors, television personalities — in what he chooses to call his Hall of Shame: It is the number of celebrities we have discovered that is so shocking.
Even those who ought to know better, like senior police officers and judges.
have been convicted.
We are creating the first annual Hall of Shame to show that personalities are willing to take the plaudits, but do not seem too willing to accept the responsibilities that go with their positions.
In fact he had found only 17 such personalities.
The list included two acquaintances and one very dear friend of mine.
The question that Englishmen yes, and Englishwomen must decide is whether or not they are prepared to knuckle under to the unspeakable creep Mathews, the demented McLachlan and the absurd Bottomley.
If they are not going to speak out soon they might as well accept a life sentence of watching Esther Rantzen.