

Parasite Communities
Edited by Gerald W Esch, Department of Biology, Wake Forest University, USA.
Albert O Bush, Department of Zoology, Brandon University, Canada and John M Aho, Savannah River Ecology Laboratory, USA
Until recently the potential role of parasitic systems as models for understanding patterns and processes in community ecology has not been fully explored.
As parasites represent what is probably the most prevalent life style, the examination of their systems is extremely important.
This book assesses current perspectives in this field where much new knowledge is being introduced with increasing frequency.
As well as identifying patterns and processes which explain structure in the specific helminth communities of both intermediate and definitive hosts, it also contains substansive new observations which add to the understanding of the overall ecological and evolutionary relationships of parasitic communities.
Taking examples from many hosts including molluscs, marine and freshwater fish, amphibia, reptiles, birds and mammals, this book shows how parasitic communities are influenced by a multitude of biotic and abiotic factors.
it examines how these factors affect the transmission dynamics of helminth parasites and provides models for multi-species parasite-host communities.
This book will provide essential information on parasitic helminth communities for all those involved and interested in parasitology and community ecology.
Patterns and processes in helminth parasite communities: an overview — G. Esch.
A Shostak, DHJ Marcogliese and TM Goater: Host populations as resources defining parasite community organization — P Price; Spatial scale and the processes structuring a guild of larval trematode parasites — WP Sousa; Guild structure of larval trematodes in molluscan hosts: prevalence, dominance and significance of competition — A Kuris; Helminth communities in marine fishes — John C Homes; Helminth communities in freshwater fish: structured communities or stochastic assemblages?— CR Kennedy; Helminth communities of amphibians and reptiles: comparative approaches to understanding patters and processes — John M Aho; Helminth communities in avian hosts: determinants of patterns — AP Bush; Helminth communities of mammalian hosts: concepts att he infracommunity, component and compound community levels — DB Pence; Models for multi-species parasite-host communities — AP Dobson; Free-living communities and alimentary tract helminths: hypotheses and pattern analysis — D Simberloff; Concluding remarks — AO Bush and JM Aho; Index.
October 1989 c250pp Hardback: 0-412-33540-9: c. £35.00
Contents:
C Bryant, Dean of Science, Australian National University, Carolyn Behm, Department of Biochemistry, Australian National University, Australia, with a chapter by Michael J. Howell.
Biochemical Adaptation in Parasites
Parasites — from protozoa to helminths — occupy many environments that have markedly different physical and chemical characteristics.
As many parasites occupy more than one environment during their life-cycles, they must possess suites of characteristics that can be expressed at the proper time.
Selection pressure operates on all stages of life cycles and has profound effects on the physiology and biochemistry of parasites.
The purpose of this book is to survey present knowledge of parasite metabolism and show how it reflects adaptation to a particular environment.
It is written from the point of view of zoologists although it is biochemical in content.
The nature of parasitic adaptation.
Energy metabolism.
Digestion and uptake of nutrients.
Host immunity and parasite adaptation — MJ Howell.
Biochemical adaptation and the "magic bullet" .
Biochemical variation in parasites.
Bibliography.
Appendix — Enzymes discussed in the text.
Index.
June 1989 c 220pp Hardback: 0-412-32530-6: c. £35.00
Contents:
Edited by Eva Bennett, Carolyn Behm, and C Bryant, all at the Department of Zoology, The Australian National University, Australia
The Comparative Biochemistry of Parasite Helminths
Parasitic helminths which invade the body cavities and tissues of man and animals have developed specialised biochemical adaptations appropriate to this lifestyle.
The study of their comparative biochemistry is concerned with determining the ways in which host and parasite metabolism differ.
The application of this information is vital in devising strategies for controlling parasitic infestation.
Comparative Biochemistry of Parasitic Helminths is a challenging assessment of current ideas in the field written by acknowledged world authorities.
Preface.
Developmental regulation of ascarid energy metabolism — R Komuniecki and PR Komuniecki; 5-Hydroxytrytamine glucose transport and intermediary metabolism of helminths — DF Mettrick; The functions of the catecholamines and 5-hydroxytryptamine in parasitic nematodes — D Smarth; Physiological significance and comparative biochemistry of complex II — H Oya and K Kita; Oxygen and lower metazoa — C Bryant; How do parasitic helminths use and survive oxygen and oxygen metabolites?— RK Prichard; The role of glycerol in the metabolism of hymenolepis diminute — S Kohlhagen; Intermediary carbohydrate metabolism in adult schistosomes — DP McManus; Detoxification reactions in parasitic helminths — J Barrett; Parasitic transport and inactivation functions involved in efficacy of antihelmintics — RC Rew; The molecular biology of drug resistance in parasitic helminths — GC Coles; The role of comparative biochemistry in parasites and its role in drug resistance — species differences in tubulin — E Lacey; Systematic effects of helminth infection as revealed by serum LDH isozymes and kinetic parameters of transport of the host tissue — P Venkateswara et al; Index.
June c. 198pp Hardback: 0-412-32730-9: c. £35.00
Contents: