

In celebration of what was arguably mankind's greatest achievement to put a man on the moon, Spaceprints is making you an offer which is too good to miss.
Not only are we offering two exceptional videos at a special price, we are giving away a free slide set.
Buy both Apollo XI and Apollo XVII videos at a specially reduced price of £18 the pair, and you will receive a free Apollo slide set worth £8.50.
A record of that momentous adventure from launch to recovery.
(28 mins approx.)
Apollo XI — "The Eagle has Landed" 
Mans last visit to the moon.
The video includes mission highlights, including the most expensive vehicle ever to be built, the Moonbuggy and previews Skylab, Apollo/Soyuz and Shuttle.
(28 mins approx.)
Apollo XVII — "On The Shoulders of Giants" 
Captured on film by Nasa and made available to you by the combined efforts of Spaceprints and Armagh Planetarium, these videos are  indispensable to anyone interested in space exploration.
Four new titles are added to our range of space videos.
Two of them have primarily only been available as a single video "Race to the Stars," but by popular request are now available as individual programmes.
Other New Spaceprints Video Titles
traces the history of the "Space Race" from Sputnik to Shuttle, including the first man in Space, the Soyuz, Mercury, Mariner and Viking programmes, and of course the Apollo manned moon landings, and the Shuttle, its success and tragedy.
(30 mins approx.)
 "Journey Into Space" 
is a video star guide to the Northern Sky, and plots the changing positions of the Stars throughout the year.
Full of excellent computer graphic techniques, and high resolution images of nebulae etc…(30 mins approx.)
 "Graphic Guide to the Heavens" 
A documentary style look at Space, past, present and future, including developments in rocketry, satellites, space laboratories and man's future journeys to the unexplored planets (54 mins.
VHS only).
 "Space — The Frontiers and Beyond" 
A tour of the Solar System, presented by Isaac Asimov.
An excellent mix of real animated images from NASA/JPL and clever computer graphics accompanies by The Plant Suite by Holst. (54 mins VHS Hi-Fi Stereo)
"Isaac Asimov — Voyage to the Outer Planets and Beyond!
The first re-usable space vehicle despite its setback the Shuttle still remains "A most remarkable flying machine" .
This video is a record of its maiden flight from lift off to touch down.
(Approx. 28 mins)
Other Videos in the Spaceprints Range
Space Shuttle
Exploration of the Red Planet culminated in the unmanned Viking missions.
N.A.S.A.
obtained the first, and still the only surface images of the planet.
(Approx. 28 mins)
Planet Mars
A video encyclopedia of space, covering subjects such as the Big Bang, The Solar System, Black Holes, Comets and Meteors, Stars and Galaxies etc.
(Approx. 70 mins)
Spacewatch
This programme covers the earlier and most rewarding stages of the mission and includes the encounters with Jupiter and Saturn.
(Approx. 28 mins)
Voyager
Notes Ordering from Spaceprints just couldn't be simpler.
All you have to do is complete the order form specifying the items you require.
then return it to us at the address below.
Price List & Order Form
Individual customers must enclose a cheque or P/O for the full cost.
Organisations, such as schools, may place an official order and pay on receipt of invoice.
Overseas customers, including Eire, should send either International Money Orders or cheques drawn on London banks only.
Please note that foreign P/Os are not acceptable.
Overseas orders (except Eire) are subject to an additional 25% charge for postage.
Please allow up to 28 days for delivery.
Normally most orders are despatched within this period, but during busy periods, and at times of stock exhaustion it may be necessary to wait 28 days.
If you require an order by a specific date please telephone before ordering.