

the winter warmth line FREE 0800 289 404  
KEY POINTS ON KEEPING WARM
Have hot food and drink each day see page 4
Take some exercise each day see page 4
Wrap up warmly before going out — no matter how short the trip see page 4
Always wear a hat or cap out of doors see page 4
Keep warm in bed at night see page 4
Keep at least one room well heated in very cold weather see page 5
Make sure your home is well insulated see pages 5 — 9
If you have problems with fuel bills or risk disconnection — seek help straight away see pages 10 — 11
BEING A GOOD NEIGHBOUR
What to do if you find someone who may have hypothermia see pages 13 -14
Warning signs for neighbours see page 14
Help the Aged Age Concern Neighbourhood Energy Action A joint venture by Help the Aged, Age Concern, Neighbourhood Energy Action, the Departments of Health and Social Security, and the Welsh Office.
Keeping warm is a vital part of keeping yourself well in winter.
This is especially true for those who may be particularly vulnerable, such as elderly people, people with chronic illness, or young children.
This booklet has been produced to help you help yourself and tells you where you can get the advice you need.
Amongst other things, the food you eat, the clothes you wear and the way you are using heat in your home are very important.
There are ways of paying your fuel bills which make budgeting a lot easier.
There are grants for insulation and you may live in an area where local Community Insulation Projects could draughtproof and insulate your home for you.
And there are a number of organisations who can provide you with sound, knowledgeable advice locally.
if you need more information or immediate advice for yourself or on behalf of a neighbour or friend ring: the winter warmth line FREE 0800 289 404
The right food and drink are vitally important to keeping warm and healthy in the long winter days.
During cold weather, hot meals and plenty of hot drinks will make you feel warmer inside.
Have at least one proper meal a day, hot if possible.
Eat plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables when you can.
And remember that bread, milk, meat, fish, eggs, potatoes and baked beans are good sources of protein, energy and vitamins.
A warm drink before going to bed may help to keep you warm.
And it might be a good idea to keep a vacuum flask filled with a hot drink by your bedside in case you wake up in the night feeling cold.
KEEPING YOURSELF WARM
Food is fuel
As we get older our bodies are not as good at keeping warm as they used to be.
Circulation problems, arthritis, other medical conditions or a poor appetite can add to this.
This is why it is so very important to keep "on the move" .
When you walk around or take any form of exercise, extra heat is produced inside your body, so any activity of this kind, no matter how leisurely, will contribute to keeping you warm.
Avoid sitting down for long periods without a break.
Try to space out any jobs you have to do so that you can alternate resting times with activity.
In very cold or icy weather some form of indoor exercise is preferable to going outdoors.
Keeping active
Do not underestimate just how cold it can be outside.
Wrapping up warmly
If you have to go out in very cold weather, warm underwear and several light layers of clothing will help to keep you warm.
Always wear a cap or hat, as a very large proportion of your body heat is lost through the top of the head.
If it is windy as well as cold, remember particularly to wear gloves, a hat and a scarf.
Some items of warm clothing may not seem very fashionable today, but they can be very effective.
It is also important to wear strong, warm shoes.
At home, several layers of clothing (rather than one very thick one) will keep you warm during the day by trapping layers of warm air between them.
Thermal underwear, bed socks and a night cap will also help to keep you warm at night.
Generally, clothes made from natural fibres such as wool or cotton will keep you warmer than clothes made from synthetic fibres.
But there are now synthetic fibres on the market which are specially designed to be light yet very warm.
Hot water bottles are useful for keeping you warm at any time of the day or night.
Rubber hot water bottles should be filled with water that is not too hot and should be covered to avoid any risk of scalds through leakage.
An electric blanket is also useful for keeping you warm at night, but remember that for reasons of safety nearly all electric blankets (with the exception of some modern overblankets) need to be switched off before you go to bed.
Never use a hot water bottle and an electric blanket together, as this is extremely dangerous.
Temperatures can fall very low during the night so some form of heating in the room where you sleep is advisable.
Make sure you follow the manufacturer's safety instructions.
A wall thermometer may be helpful.
Staying warm
In very cold weather it might be worth living and sleeping in the same room so that you only need to keep one room well heated.
Avoid sleeping overnight in an easy chair.
It is much better to have your bed moved in if you can.
Even if you live and sleep in the same room, try to stay active.
Some electricity boards operate "Budget Warmth" schemes designed to guarantee one warm room.
Ask at your local electricity board shop or office for details.
Staff at your local gas showroom can give advice on appropriate low-cost gas heaters.
This section sets out how you can keep your home warmer through draughtproofing and insulation, and by making better use of the heating you have.
Following on from this, the next section describes some of the help that is currently available both from government sources and government-funded projects to make your home warm.
KEEPING YOUR HOME WARMER
All the heat inside your house will eventually escape to the outside through windows, walls, ceiling, floors and so o.
But just how long it takes for the heat to flow out will depend on how well insulated and draughtproofed your home is.
Keeping the heat inside
Sitting in a draughty room will lower your body temperature and make you feel cold and uncomfortable.
But the problem of draughts can be simply and effectively solved by filling in any gaps around windows, doors or skirting boards with draughtproofing materials.
Remember, floor level draughtproofing materials should be fitted securely and not be loose-lying as they can be a hazard for falls.
Draughtproofing materials need not be expensive, are easy to fit and are available at most hardware and department stores.
if you living on a low income, you may also be ale to get help with the cost — see pages 8-9 for details.
If you can not fit the materials yourself, ask a friend or relation you trust to do it for you.
Your local Community Insulation Project may also be able to help with the installation — see page 8 for details.
Remember — always leave a little ventilation to keep the air fresh and for gas and coal fires to burn safely.
Never block ventilation bricks.
Put metal or plastic around the sides of doors.
Fit draught excluders to the bottoms of doors.
Hang a heavy curtain over the front door to make the hall warmer.
Get a special cover for the letter box.
Draughtproofing doors
If your windows do not fit properly, you can lose a lot of heat.
So seal gaps in window frames, between window frames and walls and between the frame and the opening parts of each window.
You can leave the top edge of some windows free of draughtproofing to allow a little ventilation.
Double glazing can be very expensive.
But simple double glazing by fitting plastic sheeting to your window frames using double-sided tape, or magnetic strip, is cheap and effective.
But make sure the sheeting is easily detachable so that it does not prevent you getting through the window in case of fire.
Hang heavy curtains or curtains with thermal linings.
When you draw the curtains in the evening, remember not to cover radiators which are under the windows.
Get the Energy Efficiency Office's Home Energy Fact Files on draughtproofing and DIY double glazing.
See page 15 for details.
Draughtproofing windows
If your home has a loft, heat which escapes through the ceiling could be substantially reduced by insulating your loft floor.
If there is easy access to the loft the this can be a relatively simple job.
You can obtain the Energy Efficiency Office's Home Energy Fact File on Loft Insulation.
See page 15.
Also see page 9 for details of home insulation grants.
Insulating the loft
The quicker heat escapes from your hot water tank, the more often you will need to switch on the water heating to warm it up.
For less than £10 you can buy an approved 80mm (3inch) tank jacket to cut down on heat loss.
Check that the jacket has been made to the current British Standard by looking for the label with the "Kitemark" symbol.
Insulating the tank like this will mean your water will stay hot for a longer time, and so should reduce water heating costs.
If you are on a low income you may also be eligible for help towards the cost of the jacket — see page 9.
Ensure that you are familiar with any heating controls the system may have such as a time clock or programmer.
If you have any difficulties, ask someone you know and trust to explain them to you.
Insulating the hot water tank
Using heat wisely
If you have central heating:
Se the room thermostat at a temperature which you find comfortable and leave it on that setting, allowing the thermostat to control the temperature of the room.
If you then find the room getting too hot, do not open the windows.
Instead, check the thermostat setting and, if necessary, turn it down a degree or two until you find the temperature you are most comfortable with.
If you want to warm rooms in very cold temperatures set the heating to come on earlier rather than turning it up higher.
Have your boiler serviced once a year to ensure it is running at peak efficiency and is safe.
Put kitchen foil, shiny side facing you, on the wall behind any radiators fitted on outside walls to reflect heat.
Fix small shelves about two inches above the radiators.
This will push warm air towards the centre of the room.
Try to choose heaters which give out enough heat to suit the size of the room.
If you are buying a new heater, showroom staff should be able to advise on this.
If your home is run on individual fires or heaters:
Where possible, buy a heater with an in-built thermostat.
This type of heater will shut itself off when the room is warm enough, and then switch on again once the temperature has cooled.
Alternatively, you could use a three pin plug with a built-in thermostat, available from electrical retailers.
Remember that standard electric fires — such as electric bar fires and fan heaters — are particularly costly to run.
Check whether an off-peak electric storage heater or a gas fire might be better choice.
If you have an open fire you should keep the grate filled with a 3 to 4 inch layer of fuel and regulate the burning rate by carefully using the air control at the front of the grate.
You can get advice on how to make the most of our heating system.
Ask at your local gas or electricity showroom or Real Fire Heating Centre or obtain the Home Energy Fact Files on heating controls and heating systems from the Energy Efficiency Office.
See page 15 for details.
Never sit too close to fires.
Put guards on all open fires.
Safety
Do not dry wet clothes on or close to heaters.
Apart from the fire risk involved, this could allow the spread of moist air to the rest of the house, and might lead to condensation problems.
British Gas will do free safety checks for elderly people who live alone, and some electricity boards will visit your home and advise you.
Always remember to ask for identification from any caller before you open the door.
Social services departments may give disabled people devices to help them operate heaters in cases where they establish need.
For further information about the ways in which you can make your home more energy efficient and make the most of the fuel you buy, ring 01-691 9000 and ask for a copy of the Home Energy Fact Files.
Alternatively write to Department of Energy, Energy Efficiency Office, Blackhorse Road, London SE99 6TU.
Community groups in many parts of the country have trained staff who will install insulation and fit draughtproofing at little or no cost for people on low incomes.
These groups are sponsored by the Department of Energy and the Training Commission.
They are co-ordinated by the charity Neighbourhood Energy Action (NEA).
If you are receiving Income Support, Family Credit or Housing Benefit, then your local project should be able to help you.
As well as actually carrying out the practical work, project staff will be able to advise you in advance of the work that will be necessary and the grants available to meet the cost of materials.
Draughtproofing grants are only available if there is a Community Insulation Project operating in your area.
HELP TO MAKE YOUR HOME WARMER
Local help
If you want to be put in touch with a local Community Insulation Project, ring the Winter Warmth Line and ask for your name and address to be passed to Neighbourhood Energy Action.
If there is a Community Insulation Project in your area, NEA will arrange for you to be contacted by them as soon as possible.
Or you can write to NEA at 2/4 Bigg Street, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NEl lUW.
Grants are available towards the cost of loft insulation under the Homes Insulation Scheme.
If you are receiving Income Support, Family Credit or Housing Benefit you may be able to get a grant for 90% of the cost up to a maximum of £144.
Home insulation grants
However, your local council will be able to tell you if you are eligible and provide you with an application form.
Owner occupiers and private tenants, local authority tenants or housing association tenants, who have their landlord's permission, can apply.
If you use a local Community Insulation Project to insulate your loft, they will deal with all aspects of your application for you.
The council may send someone round to look at your home.
If they do, ask for identification before you open the door.
Once the council have approved your application you will need to:
Insulate the whole of your loft (using an approved material mentioned on the list provided by your local council).
If they are not already lagged, lag the cold water tank and pipes in the loft space.
Lag the hot water tank.
When you have completed the work you can claim the grant.
You will need to get a receipt for the materials if you do the work yourself or the bill from the contractor if you have the work done for you.
Get a claim form from your council and return it to them together with the receipt or bill.
Do not start work before the council has written to say that you may go ahead.
If you do, the grant will not be paid.
Your local council can make a grant towards improving or repairing your home, and that can include a grant for making your home warmer.
For example, you can get a grant to help with putting in a hot water system if you do not already have one.
Ask for details at your local council office.
Home improvement grants
The gas regions and electricity boards have schemes to help people pay for their fuel more easily.
There are:
PAYING THE FUEL BILLS
Budget schemes
coin and token meters.
weekly, fortnightly or monthly budget schemes.
saving stamps.
flexible payment schemes.
Ask for details of what is available at your local gas showroom or electricity board shop or their offices.
If you use solid fuel many approved coal merchants provide budget schemes and supply small quantities.
Income Support is available to those not in full-time work who are finding it difficult to manage.
Grants and loans are also available from the Social Fund to help people who cannot meet exceptional expenses from their regular income.
Cash help
Community Care Grants are non-repayable payments to help those in priority groups, such as elderly people and disabled people, lead independent lives in the community.
Grants may be awarded to those leaving institutional care or to help people to continue to live in the community rather than enter institutional care.
Sometimes grants are awarded to ease exceptional pressures on families.
Help may be available for things such as bedding, heaters, the installation or re-siting of a meter or for reconnection charges if your fuel supply has been cut off.
These grants are normally paid only for items of £30 and over and are only available to people receiving Income support, if they have savings of less than £500.
Grants are not available to pay for fuel bills.
Budgeting Loans can be made to help meet important expenses for which you have difficulties in budgeting.
You must however, be getting Income Support to qualify.
Budgeting Loans are repayable and are not available to help towards mains fuel consumption and standing charges.
Crisis Loans are available to anyone who needs financial help to meet the expenses of an emergency or other unexpected payments, whether you are getting Income Support or not.
In exceptional circumstances it may be possible to get a Crisis Loan for fuel costs.
Crisis Loans are repayable.
If you want further information about Social Security benefits ring 0800 666 555.
Your call is free and goes to a central advisory unit rather than to your local Social Security office.
During periods of very cold weather, you may in some cases be able to claim an additional £5 for each very cold week.
This will apply if you have savings of below £500 and are receiving Income Support.
One of the following conditions must also apply to you:
Cold Weather Payments
You or your partner are aged 60 or over, and you are getting the pensioner or higher pensioner premium
You or your partner are long-term sick or disabled, and you are getting the disability or severe disability premium.
You have a child under five years of age.
You have a child who is disabled and for whom you receive the disabled child premium.
During the winter months, look out for announcements on Cold Weather Payments and a claim form in your local paper.
You can ask for Department of Social Security leaflet SB 17A at your local Social Security office or Citizens Advice Bureau.
If you are finding it hard to pay your fuel bills, you should get in touch with your gas showroom, electricity shop or their offices.
Do this straight away.
If you delay and then fail to pay your bill, you run the risk of having your gas or electricity supply cut off.
Staff are available in all gas showrooms and electricity shops and their offices to give advice to anyone in difficulty.
Disconnections
A code of practice has been drawn up by the fuel industries to protect you.
It states that all-pensioner households should not normally be disconnected between 1st October and 31st March.
if you are likely to be disconnected contact your local gas or electricity shop and tell them you are a pensioner.
For further information ask for leaflet Paying Electricity and Gas Bills which is available free from gas and electricity showrooms and offices.
If you would like further advice on what to do, contact your local Citizens Advice Bureau, Age Concern group or Consumer Advice Centre.
If you are receiving Income Support you may be able to clear a fuel debt by having money taken off your weekly benefit.
For further information contact your local Social Security office.
To claim Income Support or a payment from the Social Fund contact your local Social Security office.
The address is in the Phone Book under "Health and Social Security" , or "Social Security" .
Ring 0800 666 555 for general enquiries about benefit.
Your call is free.
WHERE TO FIND HELP AND ADVICE
Government help
To claim Housing Benefit contact your local council offices.
Your local social services department can be contacted through your town hall.
For copies of Energy Efficiency Office leaflets phone 01-691 9000 or write to the Department of Energy, Energy Efficiency Office, Blackhorse Road, London SE99 6TU.
For general advice on benefits and heating matters contact your local Citizens Advice Bureau, listed in the Phone Book under "C" , or your neighbourhood advice centre.
Voluntary organisations
Age Concern is a network of 1400 independent local voluntary organisations providing services for elderly people throughout the UK.
The national centres in England and Wales provide support for all those interested in the welfare of older people through training, research, publications, policy promotion and information.
Your local branch of Age Concern is listed in the Phone Book under Age Concern, or "Old People's Welfare" .
Or write to Age Concern England, 60 Pitcairn Road, Mitcham, Surrey CR4 3LL, or Age Concern Wales, 4th Floor, 1 Cathedral Road, Cardiff CFl 9SD.
Help the Aged is a national fund-raising charity supporting projects which provide care and facilities for elderly people.
Centrally, it provides an information and advice service on a range of issues affecting older people.
Write to Help the Aged, St James's Walk, London EClR OBE.
Neighbourhood Energy Action is a national charity and has helped to promote over 450 Community Insulation Projects which provide a low cost draughtproofing service to pensioners and others on low incomes.
If you want information about Community Insulation Projects write to Neighbourhood Energy Action, 2/4 Bigg Street, Newcastle-upon-Tyne NEl lUW.
The Disabled Living Foundation can provide advice on all aspects of daily living for disabled people.
Write to the Disabled Living Foundation, 380-384 Harrow Road, London W9 2HV.
The WRVS (Women's Royal Voluntary Service) provides a wide range of caring services for elderly people and families in need throughout the UK.
Local offices are listed in the Phone Book under "Women's Royal Voluntary Service" .
Fuel board showrooms are listed in the Phone Book under "Electricity" or "Gas" .
If the fuel board cannot help you, ask them for the number of your local Electricity Consultative Council or Gas Consumers Council.
The Office of Gas Supply (OFGAS) Southside, 105 Victoria Street, London SWlE 6QT may also be able to advise gas consumers.
Others
For any advice on solid fuel, dial 100 and ask for Freefone Real Fires.
Phone the Plumbing Help Line on 01-468 7767 if you would like information on where to find a local plumber registered with the Institute of Plumbing.
If you are not sure who to get in touch with for help and advice, ring the Winter Warmth Line 0800 289 404 or get a friend or relation to do it for you.
Remember, your call is free.
As people get older, their bodies often become less able to maintain a constant temperature, and at the same time grow less sensitive to changes in external temperature.
As a result, older people can often be cold without actually feeling that they are cold.
If the body temperature is allowed to fall below 35°C (95°C) hypothermia sets in.
Unless treated at once, this condition may be fatal.
Young babies, whose sensitivity to temperature change has not yet developed, are also particularly at risk.
WHAT TO DO IN AN EMERGENCY
If you find an elderly person or a young child living in a cold room where the temperature is below 16°C (61°F), then you should quickly take steps to improve the situation.
Gently turn up the heating, and ensure that they are wrapped up well in light blankets or warmer clothing, and take warm drinks.
Do not rely on elderly people saying they do not feel cold
Danger Signs!!
Drowsiness.
Slurred speech.
Very cold skin on parts of the body normally covered, for example the stomach or armpits.
Absence of complaint about feeling cold, even in a bitterly cold room.
Even if you are in any doubt
Move the person into warmer surroundings if possible.
Wrap the person in a light layer of blankets or a duvet to avoid further loss of body heat.
Call a doctor or nurse.
Give them warm nourishing drinks.
Do not subject the person to any sudden extreme changes of temperature — so do not put them next to a fire or give them hot water bottles or heavy layers of clothes or blankets.
Do not give them any alcohol, as it will stimulate further heat loss through the skin.
If someone has had an accident in their home, fallen and injured themselves or been taken ill, they may not be able to attract the attention of neighbours, passers-by or people who call at the door.
Always be on the look out for signs that something might be wrong, especially when the weather is cold.
Looking out for trouble
There are many tell-tale signs to look out for:
Milk not taken in late in the day.
Newspapers stuck in the letter box.
Curtains drawn during the day.
Lights burning during the day.
Home in darkness when there should be someone at home.
Dog barking all day and the cat scratching to be let in.
SB 1 Income Support — cash help SB 17A Extra help with heating costs when it's very cold RR1 Who pays less rent and rates?
Available from your local Social Security office.
USEFUL LEAFLETS
Cash help
Wonderfuel: Energy saving tips — British Gas Paying gas and electricity bills; how to get help if you can't pay — British Gas and Electricity Council Electricity and you: A guide to running costs — Electricity Council Lower costs with gas: A guide to fuel running costs — British Gas (only available from your local showroom) Advice for senior citizens — British Gas  Advice for disabled people — British Gas If you are elderly or disabled — Gas Consumers Council Advice for elderly people — Electricity Council Making life easier for disabled people — Electricity Council
Advice about fuel
Many of the above leaflets are available from your local gas or electricity showroom.
If you cannot obtain the leaflet you are after, call or write to Electricity Council, 30 Millbank, London SWlV 3JL or call your Regional Gas Consumers Council — the number is in the Phone Book.
All about keeping warm — Solid Fuel Advisory Service.
For your free copy dial 100 and ask for Freefone Real Fires.
Handy Hints to save energy in your home Home Energy Fact Files — on: Draughtproofing Loft, pipe and tank insulation DIY double glazing Heating controls Heating systems Professional double glazing Cavity wall insulation Insulation of solid walls or Home Energy Survey and Checklist with all eight Fact Files
Energy efficiency
For the above leaflets telephone 01-691 9000 or write to Department of Energy, Energy Efficiency Office, Blackhorse Road, London SE99 6TU.
Home improvement grants Be warmer this winter with loft insulation Keep your home free from mould and damp All available from your local authority.
Insulation
Keep warm this winter — Help the Aged.
Call or write to Help the Aged, St James's Walk, London EClR OBE.
Telephone: 01-253 0253.
General advice
Help with heating; Fact Sheet — Age Concern.
Warm up winter — Age Concern and the Health Education Authority.
Full details of welfare benefits for elderly people are also published each April by Age Concern in Your Rights, price £1.50.
Available from your local Age Concern group — the address is in the Phone Book.
If you cannot get the leaflet you want you should call or write to: Age Concern England, Bernard Sunley House, 60 Pitcairn Road, Mitcham, Surrey CR4 3LL.
Telephone: 01-640 5431.
Age Concern Wales, 1 Cathedral Road, Cardiff CFl 9SD.
Telephone: 0222-371566.
Further copies of this booklet are available from: Keep warm Keep well, FREEPOST, London EClD lBD.