

10
THE report, Stevie explained as Patrick drove away from the station, had come through the British Embassy in Bucharest.
They had relayed it through the Royalbion representative there, Jim Fletcher.
Sir Bryan himself had broken the news to Stephen Bonnard.
There had been an accident in the northernmost part of Romania.
A British car had gone off one of the mountain roads and plunged three hundred feet into a ravine.
It had caught fire and the two occupants, trapped inside, had been burned alive.
Car and bodies had been so badly charred that it was some time before they could be identified.
In due course a hotel in Suceava had reported that two English tourists had failed to return.
The number plate tallied with the particulars they, and the local Securitate, had on record.
The Embassy was trying to have the bodies released so that they could be flown back to England for burial.
The  Romanian authorities were putting difficulties in the way.
The enquiry into the occurrence, they said, was still incomplete.
Chris arrived at about teatime.
Patrick heard her little car passing up the avenue.
He had kept away from the house, not wanting to intrude on the Bonnards' private grief.
The knock on his studio door came less than an hour later.
He held her in his arms for a long minute.
She had been controlling herself while she was with Midge and Stevie, but now her emotions spilled over.
Suddenly she pushed herself away from him.
‘What are you doing with that suitcase?’
‘Packing my things.
They won't want me here with all this happening.
I thought you might drive me to the station.’
‘But that's the last thing you must do!’ she blazed, with a sudden change of mood.
‘Sit down and listen to me.’
Bewildered, he chose the nearest upright chair.
‘Stevie's very worried about how Midge has taken it,’ she said.
‘She's blocked her mind completely.
Refuses to believe that they're dead.
Stevie says that grieving is  an important part of bereavement and that if she bottles it up it will only be worse later.
What's so awful about this situation is that we can't have a funeral.
At least, not until we can get their bod —.
Oh, my God!’
Overcome again, she covered her face with her hands and sank onto the settee.
He waited till the storm of weeping had passed.
Then he went to his improvised bar and poured her a stiff whisky.
‘Don't you see?
That's why we need you here.
You're detached from this.
You help to prevent us going overboard.’
Patrick poured a whisky for himself too.
He was less detached than she thought.
Maybe he had proved to himself that he had recovered his nerve but he had had to hold on very tight at that moment when she had broken.
‘I have to be in London on Monday anyway.
I've arranged to have a medical check-up privately.
I want a second opinion.
I'm sure I'm fit to go back to work.’
‘You don't trust Uncle Stevie?’
‘I do,’ he said uncomfortably.
‘But I think he's over-cautious.’
‘Well, that can't be said of you!’
She was really angry.
‘After all we've done to get you better.
Listen.
Midge is going to need you more than ever.
Sooner or later this is going to hit her, and when it does…’
Midge's refusal to accept the death of her son created an atmosphere in the house that was more disturbing than overt grief.
Everything must go on as before, she insisted.
There were to be no drawn curtains, no signs of mourning, and certainly no black ties.
Stevie, deeply troubled, had decided that the only thing was to fall in with her mood, but he kept catching Patrick's eye.
He and Chris tried to steer a middle course during the ritual of drinks before dinner and the meal that followed.
It was poor Jacob who caught it in the neck.
When he came in to put some logs on the sitting-room fire he could not restrain a sob, kneeling there with his back to the coffee-table.
‘That will do, Jacob,’ Midge said.
‘There is to be no weeping in this house.
I am keeping them alive in my heart and I want you all to do the same.’
Jacob grabbed his basket and stumbled blindly from the room.
The week that followed was long.
Doctor Stephen knew that it was a matter of urgency to get the bodies back so that there could be a proper funeral and some catharsis for Midge's suppressed grief.
He had urged the Chairman to contact the British Ambassador in Bucharest and explain the situation.
The Ambassador had responded that he would go to the top and make representations to President Ceauŝescu himself.
More than that he could not do.
The only thing now was to wait.
Spending as much time as he could with Midge, Patrick found her extraordinarily rational.
It was as if the news had never come through at all.
‘They'll be coming back,’ she assured him.
‘If John was dead I would know.
I am quite sure of that.’
Stevie had phoned to say that he would not be coming home that Saturday.
He had an MAC conference to attend at Bristol.
Patrick wondered if there was another reason.
Midge's total lack of emotion  prevented him from sharing his own grief with her and he found that unbearable.
Months ago the couple had bought tickets for a Benjamin Britten concert in Aldeburgh.
Midge, who had cancelled none of her engagements, asked Patrick if he would accompany her in Stevie's place.
The War Requiem was not exactly what he would have chosen but he accepted with feigned enthusiasm.
In fact he found the performance extraordinarily moving.
Midge had lost an elder brother, killed by a shell on his nineteenth birthday in the Second World War.
She was close to tears during the aria ‘Move him into the sun’.
They were both very quiet driving back to Westfield Manor.
It was raining and he decided to drop her outside the front door, sheltered as it was by the portico with two columns.
‘That's funny,’ she said, as she stepped out.
‘That vase of flowers I put on the dining room windowsill has been moved.’
‘Perhaps Jacob's been doing a bit of tidying up.’
Patrick reached over to close the door for her.
‘That doesn't sound like Jacob,’ she laughed.
She had put her key in the front door and he had engaged a gear to take the car round to the garage when his instinct reasserted itself.
‘Midge!
Wait a minute.
Let me go in first.’
She picked up the suspicion in his voice, said nothing, but left him to open the door.
‘Wait,’ he said again, and turned on the hall lights.
The staircase rose ahead of him, climbing to the darkened rooms on the first floor.
There was a carpet on the flagstones of the hall.
It was scuffed up.
Someone had come down the stairs in a hurry and turned sharply to go towards the back of the house.
That's where Jacob's room was.
‘Midge, I want you to get back into the car, close the doors and lock them from the inside.’
‘Is anything —’
‘Everything's probably all right, but please do as I say.’
He waited till he heard the car doors close and the click of the lock.
The evidence that there had been an intruder  was slight but all the same his senses tingled as he walked quietly through the hall, past the staircase and down the passage that led to Jacob's bed-sitter.
The door was open and the light on.
He could hear an Open University lecturer discoursing on the disadvantages suffered by ‘coloured’ children in rural schools.
Jacob was not there.
The kitchen was dark.
Patrick did not call his name.
He went back to the hall and listened.
He could hear three clocks ticking and a tap in an upstairs room dripping.
The fourth stair up creaked as it eased back into place.
Patrick slowly went upstairs, well aware that renewed creaks announced his progress.
Along the landing he could see the door of Stevie's and Midge's bedroom open.
The drip was coming from the bathroom on the other side of the landing opposite this room.
He moved towards the door, his hands hanging ready at his sides.
When he was near enough he pushed it open with his foot.
It swung back against the wall.
Midge had drawn the curtains before going out and the room was in darkness.
He put his hand to the switch just inside and turned the light on.
The room leapt at him, as shocking as a pistol-whipped face.
In his haste the intruder had pulled out drawers and dumped their contents on the floor.
He had pillaged the little antique desk between the windows.
Letters and papers were scattered everywhere.
But why the smashed chairs, the broken mirror, the one curtain dragged off its rail, those dark red stains on the carpet?
It was the fallen curtain that drew Patrick's attention.
Something under it.
Walking carefully he crossed the room and pulled it clear of what lay beneath it.
There was a telephone by the bed but he decided to go back to the hall, where another instrument stood on a table under the bannisters.
He dialled 999.
‘Emergency.
Which service, please?’
‘Police.’
The answer was prompt.
‘Suffolk Constabulary.
Duty Sergeant.’
‘My name is Patrick Malone.
I am a guest at Westfield Manor, just outside  Aldeburgh.
It's the house of Dr. and Mrs. Stephen Bonnard.’
‘Yes, sir.
What's the problem?’
‘There's been an intruder and we have a dead body.’
He went out to the car, where Midge was waiting anxiously.
He explained rapidly what the situation was.
‘I'm going to take you round to the studio, Midge.
It's better for you to wait there.
This place will soon be taken over by the police and I'll handle them.’
‘Is there nothing we can do for him?’
‘Nothing.’
Above all she must not see that appalling smashed face, hideous with the rictus of death.
He saw her into the studio, checked that the heating was on, gave her a double whisky.
He was just walking back to the house when the patrol car came storming up the drive, etching his shadow on the wall.
Country cops they might be, but they were businesslike.
The driver stayed in the car, talking quietly on his radio, while his mate accompanied Patrick upstairs, stopping at the door of the room.
‘Wait here, sir, please.’
He went and knelt by the body, saw that there was no question of saving life and straightened up.
He was less accustomed to such sights than Patrick and his face was pale.
‘Things here just as you found them, sir?’
‘Yes.
All I did was walk across the room and pull that curtain off him.’
‘You know the deceased, sir?’
‘Yes.
He's a young lad who was employed in the house here, living in.
His name's Jacob.
Jacob Irwin.’
‘Anyone else in the house?’
‘Mrs. Bonnard and I have been to a concert in Aldeburgh.’
The young patrolman was watching Patrick's hands.
‘I suspected there had been an intruder so I made Mrs. Bonnard wait in the car while I came in to check the place out.
As soon as I saw this, I dialled 999 and took her out to the studio in the stables where I live.
She's there now.’
‘Is there another phone I can use?’
‘Yes.
Down in the hall.’
‘Please come with me, sir.’
Patrick stood by while the police constable telephoned subdivisional headquarters, giving a brief résumé of the circumstances of this ‘suspicious death’.
‘What do we do now?’
Patrick asked, when he'd hung up.
‘We wait here for SOCO.
Scenes of Crime Officer.’
Patrick was glad he had taken Midge out to the studio.
The house already belonged to the police, a fact which was reinforced when a second car arrived.
In the event the doctor, a National Health GP on call that weekend if the police needed him, was the first to arrive.
His clothes suggested that he had been at a party and was anxious to get back to it.
The first young patrolman, PC Bartholomew, took him up to the bedroom, where he checked the body's pulse at wrist and neck, took its temperature and the temperature of the room.
Patrick's identification of the body enabled him to write out a death certificate, which he handed to PC Bartholomew with a note of the other details.
‘Give that to SOCO when he arrives.
There's nothing more I can do here,’ and he went back to his party.
The whole tempo and atmosphere  changed when the Scenes of Crime Officer arrived.
An experienced Detective-Sergeant from sub-divisional headquarters, he knew exactly what he was doing.
His shrewd, keen eyes measured Patrick as PC Bartholomew made his report.
He had brought two cases with him.
One had the appearance of a briefcase.
The other, fitted with drawers, was always kept upright.
He invited Patrick to sit down in the hall and took him in detail through events from the moment the car had stopped in front of the house.
‘You give a very clear report,’ he commented.
‘Ever been in the force?’
‘No, but I've worked a lot with the police.
I'm Security Director to Royalbion Oil.
Or was — till I had an argument with a fifteen-inch oilpipe in the North Sea.’
‘Oh.
That was you, was it?
They managed to put you together again, then?’
‘Sort of,’ Patrick said, and they both laughed.
‘Trouble seems to follow you around.
Think this has anything to do with that other business?’
‘Too early to say.
I suppose it could be a burglar who was surprised on the job?’
‘They don't usually resort to such violence.
This is a very nasty kind of villain we have here.’
SOCO opened his print case.
In addition to the brushes and aluminium powder he needed for taking latent fingermarks, it contained two sets of coveralls of a white, light, shiny material.
‘You can put one of these on if you like.
We wear them to avoid contaminating the environment with our own clothing.’
Patrick realised that this was SOCO's way of recognising that he was persona grata and was going to allow him to enter the murder room.
He pulled the garment on and zipped it up.
‘Gloves?’
‘No.
If people have gloves on they're going to touch things.
I don't want anything touched.’
The lights of a car had swung across the front of the house.
It stopped with a crunch of gravel.
‘If that's the Press,’ SOCO called out to the PC guarding the door, ‘I'm not ready for them yet…’
‘It's the Superintendent.’
‘Oh, Christ!
Well, stall him until I've  had time to have a dekko.
But let me know if the CID turn up.
Come on, Pat.’
The Detective-Sergeant's keen ears had picked up the dripping tap in the bathroom.
He stopped at the door and stared in for a minute.
Then he crossed the corridor to the murder room.
Before entering he just stood there giving his eyes a chance.
Then he put his two cases down inside the door.
The second one contained  cotton wool , small bottles for samples, scissors, a syringe, tubes for taking penile and vaginal smears.
That white overall was a passport to the scene of the murder.
There were eventually so many people there that new arrivals simply gave Patrick a glance and a nod, assuming that he fitted somewhere into the team.
As he had nothing to do, he tried to melt into the background and give his own eyes a chance.
Poor Jacob would have marvelled if he could have known that he was the focus of so much activity.
Next to arrive was the photographer, who plugged in arc lights and photographed first the body from every angle and then every single object in the room in the minutest detail.
He was followed by  the closed-circuit television operator, who filmed a video of the whole scene for use later in the investigation.
‘Take the bathroom too,’ the Detective Sergeant reminded them.
‘Chummy called in there to wash his little hands.’
The Chief Detective Inspector who would later take on the investigation looked in, and exchanged a few words with the Detective-Sergeant.
‘I've warned the duty undertaker to expect a body.’
‘Found a vehicle?’
‘No.
But a car was seen slowing down at what might have been a pick-up point on the A12.
We're checking it with the Police National Computer.
All numbers within a radius of twenty miles are being logged.’
Waiting for the Home Office pathologist, SOCO spent his time drawing plans of the room and ‘taking a few tapings’.
He divided the carpet into sections and painstakingly covered it with strips of Sellotape.
When lifted and placed against a transparent plastic sheet they would show up the tiniest particle.
He also took tapings from Jacob's hands and from his  head, where it was not a mask of blood.
He had fought the intruder and there would be samples on his knuckles and in his fingernails of his aggressor's skin and blood.
‘If you can hit your killer's face before you croak we can probably get him,’ SOCO said helpfully, as he examined a gory piece of Sellotape before slipping it into one of his brown paper bags and carefully labelling it.
Even at this stage he was thinking of the day he would bring a murderer into court and his evidence would have to stand up to a hostile defence counsel.
‘Thanks,’ Patrick said, ‘I'll remember that.’
It was two hours before the Home Office pathologist arrived.
He was clad in the same white coveralls as the half-dozen policemen who had been working over the room, like a coven of wraiths.
Here at the scene of the crime he only made a preliminary examination.
The really grisly work would be done at the mortuary.
‘That's about all I can do here,’ he grumbled, after twenty minutes' work.
‘You can bag him now.’
A white plastic body-length bag was brought in and the mortal remains of Jacob Irwin stuffed into it.
The Detective Sergeant unzipped his coveralls, collected his labelled brown paper bags and put his equipment back in the two cases.
‘All right, lads.
See you all down at the mortuary.’
‘Have you finished here?’
Patrick asked in surprise.
‘No.
We'll need another two or three days here, but I have to go down to the mortuary with the body.
For continuity, see?’
‘Have you found anything — indicative, I mean?’
‘Plenty.’
SOCO chuckled.
‘If we still had capital punishment I've enough to have him hanged.
By the time I've finished with this room and had the forensic lab's report I'll be able to tell you a lot more than his mother ever knew about him.
No murder weapon, though.
Not yet, anyway.
Probably the jemmie he forced the window with.
He knew better than to leave that behind.
But it was a mistake to wash his hands.’
They waited at the top of the stairs  while two DCs carried the lumpy white plastic bag down the staircase.
It crackled as it moved.
The Detective Sergeant looked at his watch.
‘Gone four.
I hope my missus got to sleep again.
I don't advise coming down to the mortuary, Pat.
Might spoil your appetite for breakfast.
In any case, the CID will want to talk to you.’
The Detective Chief Inspector was a rounder, blander man than the Scenes of Crime Officer.
He was accompanied by a Detective Constable.
He stared disapprovingly at the white coveralls Patrick was wearing.
‘Now that SOCO's had his pound of flesh, do you think the good lady of the house is up to making a check?
We'd like to know if anything's missing.
I see Chummy has been round all the desks.’
Midge had been waiting out in the studio for five hours, fortified by cups of tea brought to her by the friendly police constables.
Lying on the bed she had dozed rather than slept.
When she opened her eyes and saw Patrick standing in the room she started up with a cry.
He had forgotten to take off the white coveralls.
In the gloom he must have looked like a ghost.
In Stevie's study she shook her head over the desk with its shattered lock.
The desk in the drawing room had not been locked.
In both cases the contents of the drawers had been tipped out.
‘I'm surprised Jacob did not hear anything.’
‘He had his radio turned up.
He probably did not hear anything until the intruder was doing the bedroom…’
‘The bedroom!
Oh, my God!’
Midge rushed up the stairs with Patrick and the Detective Chief Inspector following her.
She checked only momentarily when she saw the chaos in the room.
The harsh lights that the photographers had used still glared down on the scene.
She went straight to the small table at the far side of the bed, pulled open the single drawer.
When she turned, her face was anguished.
‘They've gone.
He's taken my most precious possession.’
‘What's gone?’
‘The letters.’
She sank to her knees and pressed her forehead into the mattress.
Her control had finally broken.
Patrick could hardly bear to listen to her throat-tearing sobs.
Minutes passed before she raised her head to look at him.
‘All I had left of him…
’ The words were forced out between choking sobs.’…
the one thing I valued most in all the world…’
For three days the murder room was the haunt of SOCO and the Detective Chief Inspector as they quartered every inch in search of fingermarks, blood or saliva samples and other prey for their relentless, questioning minds.
The CID had set up an incident room at sub-divisional headquarters.
It had a special phone number, was equipped with a computer and was permanently manned by a PC or a WPC.
The number of detectives on the case had risen to a dozen and before it was finished that number might rise to fifty or sixty.
There was something almost personal in the attitude of the investigating officers, as if Jacob had been a friend or relative of theirs.
Midge and Stevie had moved into the guest bedroom.
It was doubtful if Midge  would ever again sleep in their old bedroom.
For some reason she was more stricken by the loss of the letters than she had been by the news of John's and Angela's deaths.
‘It's because she has the evidence that it really happened,’ Stevie explained to Patrick.
‘Things will be better when we get John and Angela back — their bodies, I mean.’
By the end of that week there was reassuring news from the Embassy in Bucharest.
Ceauŝescu, though he himself ascribed to no religion, had been moved by the Ambassador's plea on behalf of a distressed mother.
His own father had pleaded to be given a Christian burial and Nicolae Ceauŝescu had assented to that.
Now, thanks to his intervention, the bodies of the two English tourists were being brought back to Bucharest and would be flown to London by Tarom the following Tuesday — in coffins of Romanian oak.
With the message came a warning.
They were charred beyond recognition.
Inspection by relatives was not recommended.
Midge was persuaded that there was no  point in going to the airport to meet them.
They would be given a proper funeral in the parish church and their ashes would be interred under the ancient yew tree in the churchyard.
The same undertaker as had handled the disposal of Jacob's body would collect the coffins and bring them back to Suffolk.
He would be accompanied by the police officer assigned to liaison duties with the coroner's office.
Before a cremation, English law required a doctor's certificate and the requisite form from the Registrar of Births and Deaths.
Owing to the unusual circumstances there would have to be a coroner's inquest.
So it was to the same mortuary as Jacob that the undertaker's van took the two coffins.
Midge protested at what she saw as bureaucratic interference in what should have been a private grief.
She could not bear the thought of an autopsy being carried out on her son.
‘You must not think of it like that, dear,’ Stevie told her gently.
‘John's not there any more.
Not the real John.
We're only disposing of the vehicle his spirit used for its journey on earth.’
Later Patrick asked him: ‘Do you believe in life after death, Stevie?’
‘I don't believe in life after death because I do not believe in our limited concept of time.’
The doctor looked at Patrick seriously, as if wondering whether a security director could grasp a metaphysical truth.
‘I do share Carl Jung's view that the dissolution of our earth-bound body in eternity brings no loss of meaning.’
Behind them the grandfather clock ticked seven slow seconds away.
‘I had an odd experience in hospital,’ Patrick began.
‘Yes.
Chris told me about it.
A near death experience, we call it.
It's very rare.
You were privileged.’
‘I know I was.
I don't think I'll ever again be afraid of dying.’
Midge answered the telephone call that came next morning.
The caller would not talk to her.
As Dr. Bonnard had gone over to Rendlesham Hospital he asked to speak to Mr. Malone.
Patrick was looking through the Kawasaki brochures he had  sent for when he heard her handbell summoning him.
On the phone was Detective-Sergeant Oates.
He was speaking from the mortuary.
‘I didn't want to say anything to Mrs. Bonnard, sir.
I understand Dr. Bonnard is away.’
‘That's right.
Can I help?’
‘Something's come up, sir.
We'd like someone who knows the family to come over.’
Oates was waiting at the door to lead Patrick down the long corridor to the office opposite the actual mortuary.
The pathologist, Dr. Ray, was there already.
He'd had time to wash his hands and take off his rubber gloves and apron.
He had a high-domed bald head and smoked a curved pipe.
There was another man in the room, completing a report at one of the tables.
He was younger and more aquiline, and he too smoked a pipe.
‘I'll be reporting this to the Coroner's office,’ he said, as soon as Oates had introduced Patrick.
‘I'm afraid I can't issue a death certificate yet.
For humanitarian  reasons I thought the family ought to know.’
Patrick waited.
‘The bodies were burned, yes, indeed very badly charred, but that was not the cause of death.
They were burned at least two days after death.’
Dr. Ray spoke rapidly and with a faint touch of venom.
He seemed in a hurry to distance himself from the work he had been doing.
‘Do you know the real cause of death?’
‘The woman had been suffering from radiation sickness, but there was also evidence that she had been tortured.’
‘Tortured?
God!
But how could she have been exposed to radiation?’
‘That's not a problem for the forensic pathologist,’ Dr. Ray pointed out.
‘The man on the other hand died of asphyxia.
To put it bluntly, he strangled in his own vital organs.
The only way I can account for that is he was exposed to some sort of nerve gas.’
The pen of the man at the table stopped scratching.
The policeman's shoes creaked as he shifted his weight.
‘Can you explain a bit more?’
Dr. Ray struck a match and applied it to his pipe.
He sucked the smoke in with relish.
It made a welcome change from the stink of charred flesh.
‘Nerve gases have exceedingly unpleasant results.
The voluntary muscles go into a state of vibration and then become paralysed.
The heart slows, the alimentary canal and the bladder constrict.
In a male the penis erects.
Death occurs in less than a minute, due to paralysis of the respiratory muscles.’
Dr. Ray had been watching Patrick unblinkingly as he delivered his hammer blows.
Patrick looked round and met the eyes of the Detective Sergeant.
Their message was: ‘You see why I did not want Mrs. Bonnard to hear this.’
‘Nerve gas?
Like tabun or sarin?’
‘Or something even more lethal.
My colleague here confirms the evidence of asphyxia.’
The man at the desk stood up.
His pipe was out but he did not relinquish hold of it.
‘Yes.
In cases of asphyxia the blood pressure rises to such an extent that the tiny blood vessels in the teeth burst.
That  accounts for the pinkish colour I found in the incisors of both remains.’
‘But if they were charred beyond —’
‘Oh, teeth are very resistant to heat,’ said the colleague, smiling.
‘Mr. Kidson is a forensic odontologist,’ explained Dr. Ray, stressing all five syllables of the word.
Patrick stared from one face to the other.
‘But — how could an English doctor and his wife have been exposed to nerve gas?’
‘I asked myself the same question,’ said Dr. Ray.
‘That is why I called in Mr. Kidson.’
Kidson carefully put his pipe down, with the bowl in an ashtray.
‘When Dr. Ray called me in I took the precaution of having copies of Dr. Bonnard's and Mrs. Bonnard's dental records sent to me by Telex.
At first sight the signatures of the two deceased seemed to be the same, but when I examined some of the fillings more closely I saw that they were quite new.
I analysed them and found that a material had been used which is only obtainable in Iron Curtain countries.
I shall want to send them to the department in Whitechapel  Hospital, but I'm sure they'll confirm —’
‘Excuse me.
Are you saying that these are not the bodies of Dr. John and Mrs. Angela Bonnard?’
‘Precisely that.’
Patrick wished they'd left a window open.
The mortuary smell had clung to the clothing of the two forensic experts.
‘Who are they, then?’
‘Ah!
That's not for me to find out.’
The pathologist smiled at the policeman.
‘They are about the same age and build, a man and a woman, but beyond that — Some inflammable substance had been poured on them, almost certainly petrol.’
‘About five years younger, I'd say,’ Kidson said.
‘I did a section on one incisor from each of them and I would estimate both the man's and woman's age as in the early twenties.’
The realisation that these were not the bodies of people Patrick knew did not make the matter any more savoury.
‘There's obviously been a mistake somewhere,’ Dr. Ray was saying.
‘The only thing to do is return them to the Romanians.’
‘Doctor, may I suggest you delay doing that till you have contacted the Home Office.
And Sergeant, I think you should immediately put your Chief Constable in the picture.
This is going to require Ministerial decisions.’
The two Kalashnikovs had fired simultaneously.
The reports were shatteringly loud at that short distance.
Maureen O'Duffy screamed in terror.
The two men on either side of the Renault had been punched backwards by the impact of the bullets.
The flock of sheep had panicked into a shambling run.
John and Angela sat dazed and bewildered as men spilled out of the back of the caravan.
The Renault was surrounded by guns, some of them automatic weapons.
They brooked no argument.
John unlocked his door.
Angela did the same.
Maureen was cowering on the back seat sobbing.
All three were roughly hauled out, tied hand and foot and blindfolded.
John and Angela were bundled into the back of the caravan.
Lying there on the floor, cords biting into wrists and ankles, they heard Maureen screaming with terror  and agony.
Even when a gag was stuffed into her mouth the sounds went on and on.
They knew that terrible things were being done to her.
It seemed impossible that anyone could endure such pain for so long, but at last the doors of the Renault slammed and there was comparative silence.
The engine was started up, revving violently as the car was turned round on the narrow road.
John could tell that it was being driven back up the hill towards Putna.
He twisted his head to gulp in air.
To save space he and Angela had been packed in with their faces jammed against each other 's feet.
When the gunmen climbed in to sit on the benches at the side they had to put their booted feet on the prisoners.
A hand came down to check that John was able to breathe.
He knew then that they wanted him alive.
The horse was thrashed into movement.
The cart turned round and the jolting, agonising journey began.
‘Angela!’
He dared to call her name out.
‘Can you breathe?’
‘Yes,’ faintly, her voice muffled by the rags she was lying on.
‘Just.’
‘No talk,’ a voice overhead commanded.
The caravan journey lasted no more than a mile.
It might as well have been ten.
They could hear the men talking over their bodies.
The language was not Romanian and it sounded too guttural and staccato to be Russian.
When the caravan stopped they were dragged out and transferred to an open truck.
There was more room.
Though their guards stayed with them they were not trampled under feet.
The truck climbed steeply, the sound of its engine echoing back from thick forest.
The bends were sharp and the sideways gravity made them roll helplessly.
John's hands were numb when at last the climb ended.
The blindfolds were removed and their ankles were untied but it was minutes before they could stand, much less walk.
As soon as Angela could think of anything except the pain of returning circulation she saw that they were outside the gate of a walled enclosure.
There were turrets at the corners and a guardhouse over the entrance.
On the hills that crowded close around it black forest  stretched up towards the skyline.
The sun had set.
The men surrounding them were squat and dark, their expressions callous and indifferent.
They were just doing their job.
If it meant a woman had to suffer that was no concern of theirs.
She looked at John.
He was haggard.
If he had not forced himself to smile back it would have been easier.
Neither of them tried to speak.
Hands still bound behind their backs, they were hustled through the gateway.
Even in this extremity Angela gasped with amazement.
In the centre of the fortified enclosure stood a church of exquisite elegance.
Its roof curved out on cantilevers to provide a permanent awning over the outside walls.
They were dazzling with brilliantly coloured paintings.
Half the saints in Paradise were facing them in rows from the rounded west wall and along the south wall stretched a hieratic representation of the life of St. Nicholas.
The two crosses at either end of the roof gave her a brief moment of hope.
John's more practical eye had noted the men lounging at the doors of what had been monastic cells.
Some of them carried  the guns which were the tools of their trade.
A punishment stake had been embedded in the turf opposite the west door of the church.
A whip hung from the centre of the stubby cross.
In one corner of the walled enclosure an instructor was demonstrating the techniques of unarmed combat to a squad of young men and women.
It was obvious that one of the fortified monasteries characteristic of Bukovina had been turned into a terrorist camp.
An attitude of respect, even fear came over their escort as they were taken into the church.
Like all Orthodox churches it was divided into three sections.
They were made to stand and wait in the first of these.
A low-powered electric bulb hung starkly from a wire overhead.
It faintly illuminated the interior wall paintings that surrounded them.
They had been darkened by centuries of smoke from votive candles but still held the compelling Byzantine drama of the sixteenth-century Moldavian artists.
On the ceiling a procession of blessed souls ascended the ladder that led to Heaven, on one wall St. George thrust his spear into the belly of  a squirming dragon, and on another St. Catherine was being roasted on a wheel.
These images paled before the man who came through the archway that led to the deeper mysteries of the church.
He had the eyes of an idealistic fanatic and the mouth of a pitiless executioner.
Through his Arab interpreter he told them that if they did as they were told no harm need come to them.
But if they disobeyed or tried to escape they would be shot out of hand.
‘You will not be traced,’ he assured them.
‘I have arranged for that.’
There had been a little accident and Dr. Bonnard's medical skills would be used to save life.
It was an added bonus that his wife had trained as a nurse.
The casualties had been isolated in one of the huts outside the walls.
It had been turned into a temporary hospital.
‘There is one casualty in particular who must be saved,’ he warned them.
‘As far as you are concerned his name is simply Haroun.
Your own lives are at stake in his life.’
11
RICHIE did not waste any time in responding to Patrick's appeal.
The pathologist and the Detective Sergeant had not been over-eager to react to his suggestion to go straight to the highest authority.
Richie was the only person he could think of with the necessary clout.
Over the years he had forged links with the Foreign and Home Offices, the crucial departments of Military Intelligence and the Government's secret services.
Above all, he had a line to COBRA — the Cabinet Office Briefing Room.
He was at Westfield Manor by the middle of the afternoon.
Patrick heard the beat of a familiar engine and went out to meet his own Mascot Missile coming up the drive.
It had been recovered from Lowestoft and adopted by Richie for his personal use.
‘How are you, old Pat?’ he asked, with  a solicitous concern that made Patrick fume.
‘Never better,’ he replied.
Richie wanted to stretch his legs.
Walking through the woods at the back of Westfield Manor, Patrick brought him up to date on the burglar who had committed murder to get hold of a packet of letters, and the macabre business of the switched bodies.
‘What was in the letters?’
‘Mostly holiday stuff.
Angela's impressions of the tour through Romania with an occasional PS from John.’
‘Did you see them?’
‘Yes.
Midge — Mrs. Bonnard insisted on my reading them.’
‘How well do you remember what was in them?’
‘Pretty clearly.
Stevie and I are going to put our heads together to try and reconstruct them for Midge.
Losing them was a great blow to her.’
Richie stooped to pluck a wild oat that had strayed into the wood.
He stuck it in his mouth.
‘I suggest you go ahead and do that.
Make a copy for me while you're at it.’
‘I don't know what it will do to her when she hears that they're the wrong bodies.’
‘Does she have to be told?’
Richie's glass eye glinted as he looked sideways at Patrick.
‘Why not just go ahead with the funeral?’
‘Because British law would not allow it, Richie.
You know that.
You can't cremate a body without a doctor's certificate and in a case like this the coroner's office would never allow it.’
‘You're right,’ Richie admitted.
They had come to the stile at the end of the park.
By common consent they stopped and leant on the oak fence that bordered the field of barley beyond.
The undulating East Anglian landscape stretched towards a not distant horizon.
Brilliant yellow squares of rape shone luminously among the green or golden fields.
‘There you have the difference between us and them.
That's what they left out of their calculations — whoever is behind this.
Our respect for the life of every individual.’
‘A mistake or sheer incompetence is ruled out.
The forensic odontologist told  me there had been a deliberate attempt to make the teeth match.’
‘Which proves they had the originals to work on.
Either they want to conceal the real cause of death or they're still alive.’
‘That's what Midge thinks.
She's always maintained that her son is not dead.’
Richie turned round and hooked his arms over the fence.
He had chewed his way to the bunch of seeds at the end of the stalk.
‘Nerve gas, the pathologist said?
Could he identify the type?’
‘No, something more lethal than tabun or sarin.
But why dump the bodies on us?’
Along the edge of the wood a blackbird was doing its job of warning all the wild life for a quarter of a mile around that their common enemy, man, was on the prowl.
‘Well, we know that they come from behind the Iron Curtain and that there are vast stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons in the Eastern Bloc.
I've got to get back to London.
The Million Sterling  Tournament is less than a month away.
I don't like the smell of this, old Pat.’
Patrick thought that telling Midge the bodies were not those of John and Angela would be the most difficult thing.
To his surprise, her face lit up.
‘There!’ she said.
‘I've been telling you all along.
They're still alive!’
Then her face clouded.
‘But those other poor souls, whoever they are, we must give them a decent burial.’
There was no way the bodies could be cremated or even interred unless the coroner's office was satisfied.
But after Richie had pulled his strings at the Home Office it was agreed that a little deception could be practised.
The vicar would never have agreed to any kind of mock funeral, but he finally yielded to Midge's plea that some intercession should be made for the souls of the unknown man and woman whose charred corpses lay in the refrigerator at the mortuary.
And so it was that a simple service took place at the parish church.
Only the family and closest friends were admitted.
Even the local reporter had to kick his heels at the lich-gate with the few  inquisitive neighbours who had gathered.
He saw the hearse arrive and watched the two coffins being carried into the church.
Presently the strains of Brother James's air, ‘The Lord's my shepherd’, drifted out, soon followed by a psalm not often heard at funeral services, number CXXVII ‘As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man; so are the children of youth.
Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them: they shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate.’
If prayers were said, they were inaudible to the outsiders.
Presently the church doors re-opened, the coffins were borne out and put in the hearse.
A press photographer's camera flashed.
Then the black vehicle drove slowly away.
No mourners followed but an unmarked car appeared in the road and made it impossible for any vehicle to tail the hearse.
Once out of sight it speeded up, heading not for the crematorium but back to the mortuary.
Afterwards, at tea in Westfield Manor, those who had attended the service stood around, too uneasy to sit down.
‘In a strange way that was very  moving,’ Chris said.
‘Even though we didn't know who they were.’
‘Any man's death diminishes me’’ quoted Stevie, ‘‘because I am involved in Mankind.’’
Midge said: ‘Thank you for that prayer, Vicar.
I realised it was for John and Angela.’
That was the only time Patrick had seen tears in her eyes, when the vicar had said a prayer ‘for those whom we love but see no longer’.
Watching her, Patrick had made his mind up.
When the guests had gone he managed to get Chris alone and tell her.
‘I'm going out there.
To Romania.’
The argument lasted an hour.
At first she tried to dissuade him, but he was adamant.
He'd been sitting on his fanny for three months now and here was a chance to do something.
When she saw that she could not stop him she tried another tack.
If he insisted on going to Romania then she was coming too.
‘Oh no, you're not.
I can't let you take that risk.’
‘So you admit there's a risk…’
And so on.
In the end she resorted to feminine persuasion.
‘You say you're going to hire a car and follow their tracks.
Whoever heard of an Englishman touring a Warsaw Pact country on his own?
You'd stick out like a suppurating thumb.
But a couple would seem much more natural.
We could say we were on our honeymoon.’
He was looking at her speculatively.
She laughed and added: ‘It's a sacrifice I'd be prepared to make for Midge's sake.’
The Romanian tourist office in London referred Patrick to an independent agency called Transylvanian Travel.
He was in luck.
There had been a cancellation so two seats would be available on a Tarom flight five days hence with a Romanian Automobile Club hire car waiting at the other end.
That would just leave time for the necessary visas to be obtained.
Richie was in the know but the plan was kept a secret from Midge and Stevie.
Patrick decided to spend three of the intervening days with Timmy.
His holidays had  just begun, and it suited Juliet's book to let Patrick have him.
He hired a car and took the boy down for a long weekend at the St. Mellion Golf and Country Club.
They played the St. Mellion course and the newly opened Jack Nicklaus course.
Timmy was a natural games player and was quick to profit from the tips his father gave him.
When it rained they played squash or swam in the indoor pool.
They competed to see who could eat most in the hotel restaurant and gorged themselves on Cornish cream teas.
For the first time in eight months Patrick felt one hundred per cent fit.
‘It's great to find that you can be really good friends with your own son,’ he told Chris, back in London.
They were dining together the night before their flight to Bucharest.
‘He's a really nice guy.’
‘Takes after his father rather than his mother?’
Chris suggested drily.
Flight TARO 205 was due to take off from Heathrow at 12.50.
In the duty-free shop Patrick bought twenty packets of chewing gum, 400 King Size Kent cigarettes and a couple of litres of Glenlivet whisky.
Jim  Fletcher had signalled that these were essential for any traveller in Romania.
But he had advised them not to contact him when they arrived in Bucharest.
There was no need to harm their image as a romantic couple unnecessarily.
Jim had warned that the Romanian Securitate would know exactly who they were.
It was more than likely that their hotel room would be bugged and perhaps fitted with a see-through mirror.
‘Good!’
Chris had exclaimed when she heard that.
‘I'll bring my copy of the Kama Sutra.
We'll give them their money's worth.’
The flight lasted five and a half hours.
It was seven o'clock Romanian time when they landed at Otopeni Airport.
There was one bad moment.
When Patrick came to the door of the aircraft he saw the flight of metal steps leading to the tarmac.
He froze, unable to take that step into the void.
‘What's the matter?’
Chris was just behind him.
‘Left something on the seat,’ he mumbled.
He turned round and forced his  way back into the cabin, past the protesting passengers.
They waited until everyone else had gone down the steps.
Then, with an enormous effort of will, he followed them.
Chris was nervous entering an Iron Curtain country for the first time.
The checkers at the airport were poker-faced but affable.
A policeman checked their passports.
A blonde girl at a desk checked their travel vouchers.
At a glassed-in box-office an immigration officer, seated high above, examined their passports again and subjected them to the piercing but impersonal stare of his kind.
At the customs table the officer did not seem interested and waved them and their suitcases through.
Neither of them was trying to smuggle anything.
The only thing Patrick was sensitive about was the résumés of the letters from John and Angela which he had in his pocket.
Beyond the barriers a representative of the Automobile Club of Romania was waiting, and picked them out without hesitation.
He would drive them to their hotel in Bucharest, he explained with immense  courtesy, and their hire car would be delivered next day.
They sat in the back of the Dacia for the drive from Otopeni Airport to the outskirts of the city, holding hands and staring at the lights flashing past.
The Parc Hotel stood at the end of a long, wide avenue Soseaua Kiseleff.
Their driver escorted them into the foyer and made sure they registered.
That done they were directed to the ACR counter at the end of the reception desk where an efficient young woman issued the petrol coupons and the vouchers for the hotels where they were booked in.
It was all very efficient.
It gave Patrick the feeling that their every move had been planned for them by Comrade Ceauŝescu himself.
‘I feel so conspicuous in these clothes,’ Chris whispered, as they turned to look for their luggage.
The foyer was crowded but it was true that there was not a smartly dressed woman in sight.
Even Patrick in a tweed jacket felt over-dressed.
Their suitcases had been seized by the hall porter and an ageing bell-boy, both avid for Kent cigarettes.
Their swarthy features were more Mediterranean than East European.
‘Room 572,’ Patrick told them, and showed the number on the key.
When the door of room 572 had closed on the two Romanians, they both stood there slightly embarrassed.
There was a large mirror behind the bed.
‘Do you think we're being watched?’
Chris whispered.
‘I don't care if we are.
Do you realise that this is the first time we've been alone — I mean, really on our own?’
The meal in the hotel dining room was basic but adequate, and the red wine equivalent to a good vin ordinaire.
Patrick was impatient to get finished.
The feel of Chris's body in his arms and the taste of her lips had gone to his head more powerfully than any wine.
Back in their room they draped a sheet over the mirror and played love games till they fell asleep in each other 's arms at 1 a.m.
At five they woke up and made love again, a different way.
The hire car was due to be delivered to the hotel at ten.
It was not till 9.45 that they came out of the dining room after a breakfast of yoghurt, fried eggs, maize  rolls and ersatz coffee.
They were waiting for the lift when they saw a man come hurrying in through the swing doors.
Even without the Guards tie, his dress and manner made it obvious that he was a Brit.
He strode to the reception desk, made a brisk enquiry and then came straight over to where Patrick and Chris were standing waiting for the lift.
‘Mr. Malone?’
‘Yes.’
‘My name's Jim Fletcher.
I've just come from the Embassy.
I'm afraid I have some bad news for you.
Your mother's had a heart attack and it's urgent that you get back to London at once.’
Patrick's mother had died twenty years before in the County Donegal, trying to prove that she could still climb to the top of a mountain called Muckish.
‘Oh,’ he said.
‘That's terrible.
It happened since we left?’
Fletcher nodded, relieved that Patrick had taken his cue.
‘I have a car here.
I can take you back to the Embassy and you can ring up from there.’
The car was one of the new Jaguar XJ 40s.
Fletcher offered no explanation till he  had driven away from the Parc Hotel.
The car had been surrounded by a small crowd of technically minded Romanians.
Fletcher had needed all his diplomatic flair to unscramble the arrangements at the hotel and have the luggage brought out to the car.
Patrick made sure the porter and the bell-boy each got another packet of Kent King Size.
‘Phew!’
Fletcher wiped his brow as he steered out onto the wide boulevard.
‘There were two Securitate men in the foyer.
Thank God you got the message.’
‘What's this all about?’
‘We've had a tip from one of our moles in the Securitate.
The Bonnards’ car crossed the Romanian frontier into Hungary at seven o'clock this morning.’
‘The Bonnards’ car?’
‘Same make and description.
Same registration number.’
‘Do we know who was in it?’
‘A couple with British passports.’
Fletcher checked his mirrors to see if a car was following.
It was a reflex of all foreigners working in Bucharest on diplomatic or semi-diplomatic work.
‘I'm taking you back to my flat, not the  Embassy.
One of the third secretaries is coming over.
His name is Peter Jennings.’
He drove fast down the broad, straight Soseaua Kiseleff.
On the left stretched a huge park where the waters of a lake shone.
‘Used to be a marvellous golf course in there,’ Fletcher said.
‘Ceauŝescu had it ploughed up.
He said it was a playground for the idle rich and ought to be used to grow crops for the proletariat.
Pity.
It was the only one in Romania.’
They passed the Monument to the Soviet Soldier, significantly sited at Piaţa Victoriei, and half a mile later turned left into Strada Cosmonautilor.
The Fletchers had a flat on the first floor of one of the fine period houses dating back to the bad old days of the monarchy and the Iron Guard.
Molly Fletcher had been a pretty girl, but she had the faded air of a flower that has been transplanted into the wrong soil.
While she went to brew coffee Fletcher introduced Patrick and Chris to the man who had been waiting in the sitting room.
He was smallish with spectacles and an untidy moustache.
His dark grey suit would have sat well on a clerk  in a City bank.
Patrick thought he looked insignificant enough to be the undercover MI6 man at the Bucharest Embassy.
‘Are you bugged, Jim?’ he asked.
‘Of course, though probably not the kitchen.
Let's go in there and I'll put on a cassette.’
Like most expatriate wives Molly Fletcher had a collection of sound and video cassettes which she had pre-recorded at home.
The continuous propaganda meted out by Romanian radio and television jarred on her staunchly Tory mind.
To the accompaniment of one of Alan Dell's Big Band programmes Patrick told Peter Jennings about the murder and the theft of the letters, the switched bodies and his decision to come out to Romania and try to pick up the scent of John and Angela Bonnard.
‘Something very odd is going on.
Jennings had listened carefully but without surprise.
‘Ceauŝescu was absolutely furious about the opposition we met in trying to recover the bodies.
My guess is that someone substituted bodies in order to keep him happy.’
‘Whoever did that must have had the  bodies of John and Angela in their possession, either dead or alive.
Sorry, Chris.’
Patrick paused to glance at Chris, who was helping Molly Fletcher to hand round cups of coffee.
‘This is very distressing for you.’
‘Feel free.’
‘What I can't understand is this.’
Patrick absent-mindedly accepted a cup and put it on the kitchen table beside him.
He had to raise his voice above the strains of ‘The Atomic Count Basie’.
‘The body switch was intended to make us believe that John and Angela were dead.
What was the point if they were going to be allowed to drive back to England?’
‘You're assuming that the couple in the car are the Bonnards?’
‘Well — yes.’
‘You've left something important out of your calculations.
Maskirovka.’
‘That's Russian.’
‘It is the Russian word that covers all forms of deception, disinformation, trickery, subversion, character assassination, the re-writing of history — all the activities that are grist to the KGB mill.
But it can be self-defeating.
No, no sugar, thank you, Molly.
These secret services become a law unto themselves and their very secrecy insulates them from inspection or criticism.
The Romanian Securitate is a case in point.
Even in Britain the secret services are not ‘accountable’.’
You should know, mate, Patrick thought.
‘So you see, as often as not the left hand knoweth not what the right hand doeth.
Even when secret services are grossly incompetent they get away with it.
Now, the Romanians are not really masters in their own country.
They have to dance to the Russian tune, or at least the government does.
Ceauŝescu may not be popular with everyone but at least he is a Romanian, and he has kept Romania separate from Russia…’
‘Sorry to interrupt, but are you saying that the Bonnards fell foul of the secret service?’
Jennings might appear ineffective but he was obviously well-informed.
‘I'm coming to that.
The Securitate is a very efficient body.
Its head is the brother of the President.
One in ten of the population either belongs to or works for  the Securitate.
And they resent the KGB coming in and running their own operations on Romanian soil.
There's always been a great deal of antipathy between Cheka and Securitate, but the Securitate has to kow-tow.
The Romanians are really a West European nation — in language, culture, history and so — on and they don't like being dictated to by these Mongols, as they see them.
That's why we have our moles in high places.
We can feed them information on Russian intentions in exchange for scraps like this tip about the Bonnard car.’
Patrick checked his watch.
It was already nearly half-past ten.
That Renault was travelling further and further towards the Channel by the minute.
‘You're implying that the KGB is running some big operation in Romania.
Is it by any chance a terrorist training camp?’
Jennings turned his faintly blue eyes on Patrick and stared at him blandly.
‘It could be.
They do run training camps here, including one for the ANC.
I've no specific information but I suspect that they are cooking up something big and the Romanians don't like it.
Somehow or other  the good doctor and his wife have become embroiled in it.’
There was a pause while Molly changed the tape.
In the silence everyone seemed to be aware of listening ears.
The next tape was quieter.
‘Henry Hall and the BBC Dance Orchestra’.
‘Either John and Angela have escaped,’ Chris said, ‘or someone else is using their car and pretending to be them.’
‘She's put her finger on it.’
Jennings smiled at her approvingly, then turned to Jim Fletcher.
‘I don't know what you're waiting for, Jim.’
‘Peter thinks we should go after them,’ Jim said, polishing off his coffee.
He grinned.
‘I've checked with Tarom and flights to London for the rest of the week are booked solid.
So if you want to see that old mother of yours it'll have to be by road.’
Jim Fletcher and Peter Jennings had cooked the plan up before the Royalbion man had gone to the Parc Hotel.
The XJ 40 had done 10,000 miles and he was glad of an excuse to take it back to the UK for a proper service.
The nearest Jaguar agents  were in Vienna, where he had taken it for its first service, but the electronic engine management and monitoring systems were so complex that he wanted them checked over by experts.
Molly Fletcher made no objection.
She disliked travelling by road and was going to seize the chance to have the flat re-carpeted.
So, fifteen and a half hours after arriving in Bucharest, Chris and Patrick were on their way home again.
By now the Bonnard Renault must be a good 900 kilometres ahead of them on the road, and somewhere near Budapest.
In terms of time that meant ten to twelve hours, depending on how long they took to get through the Romanian frontier.
John and Angela had travelled out by the Sally Line from Ramsgate to Dunkirk and had intended to return by the same route.
It was an even bet that whoever was in the Renault had the Bonnards' documents and would use the open-ended return tickets.
There were crossings from Dunkirk at 8.30 and 1330 hours.
Chris thought that Angela would not aim for the earlier time, she hated early rising.
If she was right, they had 2,700 kilometres, or about 1,700  miles in which to make up the leeway.
They had no hope of doing that unless the occupants of the Renault stopped somewhere for the night.
The 660 kilometres to the Romanian frontier would be the slowest part of the journey.
In Hungary the roads improved and from Vienna they would be on motorways all the way to the Channel.
If everything tumbled into place there was just a chance that they could be on the same ferry as the Renault, at 1330 hours the next day.
It was going to be a very long car chase.
The 113 kilometres from Bucharest to Piteŝti is the only stretch of four-lane motorway in Romania and the national speed limit of 100 k.p.h. applies on it.
To avoid attracting unwelcome attention Jim kept his speed down to 75 m.p.h., less than half the Jaguar's maximum.
At Piteŝti the road turned left amid a forest of oil installations and then cut south-west to Craiova 120 kilometres further on.
Craiova was made hideous by a huge petrochemical works, but after that the road was flanked by beautiful scenery.
Chris was gazing wistfully at the passing landscape.
‘What a lovely country!’
Patrick turned round and met her eye.
They smiled sadly.
But for that mole in the Securitate they would have been dawdling through the hills on their own.
It had been a short honeymoon: one night in front of a two-way mirror.
Sitting alone in the back seat Chris broke a long silence.
‘I hope we do get there before them.
If it's another trick I want to warn Midge in time.’
Patrick had a different problem on his mind.
If the two in the Renault were impostors, why were they taking the risk of using the car and the passports of two people who were presumed dead?
They could not know that John and Angela were still not officially dead, no death certificate having been issued.
Someone must be prepared to take a very big chance and that implied that the stakes were equally big.
‘Would it take long to stop and telephone London, Jim?’
‘Hours.
Besides, your call would be tapped.
Don't let's rock any boats.’
They did not talk much till they reached Drobeta-Turnu Severin, where the  Danube had once passed spectacularly through the Iron Gates.
They had done 343 kilometres.
Jim saw an open petrol station and cut in front of a two-kilometre queue of Romanian cars to flash his coupons at the attendant.
That did not make the Jaguar very popular.
‘They only stand for it because we bring them hard currency,’ Jim explained, as he accelerated away.
The narrow defile which had once been bridged by the Romans was now dammed to create a vast reservoir upstream.
For the next twenty miles the road ran beside the restrained waters of the Danube.
‘That's Hungary on the other side.
This is the favourite place for Romanians who want to make it to the West.
This side is thick with informers but all the same a thousand managed to swim across last year.
God knows how many more failed.
I don't envy them.
There's no heating in Romanian gaols.
Anyone feeling hungry?’
That was a hint to Chris, who was sitting beside the basket that had been packed by Molly Fletcher.
Patrick would have liked to get his hands on the Jaguar, but Jim ate his sandwiches with one hand on the wheel.
The next stretch northward for a hundred miles or more showed the variety of the Romanian countryside.
This was an area planted by Maria Theresa with Swabians, and their Teutonic orderliness was stamped on the villages and homesteads enclosed by ornate wooden gateways.
Then, after miles of road lined with orchards in full blossom, came the startling contrast of the area populated by Hungarians.
‘You can tell by the horses that this is Hungarian country,’ Jim said.
‘See how sleek and fat and well-fed they are compared with the spindly, underfed Romanian horses.’
‘Those look like gypsy carts.’
Chris was looking back at a colourful four-wheeled cart drawn by two tasselled horses.
‘They're gypsies all right.
Did you see them laughing?
They can laugh because they're the only people in Romania who can go where they want.
According to official statistics, the gypsy population is five hundred thousand but the real figure  is over a million.
They have no fixed abode, you see, and they have their own ways of crossing frontiers.’
It was half-past five when they passed through Timoŝoara, the modern name for Temesvar.
The frontier was only fifty miles further on.
‘Do you think there'll be any problem, Jim?’
‘At the frontier?
Hard to say.
I have the telegram from your cousin with me.’
He took his eye off the road to wink at Patrick.
‘They'll know all about you, of course, but Peter Jennings thinks they'd rather have you out of the country than poking about up in the north.
They don't want another  kerfuffle with two dead English tourists on their hands.’
The frontier checkpoint was in the little village of Nadlac.
Here was the real Iron Curtain dividing West from East, blocking the twenty-one countries of the Council of Europe from the Warsaw Pact countries and the sixteen Republics of the Soviet Union.
Behind them the dominions of Russia marched eastward through eleven time zones to the borders of China.
On either side of the well-guarded checkpoint  stretched wire fences, barbed-wire entanglements and minefields.
Not till you came to this barrier did you realise that you were in a cage, reinforced to contain humans.
It was 6.20 when they joined the end of the queue of vehicles waiting to pass through into Hungary.
Jim switched his engine off and stretched his arms.
He had been at the wheel for over seven hours.
‘If previous form is anything to go by, we'll be here for three to four hours.’
This waiting was the worst part, creeping forward a few feet every twenty minutes.
The fact that they were hungry and thirsty stretched nerves even tighter.
As they came nearer to the checkpoint Patrick could see that the guards were almost taking some of the cars apart.
The sense of menace was strong.
A uniform, peaked cap, boots and gun can be frightening when you know that they have the backing of a ruthless system.
The Jaguar came to the front of the queue at 10.10.
It was there for an hour and forty-five minutes.
During that time the passengers had been made to dismount and the car subjected to an exhaustive  search.
Everything moveable was taken out, every nook and cranny probed.
Their documents were taken into the office for checking.
They had to go through a long interrogation, and their answers were not found to be satisfactory.
The officer in charge of the post could not believe that a couple who had arrived by air on Tuesday should be returning home by car on Wednesday.
Jim's forged telegram did not convince him.
While he went away to phone Bucharest the three stood around the car, feeling like criminals awaiting sentence.
The officer was gone for three-quarters of an hour.
When he came back he had their passports and documents in his hand and it seemed that he could not get rid of them quickly enough.
‘We can go on?’
Jim asked, like a schoolboy wanting permission to go to the bog.
‘Da, da.
Ja, ja.
Oui, oui.’
The officer pointed towards the Hungarian frontier post and descended upon the next vehicle in the queue.
In the time they had been kept waiting, Patrick calculated, the Bonnard Renault  could have covered at least five hundred miles of autobahn.
Jim must have felt like accelerating to the point of wheelspin but restrained himself and drove sedately to the Hungarian post.
It was possible to feel the antagonism and hatred of the two sets of guards facing each other across the frontier.
The Hungarians, efficient and courteous, probably knew what the Jaguar and its occupants had been put through.
They checked passports with the minimum of fuss, made no search and waved the British car on.
It was just midnight.
‘Put your watches back an hour,’ Jim told them.
‘We've done less than a third of the total distance, but the worst is over.
We've about two thousand kilometres to go.
From Vienna it's autobahn all the way.’
‘Sailing time is fourteen and a half hours away.
We should make it.’
‘I'll have to stop somewhere.
There's a good hotel in Budapest, the Adelbrau…’
‘We haven't time to stop, Jim.
I can spell you if you get tired.’
‘This is a pretty powerful car,’ Jim said, protective towards his baby.
‘I drive a Mascot Missile.
That does a hundred and seventy miles per hour.’
‘Oh.’
Jim was beginning to nod before they reached Budapest.
It was Chris who prodded him into handing over to Patrick.
She came in front beside Patrick and Jim crept into the back, where he promptly fell asleep.
So he saw nothing of Budapest, where the bright lights were a contrast to darkened Bucharest.
Patrick drove up the east bank of the Danube through the low-lying city of Pest, then crossed the Elizabethan bridge into Buda.
Even at 2.30 a.m. there were signs of night life, but the leafy suburbs on the hills to the west were asleep.
Vienna was 260 kilometres away.
As he drove through the night Patrick was kept alert by the feel of Chris's fingers on his thigh.
So far from quenching ardour, that night of uninhibited lovemaking in the Parc Hotel had set stronger currents running between them.
At one point he had to slow down for a  distance of several miles.
A military convoy was moving towards Budapest.
Many of the vehicles were transporters carrying huge tanks.
‘Russian T64s,’ Jim said from the back.
The roar of engines had woken him up.
‘The Russians have four divisions in Hungary, sixty-five thousand superbly equipped troops with tactical air forces in support.’
‘That's comforting.
’ Patrick reduced his speed even more.
The menace of those long gun barrels was sobering.
At 6 a.m. the guards on the Austrian frontier showed little interest in the Jaguar or its occupants.
Vienna, often a tiresome city to get through with its extensive suburbs and cobbled streets, did not present such a problem in the early morning.
Before clearing the suburbs to the west Patrick stopped at a café so that they could have a quick breakfast of delicious brioches and excellent coffee.
A few minutes after restarting he picked up the autobahn to Salzburg.
Jim had not really woken up for his breakfast and was happy to curl up in the back again.
With the stimulus of a wheel in his  hands Patrick did not feel sleepy.
1,350 kilometres of ordinary roads lay behind and ahead stretched 1,300 kilometres of autobahn, a little over 800 miles.
There was no speed limit on the autobahn and even at 135 m.p.h. the Jaguar seemed to be only cruising.
The leather seat ensconced him comfortably and the long broad bonnet stretching ahead was reassuring.
Beneath it was 3.6 litres-worth of engine putting 220 brake horsepower on tap.
Before his eyes was the ‘Vehicle Condition Monitor’, a dot-matrix display that gave warning of any problem from handbrake on to brake failure.
The ZF four-speed automatic gearbox offered the best of both worlds.
It was Patrick's first experience of a J-gate.
There was the usual Park — Reverse — Neutral Drive pattern, but if he wanted to control the gear changes himself all he had to do was move the gear lever across the bottom of the gate, while in Drive.
To the left, parallel to the automatic system, was a manual system; you changed down by simply pushing the lever forward.
Most of the  time, though he was in fourth gear,a long-legged overdrive which wafted the big  saloon along effortlessly.
The car was not so exciting to drive as the Mascot, but he had to admit that it was less demanding.
He stayed in the overtaking lane, averaging only a little less than the car's maximum speed, the quadruple headlights sweeping a path for the commanding prow of the Jaguar.
Salzburg was passed at 7.44 a.m. — ah, Mozart!— and they were circumventing Munich — shades of Chamberlain — by 9.05.
Jim surfaced in time to warn Patrick to swing north towards Nürnberg — Sieg Heil!
The old pre-war autobahn to Stuttgart only had a double carriageway and after fifty years of use was often under repair.
By 10.35 with 735 kilometres of autobahn behind them they were swinging past Frankfurt and had reached Cologne by 11.25.
The traffic was heavier now but the Germans were disciplined to respect a fast-moving car.
Mons swam past at 1230 hours.
A little under a hundred miles still to go.
It was going to be tight.
The motorway ran out at Bergues, leaving twenty-two kilometres of main road still to be negotiated.
Patrick had the measure of the car now and did not hesitate  to impose the authority of the Jaguar on other road users.
Jim was sitting in the middle of the back seat and on the edge but he did not utter, even when Patrick squeezed between two juggernauts with inches to spare.
Signs outside Dunkirk steered them onto a ring road westward of the town.
The worst part was wrestling through the urban traffic, knowing that it was coming up to sailing time.
When they reached the entry gates to the ferry they were closed.
Ahead the last vehicles had disappeared into the belly of the ship.
Jim slid out and went to the gate, brandishing a £20 note and his American Express card.
They could hear him making his point in fortissimo Anglo-Saxon tones.
The gateman shrugged and made a gesture towards the ship.
The big door at the bow was just swinging shut to seal the car deck.
Patrick cut the engine and got out.
Chris could only stare at the slowly moving ship.
They had driven over 1,700 miles in twenty-seven and a half hours, including frontier stops, only to miss it by five minutes.
Passengers who had left their vehicles on the car deck had crowded at  the rails on the upper deck.
Some of them were waving to friends on shore.
They were too far away for her to recognise faces, but she could imagine John and Angela among them, unaware that they had been pursued all the way from Romania.
For three weeks the fortified monastery had been their prison.
Their days were spent in the makeshift hospital.
It was the hut furthest from the walls on the south side.
At night they were locked in one of the cells of the former monastery.
Despite the cold there was no heating.
They worked at a pitch only experienced in times of disaster such as earthquake or war.
The casualties were of several different nationalities.
Most were Kamalians but there were also Spaniards from the Basque region, Africans from the front-line states, plus a few East Germans and one man from the Republic of Ireland.
Many were suffering from burns of varying degrees of severity.
A few showed the symptoms of radioactive contamination — bleeding of the eyes and gums, constriction of the throat, vomiting and diarrhoea.
The couple had been genuinely distressed by the suffering.
It was not the ever-present guard or the commandant's threats that made them work so devotedly.
The treatment given to the burns casualties by the medical orderly had been crude.
He was a Spaniard with an improbable name that sounded like Rioja.
They were able to do a lot to relieve suffering, though the resources were rudimentary.
Haroun had been given a small separate room at the end of the hut, as befitted a VIP.
They were astonished when they found that he was a lad of no more than seventeen.
His case was serious, almost as advanced as Maureen O'Duffy's.
John insisted on seeing the commandant.
With all the authority of a doctor he demanded proper medical supplies, in particular burn dressings and a liberal supply of iodine.
He even made so bold as to ask about Maureen O'Duffy.
‘The Irish woman?’
The commandant's eyes hardened.
‘She has given her life in the service of our cause.’
A small supply of burn dressings and some iodine solution was forthcoming after a few days.
He never enquired where they  came from.
They never asked questions but they were inevitably acquiring information that could be fatal.
Though they were confined to the hut by day and the cell by night they soon knew far too much about the camp.
They could never be allowed to leave the place alive.
Some of the patients, especially the dying, wanted to confide in the man and woman who had eased their suffering.
Others had talked in delirium or expressed fears to each other.
The accommodation huts were on the same side of the walls as the hospital hut.
On the north side were the training huts, one for chemical and bacteriological agents, one for firearms and explosives and one for ideological instruction.
On the east side there was an assault course and a firing range.
The section for training in portable nuclear devices had been in the deep cellars of the monastery.
It had been sealed off since ‘the small accident’.
Half a dozen trainees who had failed to get out were still inside.
The instructors were housed in former monastic cells.
The commandant had his office and quarters in the church.
The sanctuary was his bedroom.
Discipline in the camp was strict.
The hardest worked were the female freedom fighters.
They were in a minority but were expected between them to meet the sexual needs of the men.
Twice they heard the screams for mercy of men at the punishment stake.
Rioja told them that the victims had been caught in acts of sodomy and been condemned by the camp council.
The Spaniard had taken a shine to Angela.
He often brought her scraps he had filched from the instructors' table.
The sound of shooting from the firing range was frequent.
There was no danger that this would be heard by anyone outside.
Miles of dark and silent forest walled the whole camp in.
One night John and Angela were unable to sleep.
This time it was not because of the cold.
The entire camp seemed to be in movement.
They heard shouted commands and tramping feet, the sound of vehicles being loaded up and driven away.
‘The commandos must be moving out to go on their missions,’ John whispered into Angela's ear.
He was holding her in his arms for warmth.
They were always  careful what they said in the cell.
They suspected it was bugged.
Next day the camp seemed half deserted.
Rioja confirmed that John's guess had been right.
‘I heard Commandant say all patients not cured will have to be disposed soon.’
‘Disposed?’
Rioja bared his teeth and drew a nail across his throat.
John stared at him in disbelief.
‘Killed?
I can't believe it.
Even him?’
He nodded towards the small room at the end of the hut.
Haroun still lay there fighting for his life.
Rioja shook his head.
‘He not dare kill him.’
‘Rioja.’
John lowered his voice.
The guard was standing at the door of the hut, staring down towards the monastery.
‘Why is Haroun so important?’
‘You not guess, doctor?
He son of Brigadier Jazali.
Bastard but still son.
If he die Commandant die, we all die.’
12
CHRIS sat in the car for a couple of minutes watching the slowly receding ship.
Then she got out and strolled up to the gate with her most provocative walk.
She gave the gateman a dazzling smile.
Patrick and Jim could only just overhear the conversation that ensued, in quick-fire French.
They saw the man reach for a list, run his finger down it and nod.
He watched her back as she came to join them.
‘It's on that boat.
A Renault 18, registration number B302 EAM.
It was one of the first on.’
‘I didn't know you spoke French, Chris.’
Patrick was gazing at her in admiration.
‘C'est parce que tu ne me l'as jamais demande, mon chou.
The crossing takes two and a half hours, so she'll dock at three English time.
He says there's a Hovercraft every hour from Calais, so if  we're lucky we could be there to meet her.’
Jim had had enough of being a passenger in his own car, so Patrick took a spell in the back seat.
But he could not relax.
They were well clear of Dunkirk when he said: ‘Don't these people have any phone boxes?’
‘You can phone from any decent café,’ Chris reminded him.
‘It's much better than our way.’
Jim stopped at a café on the road side.
Madame behind the counter was not in the least fazed when he said he wanted to call England.
She made the connection for him and gestured towards the phone at the end of the counter.
He could hear Richie's number ringing.
It was answered promptly by Anthea Dixon.
‘Anthea.
It's Patrick here.
I'm calling from France.
Is Richie there?’
‘No, but I'm expecting him back.’
‘I've a message for him.
It's very urgent.’
‘Go ahead.’
‘The Bonnards’ car Renault registration B302 EAM is on the 1300 hours Sally Line Ferry from Dunkirk to Ramsgate.
Occupants  unidentified.
Suggest you arrange surveillance.’
‘I've got that.’
‘It's very urgent.’
‘Will do.’
Patrick then found he had no French money.
Madame was happy to take the £10 note he put on the counter.
‘Monsieur, attendez!’ she called after him.
‘Votre monnaie.
C'est trop.’
But Patrick was already halfway back to the Jaguar.
Calais was forty kilometres down the coast.
Jim did it in half an hour.
They just caught the 14.45 Hovercraft.
It reached Dover at 14.20 British time.
They were clear of Customs by 14.30 with twenty miles to go to Ramsgate.
By 14.45, 2.45 p.m., they were by-passing Sandwich and speeding beneath the Roman Fort at Richborough.
‘It's all right,’ Patrick assured Jim as he touched 120 along the straight stretch up to the crossroads outside Ramsgate, where the A253 meets the A256.
‘We'll make it.’
The lights went yellow as he approached but he just managed to squeeze through, to a chorus of horn  blasts.
As they came down the sloping road to the harbour they could see the ferry just coming in to dock.
Jim turned the car outside the harbour entrance and parked it where they could see the vehicles as soon as they emerged from Customs.
The wait was agonising for Chris who could not help hoping that she might be about to see John and Angela again.
First to be cleared was a string of a half a dozen caravans.
Then the cars began to appear.
Some of the drivers were making an obvious effort to remember to drive on the left.
‘There they are!’
Chris exclaimed suddenly.
‘That's the car!’
A green Renault 18, very travel-stained with grime on the windscreen except for the segments swept by the wipers, was the seventh private car to come out.
‘Can you see who's in it?’
‘There's a reflection on the windscreen.
There's two people, but it's impossible to…’
‘Get after them!’
Patrick told Jim.
He started up, engaged a gear and  moved into the line of cars, three behind the Renault.
‘There was a woman in the passenger's seat.
Was it Angela?’
‘I think it was.
She had fair hair.’
‘Get behind them, for God's sake!’
Patrick yelled at Jim, as the line of cars reached the top of the hill above the yacht marina.
‘Pass this chap in front and just cut in.’
Jim did not like doing it.
He was far too polite a driver.
It was half a mile before he accelerated level with the Montego in front.
‘You can take two of them.
Go on, Jim!’
Jim gritted his teeth.
A closed van was coming fast from the other direction, and the Montego was nose to tail with the car in front of it.
He kicked down the accelerator — he was in automatic — and against all his better instincts overtook a Vauxhall and slewed left.
There was a jarring of brakes and a cacophony of horn blasts as he squeezed into the gap between the Vauxhall and a black Ford.
‘Smile at them,’ Patrick told Chris.
‘Give them the glad eye.’
It was not a good idea.
The driver of the Vauxhall was a woman.
There was still this one car between the Jaguar and the Renault 18.
‘You've got to get behind him, Jim.’
Patrick was wishing he was at the wheel.
‘We mustn't lose them now.’
‘I'm trying, damn you!
Can't you see there's a bloody great lorry coming?’
The black Ford was determined not to let a Jaguar pass.
It was being driven by a very po-faced Englishman with another of the same ilk beside him and the car was spotlessly clean.
Every time Jim tried to pass the Ford moved up close to the Renault's rear bumper, or rather the towbar protruding from it, and Jim was forced to ease back again.
The traffic was thick through the outskirts of Ramsgate and Jim had still not made it when the traffic lights at the crossing where the Sandwich road met the London road showed up ahead.
‘Go on, Jim, for Christ's sake, or we'll lose them at the lights.’
Jim swung out and charged.
The Ford driver gave nothing away and for a moment it looked as if there would be a confrontation with a juggernaut coming  from London.
Jim edged left and the Ford was forced to brake.
The Jaguar slotted in behind the green Renault.
The Ford driver started a protest on his horn.
‘Not too close, Jim.
Just so that no one can cut in between us.’
‘I wish they'd turn their heads,’ Chris said.
The rear window of the Renault was filthy.
‘Give them a toot on the horn.’
‘Don't!’
Patrick warned just in time.
There was plenty of tooting going on already.
The Ford driver was furious and trying to regain his place, a very dangerous manoeuvre.
Ahead the lights had changed and the line of traffic was slowing down.
When the Renault stopped, the Jaguar was exactly a car's length behind.
The occupants of the car in front were staring straight ahead, not talking to each other, very tense.
Patrick could see the eyes of the driver in the centre mirror, looking back.
The Ford behind had switched on its lights and its right-hand indicator was blinking.
The driver was obviously preparing for a grand-prix start.
Ahead the lights had turned green.
The cars at the front of the line were beginning  to roll.
Patrick saw the reversing lights of the Renault come on.
‘Look out!
Brace your necks!’
The Renault, under full acceleration in reverse, was coming back at them.
Patrick braced his head against the rest just as the crash came.
An instant later it was followed by another.
The Jaguar had become the meat in a sandwich.
The Ford had crunched the rear off-side, shaping that side of the boot like a concertina.
To the tinkling of glass was added a rending sound.
The Renault driver had engaged first and was tugging his tow-bar out of the radiator of the Jaguar.
Already clouds of steam were rising, obscuring the forward view.
‘Bastard!’
Jim screamed.
‘That was deliberate.
Bastard!
Bastard!’
‘Don't let him go!
Jim, get after him.’
The Renault had accelerated away, racing for the lights, but Jim's race was run.
The Ford behind had also disengaged itself, not caring about the shriek of metal.
The swearing of the two men in it was clearly audible.
But their anger appeared to be directed at the Renault rather than the Jaguar.
With tyres shrieking under  acceleration the driver went after the disappearing car.
It had reached the lights just as the amber changed to red and turned down the Sandwich road.
A stream of cars from both directions blocked the Ford and it had to stop, fuming.
The driver of the Vauxhall had got out of her car and was advancing with menaces.
All down the line drivers had their hands on the horn button.
The real holiday spirit.
Patrick opened the door and slid out.
He started to sprint towards Ramsgate.
He had noticed a telephone kiosk a quarter of a mile back.
There was a solid line of cars all the way back to it, drivers peering ahead or craning their heads out of the window.
One man had climbed on to the roof of his car.
‘What's the hold-up, mate?’
Patrick just beat a teenage girl in holiday gear to the kiosk.
He shouldered her aside and let the door slam on her angry face.
For once the kiosk had not been vandalised.
He heard the dialling tone and stabbed the 9 button three times.
‘Emergency.
Which service please?’
‘Police.’
When the police answered he spoke fast  but distinctly.
‘This is not a hoax.
My name is Patrick Malone, Royalbion Oil.
You can check me with Scotland Yard SO13…’
‘Did you say Roy Albion, Mr. Malone?’
‘Just listen.
Car number B302 EAM is on the A256 heading south from Ramsgate.
A green Renault 18, it has just rammed a car at the junction with A253.
I have good reason to believe the occupants are terrorists.
B302 EAM, got that?’
‘Just a minute, sir…’
‘Get on with it,’ Patrick snapped.
‘Every second counts.’
And he rang off.
‘I just hope the police reacted quickly enough to catch them.
If not there's a couple of terrorists loose in England and I don't like to think what they've got in that car.’
‘By Genghis!’
Richie breathed.
Calling on the great Khan was the highest oath in his repertoire.
Chris and Patrick made no objection when he took their glasses to replenish them at his cocktail cabinet.
By the time they had reached his flat the sun was under  the yard-arm.
It had taken three-quarters of an hour to sort out the situation at the crossroads in Ramsgate, make statements to the police, get the names of witnesses, watch the crippled Jaguar being winched on to the back of the Relay tender.
They had all squeezed in behind the driver for the run to Canterbury, where there was a Jaguar agent.
Jim had decided to stay at a hotel there till his car was mended.
Chris and Patrick had caught a train to London and taken a taxi straight to Richie's flat.
Patrick had briefed him on the reasons for their sudden turnaround in Bucharest and the dash back to the Channel.
Patrick's telephone message from France had not reached him till shortly before the Sally Line ferry was due to dock.
It had not left much time to arrange for a reception committee.
The Immigration and Customs people at Ramsgate had been instructed to watch out for the Renault 18 but to keep a low profile and let it through.
An unmarked police car had been detailed to shadow it and report its ultimate destination.
‘You buggered that up properly, old Pat.
That was the police car behind you  when the Renault rammed you.
SO13 are pretty sick with the Kent police for losing them.
They should have had them in a box.’
‘Thanks.’
Patrick took the topped-up Gordon's and Dry Martini.
‘Well, even we couldn't be sure about them until they rammed us.
It could have been the Bonnards.
Did Customs search the car?’
‘They put the sniffer over it but only did a perfunctory search.
Chris, why do you think John took his golf clubs to Romania?
I thought Ceauŝescu had liquidated golf.’
‘I didn't know he had.
Were their passports checked?’
‘Yes.
The likeness was remarkably good, certainly enough for a quick check at Immigration.
But the officer noticed they weren't eager to say much.
You don't think it could have been an accident, reversing into you like that?’
‘Certainly not!’
Chris was indignant.
‘That could never have been John.
Besides, John would have telephoned home by now.
No, it was not them.’
‘I wonder how long it took for my message to get through to the patrol cars  on the road,’ Patrick said.
‘I was in that telephone kiosk within a minute of the shunt.’
‘They were on to it quickly.
But within a minute that Renault could have turned off the main road and got lost in the maze of lanes to the west of Sandwich Flats.
Every police car in Kent was on the lookout.
It's my guess they went to ground somewhere in that area.’
‘Sandwich.’
‘Yes, I was thinking that too.’
Richie had poured himself another whisky and soda.
He sat down and beamed his good eye at the shine on his toecap.
‘There's one thing doesn't make sense to me.
If they took all that trouble to send fake bodies back to England and establish the fact that the Bonnards were dead, how could they hope to infiltrate two impostors into the country on their passports?’
‘Maskirovka, Richie.
The left hand knoweth not what the right hand doeth.
The MI6 man in Bucharest thinks that the KGB and the Securitate have got their knickers in a twist or rather two separate twists.’
‘You weren't long behind the Iron  Curtain, old Pat, but you talk as if your brain has been taken to the cleaners.
By the way, the police have arrested two men in connection with the murder at Westfield Manor.
They traced the car that was seen on the A12 and found that its number had been noted by a patrol car near Saffron Walden on the day the bomb was planted on Bryan Thomson.
That led them to a Kamalian whose secretions matched the saliva found at the scene of the crime.’
Richie put a match to the small cigar he'd been holding.
‘I'll talk to Thomson tomorrow.
We need a decision on whether this Million Sterling Tournament is to go ahead or not.
What are your movements, Pat?’
‘I thought I'd run Chris down to Westfield Manor after dinner.
Is the Missile at Royalbion House?’
‘You're not running me anywhere.’
Chris turned to Richie for support.
‘We've been on the road since yesterday morning and Patrick drove a thousand miles of that — mostly at a hundred and fifty m.p.h.
I'm going to get him to bed, that's what I'm going to do.’
For once in his life Richie looked envious.
The Melbury Court Hotel had a cancellation.
Patrick did not want to take Chris back to the Barbican.
His flat had been closed for weeks and the fridge was empty.
Besides, there was no room service.
They were allocated one of the best rooms with a splendid four-poster.
After dinner they went straight to their room.
‘No, Patrick,’ Chris said firmly.
‘We've simply got to sleep.’
But he woke in the small hours and found her in his arms, just like that first time in the studio at Westfield Manor.
His second sleep was deeper and longer.
This time when he opened his eyes her face was turned towards him.
There were tears on her cheeks.
‘Chris.
What is it?’
‘I don't know.’
‘Have you been awake long?’
‘Yes.
I've been watching you sleep.’
They had missed breakfast but the porter brought them coffee and hot rolls in one of the small lounges, then rang for a taxi to take them to Royalbion House.
The Missile was fuelled and waiting in the  basement car park.
Chris was very quiet and she still did not say much as he threaded the car through the morning traffic.
He thought she was worrying about Midge's reaction to the news when they had telephoned her from Richie's flat.
Midge had taken it as confirmation that John and Angela were alive, and nothing they said could alter that conviction.
‘I shall stay here,’ she'd said.
‘Sooner or later they will telephone.’
Chris waited till they were on the stretch of dual carriageway between Brentwood and Chelmsford before she broke her silence.
‘Patrick.’
‘Yes.’
Something in her voice made him ease back on the throttle, decide not to pass the Renault Turbo lorry he'd been stalking.
‘It was fun in Bucharest when we covered that two-way mirror.
But last night in the Melbury was different.
Nothing like that has ever happened to me before.’
‘Nor to me.’
‘You're the most marvellous lover  anyone could wish for.
I suppose it's because you've had so much experience.’
He thought he understood now why he had seen tears on her cheeks.
‘It was because you brought me back to life.
Remember?’
‘I thought I could control my feelings, have an exciting affair with you and keep myself intact.
But it hasn't worked out that way and what happened last night was so…’
‘Then what's the problem?’
‘Darling, you've had one wife and one fiancée and you have a son who's going to need you more and more.
I have to be sure…’
‘Sure that you really love me…?’
‘No, you've got it wrong!
I love you more than I've ever loved anyone and I'll never love anyone so much again.
But this has happened so quickly and I need time.’
‘What are you telling me?’
‘These last few days it's been like a kind of magic carpet — we've been so close, living on a heightened plane.
I don't want to make a decision that will affect my whole life while I'm still — intoxicated.’
It was already over.
In a brief half-mile  the whole dream that he had built up had dissolved.
He checked his mirrors, changed down a couple of gears and shot the Missile past the Renault.
The driver had the good manners to signal with headlights that he was clear but he stayed in the overtaking lane, letting the twin turbos build up speed.
‘All I'm saying is that I think we need to be apart for a while, come down to earth, if you like.
A magic carpet is not the best place to make decisions.’
‘I understand,’ Patrick said.
He had come to count too much on Chris.
It was true that she had literally brought him back from the dead.
He had built his whole existence round her and had known more joy than he could have imagined.
But if he really loved her he would have to be prepared to let her go.
Her brief mention of Timmy had shown him that this was the stumbling block.
He was not free to give her the untrammelled life that she deserved.
He negotiated Chelmsford with impeccable traffic discipline and superhuman patience.
On the open road beyond he  went up through the gears, racing a train on his left.
‘I wish you'd say something.’
Her hand had strayed over onto his thigh, those magic fingers gentling his muscles.
‘It's going to be hard, Chris.
Please don't make it harder.’
He did not remember much about the journey back to London except that he drove very fast.
It was clearly impossible for him to stay on in the studio.
Midge had known the moment she saw them that something was wrong and she was hurt by Patrick's announcement that he was going to pack up his things.
Stevie, sensitive man that he was, had also picked up the atmosphere, Chris's unusual silence and the way they avoided looking at each other.
‘Well,’ he'd said, eyeing his star patient shrewdly, ‘I can hardly believe it.
When I think of the trauma you were in eight months ago…
Frankly, I never thought you'd live.
Just shows what modern medicine can do.’
‘Something more than that, Doctor Stevie.’
Just for a moment Patrick and  Chris let their eyes meet, but not for long.
Maybe he was a miracle of recovery but there were areas where he was still weak and one of them was hurting badly.
He had refused their offer of lunch.
When he left, Midge and Stevie stayed in the house and Chris came out under the portico alone.
As he went down the avenue her figure in its sky-blue dress was framed in the driving mirror, an indelible imprint.
Then trees intervened and she was gone.
He stopped in Ipswich at one of the new-style Shell service stations.
They had microwave ovens where he was able to heat up a portion of hot food to eat in the car.
Then he telephoned Richie, whom he tracked down to his own old office at Royalbion House.
‘You're coming back to London this afternoon?’
‘Yes.
Chris and I have called it a day.’
A pause.
‘And they still assure us the sun will rise again tomorrow.
Are you all right, old Pat?’
‘Never better.
If you want to contact me I'll be at the Barbican flat…’
‘You won't,’ Richie cut in.
‘You'll be chez Richie Bryer at Melton Square.
The  Glory Hole is unoccupied for the moment.
No argument now.
We have some serious decisions to make.’
‘One thing I want to make clear to you, old Pat.’
Richie emptied the last of the Glenlivet bottle into their glasses.
‘I only stepped in at Royalbion because you'd been knocked out.
I think it's as well I did, especially in view of what's brewing up now.
But when the scare is over, Hazards Limited will pull out and leave you in charge.’
Patrick had dumped his things in the Glory Hole, a spare room that served as a space for the computer, the washing-machine and Richie's permanent stockpot.
It also contained a bed.
There was irony in the fact that Patrick was once again back in Richie's parish.
He had to admit that it was not unpleasant to be taken in hand by someone so positive and avuncular.
And Richie was no longer treating him like a lame duck.
The Romanian trip had put paid to that.
‘Meanwhile, until we know what the Kamalians are up to the more people we have on the job the better.
They may stage  something to coincide with the trial of last October's terrorists.
That comes up at the Old Bailey next month and Jazali is already beating his chest.
The country has an uncomfortable feeling of the powder-keg about it.
There's a lot of talk about taking politics out of Parliament into the streets.
Somebody is stirring things up.
It's the sort of thing the KGB are very good at.
We've got the miners rattling sabres again and there's been mob violence outside that new printing works in Sheffield.
That black youth dying in police custody has not helped.
Police in the inner cities are stretched to the limit.
To cap it all, CND are organising a massive Peace Rally in Trafalgar Square on the second Sunday in July.
That's the final day of the Million Sterling Tournament.
Excuse me.’
The phone had been ringing for some time.
Richie went to pick it up.
Patrick could tell by the change in his tone of voice that he was talking to a woman.
After a minute he put his hand over the mouthpiece and leant towards Patrick.
‘I'm taking out one of Colleoni's mannequins these days.
Rather a gorgeous  creature from Grenada.
Shall I ask her if she has a friend to bring along for you?’
Patrick shook his head.
For the moment he preferred the company of his own sex.
Richie finished his conversation, looked sadly at the empty whisky bottle before sitting down again.
‘We'll go out and have something to eat soon.
But first I'd like to go over what the Bucharest MI6 man said to you.
We have this meeting tomorrow to decide whether we go ahead with the tournament or not.’
It was eight months since Patrick had entered the portals of Royalbion House.
He felt a stranger among the crowd of unfamiliar faces.
Not until Fred, the bearded security guard, greeted him with a broad grin did he start to believe that he belonged here.
The meeting took place in one of the smaller boardrooms on the top floor and brought together the Chairman, Lord Monkton, Hammond Wilde, ‘Squeezer’ Lemon and Ms. Georgie Peacock, with Richie and Patrick in attendance.
Sir Bryan opened the meeting by saying how glad they all were to see Mr. Malone  back again and restored to health.
He went on to give his reasons for calling this special meeting.
Information from secret intelligence sources indicated that Brigadier Jazali had reorganised his action squads after last autumn's abortive attacks and was planning some new initiative.
There was no reason, however, to link the unrest that was brewing up in the country with the Kamalian dictator.
However, if a decision to cancel was going to be made it would have to be made now.
With the tournament due to start in a couple of weeks' time they would soon be past the point of no return.
‘Squeezer’ Lemon put the case in favour of cancellation.
He had always been against this extravagant gesture, he pointed out, and now he was being proved right.
The event would bring together dozens of celebrities to partner the professionals, many of whom were themselves household names.
Tens of thousands of spectators were expected, providing an ideal target for terrorist attack — even without the presence of Princess Jane on the final day.
Hammond Wilde was equally emphatic  that the event should go ahead.
Nearly all the internationally famous players had agreed to participate.
Or rather, their managers had agreed on their behalf.
The Million Sterling had proved to be powerful bait.
Television coverage had been scooped up by the BBC, who had realised the dramatic possibilities of the occasion.
Contracts had already been given for the erection of grandstands and a tented village.
‘We planned this tournament to improve the image of Royalbion.
If we cancel it now it will create a lot of bad feeling and leave us with egg on our faces.’
Sir Bryan's eye did a lap of the table and stopped at Lord Monkton.
‘Bertie?’
Lord Monkton cleared his throat.
The Peacock gazed at him like Susanna in ‘Le Nozze di Figaro’ waiting for the Count to give tongue.
‘As a matter of principle one should never yield to terrorism.
If we cancel this event because of a shadowy terrorist threat it will be an admission that these people can control our lives.
This company bears the name Royalbion, which is synonymous with Britain itself.
Are we  going to allow ourselves to be intimidated by a tin-pot dictator like Jazali?’
During those two weeks Patrick deliberately kept himself busy, carrying out checks on the precautions at onshore installations, flying out to the offshore platforms.
Only he knew what an effort it cost him to climb down from a helideck onto a drilling rig.
But gradually his terror of metal stairways subsided to little more than ordinary fear.
Security everywhere had been tightened up.
The Royal Navy, with the Special Boat Squadron, would make it very difficult for any unauthorised vessel to approach the oil and gas platforms.
The Norfolk Constabulary in collaboration with the Doberman Security Service had sewn Bacton up tighter.
The anti-terrorist department of Scotland Yard, SO13, were maintaining surveillance on all terrorists known to have links with Kamalia.
The days were no problem, but at night he would lie awake thinking about her.
If he slept his starved body would summon up a parade of dreams that re-ran those amorous collisions at the Parc Hotel and  Melbury Court.
Her lips came towards him through the darkness, he felt the touch of her fingers at the most erotic points of his body.
He could see slanting light pointing up the brave thrust of her breasts, emphasising the marvellous trough of her waist above the firm swell of her nates.
Often at first light he would thrust the bedclothes away and get up to escape those delicious but agonising visions.
During his waking hours the thought that haunted him was the Renault 18 and its two occupants.
Both car and occupants had disappeared without trace.
He even drove down to Thanet and spent a couple of days driving round the maze of lanes, orchards and villages that lay south of the Stour inland from Sandwich.
He must have questioned a hundred people but none could remember seeing the green car.
13
SIR BRYAN had offered Richie and Patrick the hospitality of his house in Sandwich, Prince's Lodge.
There was plenty of room.
Lady Thomson never came there now and his family had grown up.
They moved down on the Tuesday of tournament week, two days before the first rounds were due to be played.
Richie had deployed half a dozen of his tried and trusted Hazards Limited operatives to look after Royalbion plant and installations both onshore and offshore so that he and Patrick could be free to hold a watching brief at the Million Sterling Tournament.
That evening the Vice-Captain of Royal St. George's took them out to survey the arrangements.
A retired naval officer, he was in charge of the army of stewards and marshals, all volunteers.
The whole place looked very different from when they had played their friendly match with Sir Bryan and Doctor Stevie.
Three enormous stands  had been erected to form an open square round the 18th green.
This was the arena which would provide grandstand finishes on the Saturday and Sunday at peak television time.
There was an enclosure of smaller grandstands round the first tee and others at all but the four most distant greens.
‘All the reserved seats have been sold for Saturday and Sunday.
This tournament has created enormous interest.’
The Vice-Captain pointed to an enclosure within the main stand, exactly behind the flag on the last green.
‘That's the Royal Box.
The Princess will get a perfect view of the players approaching the 18th.
Let's hope none of them over-clubs!’
‘She's not coming till the Sunday, though.’
‘No, thank goodness!
One day with security at royal level will be enough.’
There were roped walkways to channel the more energetic spectators round the course, with approved crossing-points on the fairways.
The road that ran along the shoreline on the eastern side of the course would be closed to traffic and for security  reasons there would only be one pay-gate on that side.
In the fields to the right of the first hole the Tented Village had already taken shape.
Huge marquees had been erected on steel frames.
Commercial enterprises had hired space to display their goods or services — makers of sports equipment and clothing, banks, building societies.
There were bars and food counters for the general public, but they were outclassed by the hospitality units.
These marquees, lined with blue awnings over blue carpeting, were arranged regimentally on either side of grassy alleys that were already adorned with banks of flowers.
They bore names like Ballesteros Boulevard, Norman Close or Lyle Lane.
The tables would be clothed with white cloths and fine cutlery, as befitted the prime dishes which would be prepared in the central kitchen.
A golf tournament with royal patronage was too good an opportunity for a publicity-minded company to miss.
Firms would invite favoured clients or business associates down for a day at Sandwich, either as a reward for past favours rendered or in  the hope that the goodwill created would lubricate some future deal.
And never mind if some of them did not see a single golf-ball struck.
The Royalbion Hospitality Unit was the biggest of them all and was sited in the best position.
More realistically there were first-aid posts, a British Telecom centre, a medical centre and a police HQ.
The car parks — Green, Blue, Orange and Red — were in the fields south and west of the course.
The only access was through the narrow, winding streets of Sandwich.
The police would channel traffic from Deal, Canterbury and Ramsgate by different routes which would lead them to their allotted car parks.
‘Pray God we don't have another thunderstorm,’ the Vice-Captain said fervently.
‘We can control them on the course reasonably well, but when they get into their cars, oh dear!’
The Communications Compound was tucked away between the Tented Village and the Green car park.
The tournament had a strong international flavour with top players from the United States, Japan, Scandinavia, Australia, Spain, South  America.
Golfing correspondents and television teams from all over the world were already assembling.
They required the most sophisticated communications technology so that they could transmit their stories and pictures back to their own countries.
This would give Royalbion world-wide publicity and Sir Bryan had decreed that the foreign media should be given the best that Britain could provide.
A communications mast towered 150 feet above the complex and there were half a dozen parabolic antennae, similar to the ones Patrick had seen on offshore platforms.
They were aimed at the sky, poised ready to bounce signals off satellites over the rim of the earth.
‘Excuse me,’ the Vice-Captain said.
‘I just want to see if these people are happy.’
He was heading towards a particularly large trailer parked in the centre.
On its side in large letters it bore the legend INTERNATIONAL TELEVISION SYNDICATION.
On the roof a man was polishing the inside of a large microwave dish.
‘Everything all right?’ the Vice-Captain shouted up.
‘Excuse?’
‘Everything sat-is-factory?’
‘Satisfactory?’ showing teeth in beaming smile.
‘Oh, yes.
Very good.’
‘Important people, those,’ the Vice-Captain remarked, as they made their way back to the club house.
‘They syndicate pictures to smaller countries who have not the resources to send their own teams, like Taiwan or Zimbabwe.
Means they have to have a very strong signal.’
Sir Bryan of course had been in touch with the Chief Constable about the security and policing of the tournament.
He had put a Chief Superintendent in charge and suggested to him that he should liaise with the Royalbion security people.
Chief Superintendent Large had been polite but made it clear that this was a matter for professionals and he had everything sewn up.
He was in touch with SO13 at Scotland Yard to arrange for surveillance of the crowd.
There would be a uniformed PC with every match as well as plain-clothes men mingling with the crowds.
As always when a VVIP was present there would be extra security on the Sunday and 11 Bn RAOC had been asked to provide coverage.
Patrick made so bold as to ask: ‘Do you know if they're coming from Ashford or Headquarters?’
‘I'm not at liberty to say,’ the Chief Superintendent replied.
‘All that area is very confidential.’
‘That's all very well,’ Richie had said to Patrick afterwards, ‘so long as his men are not called away to deal with strikes and peace rallies.’
As they walked back to the clubhouse with the Vice-Captain, conversation was made difficult by the roar and whirr of a helicopter hovering over the field behind.
‘Just trying out the helipad,’ the Vice-Captain shouted.
‘The top players will be staying at the Stour Country Club and we'll be flying them to and fro by helicopter.’
In the pro-celebrity event Sir Bryan and Doctor Stevie would provide some leavening of the showbiz and TV personalities, the top sports stars and the controversial public figures who were expected to draw the crowds.
The Rolls drawn up in front of Prince's Lodge was evidence that they had arrived.
Before dinner Sir Bryan was again  complaining about the loss of his precious clubs.
He'd had a new set made for him by the professional but somehow could not get used to them.
‘The ironic thing is that those clubs are of no possible use to anyone else.
It's not as if they were a modern matched set that could be re-sold.’
‘You offered a reward, of course?’
Richie asked.
‘A thousand pounds, which is four times their value and I had an advertisement in all the golfing magazines.’
Patrick caught Stevie's eye.
The doctor winked.
The Chairman's obsession about his stolen clubs was becoming a bore.
‘Midge not with you, Dr. Stevie?’
The look the doctor gave Patrick showed that he realised what lay behind the question.
‘She may come down on Saturday if I get through to the final.’
He added, with a faint smile: ‘If she does I expect Chris will come too.’
‘What do you think of the programme?’
Sir Bryan was handing out copies of a glossy A5-size booklet.
‘These have just come through from the printers.’
Hammond Wilde had seen the advantages of producing a really lavish brochure which made the point that Royalbion was sponsoring the Million Sterling Tournament.
It contained portraits and potted biographies of the leading professionals, a photograph and description of every hole on the course and articles by golfing correspondents.
More importantly it carried an explanation of the format of this pro-celebrity event.
It had been planned to provide two grandstand finishes on the Saturday and Sunday afternoons when television viewing would be at its peak.
The entry had been by invitation and restricted to forty-eight amateurs and forty-eight professionals.
Forty-eight was the maximum number of matches that could be fitted into a day.
Hammond Wilde and the Chairman had agreed that pairings would be more dramatic than the three-balls now customary in major competitions.
For the first two days of the four-day event each professional would be partnered by an amateur, who would play off his club handicap.
After two days all but the twenty-four leading amateurs and the  thirty-six leading professionals would be eliminated.
On the Saturday the amateurs would play their own final round, with the leaders starting last.
For the Sunday the pros would be on their own, battling it out for the first prize of £500,000.
Spectators would thus have the interest of professionals playing with well-known personalities on the formula made so popular by Peter Alliss's programmes, followed by the drama of a full-blooded professional shoot-out.
The possibility was there for a tremendous finish.
Anything could happen on the last hole at Royal St. George's, with its six bunkers, the out-of-bounds line twelve yards beyond the green and the ever-present Duncan's Hollow.
Hammond Wilde had been adamant that if a tie for first place forced a ‘sudden death’ play-off he would not allow the leaders to disappear out on the course.
They would settle it with a pitch and putt contest there in front of the grandstands, on the last green.
Wednesday was a practice day in more senses than one.
The professionals were honing their game, but in a relaxed mood, wise-cracking with the thousands of  spectators who had come to watch.
This gave the organisers a chance to check their arrangements for crowd control, while Richie and Patrick were able to test their radios over the full extent of the course.
Patrick followed the tall young English professional, Andy Kyle, for half a dozen holes.
He liked his style and approach to the game.
Back at the Village he saw that Ladbroke's were offering odds of thirty to one against him.
On an impulse he put £1,000 on him to win.
The competition began in earnest on the Thursday.
By eight o'clock, when the first pair was due to tee off, the sun was well up in a clear sky.
Doctor Stevie had drawn the mercurial Spaniard, Manuel Caballeros.
Their match was due to start at 11.15.
Sir Bryan was paired with Des O'Grady, the little Irish pro, and would not be starting till 3.30.
By midday there were matches on all the holes, each accompanied by two caddies and a uniformed bobby.
The sun had dried the early morning dew off the fairways and on the darker green of the putting surfaces the flags were stiffened by a sea breeze.
You could tell where the best-known pros or the most famous celebrities were by the larger galleries following them.
These were thickest round the comedians, the film stars and the pop singers.
Not so many spectators had trudged out to the furthest holes along the seashore.
It was out there, on the 7th, that Patrick saw Dr. Stevie match Manuel Caballeros's par 5.
‘Dr. Stevie's playing well below his handicap,’ he reported to Richie on the small radio set he was carrying.
‘His net score is two less than Manuel's.’
Bryan Thomson did not reach the same hole till four hours later.
He was playing well enough till he reached the greens, but his putts would not go in.
After he'd missed yet another holeable putt, Patrick saw him lay the steel-shafted putter across his knee as if to break or spank it.
‘Sir Bryan's giving his putter hell,’ he told Richie on the radio.
‘We'll be hearing this evening what he'd have done if he'd had his James Braid putter.’
‘Stevie's got some news for you.
You'll find him in the Royalbion Hospitality Unit.’
On his way back to the Tented Village  Patrick paused at the ‘short’ 11th, where a big crowd had collected.
It had originally been a short par 4, but had been turned into a long par 3.
The tee offered a fine view of Pegwell Bay, where St. Augustine had landed in 597.
Standing on it were the leading American money-winner, Bob Stein, and the film actor Buck Finnegan, famous for his tough-guy roles.
Their interest was not in the view across the bay but in the Bentley Mulsanne parked on the grass to the left of the tee.
A board beside it bore a specification of the car and an outline of the services offered by Hazards Limited, who were sponsoring this prize for the first player to ace the hole.
Patrick could see the flash of the club's shafts above the heads of the spectators and the ‘Oohs’ of the crowd as their shots hung above the flag.
But the diminishing ‘Aaahs’ indicated that the Mulsanne remained unclaimed.
Passing the big scoreboard behind the grandstand on the south side of the 18th green he saw that Doctor Stevie had returned a gross score of 81 which, with his handicap, gave him a ‘net’ 66.
That  was good enough to put him in the lead for the amateur half of the tournament.
But when Patrick found him scoffing a large tea in the Royalbion marquee that was not the reason for his jubilation.
‘Marvellous news, Patrick!
Midge has heard from John and Angela!’
‘Heard?
How?’
‘He telephoned from Austria this morning.
A place called Hartberg.’
‘Was she sure it was really John?
Not another hoax?’
‘Well, he couldn't talk for long and the line was very bad but she's absolutely sure it was John.
He said they were helped by gypsies to get out of Romania and through Hungary.
Unfortunately he got cut off in the middle of a sentence.’
Patrick was not ready yet to share Stevie's excitement.
John and Angela had already been used twice in the deception game.
He would not believe anything till he saw them with his own eyes.
The first day of the tournament ended when the last couple holed out on the 18th green at 8 p.m.
The sensation on the amateur or celebrity side was Doctor  Stevie's net 66.
During the next few days Stevie was to find himself something of a cult figure.
The media had recognised a good subject in the white-haired surgeon in his plus-twos and St. Andrew's pullover, with his characteristic swing and follow-through — his body leaning forward and the club aimed like a rifle at the flag.
Sir Bryan had done well to play to his handicap, but he could not resist telling everyone what he would have done if he'd had his James Braid putter.
On the second day the biggest crowd was following Manuel Caballeros, who was today paired with Buck Finnegan, himself no mean player.
Manuel had not been able to improve on par the first day but everyone knew he was capable of making up a lot of leeway with one of his famous ‘charges.’
Patrick was watching them play the 7th, which they had reached at 11.45, when Richie's voice crackled on the radio.
‘Where are you, Pat?’
‘Beside the seaside.
Seventh hole.’
‘Hotfoot it back to the Hospitality Unit.
We have a problem.’
These PMR systems were even less  secure than land lines so he did not ask what the problem was.
When he got there the marquee was already filling up with Hammond Wilde's lunch guests.
They were knocking back drinks as if there were no tomorrow.
This was the third division of business associates.
The first division would be coming on Sunday, the royal day.
The problem, Richie explained, was that John and Angela had arrived at Heathrow Airport on a flight from Vienna, but as they had no passports they could not be admitted to the country.
The Immigration people were being very nice about it, but with the stringent new visa regulations for Indians and Tamils they could not let a couple of whites in without ceremony.
They needed some relative to vouch for them and documentary proof of identity.
‘I told Mrs. Bonnard not to try and cope with it on her own,’ Richie said.
‘Dr. Stevie's already out on the course.
She's catching a train that gets her to Liverpool Street at two-twenty.
Can you meet that train, escort her to Heathrow and sort it all out?
Take the Missile.’
He did in the end manage to reach  Liverpool Street station just as the passengers were coming off the two-twenty from Ipswich.
Midge was lit up with excitement but she had remembered to bring birth certificates, marriage lines, wedding photos and a whole dossier of medical records.
Armed with that lot Brigadier Jazali himself could have entered the land of hope and glory.
She chattered happily as Patrick drove along the Marylebone Road, speculating on the miracle that had brought John and Angela back from the dead.
He managed to get his question in as he crossed the Hammersmith Flyover.
‘How's Chris?’
‘Chris?
Oh, we haven't seen much of her lately.
She's very withdrawn and working far too long hours, of course.’
He could see that Midge had turned her head and was looking at him.
She said: ‘She's very vulnerable.
Smoke got in her eyes once before.’
‘Smoke?’
‘You know, ‘when a lovely dream dies…’’
‘Smoke gets in your eyes’,’ Patrick  finished the song line.
‘Yes, I know that one.’
There was no problem at London Airport.
More than satisfied, the Immigration officer issued a temporary document pending the enquiries that must inevitably follow.
Patrick waited outside while the emotional reunion between mother, son and daughter-in-law took place.
When they came out he saw that John and his wife, though happy, looked strained and thinner, their faces sunken with tension and deprivation.
Their clothes were hardly fit for a jumble sale.
John made a point of sitting in the front with Patrick for the drive back to London.
He had the look of a man who is haunted by some terrible knowledge.
Midge and Angela, close together in the back, were carrying on their own conversation.
Speaking low so that Midge could not hear, John said: ‘I have to talk to someone in authority.
I don't know whether it ought to be the Foreign Office, the Home Office or the Ministry of Defence.’
‘Something to do with nerve agents or radiation sickness?’
John's head jerked round.
‘Good God!
You know about that?’
‘Very little.’
This was not the moment to tell John about the substituted bodies.
Patrick was negotiating the tunnel that links the terminals with the M4.
‘What is this information you've got?’
John talked, quickly and urgently, while Patrick drove along the M4, crossed the Chiswick and Hammersmith Flyovers and slowed down for the traffic in Cromwell Road.
‘There's only one place for us to go with that story,’ he said, when John paused.
‘That's the Cabinet Office Briefing Room.
I'll telephone someone I know in COBRA and ask him to meet us at Melbury Court.’
‘Charles’ had been friendly ever since Hazards Ltd had got him out of a jam in the D Saceur affair.
He arrived at the Melbury Court Hotel only half an hour after Patrick's call.
It was a small, unpretentious, privately run hotel, with small rooms where conversations were not likely to be overheard.
Charles was about the same age as Richie and had something of the same  military bearing.
Not so tall, he was dark and clean-shaven with sharp, observant eyes and a cleft in the flesh of his chin.
He was wearing a well-tailored dark grey suit and a Vikings tie.
He was the epitome of conservative respectability, but Patrick knew he had a hand in some of the most hairy activities of the secret intelligence services.
While Midge and Angela had tea, the three men sat in one of the smallest lounges.
Charles smoked his way through half a packet of Gauloises while John told his story.
He dealt quickly with the Romanian trip until that day when they had driven up into the mountains to visit Putna.
He was watching Charles closely, as if afraid that he would not be believed, when he came to describe the meeting with Maureen O'Duffy and what she had told them during the drive down the mountain.
Even though he was talking unemotionally his voice reflected the shock of that moment when the canvas flap at the back of the gypsy caravan had parted, revealing the barrels of the two Kalashnikovs.
‘Just a minute,’ Charles interrupted after half an hour, leaning forward and  lowering his voice.
‘You said there had been an accident in the section where they were handling nuclear devices.
Did you deduce this from the symptoms you saw or was there harder evidence?’
‘There was this Kamalian who was dying.
In fact he was the son of Jazali.
His English was quite good.
I could not make out whether his conscience was troubling him or whether he didn't realise what he was telling me.
But according to him it's quite simple to make a bomb provided you can get hold of about eight kilograms of plutonium, a lump about the size of an orange.’
‘Yes,’ Charles agreed.
’ The New Scientist obligingly published an article in 1980 describing how to make a DIY plutonium bomb that would fit into a suitcase.’
‘More in the shape of a cylinder or gun barrel,’ John corrected him, with a professional's concern for accuracy.
‘You fabricate a ball of plutonium with a cylindrical section missing from its centre.
This is placed at the bottom of the cylindrical casing.
At the top end you put a wad of chemical explosive and beneath it a slug of  Plutonium 239.
When this is fired into the slot in the lower ball it brings together the critical mass of Plutonium 239 in two millionths of a second.
The result is a twenty kiloton explosion, enough to devastate several square miles of a city and kill twenty thousand people.’
‘Excuse me, sir…
’ The heads of the three men jerked round.
The green-coated hotel porter was standing above them.
‘The ladies are having tea.
They asked me to see if you'd like me to bring you some.’
‘I think I'll wait till the bar opens,’ Charles said.
‘I feel like something stronger.’
When this reminder of a real world outside the little room had withdrawn, he asked: ‘Did you glean any idea of when they might like to use this — ah — device?’
Again, John could not be precise but he had the impression that three separate Kamalian squads were being briefed to hit targets in the UK.
The word ‘Albion’ had been used often.
Any one of these teams could inflict more damage than a wing of Luftwaffe bombers in the Second World War.
‘We didn't believe what the Irish girl told us,’ said John, ‘but it was true.’
‘Go on,’ Charles said.
A few days after they had learnt that Haroun was the illegitimate son of Jazali an extraordinary thing had happened.
Late one afternoon Rioja had rushed in to tell them that the whole camp was being evacuated across the border and they must flee before the men who were coming to shoot them reached the hut.
They had run for the woods in what they stood up in.
They did not realise then that Rioja had stayed to face the killers.
From the hut behind them they had heard a single shot.
All over the camp in wild panic the huts were emptying as the remaining occupants scrambled for the safety of the hills and the Russian frontier beyond.
Then they saw the reason.
A convoy of Romanian Securitate trucks filled with helmeted men came racing up the track that emerged from the forest.
As they dismounted and fanned out to surround the camp, John and Angela headed over the mountain to the south.
They wandered all night, in the morning smelt smoke and food cooking, and stumbled exhausted into a gypsy encampment.
‘They hate the Communist regime, you know,’ John continued.
‘When they heard our story they said they would get us out of Romania.
They have their own secret routes.
We travelled in one of those horse-drawn covered waggons.
Out of Romania, then right across Hungary into Austria — always down lanes or minor roads and mostly at night…’
Charles for some reason looked at his watch.
He gazed out of the window.
It had started to rain.
John mistook his expression.
‘You don't believe me, do you?
You think I've made it all up.’
Charles looked at him levelly.
‘In my job, old boy, I've learned that truth is stranger than fiction by a long way.’
Midge put her head round the dividing wall.
‘Have you men nearly finished?
Why don't you join us for tea?’
‘Not quite, Mrs. Bonnard.’
Charles turned back to John.
‘I'm going to have to impose on your time a little longer, Doctor.
I'd like you to tell your story to a couple of my colleagues and they may  want to go into greater detail.
It should not take more than twenty-four hours but it might be better for your wife to go home with Mrs. Bonnard.’
‘John.’
Patrick had seen the chance to ask a question that had been on his mind a long time.
‘Why did you take your golf clubs to Romania?
There's no golf course in the country.’
‘My golf clubs?’
John was puzzled.
‘I didn't take golf clubs with me.’
‘It's an extraordinary story.
You do believe him?’
‘Oh, yes.
We've known something was going on in northern Romania for some time.
Dr. Bonnard is a very good informant and he had no reason to invent anything.’
Charles and Patrick had remained in the little sitting room while John went to talk to his wife and mother before he was taken away for further debriefing.
‘All the same, a lot of it makes no sense but that's nothing new in my line of business.
Oh, thank you.
Perhaps I will have some tea after all.’
Charles moved back so that the porter could put down a  tray with tea things on it.
He waited till the man had gone out again.
‘There are a lot of questions still to be answered.
For instance, did they know before they kidnapped the Bonnards that he was a doctor?
And why did they put on that charade with the fake bodies when they planned to send two live substitutes to England in the Renault?’
‘I have a theory on that.
Sugar and milk?’
Patrick had taken charge of the tea tray and was pouring out.
‘Milk but no sugar.’
Charles patted his stomach.
‘Too much sitting down in my job.
If you have a theory let's have it.’
‘It's a case of two rival organisations getting across each other.
The training camp was a KGB operation, probably under the auspices of Department 8 of the First Chief Directorate.
Perhaps they had not cleared it properly with the Romanians.
Ceauŝescu may not be the most benevolent of rulers but he has at least kept his country outside the Soviet Union.
He has to watch his step very carefully vis-à-vis the Russians but my guess is that in this instance they went too far.
You know that his brother is head of the Securitate?’
Charles nodded, munching a biscuit.
‘It would make sense,’ Patrick went on, ‘for the KGB to support Jazali's campaign against a British target.
The First Directorate's Service A isn't answerable, even to the Politburo.
Without committing themselves they would be able to test out some of their newest toys —’
‘Nerve gases and the suitcase bomb.’
‘That's what I mean.
The Bonnards and their car offered the opportunity they were looking for, a way of gaining entry to this country for two operatives and a device of some kind.’
‘You think they were lured up there deliberately?’
‘They may have been,’ Patrick said.
‘We do know that someone in Bucharest told them that the monastery at Putna was an absolute must.
You see, that accident in the nuclear weapons section must have thrown them badly, and the fact that Jazali's own son was at risk raised the stakes.
There would have been an enormous panic when they realised that the Irish girl had been picked up by the  Bonnards.
The Securitate and the KGB were falling over each other at that point.
We'll never know what really happened but I think the KGB got what they wanted — the English couple and their car.
When Ceauŝescu personally came in on the act they faked a car accident and tricked up a couple of bodies for the Securitate to send back to England.
I think one of them was the Irish girl.
The man was probably the victim of another accident.
I doubt if the KGB told the Securitate what they were doing.
The whole thing was a botch job, but these clandestine organisations are just as capable of making a balls-up as —’
‘The Department of Education and Science.’
Charles got it in quickly as Patrick hesitated.
‘Well, it's improbable enough to be true.
We may get more from Dr. Bonnard when we question him in depth.
The worrying thing is that botch-up or not they have succeeded in getting a car and two operatives into England.’
‘Don't forget that John Bonnard said he thought the Kamalian teams had been despatched on their missions.’
‘No,’ Charles said, very seriously.
‘I'm not forgetting that.
It so happens that I  have an appointment with the PM this evening.
This time of the year is the open season for demonstrations but we're beginning to wonder if someone is co-ordinating the restlessness we've got at the moment.
On the one hand there's Militant Tendency and the Workers’ Revolutionary Party, and on the other the Peace Council and the campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.
The country is like a smouldering house full of fumes.
It only needs someone to knock a window out and the whole thing could go up in flames.’
14
PATRICK was back at Royal St. George's in time to see the last couples finish their rounds.
After the nightmare images conjured up by John and Charles it was reassuring to drive through the historic streets of Sandwich and return to the sane world of the golf tournament.
In the ideal golfing conditions the first eight professionals had beaten par.
Owen Rowlands had slipped a little but at the end of this second day still maintained the lead on 132.
He was threatened closely by Bob Stein and Gerhard Bugner, both on 133.
Manuel Caballeros with a 66 had moved menacingly up to fifth place with the little Japanese, Otaki.
‘Our own’ Andy Kyle was on 137, five shots off the lead, tied with Reg Coleman, the big-hitting Australian.
Seeing the low scores, the Chairman of the Greens Committee was muttering  darkly about setting more difficult pin positions the next day.
Though a million sterling was not at stake there was a lot of interest in the amateur competition, in which there was only one more round to play.
Only the top twenty-four scorers would qualify for the last round on Saturday.
Both Dr. Stevie and Sir Bryan would be playing.
Stevie had responded well to being in the limelight and returned a 67 (82 gross).
Bryan Thomson had scraped in with a 74 (84 gross).
The best golf of the day had been produced by the boy champion, Tim Baxter, playing off scratch.
He had returned scores of one over and one under the par of 70.
The popular leader, however, was Buck Finnegan.
An 8-handicap player, he had gone round in 74, which gave him a net score of 66 to add to the previous day's 67.
This meant that the film actor would be paired with Dr. Stephen Bonnard for the final.
Patrick was occupying a little room at the top of Prince's Lodge with a dormer window set in the roof.
He woke at three with a recurrence of the old nightmare-drowning  and helpless in a deluge of glutinous liquid in which paradoxically there was also a ball of fire.
The wind was gusting through the branches of the old oak tree outside and hurling itself against his window.
The Renault 18 kept looming up in his mind.
Why had it formed such an important part of the terrorists' plan?
John had described the do-it-yourself plutonium bomb as being shaped like the barrel of a small cannon.
That was not a convenient shape to go into an attaché case but it would fit very snugly into
Suddenly he sat up and switched the bedside light on.
Sleep was out of the question now.
He lay on his back, figuring in his mind how it could be done.
It would be a simple matter to saw off the shafts of the clubs and embed the heads in a dummy top.
That would leave the bulk of the bag free for the plutonium 239 and the firing mechanism John had described.
It would be heavy, of course, but the carrying strap could be reinforced and the object could be transported on an ordinary golf trolley.
He must have gone to sleep at last for  the next thing he heard was his alarm clock.
Sir Bryan's Scottish housekeeper regarded breakfast as a formal meal and required everybody to be ready to take their places when she rang the bell at eight.
That left plenty of time.
The professionals who had survived the cut were teeing off from 8 till 11.
The celebrities would start at 11.15, the last pair going out at 1.15.
The timing had to be strict to meet television requirements for the finish at about 5 p.m.
Sir Bryan nodded at the rain beating against the window.
‘I pity the pros starting out in this.
The wind is gusting to about fifty knots.’
‘I hope it clears up.’
Dr. Stevie was helping himself to bacon and eggs from the sideboard.
‘Midge is bringing Angela down in time to see me tee off.’
He glanced round at Patrick.
‘She said she might bring Chris.’
‘We're fully booked up at the Hospitality Unit,’ said Sir Bryan, ‘but Mrs. Mackintosh can easily lay on a cold lunch for them here.
There's plenty of room if they want to stay the night.
I'm sure  Patrick would not mind using the extra bed in Richie's room, so Chris could sleep in his.
I'm sure they'll want to stay over till tomorrow — especially if Stevie wins.’
‘I'm bound to crack up soon, Bryan.
It's too good to last.
You're not far behind.
You could still win it.’
‘If I had my own clubs I might,’ Sir Bryan said gloomily.
‘Just can't seem to get on with this set.
And as for the putter —’
‘I thought I'd come round with you, Sir Bryan,’ Richie said.
‘If you're playing with Gordon Parker you may need some personal protection.’
‘Oh, he's all right on the golf course.
Quite a contrast to his style in Parliament.
Who did you speak to at the Palace?
I hope you did not try too hard to put the Princess off.’
‘It seemed only fair to give her the chance to opt out, but I don't think the Palace had much say in the matter.
She's made it clear that she is not about to be scared off by terrorist threats.’
They were at the toast and marmalade stage when Mrs. Mackintosh came in to say that Sir Bryan was wanted on the  telephone.
It was the weekend porter at Royalbion House.
When Sir Bryan came back he was both frustrated and excited.
‘That's an extraordinary thing!
A chap just turned up with my lost golf clubs.
He wanted to collect the one thousand pound reward there and then.’
Patrick had swallowed his mouthful of toast.
‘Is he still there?’
‘I told Bagshot to give him a chit on my behalf and take his address.
We'll send him the money through the —’
‘Sir Bryan —’
‘He can't really have expected anyone to produce a thousand in cash on a Sat —’
‘Sir Bryan,’ Patrick cut in again.
‘Will you ring back and tell Bagshot to keep him there, stall him somehow.’
Richie had picked up the urgency in his voice and had stopped chewing.
‘I can't see the point.
If he really wants his —’
‘He can tell him that if he waits someone will bring him the money.
Sir Bryan, would you do that, please?’
‘Want to nab the chap, eh?’
‘Well — suppose they're not your clubs at all— or he's nicked the putter?’
‘My God —!’
Sir Bryan was gone for two minutes.
They heard him dialling and speaking tersely for a moment.
‘Too late,’ he said when he came back.
‘He'd already gone.
I told Bagshot to lock the clubs in the baggage-room and watch them like a hawk.’
He glanced at his watch.
‘Eight thirty-seven.
I'm due off the first tee at ten past twelve.
Do the rules permit one to change a club during a round?’
‘Only if it's damaged in the normal course of play,’ said Stevie.
‘Rule 4–4 a. ii.’
‘On a Saturday morning,’ Patrick said, ‘I should be able to make the City and back in three hours.’
‘Well,’ Richie murmured, ‘it's seventy miles there and seventy miles back.’
‘No problem.
Would you phone Bagshot, Sir Bryan, and tell him I'm coming?’
‘I'll do that.
With the traffic jams in Sandwich I doubt if you'll make it in time.
But even if I've started bring the putter  out to me on the course.
We may find that my Golden Goose gets its scraggy little neck damaged in the normal course of play.’
‘You won't need the Missile,’ Patrick told Richie as he pushed his chair back.
‘No.’
He followed Patrick out into the hall.
‘What's going on in your mind, old Pat?
This is where the action's going to be.
Bryan Thomson's bag doesn't matter a tuppeny damn.’
‘There was a golf-bag in John Bonnard's car when it was passed through Customs.
But he told me he did not take any clubs abroad with him.’
Patrick did not wait to elaborate further.
He took the Mascot Missile's keys from the tray in the hall and went out into the driving rain.
The atrocious weather helped.
It had kept all but the most enthusiastic golf addicts indoors.
Only a trickle of cars was moving through Sandwich towards Royal St. George's.
A quarter of an hour after starting he was bypassing Canterbury and six minutes later he was on the M2, leaving a long plume of spray behind him.
You don't dawdle when you suspect that a plutonium bomb has been planted in the centre of a city of ten million inhabitants.
He would have liked to talk to Richie, but Richie had had the in-car phone removed.
It had failed him in a crisis and that was once too often.
The motorway carried him to within fifteen miles of the City.
After that he was contending with the Saturday morning traffic of south east London.
The Dartford Tunnel was quiet enough for him to sneak through without loss of time.
With the financial institutions of the City closed for the weekend the normally bustling streets were clear enough to allow bursts of sixty to seventy miles an hour.
He did not have time to check his mirrors for police cars as he passed All Hallows-on-the-Wall and plunged into the long straight canyon of London Wall.
He had a momentary vision of the tall, proud tower blocks that rose on either side of him collapsing in a cloud of dust.
But no ball of fire climbed into the sky ahead of him and the familiar landmarks were still there as he passed the City of London Museum and slipped past St. Botolph-without-Aldersgate into Little  Britain.
It was not yet ten as he swept up to the space reserved for the Chairman's car slap in front of the main entrance to Royalbion House.
The glass doors opened automatically for him.
The big foyer was deserted compared with a normal working day.
A skeleton staff was on duty to keep the world-wide operations of Royalbion ticking over.
Perhaps a hundred skeletons?
He was terribly conscious of the forty stories piled over his head.
The palms of his hands were sweating and he had yawned twice since he left the car.
A self-important figure in its blue uniform was strutting the marble slabs.
‘Sergeant Bagshot!’
The figure turned, stiffening.
Bagshot had served for twenty years in the Royal Marines.
‘I'm Malone.
Sir  Bryan told you I was coming?’
‘Ah, Mr. Malone.’
The voice had an Irish brogue to it.
‘You've been very quick, sir.
Shall I fetch the bag?’
‘No!
Hold on!’
Bagshot had been heading for a door opening off the foyer.
He was stopped by the urgent tone of Patrick's voice.
‘I'd better have a look at it first.’
‘Whatever you say, sir.
’ A little offended, Bagshot put the key in the lock and opened the door.
Patrick followed him in.
‘That's it, stood over in the corner.’
‘Wait!’
Patrick warned again.
‘Don't touch it!’
Bagshot turned, puzzled by Patrick's attitude.
But he had not served in the Royal Marines for nothing.
‘Jesus, you talk as if it's booby-trapped or something.
It's not another of those terrorist bombs, is it?’
‘No, I don't think so.
Just let me take a look at it.’
Patrick had been able to do some thinking on the drive from Sandwich.
His reaction to the news that Sir Bryan's bag had been handed in had been the outcome of his sombre thoughts during the night.
Sober reflection would have shown him that the sensible procedure would have been to phone the police and get them to ask the Bomb Disposal Squad to come and check the bag out.
It had been his reluctance to cry ‘wolf’ that had got him to where he stood now.
The bag was Sir Bryan's all right.
There  was no doubt about that.
The red and white pattern was unmistakable.
The green, blue and black umbrella was still strapped to the outside.
The hemispherical ball cleaner dangled by a cord from the carrying handle.
The pencil for recording scores was still in its slot, and the tag with the owner's club membership number was in its perspex cover.
He could not see the clubs.
The cover had been zipped over the top of them.
The question was, had it been to Romania and back?
Or had something which had been brought back from Romania in another golf bag been fitted inside it?
It was all too easy to visualise a cylindrical metal casing concealed inside that innocent-looking exterior.
‘How heavy was it?’
‘Too bloody heavy.
I wouldn't fancy lugging that round a golf course.’
‘What was he like, the chap who left it?’
‘Shifty bloke.
Wouldn't look you straight in the eye.’
‘What time was it?’
‘Just before I phoned up Sir Bryan.’
That had been at 8.40.
An hour and  twenty-five minutes ago.
He stared at the bag, willing it to tell him something.
‘Always consider the worst possible case,’ was the EOD maxim.
He could be looking at a device which at any moment could be activated by a radio-operated switch.
Perhaps by something as ordinary as a British Telecom radio-pager.
Almost certainly the timing would be calculated to forestall possible discovery and defusing by a Nuclear Emergency Search Team.
The man who had planted it would want time to get clear before an explosion occurred greater than the blasts which had flattened Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Say, an hour to an hour and a half?
What would happen if he telephoned the police now?
It could take half an hour for a bomb disposal team to get to Royalbion House.
Then there would be the usual reconnaissance, the donning of protective clothing, the stalking of the device.
And if the electronic sniffers or whatever they used to detect the presence of a nuclear mass gave a positive reading would the police want to evacuate the area before an attempt was made to render it harmless?
From outside he could hear the muted  hum of London's traffic.
Thirty seconds had ticked past since he entered the baggage room.
‘Sir Bryan sounded real keen to get his bag back,’ Bagshot prompted him.
‘Whoever stole it played his cards well.
Must have seen his name in the paper and reckoned he'd pay over the odds to get it back today.’
‘Sergeant Bagshot, would you do something for me?
Go and telephone Sir Bryan and tell him that I'll have his clubs back to him by midday.’
What he really wanted was to get rid of Bagshot.
It was harder to think clearly with someone breathing down his neck.
When the man had gone he closed the door.
He was alone now in the baggage-room, surrounded by parcels, cast-off electric fires and typewriters, a step-ladder, two suitcases, a coat-rack on wheels, even several cases of wine.
He moved closer to the bag.
If it really was a bomb, unzipping the cover would almost certainly trip a booby trap.
He crouched down, scanning it for signs.
He even found himself sniffing.
Out in the hall he could hear Bagshot at the  reception desk dialling a number.
He felt he was at the heart not just of Royalbion House, not even of London, but of the entire cosmos.
He was a god, poised to be at the centre of another Big Bang, creating a new universe with which he would be integrated in the most positive way.
Then at last the bag spoke to him.
From the pocket at the side a small flower petal was peeping out.
It had been caught when the zip was closed.
The petal was faded now but it had once been bright pink.
Midge's sea pinks.
Some outside force seemed to take over Patrick's body.
He was fully conscious but his limbs, hands and feet began to carry out movements that were independent of his will.
He went to the coat-rack.
Unhooked a smart black overcoat with a velvet collar.
Took the coat off the wire hanger, tossed the coat over the tubular rail.
He untwisted the wire and straightened it out into a piece about a yard long.
Sucked the blood from the forefinger of his left hand.
There was a small gap between the zip fastener and the upper collar of the bag.
He gently pushed the end of the wire in.
No resistance.
Pushed it a little further.
Felt it scrape first on a soft surface and then on a surface smooth like metal.
The wire went in to its full length.
He withdrew it and threw it on the ground.
Then with a quick movement he unfastened the zip.
London stayed where it had always been — at least since Roman times.
‘Londinium,’ he said aloud.
‘Stet.’
The clubs were all there, the James Braid putter a little rusty after six weeks of neglect.
‘Bloody marvellous, he says.’
Behind him Bagshot had opened the door.
‘He says bring them straight to the first tee.
Holy Jesus!
Who could have done that?’
He was staring at the overcoat thrown over the rail.
‘Hasn't this door been locked ever since I put that coat up?’
‘I'd better be on my way.
’ Patrick eased the faded sea pink out of the pocket and stuck it in the buttonhole of his shirt.
Then he slung the strap of the bag over his shoulder.
‘Thanks for your help.’
He left Bagshot solicitously tending the overcoat — very much Lord Monkton's style — and walked across the foyer.
The  automatic doors opened respectfully.
Outside he stood on the steps for a minute, surveying his city and sniffing the morning air.
He took a deep breath.
‘Hello, London!’
A very attractive girl passing by heard his shout.
She turned her head, responding to his grin with a smile.
But she did not pause.
Patrick looked a little intoxicated as he made his way towards the Missile.
Bryan Thomson's match was already at the first tee when Patrick strolled up with the bag of clubs over his shoulder.
Sir Gordon Parker had one of the regular Royal St. George's caddies; Richie was caddying for Sir Bryan.
The quartet was augmented by a referee, a steward to control the spectators and a uniformed PC.
The latter was happy to be walking the fairways of Sandwich instead of battling with strikers on the picket lines.
The first of the pros were already finishing their rounds on the 18th green.
They were tired and despondent, stooped in their waterproof coveralls.
Scores were  going to be high in the rainy, windy conditions.
Par for the course on a day like this was really 74.
Sir Bryan received his clubs with the emotion of a lover reunited with his long-absent mistress.
Patrick waited to watch him and his opponent drive off.
He took Sir Bryan's rejected set of clubs back to the caddie-master's hut and then headed for the Tented Village.
He was ravenously hungry.
At the entrance to the Royalbion Hospitality Unit he stopped.
Doctor Stevie was sitting at a table having an early lunch.
With him were Midge and Chris.
Patrick turned away.
He picked up a beefburger at one of the stalls in the Tented Village and set off to overtake Bryan Thomson's match.
He came up with them as they followed their tee-shots up the 2nd fairway.
Sir Bryan had made par on the first hole by sinking a long putt and his tail was up.
‘I think you over-reacted a bit this morning, old Pat,’ Richie said, when Patrick fell into step beside him.
‘Still, no harm done.
In fact you've scored a lot of Brownie points with the Chairman, bringing his precious clubs back.
I thought of ringing the Met when you dashed off like that but decided to leave it with you.’
No comment from Patrick.
What had passed through his mind in the baggage-room at Royalbion House would remain his own personal secret.
They paused while the two players chose clubs for their second shots.
Sir Bryan used his 7-wood to plant the ball neatly on the green.
‘Great shot, Sir Bryan,’ Richie applauded encouragingly, replacing the woollen cover on the club.
He fell back to rejoin Patrick.
‘I had Charles on the blower this morning.
He could not divulge his sources but he thinks something may be going to happen in the southern North Sea.
The Royal Navy have intensified their patrols and the Special Boat Squadron has been put on alert.
Charles thinks if anything happens it will be co-ordinated with this strike at Sheffield and the peace demonstration tomorrow.’
‘Will there be an EOD team here tomorrow?
They usually cover a VVIP.’
‘I'm informed that there will be an EOD presence, that's all.
Some things it's  better not to ask too many questions about.’
Richie glanced over his shoulder at the young PC pacing behind them.
‘The Chief Constable says he has everything tied up.
Our job, old Pat, is to hold a watching brief, use our eyes and ears, be ready to plug any gaps.
No reason why we shouldn't enjoy ourselves.’
They had reached the green.
Richie took the James Braid putter out, laid the bag down and went to confer with Sir Bryan about the line of his putt.
Patrick stayed with that match till they reached the 7th hole, the Maiden.
He waited there on top of the high dune watching half a dozen matches come through.
Last to appear were Doctor Stevie and Buck Finnegan.
Not till they had come up onto the green did he realise that the figure in waterproofs pulling the doctor's trolley was Chris.
She was absolutely soaked.
When they'd putted out he went down to the 7th tee.
‘Stevie's caddy never turned up,’ Midge explained.
Patrick walked over to where Chris was  standing, with a towel in her hand to wipe the grip of the driver.
‘I'll take Doctor Stevie's trolley.’
‘It's all right,’ she said, without looking up at him.
‘I can manage.’
Stevie's and Buck's method were as different as their clothing.
The actor wore a sky-blue, neatly fitting waterproof suit.
He had an attentive caddy who held the brilliantly segmented umbrella over him between shots.
He was hitting huge distances down wind but his shots to the green failed to bite and often rolled on into the rough beyond.
At the 8th, which turned back against the wind, his hook was accentuated and cost him strokes.
Stevie, by contrast, wore a cloth cap, woollen plus-twos and a double-knitted Norwegian pullover.
He kept his ball low under the wind.
They reached the turn in 37 and 42 respectively, very respectable for golfers with handicaps of 8 and 15.
Allowing for handicap adjustment, there was little more than a stroke between them.
As the afternoon progressed it was apparent that any amateur who could play to his handicap in these conditions was  going to do very well.
The real test would be the inward nine holes.
As word came back from the matches in front it looked as if only Dr. Stephen Bonnard and Buck Finnegan were in serious contention.
Patrick watched Chris setting off down the 10th and then cut across to the 11th green, which was quite close.
The two ‘Sirs’ Bryan and Gordon, had already driven and the Bentley Mulsanne remained unclaimed.
But Sir Bryan was on a hot streak, inspired by the recovery of his clubs.
Though he had no hope of beating Stevie or Buck, he was heading for one of the best net scores of the day.
There was a good crowd round the 11th attracted by the possibility of seeing someone win the Bentley.
Patrick stayed with them until Doctor Stevie's match came along.
Overhead the clouds had been breaking up for some time.
Now the rain stopped and the sun came out.
Suddenly the sea was sparkling and the golf course a glittering green.
By the time they came to the 16th Chris was flagging, after pulling the heavy trolley for fifteen holes through the wind and rain.
She had taken off her waterproofs to  reveal a white one-piece suit.
Midge had seen Patrick in the crowd.
As they moved towards the next tee she nodded towards her niece.
Patrick went after Chris and simply took the trolley from her.
She gave him a quick smile, said: ‘Thank you, Patrick,’ and went to stand beside Midge.
‘Not before time,’ Stevie remarked, as Patrick joined him on the 17th tee.
He had holed his putt on the 16th and was one shot ahead.
The wind, still strong, was gusting in the faces of the players at this difficult hole.
Sir Bryan had already finished.
On the radio link Richie reported that he had scored a net 69, which was likely to stand as the best score of the day.
But unless Stevie and Buck blew it, one of them was sure to win.
It was now 4.20.
The ‘Grandstand’ television cameras had taken a break from horse-racing and cricket to record the closing holes of an event that had captured a good deal of public interest.
In addition to the cameras on gantries alongside the 17th and 18th holes there were portable cameras and microphones, carried in little  jeeps which scurried along the fairways as the players advanced.
It was a lot easier for Buck, who was used to performing in front of cameras, than for Stevie, to whom this was a new and unsettling experience.
The 17th is an unnerving hole and the comforting little thatched hut beside the tee gives a false impression of cosiness.
Stevie had the honour and drove first.
He managed to steer the ball between two bunkers, one on the left and one on the right of the fairway, but at some sacrifice of length.
Buck outdrove him by forty yards.
Stevie did not reach the green with his second shot but he had avoided the bunker on the left.
Buck strode up to his ball and had a long consultation with his caddy.
They decided to go for it, even against the wind.
He played his best shot of the round, a long, low 3-wood, which landed short of the slope at the front of the platform green and ran up level with the flag.
Poor Stevie, unsettled by the cameras, fluffed his chip and left himself at the bottom of the slope.
‘Steady, Dr. Stevie,’ Patrick warned, as he showed every sign of rushing at the  next shot.
‘This match is a long way from being over.’
Buck had gone up to the green and marked his ball.
Good actor that he was, he somehow managed to convey that he had become the dominant figure, that the contest was as good as won.
Stevie decided to putt rather than chip.
As always, it was difficult to judge the uphill putt over a kind of step.
He hit it too hard.
It rolled to the back of the green and was still outside Buck.
He ended up with a six.
Buck got down in two for a par and strode off to the 18th tee two strokes in the lead.
‘Just play your normal game,’ Patrick counselled, as he and Stevie followed Buck up to the 18th tee.
They passed close to Midge and Chris.
Both were crestfallen after Stevie's erratic performance on the 17th.
‘Buck thinks he has it in the bag, but there's a long way to go yet.’
The wind had abated, but was still blowing in gusts from the left.
The shot to that diabolically difficult green was going to be very difficult.
Buck, the adrenalin flowing, hit one of  his longest drives, but he came up on it a little early.
The wind accentuated the faint slice and carried the ball into the rough on the right.
Stevie hit a low, unambitious shot which took a look at the bunker on the left but swung back onto the fairway.
It was his turn to play first.
Ahead was the daunting sight of the three grandstands enclosing the last green.
Now that the sun had come out, many of the spectators had stayed to see how the celebrities would perform after the fireworks of the professionals.
Patrick had to signal one of the TV cameramen to move back a bit.
He guessed that the mikes were near enough to pick up his discussion with Stevie and relay it to several million viewers.
‘What about the 5-wood again?’
‘I'd rather play a 3-iron and keep it low.’
‘You're not going for the green, are you?’
‘No.’
Patrick handed him the club and stood back.
He could see Chris in the little circle surrounding Finnegan's ball.
Stevie hit the shot thin.
There was a nasty moment before the ball flew over the  three bunkers that block the fairway.
It rolled on to within eighty yards of the green, finishing on the left side of the fairway.
Buck was too ambitious with his shot from a bad lie.
The grass caught his club-head and he hoicked his ball into one of those bunkers.
Once again he blasted out at the first attempt, reeling back amid a cloud of sand and covering his eyes.
There followed a lot of business with a handkerchief and shaking of the head to get the sand out of his ear, nose and throat.
Good television.
But he had played three and was still behind Stevie's second shot.
For his third, about ninety yards, he chose his pitching wedge, but let the heavy head take charge.
The shot was hooked and finished in Duncan's Hollow.
More than one champion had failed to get down in two from that spot.
‘Go for the fat part of the green.’
Patrick handed Stevie the 7-iron which he preferred for these pitch and run shots.
The flag was well to the back of the humped green with its treacherous slopes to right and left.
The bunker on the right waited to welcome any stroke that was  shanked or pushed.
Stevie's ball pitched short, climbed onto the green and rolled to the back about fifteen feet from the flag.
A burst of applause greeted caddies and players as they walked up into the arena.
It was quite clear now that one of these two would be the winner of the Golden Putter.
Stevie went to lift his ball and put a marker down.
Buck, under the stare of the cameras, descended into Duncan's Hollow.
The ball was nestling in thick but not very long grass.
He had chosen an 8-iron to propel it forward as well as up.
The man who had hunted down countless villains on the screen crumbled when it came to punishing a little white dimpled ball measuring 1.68 inches in diameter.
He gave it a stab which only just carried it up the slope and onto the edge of the green.
He had played five shots to Stevie's three.
Buck had to putt first.
He knew that if he was to be sure of winning he had to hole it.
He gave it every chance.
His caddie whipped the flag out, but the ball slid four feet past.
Buck Finnegan was going to take 7, which meant that Stevie had two strokes to force a ‘sudden death’ play-off.
‘Somewhere near the hole will do,’ Patrick said, as he handed him his putter before going to hold the flag.
There was silence in the stands as Stevie lined up his putt.
Midge and Chris had gone to the back of the green.
The TV cameras were focused on the figure of the sixty-year old surgeon whose face had become known to millions over these last few days.
Patrick knew that he only intended to lag the putt up close, but as so often when a player does that the ball ran exactly along the line he had chosen, curved left as it ended its run and plopped neatly into the hole.
Finishing with a par 4 Stevie had won and on the morrow would be presented by the Princess with his Golden Putter.
The grandstands erupted with applause but Stevie held up his hand for silence.
Buck still had to putt and secure second place.
He holed it bravely.
Only then did Stevie hand the putter back to Patrick.
The cameras focused on him as he went to the back of the green to kiss first Midge and then Chris.
The big scoreboard behind the stands  showed that the professional side of the tournament had not been without its drama.
As Sir Bryan had predicted, the weather had sorted out the men from the boys and difficult pin placings had not been needed to tame the pros.
Poor Owen Rowlands, the first-day leader, had slumped to a 76 and dropped to sixth place.
The dramatic feature of the day had been Manuel Caballeros's climb from 5th to equal 1st place.
He had triumphed over the wind and rain to shoot a 69, the only below-par score of the day.
The Leader Board read:
So with eight of the world's top golfers within five shots of each other and eight different nationalities represented, the stage was set for the grandstand finish  which Hammond Wilde had been dreaming about for the best part of a year.
The tournament had attracted the media of Spain, Germany, and the United States, whilst in Japan and Australia golf addicts would be watching their TV sets in the middle of the night to see how Otaki and Coleman were doing.
The golfing correspondents of newspapers and magazines from all over the world had gathered for the finale.
The resources of the Communications Compound would be stretched to the limit, sending instantaneous pictures by satellite to destinations which Marco Polo and Captain Cook had taken years to reach.
15
SIR BRYAN THOMSON threw an impromptu dinner party at Prince's Lodge that evening.
It had a double purpose.
Doctor Stevie's triumph was a worthy cause for celebration as indeed was the host's own final round.
‘What might I not have done if I'd had my own clubs for the first two rounds?’
It was also to be a welcoming home for John and Angela, who had come down to watch the final round and were staying at the Bell Hotel.
The occasion was also graced by the presence of Lady Thomson.
Duty required her to be present on the Sunday for the arrival of the Princess.
Neither Patrick nor John had brought dinner jackets so Sir Bryan decreed that the men would wear lounge suits.
Lady Thomson, Midge and Chris were wearing long dresses.
Midge was glowing with pleasure and pride at the return of her beloved John and Angela.
Chris was stunning in a green Chinese-style gown with a  long slit up one side.
She had a velvet band round her throat, long ear-rings and gold shoes.
‘Ah!’
Sir Bryan greeted Patrick when he came into the drawing room.
‘Here's the man who saved the day for me.
Come in, Patrick.
Have a glass of champagne.’
Chris had glanced round and then, hurt by some private wound, turned back to John.
Dinner was hurried along so that the whole party could be in the study to watch the television programme ‘News and Sport’.
Stevie had received a tip that he was to be featured.
After the usual shots of the day's decisive football matches some highlights were shown of the Million Sterling Tournament at Sandwich, with a good puff for the dramatic finish awaiting viewers on the morrow.
‘Grandstand’ will be there.’
Then the announcer smiled at the camera.
‘And finally, a sixty-year-old surgeon today earned the privilege of being presented tomorrow with a golden putter by Princess Jane.
He defeated the well-known  actor Buck Finnegan with his final putt.’
There followed shots of the hapless Finnegan missing his putt and Stevie holing his.
Everyone in the room applauded.
Stevie looked modest.
‘Just shows what a good caddie can do for you,’ he said, with a generous smile at Patrick.
Patrick escaped from the party on the excuse that he needed to check up on some security arrangements.
The truth was that he could not bear to be so close to Chris and yet feel so distant.
It was still light and the orange glow in the western sky promised good weather for Sunday.
He wandered towards the old harbour, now little more than a quiet backwater.
Shallow-draught cabin cruisers were moored upstream of the bridge.
In a few boatyards sea-going craft were being built or repaired.
He stopped above a man who was painting the superstructure of his boat and asked him how far it was to the sea.
‘About three miles by water, less as the crow flies.’
‘Can you disembark anywhere along there?
I mean on the seaward side?’
‘I suppose it's possible, but you would not be very popular.
That land belongs to Prince's Golf Club.’
He went back to Prince's Lodge and managed to collect the keys of the Missile without being seen.
He drove out of Sandwich via the only bridge across the Stour, cruised up the A256 to the crossroads outside Ramsgate where he had seen the Renault 18 disappear three weeks before.
He turned round and drove slowly back, past the abandoned Hoverport, the replica of the  longboat in which the Saxons had come to England and the monument where St. Augustine had first set foot in Thanet.
A couple of miles further on the massive cylindrical cooling towers to Richborough Power Station emitted a faint breath of steam.
The road after that was pinched between the river Stour and the bluff on which Richborough Castle stood.
To reach it he had to drive almost into Sandwich, between factories and yards where acres of cars awaited export, and find a small road that wound its way inland.
At the end it climbed steeply onto the high ground on  which the old Roman fort had been built.
All that remained of this important bastion were three long sections of the massive walls, now only twenty-five feet high.
In the centre a cruciform plinth marked the spot where a triumphal arch faced with marble had once towered above the sea to remind passing ships of the might of the Roman Empire.
The position of the West Gate could still be seen.
Through it the legions of Claudius and Nero had set off on their march along Watling Street nearly two thousand years ago.
This vantage-point commanded a view of the low-lying coastland from which the sea had retreated in the seventeenth century.
Three famous golf links lay below Patrick as he stood there in the last of the daylight — Royal Cinque Ports, Royal St. George's and Prince's.
He could just make out the greens, the fairways and the dunes through which the three dozen surviving professionals would toil tomorrow in search of their own Golden Fleece.
Was there something about him which made it impossible for women to stay with him long?
What had he done to make Juliet so vengeful and bitter?
It did not  seem to matter that she had borne him a son.
With Romy he'd had a real romance but it had flourished only on the Continent and withered in the cold climate of England.
His passionate encounter with Tro had been a reaction to horror and danger, and they both knew it.
But Chris — Chris had brought him back to life.
Chris had reconstructed him as a man.
With Chris he had known a joy he had never dreamed of.
Where had he gone wrong?
Even the sun was in a hurry to get back to Sandwich that Sunday.
Only five hours after its shepherd-delighting glow had faded behind Richborough Castle the first eager fingers of light were fondling the clouds over Calais.
Soon after it rose the traffic police were in position on the roads outside Sandwich.
The larks had not been up long when the first cars began filtering into the parks.
Play was due to begin at 9.24.
From then there would be seven hours of golf, from the moment the first pro drove off till the final putt dropped on the 18th green.
In that time some twenty thousand people  would tramp round the marked routes or roost in one of the twenty grandstands.
Out in the southern North Sea Gareth Evans, the installation manager of R 253, was leaning on the rail outside his office watching a Royal Navy frigate dipping her graceful bow into the light sea.
The standby vessel circled patiently half a mile away.
One twelve-hour shift had knocked off and a new one had taken over the duties of maintaining the platform's complex equipment.
The dawn search of the platform, mandatory these days, had revealed no evidence of intruders during the night.
It was clear enough for Gareth to just make out the gaunt shapes of the drilling platforms on the north-eastern horizon.
Leaning out over the rail he stared down into the moon pool.
From the depths below the gas flowed silently and invisibly up its pipes, through the processors and then on across the bed of the sea to the site at Bacton.
The Princess was not due to arrive till 12.45.
By that time the first players to start would be nearing the end of their rounds  and the leaders would be about to start.
It had been agreed that Richie would remain in the area of the clubhouse, the Tented Village and the grandstands round the 18th green.
Patrick would have a roving brief out on the golf course.
He watched the first few matches tee off, then joined the trickle of early spectators following the Red route round the course.
Even the lowest of the qualifiers still had something to play for.
Finishing as low as thirteenth, a pro could still win £1,000, whilst at the 11th the Bentley Mulsanne still waited for an ace.
The custodian, a member of Jack Barclay's staff, had taken the car away for the night and it was gleaming spotless in the sunlight.
Beyond it the waters of Sandwich Bay were blue, flecked by the white specks of seagulls plunging to their prey, or little squads of terns scudding close to the waves.
The tempo of a summer's day had adjusted itself to the measured progress of the tournament through the placid dunes and sandhills.
‘Richie?’
‘'Lo, old Pat.’
‘Your Mulsanne is still intact.’
‘More's the pity.
Better publicity if someone wins it.’
‘The pin placing is diabolical today.
Very close to the bunkers on the left.’
‘I'm just going over to the Hospitality Unit.
All the big-shots are here today.
More for the champagne than the golf.
Be in  touch.
Patrick walked along the shoreline towards the 6th tee, keeping inside the fence that bounded the course.
No cars were allowed on the road beyond it today and volunteers were patrolling it to keep out gate-crashers.
A few parties had walked along from Sandwich Bay Estate to picnic on the beach.
He followed the match on the 6th up to the green players, caddies, referee, steward and camp followers.
One notable feature was missing today.
There were no police constables.
They were reinforcing the Metropolitan police up in London where CND had organised a Peace March from Hyde Park to Trafalgar Square and the National Front were planning a counter march from south of the Thames.
Many spectators had squatted on the dunes surrounding the 6th, most of them  on the Maiden itself.
Its summit was a good vantage point for looking out over the course.
Patrick was climbing up there when he heard his name called.
John and Angela were sitting on their anoraks near the top.
He veered left towards them and put his own jacket on the ground.
John still looked strained but Angela had recovered quickly and was radiant.
He remembered the art exhibition at Royalbion House and how he had thought she would make the ideal companion for his life.
That was before Chris.
They exchanged a few banalities and then Patrick asked: ‘You're quite sure you did not have golf clubs in your car when you went to Romania?’
‘Quite sure,’ John said, not pleased that the question had been asked again.
‘Why on earth would I?’
‘I expect you're fed up with answering questions —’
‘Well, I had a whole day of it —’
‘But there are a couple of things I want to ask you.’
Angela gave him a reproachful look but he persisted.
‘Those two bodies that were sent back.
One of  them had symptoms of radiation sickness, and she had been tortured.’
‘It must have been Maureen O'Duffy.’
John's face flinched.
‘Poor kid.
She was some sort of idealist.’
‘But the other, the man, the forensic pathologist thought he'd died from the effects of nerve gas.’
‘Yes.’
John's face muscles twitched.
‘They executed some of their men by exposing them to nerve gas.’
Patrick held up his hand.
One of the players on the green below was about to hole his putt.
As it went down to a flutter of clapping, John added: ‘They wanted to study the effects.
But what they really need is a proper test on a large crowd.
Of course that's not really practicable, unless —’
The caddie had put the flag back in the hole so that the second competitor could line up his putt on it.
He took a very long time over it and in the end just lipped the hole.
By the time he had tapped in John had lost the thread of his remark.
‘That's what frightens me about this campaign for nuclear disarmament.
Get back to conventional weapons?
People  don't realise that the Russians regard chemical and biological weapons as conventional.
They have thousands of tons of them stockpiled on their western front.
Did you know that in the Soviet cities every citizen has been provided with a gas mask?’
‘Is that a fact?’
‘So I was told by one of the instructors at the camp.’
John stared towards the beach, seeing disturbing visions.
‘People forget that we've had forty years of scientific advance since the first atom bomb was dropped.
Some of these horror weapons are more insidious than the nuclear ones.’
Patrick could see that Angela was distressed.
She had brought John down to Sandwich to help him forget what they had been through, but he was haunted by what he had learnt and seen behind the Iron Curtain.
‘The pathologist who did the autopsy on the body of the man told me something about the effects of nerve gases.
It sounded —’
‘Horrible!’
John exclaimed.
‘I saw it happen.
The respiratory system fails, he's clutching at his throat, vomiting and  excreting uncontrollably, staggering about and dead in half a minute.
Just from inhaling one fiftieth of a drop.’
‘John,’ Angela cut in with a pleading glance at Patrick, ‘don't you think you ought to —’
‘Biological weapons are worse.’
John again had the pinched look Patrick had seen on his face at London Airport.
‘With them the body just disintegrates.
I mean literally.
Arms and legs just fall off —’
‘They're on the tee,’ Patrick said firmly.
‘Let's watch how they play this hole.’
Through his binoculars he focused on the couple on the 6th tee.
‘It's Lars Nielsen and Doug Saunders.’
John remained silent and brooding while the Swede and the Australian played the hole.
Both scored par 3s and went on their way to the 7th tee chatting amicably.
‘Where are you, Pat?’
Richie's voice, slightly distorted, was coming out of the V of his jacket.
‘On the Maiden, just below the tit.’
‘Better get back here.
The VVIP is due in twenty minutes.’
Television cameras were there to record  the arrival of the Princess for ‘Grandstand’ viewers.
She was greeted by the Captain of Royal St. George's, the Lord Lieutenant and Sir Bryan and Lady Thomson.
What the cameras did not show were the anonymous men mingling with the crowd, the sophisticated electronic surveillance devices, the hidden cameras monitoring the crowd, the concealed marksmen at vantage points above their heads.
Having shaken hands with the dignitaries she moved to the quartet of golf professionals who were to be presented to her — Manuel  Cabálleros , Gerhard Bugner, Des O'Grady and Andy Kyle.
Des O'Grady must have made some audacious remark to her in his broad Irish accent for she gave him a wide grin, showing her impeccable set of incisors.
Then she was whisked off to lunch at the clubhouse.
Her schedule required her to tour the Tented Village and be in the Royal Box by 3.30 p.m. to watch the last two hours of play.
Royalbion's most important guests were at the hospitality unit today, hoping for a smile from the Princess.
Hammond Wilde had enlisted the help of Ms. ‘Georgie’ Peacock to cope with them.
Lord Monkton had invited several fellow peers.
‘Squeezer’ Lemon was in attendance, probably to monitor the consumption of Moët et Chandon Vintage 1978.
On a nod from Richie, Patrick left them to it and moved over to the first tee.
By following Andy Kyle he could keep just ahead of the final match, make a progress round the entire course and keep an eye on his stake.
As it transpired he was able to watch one of the most remarkable rounds of golf ever played at Royal St. George's, or indeed any other golf course.
Andy started soberly and steadily.
He used a 3-wood, an 8-iron and two putts for a par 4 at the 1st.
He birdied the 2nd by driving 320 yards, wedging to within seven feet and holing the putt.
He made a par 3 at the 3rd, but dropped a shot at the next hole.
The tee shot here was blind over one of the most daunting bunkers in golf.
He hit a huge drive which rolled so far that it ended in deep rough.
Trying to power it out he only succeeded in finding a fairway bunker.
This did not augur too well for Patrick's chances of winning £30,000.
He cut across  to the Maiden, hoping to catch another glimpse of Angela.
But she and John had moved on to some other vantage point.
From the top of the mound, using his binoculars, he could see Tam Otaki and the big American, Bob Stein, coming up the 8th.
There were players now on every hole except the first two.
Most of the grandstands were full and the sun was warm enough for the men to have taken off their jackets and the women their cardigans.
Des O'Grady had the honour when he and Kyle came to the 6th.
The par 3s they scored gave no hint of the fireworks to come.
The 7th was a par 5 of 529 yards, slightly dog-leg to the left.
Andy, driving second, really opened his shoulders.
He hit his drive a good 340 yards to find the fairway, invisible from the tee.
For his second, a shot of 190 yards, all he needed was a 7-iron.
The beach road was on the right of the green, and ‘out of bounds’.
Andy took careful aim at the flag.
It had been placed on the right-hand side of the green, guarded by two bunkers.
His shot, hit with slight draw, soared over the  bunkers, pitched beyond the hole and rolled back into it.
The applause from the crowd round the green must have been heard back at the clubhouse.
An ‘albatross’, three shots below par, was one of the rarest phenomena in golf, even rarer than a hole in one.
‘Andy Kyle has just…
Richie, are you there?’
‘Yes.
Come in, Pat.’
‘Andy Kyle has just shot an albatross at the 7th.’
‘Shot an alb — Oh, a double eagle.
Listen, she's just coming out from lunch, but stay on channel.’
Drama was in the air.
As O'Grady and Kyle went down the 8th another sudden roar came from the expectant crowd waiting round the 11th.
The little Japanese, Otaki, had holed his tee shot and would be going home in a Bentley Mulsanne.
The noise may have unsettled Kyle, for he bogeyed the 8th.
He then proceeded to complete ‘the Loop’ 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th — in thirteen shots.
As he came off the 13th green he was six under fours with five holes to play and  Patrick's prospects of collecting had improved.
The 14th has been the graveyard of many an aspiring champion's hopes.
On the right the fence marking the boundary with Prince's elbows in quite close to the fairway.
Three hundred and twenty-eight yards from the tee the Suez Canal cuts a deep channel across the course.
As he stood on the tee with the green five hundred yards away, Kyle must have been thinking of another birdie, possibly an eagle.
His caddie had a hand on the driver but Andy shook his head and chose the 3-wood.
There was a faint following breeze.
As he began his down swing a camera clicked somewhere in the crowd pressing round the tee.
He tightened as the club entered the hitting area.
That pulled the club face across the ball, imparting a fatal slice.
It soared away to the right, effortlessly clearing the fence.
Andy merely stared in the direction of the anonymous photographer but his eyes were murderous.
That click could have cost him £250,000, the difference between first and third place.
He waited till Des  O'Grady had driven before driving again, this time straight and long.
But it was his third shot, the penalty for ‘out of bounds’ being stroke and distance.
Des hit his second shot onto the green.
It was then that Andy's pent-up anger showed.
He topped his 3-iron into the Suez Canal.
When his caddie had fished the ball out and he had dropped it behind the stream he was facing his fifth shot.
With 170 yards to go he selected an 8-iron for height and back-spin.
He hooked it into the bunker on the left of the green.
Really angry with himself, he splashed out too strongly and needed two putts to get down.
That put a 9 on his card.
It was goodbye to Patrick's £30,000 and Andy's half-million.
Who could hope to make up such a deficit over the last four holes of Royal St. George's?
He walked back up the side of the 14th to meet the match of Caballeros and Bugner.
Both very meticulous players, they had fallen more than one hole behind and had been warned for slow play.
The West German had lost his magic putting touch and was level par for the day.
‘Manuel took 37 to the turn,’ Patrick reported to Richie.
‘But he's birdied the first four of the second nine.
If he's on a hot streak he could come home in twenty-nine.’
‘We've got the Princess safely in the Royal Box.
She'll be okay so long as no one over-cooks their second shot.
We've had one ball in somebody's lunch-basket already.’
A glint of reflected sunlight had caught Patrick's eye.
The Bentley Mulsanne was being driven carefully towards the gate behind the 13th green, at the north-western corner of the golf course.
It bounced with dignified consideration over the bumps and hollows.
The custodian was taking it back to the clubhouse area, where it would be needed for the final ceremony in about an hour's time.
It was now 4.15.
‘Richie, your Mulsanne is on its way — Richie, are you receiving me?’
There was no reply.
Patrick walked down to the gate, which the two stewards on duty were just closing behind the Bentley.
‘No gate-crashers today?’
‘Not so far as we know,’ a man in a  flat cap wearing a Hawks Club tie told him.
‘There was a party came over from Prince's, trollies and all, but as they paid we could hardly object.’
‘With trollies?
How many of them?’
‘Three chaps and a girl with them.
Typical Prince's!’ he added, with characteristic scorn for a rival club.
‘They were togged out to the nines.’
On the beach road the Bentley was accelerating away towards Sandwich Bay Estate and the toll-gate there.
‘How long ago was that?’
‘Oh, half an hour, maybe.
About 3.45.’
‘Did you see where they went?’
‘Towards the 15th green.
I expect they wanted to watch the last few matches play the concluding holes.
Why?
Is there a problem?’
‘No problem.’
A great roar from the 15th green had suggested that Andy Kyle was making amends for his disaster.
Now another from the direction of the short 16th must mean that he had scored a birdie 2.
Meanwhile, like the answer to a challenge, the cheers of Manuel Caballeros's supporters greeted the Spaniard's exploits.
Patrick was  missing the excitement.
He hurried back in the direction of the 17th.
What could be more natural than for three members of Prince's plus a girlfriend to wander over to St. George's to see the closing stages of the Million Sterling Tournament?
Patrick had been accused of overreacting the previous day.
He tried to keep his imagination in check.
When he caught up with the spectators following the last match he picked up the information that had filtered back through the crowd's grapevine.
 Kyle had won back two strokes with birdies at the 15th and 16th, but Des O'Grady had lost a ball off his drive at the 17th.
He tried again to call Richie on the radio link.
Still no reply.
One hundred and twenty miles to the north, out in the southern North Sea, the installation manager's Saturday afternoon had been rudely interrupted.
A betting man, he had switched on ‘Grandstand’ for the horse racing from Newbury and had then become riveted by the drama of the golf tournament.
One of his technicians burst into the rest  room where the television was.
‘There's something bloody peculiar happening.
Either the telemetric system has broken down or they've gone bonkers at Bacton.’
Such near hysteria was rare from the usually phlegmatic technicians on the platform.
‘What's happening?’
‘The solenoids in the metering room are all to buggery and the dials are flicking to and fro like dildos.’
The IM reached for the telephone that linked him by direct line to Bacton.
‘What the hell are you trying to do to us?’
‘What's the situation out there?’
‘All haywire.
Your computers must be on the blink.
You want to blow us out of the water?’
‘We have interference,’ the distant voice stated calmly.
‘We are trying to stabilise the situation but our signals are being overridden.
You'd better prepare to abandon the platform.
The instruments show a build-up of methane that could explode any minute.’
The delay at the 17th enabled Patrick to  catch up.
He passed Caballeros and Bugner as they were holing out at the 15th and driving at the short 16th.
Caballeros had heard of Kyle's 9 at the 14th and it had set him alight.
He had started a succession of birdies and looked set to do the inward nine in under 30.
As he walked up beside the 17th Patrick met O'Grady trudging disconsolately back to the tee to play a second ball.
Before he had time to do so, Caballeros and Bugner had arrived from the 16th green.
As they had hurried their game up in response to the warning, the referee decided that they should go through Kyle and O'Grady.
There was a high grandstand on the hill behind the 17th green.
Patrick spotted an empty seat in the very top row.
He hurried ahead, climbed the steps and pushed past twenty pairs of knees.
From up here he had a panoramic view over a large part of the course and as he was in the last row could see behind as well as forward.
To his right, beyond a sea of dunes and hollows, the 9th hole was now deserted.
The elevated 18th tee was in front of him and to the left.
On that hole Stein and  Otaki were already playing into the arena of grandstands.
He was seated just in time to see Caballeros, now in his most swashbuckling mood, plant a superb iron shot on the platform green and hole the putt.
That was his fifth successive birdie.
It was five o'clock exactly when the Spaniard and the German walked up onto the 18th tee.
This caused some confusion in the grandstands as most spectators did not realise that they had gone through Kyle and O'Grady.
Back on the 17th fairway the wait of ten minutes had given Andy time to think.
He had seen Caballeros make his 3 and knew that unless the Spaniard cracked he would need to finish with two birdies himself.
Des, having opted for safety, had to play first.
Then Andy took his wedge, which he had been swinging for the last ten minutes, and hit the perfect, or apparently perfect shot, straight at the flag.
It pitched a yard short, bit viciously and rolled back down the green shelf at the front of the green.
Five hundred spectators groaned in sympathy.
Patrick had seen Caballeros boom an  enormous drive down the 18th, splitting the fairway.
Using his binoculars, he watched the ball roll to within a few feet of the bunker into which he himself had dived that day when he had played with Richie, Dr. Stevie and Sir Bryan.
He swung the binoculars towards the ranks of spectators on either side of the 18th fairway, and slowly traversed back to the tee.
Then he examined the crowd round the 17th.
There was no sign of any trio of golfers hauling trollies.
Andy and Des were making their way to the 18th tee.
They had scored 4 and 6 respectively.
Patrick spotted a Sandwich Tern going about its own business unperturbed by the golf.
Following its flight in the binoculars he saw it make a sweep over a rough piece of land shunned by the golf course architect, a triangle of unsuitable terrain enclosed by the 2nd, 9th and 17th holes.
He saw it break its flight over a dell between the dunes, soar vertically and then head off at an angle.
Something had scared it.
Letting it go he focused on the dell.
At first there seemed to be nothing there, but as he watched the figure of a man emerged.
He stared towards the 18th  green for a moment, then disappeared again.
He had seemed too good to be true — the perfectly attired golfer, with check cap, patterned pullover, tartan trousers and, most improbable of all, a Royal and Ancient tie.
Why would the Complete Golfer be skulking in a dell while the most dramatic tournament ever staged was reaching its climax?
It was a hot and sexy day but somehow the obvious answer did not seem satisfactory.
He tried the radio.
This time there was an answer.
A female voice.
One he knew.
‘Where's Richie?’
‘There's a flap on.
He asked me to, you know, man the station.’
‘You know Caballeros and Bugner have gone through Kyle and O'Grady.
Caballeros is burning the course up.’
‘Yes, we heard that.’
‘What's the flap, Chris?’
‘Richie's had to go with Sir Bryan.
One of the North Sea rigs has gone on the blink.
I think he'd like you back here.’
‘There's something I want to check up on first.
Will you stay on call?’
‘Okay.’
The time was 5.03.
Andy Kyle had the honour at the last hole.
Waiting to play his shot he had seen Caballeros ahead put his second onto the green.
The Spaniard was sure to get a 4, possibly a 3.
Andy knew that he had to shoot a birdie himself to have a chance of forcing a ‘sudden death’ play-off.
The caddie was offering him his 3-wood.
Today those cross bunkers were in range of a really long drive.
Andy shook his head.
‘Driver.’
The caddie's face showed his disapproval but he took the cover off the driver and handed it to his pro.
Andy had unwrapped a new ball.
(Later the makers would use this shot to advertise it.)
He eagle-eyed the cross bunkers, waggled a few times, opened his shoulders and — wham!
The ball seemed to be in the air for half a minute.
From behind the tee had come a cheer which changed into a gasp.
The ball was flying straight for the middle bunker.
But helped by the wind it cleared the hump in the middle of the fairway, bounced high off the forward slope and ran through the narrow gap between the  bunkers.
Andy's gamble had paid off.
His ball lay on the virgin turf beyond.
Sir Bryan, sitting two seats away from the Princess in the Royal Box, had watched Caballeros put his second shot on the green.
It was 5.06 when he was tapped on the shoulder and told that he was urgently needed on the phone.
Excusing himself with a bow he made his way out to find Richie waiting behind the stand.
He had a Hotline pocket phone in his hand.
‘It's Bacton for you, sir.
Apparently one of your gas platforms is blowing up.’
Sir Bryan took the square instrument, put a finger in his left ear.
‘Thomson here…
WHAT?…
Are there casualties?…
Oh, my God!…
Have you informed the police?…
Good.
And the Navy?…
Yes.
Well, put the emergency procedure into operation…
Right.
Goodbye.’
Sir Bryan stared over the Red car park, packed with cars but devoid of people.
The spectators were all either lining the 18th hole or watching the drama on one of the hundred or so TV sets in the Hospitality Units.
‘I can't understand what's happening  but the telemetric system that controls the flow of gas from the whole of the Hewett, Leman and Shaun fields has gone berserk.
A major source of British energy is being sabotaged — but by whom and from where?
I'm going to ring the Ministry of Defence.’
‘This could be a matter for the COBRA, sir.
Especially on a Saturday afternoon.’
‘COBRA?’
‘Cabinet Office Briefing Room.’
‘Do you have a contact there?’
‘Several.
The duty officer will know my name.’
‘Then you'd better get on to them in the first instance.
I'll speak when you've made your number.’
Richie dialled the number he had never written down but always carried in his memory.
The time was 5.10.
Caballeros and Bugner were just coming up onto the 18th green to prolonged applause from the huge crowd in the three grandstands.
They waved acknowledgement and then, primed by the referee, made a little bow to the Royal Box.
It was Bugner to putt first from the edge of the green.
He had already blown his chances and perhaps that was why he played a relaxed stroke.
The ball sped across the green and popped into the hole.
Very good television.
Manuel Caballeros took immense care with his fifteen-foot putt, stalking the line in both directions, conferring with his caddie, who had taken the pin out, staring at distant parts of the green as if they might unexpectedly become pregnant.
At last he was ready and walked to the ball.
A deathly hush fell, in which the sound of someone talking too loudly behind the main stand could clearly be heard.
Caballeros struck the putt.
It ran straight, veered at the last moment and dropped.
Caballeros punched the air with the exultation of victory.
He had completed the second nine in 29 for a round of 68 and a total of 273, finishing with six successive birdies.
Behind and back up the fairway Andy was waiting for Des to play first from behind the cross bunkers.
He had notched up 65 shots on this round so far and his total for the tournament was already 272.
Des played tidily onto the green, and Andy walked past the bunkers to his ball.
He had already pictured the shot and knew what he had to do.
He did not delay, just took his wedge, aimed once, then executed the stroke.
His divot travelled halfway to the green and had landed before Andy lifted his head.
He saw the ball hanging over the flag and let the club slide down through his hands, a sure sign that a pro likes his shot.
This time he had judged it right.
The ball pitched, bit and spun back into the hole.
Patrick heard the roar and the storm of applause and guessed that his curiosity had made him miss the shot not only of the tournament but probably of the golfing year.
He had clumped down out of the stand and, against the flow of spectators, was making his way towards that hidden dell.
Over the public address system the announcer was telling the crowd that as Manuel Caballeros and Andy Kyle had both scored a total of 273, they had tied for the lead.
Therefore the result of the  tournament and therefore the one million pounds would be decided by a ‘sudden death’ play-off.
This would take place in view of the grandstands at 5.35, after the players had checked their scores, signed their cards and taken a little time to compose themselves.
Each man would place a ball in the circle marked fifty yards from the edge of the green, as if playing an extremely short hole.
In effect it was a chipping and putting contest, with a differential of £250,000 between the winner and the loser.
The stewards had thrown a cordon across the fairway seventy yards back from the green.
Spectators were ten deep behind it.
The arena was now enclosed on all four sides.
Hammond Wilde was rejoicing at the fulfilment of his Hammondest dreams.
‘Grandstand’ had moved back to the cricket but Harry Carpenter had promised viewers that they would return to Sandwich for the finale of ‘this extraordinary golfing drama’.
It is only the slow pace of human speech and human reactions that slows down the electronic processes that come into play  when national security appears to be at risk.
The duty officer at the Cabinet Office Briefing Room was at the centre of a web of information technology.
All afternoon he had been monitoring the progress of the Peace Demo from Hyde Park to Trafalgar Square and plotting the advance of the National Front from the opposite direction.
The police, earning the enmity of both factions, had managed to prevent a collision, but only by the use of mounted police.
Tempers were high and there was a murderous quality in the mood of some sections of the crowd, inflamed by the amplified speeches.
Up in Sheffield a protest rally against police provocation and brutality was turning ugly.
Now there was this very disquieting development in one of the most sensitive areas, the gas fields in the southern North Sea.
It must be more than a coincidence that all this was happening simultaneously.
It bore out the warnings received from MI6.
And a few seconds ago an urgent message had come through from GCHQ at Cheltenham.
The COBRA man's computer told him the whereabouts of every Lord-Lieutenant and Chief Constable in Great Britain.
He  knew that there was a VVIP at Sandwich.
He told Sir Bryan to get the Chief Constable on the line immediately and to keep it open in the meantime.
So Richie's Hotline pocket phone became the channel for a very high level communication and all the while he was standing on the grass of the main grandstand.
‘Chief Constable speaking.’
‘This is the Cabinet Office Briefing Room.
We have a report from GCHQ at Cheltenham that telemetric messages are being beamed at gas platforms in the  Shaun and Leman fields off the Norfolk coast from a location two miles due east of the centre of Sandwich…’
‘Telemetric messages?’
‘Yes.
GCHQ have analysed the signals and they are designed to completely confuse the whole system controlled from Bacton.’
‘Does that mean…’
‘I suggest you investigate without delay.
There must be some powerful transmitter at work.
Okay?’
It had not been worded as an order, but the tone of the COBRA man meant that this was more than a suggestion.
The Chief  Constable did not need to think twice to realise that there was only one place those powerful signals could be coming from.
Using a nearby police Constable's pocket radio he spoke to the Superintendent in charge of the whole tournament operation.
‘I want action fast,’ he concluded.
‘Don't take any cover away from the Princess but get every other available man on to it…
Yes, you're authorised to use firearms but only if absolutely necessary…
All right, I'll send a PC over with written confirmation, but meanwhile get on with it.’
The time was 5.25
Now that he was down at ground level it was not so easy for Patrick to locate the dell where he had seen the immaculate golfer.
The whole area was a maze of dunes and dells.
He used the same technique as when looking for a lost golf ball and took a line on a large house on the Ramsgate front.
At the bottom of one dip he spoke into his radio.
‘I heard a big cheer.
What's happened?’
‘Andy Kyle holed his approach to tie  with Manuel.
So they have to play a ‘sudden death’ to see who wins the half million.’
‘I must get back for that.
If Andy wins I pocket thirty grand.
What time are they doing it?’
‘Five thirty-five.’
‘Okay.
Stay on call.’
‘Will do.
I'm watching it on television so I can tell you what happens.’
He had got the direction slightly wrong and had passed the dell before he realised it.
This whole area was deserted.
Everyone had gone to the 18th green.
In the end he almost stumbled into the dell.
He checked himself just in time, went down flat on his stomach, peering through the tough grass that grew on these dunes.
The dell was quite deep with a flat grassy bottom.
There were three men and a girl in it.
The men were dressed in flashy golfing outfits which looked brand new.
They all had a tartan element somewhere.
The girl, dark-haired and olive-skinned, with a flat chest and tight little bum, wore jeans and a T-shirt.
Two of the trollies stood a little to one side.
They contained full sets of clubs with  new covers over the woods.
The third trolley —.
Where were the clubs?
Then he saw them lying on the ground, but not complete clubs, just the heads with their covers on, protruding from a detachable section that could be removed to expose the empty cylinder of the golf-bag.
A cylinder!
All the images that had been in Patrick's mind while he drove up to the Barbican the previous morning formed again in his imagination.
It had always seemed possible for a ‘device’ to be hidden in a golf-bag.
But now a new picture was forming.
The golf-bag on its wheeled trolley was at an angle of 45 and the open end was pointing towards the 18th green.
The trolley provided a perfect means of transporting a device and also was approximately the shape of a mortar or rocket launcher.
With eyes half closed he could see it as a miniature cannon.
And the range from the 18th green and its three grandstands?
About six hundred yards.
Something less than a precision guided missile would do the trick.
The trio were modifying the trolley with implements they must have brought in the  pockets of the golf-bags.
Coils of 15-amp wire and hand tools had been placed on a groundsheet.
Beside them lay a couple of machine pistols — Skorpion VZ 61s by the look of them — and three  gas masks with staring glass eyes.
The bogus golfers had placed a triangular support under the open end of the decapitated golf-bag and had hammered a notched support into the grout at its base, which still rested on the trolley.
This enabled them to adjust the angle.
The man whom Patrick had seen through binoculars was using an artillery sight to fine-tune the angle.
He still wore his tartan cap.
Another was talking urgently into a hand-held radio set.
His speech had the harsh, guttural sound of Kamalian.
The time was 5.35.
At the 18th green Manuel and Andy had walked back to the marked circle.
Andy was accompanied by his caddie who had brought the full bag just in case his pro decided to change his club.
Manuel had selected a wedge; his caddie was waiting beside the green with his putter.
The referee tossed a coin.
Manuel won  and elected to play first.
With outstretched arm he dropped the ball in the circle.
He glanced at the referee, who nodded approval.
Then he struck a firm but compact stroke and played the ball to within five feet of the hole.
A storm of cheers.
Andy, smiling despite the tension, decided to pitch and run.
He took a 7-iron and put his ball two yards past the pin.
More applause.
Both players walked up to the green, collected their putters and started to study the line.
£250,000 hung on these two putts.
Of course, ‘Grandstand’ was back again.
It was Andy to putt first.
He had obviously decided that too much deliberation would allow his nerves time to needle him.
He looked twice at the hole, then tapped the ball a little too firmly.
It ran straight, hit the back of the hole, bounced up an inch and then dropped into the cup.
That put a lot of pressure on Manuel.
He squared up to the putt once.
Up in the stand someone giggled with nervous tension.
The sound was clearly audible in the awful silence.
Manuel had stepped back.
Giving no sign that he had heard anything he went through his routine  again.
He took the club-head back quietly and was just beginning the stroke when the crack of a single shot blasted the silence.
Manuel's muscles jerked.
As the ball trickled past the hole the ugly rasp of a burst of submachine-gun fire tore through the sunlight.
It was followed by two more single shots, then silence.
In the caravan of International Television Syndication one of the operatives lay dead.
He was still gripping a Skorpion machine-pistol.
A second lay on the floor, writhing and trying to pull the mask off his face.
The third was standing with his hands up, covered by two police marksmen armed with .38 Smith and Wessons.
All three were anonymous in shiny protective clothing of the same pattern as that issued to Russian NBC battalions on the Western front.
Their hands were encased in closefitting gloves and their heads were grotesque in respirators with ribbed breathing tubes and large, goggling eye-pieces.
Thirty-seven minutes earlier they had readjusted the parabolic antenna on the roof of the caravan, changing its direction  180 degrees from southern Spain to the southern North Sea.
They had boosted the strength of the signal they were bouncing off the troposphere and started transmitting the pre-coded programme that would override the telemetric signals being sent from Bacton to the offshore gas platforms.
Just inside the doorway a police marksman lay on his face.
He was not moving.
His body was riddled with bullets from the Skorpion.
‘Keep them covered,’ the police Sergeant told his colleague.
‘They may be shamming.’
He stared at the complex array of panels, dials, visual display units and keyboards.
On the shelf beside them a PMR set was gabbling away in a foreign language.
‘Let's see if chummy here knows how to switch all this stuff off.’
He crooked a finger at the one operative still upright and when the shaking man did not move, went up to him, gun aimed at his diaphragm.
‘Let's have this mask off first, shall we?’
He put up a hand and ripped the head harness off.
A terrified and very youthful  face was revealed, pathetic after the horrible countenance of the respirator.
‘No!’ he protested.
‘Must have respirator!’
The Sergeant looked round, sniffing.
Had they set some kind of booby-trap, say with CS gas?
‘What's the problem, son?
Our English air not good enough for you?’
‘Nerve gas come,’ the young terrorist babbled.
‘Die horrible if no respirator.’
The time was 5.39.
Patrick lay looking down into the dell.
He saw the operative holding the radio set suddenly gesticulate and start shouting to his companions.
There was a chance that they would not hear if he used his radio.
He did not wait for an answer, spoke low and fast.
‘Hear this.
Emergency!
Tell Richie.
Rocket launcher in dell two hundred yards east of 17th green.
Target 18th green.
Four terrorists.
Am going in.’
From the other end came a gasp and he knew he'd been heard.
He did not wait for an answer, thrust the radio into a tuft of grass six inches from his face.
During the  next ten seconds his actions were pure reflex.
The terrorists were obviously about to fire their weapon and it was aimed at the main grandstands.
He scrambled to his feet and charged full tilt down the side of the dell.
The slope added impetus to his speed.
Unheard in the tuft of grass behind him a voice cried: ‘Patrick, hear this, I love you!’
He was halfway down about ten yards from the launcher when the terrorists turned.
The girl was quickest, grabbing a Skorpion from the ground.
Firing from the hip, she got one short burst off.
Patrick felt a bullet burn a track through the right side of his chest.
But the Skorpion did not have enough stopping power.
His momentum carried him as far as the launcher and with out-thrust foot he sent it keeling over on to its side.
The impact as well as the shock of the bullet wound knocked him crashing face down to the ground, his legs all mixed up with the trolley's wheels.
The girl had aimed her Skorpion again, but the leader put up a hand.
A third terrorist had already flung himself on top of Patrick.
Patrick could only understand one word of the shouted order and that word was ‘hostage’.
He quickly knew that the rest of the order had been ‘tie him’.
Bonds can be as cruel as torture if applied with enough viciousness.
Two of the Kamalians only needed a couple of metres of the wire to render him helpless and under continual self-torture.
They flung themselves on him, yanked his legs back, crossing them so that his knees splayed out.
A noose was tied round his ankles and the free end led up over his back.
A hand seized him by the hair and yanked his head back.
The wire was forced between his teeth, hauled back hard and secured to his ankles.
It was a method taught by North Korean trainers of guerrillas.
The victim lies with his spine arched, like a bow under tension, and his head forced back.
The strength in his own sinews cuts the wire into the flesh round his mouth.
So intense was the pain in his neck, flexed almost to breaking point, that he almost forgot the wound in his chest.
Though his hands were free he could not rise, only thrust helplessly at the ground.
To turn his head sideways meant slicing the edges of his mouth with the taut wire, but he had to see what they were doing.
He heard himself gasp and gurgle, saliva and blood spitting past the merciless wire.
The four of them, ignoring him, were setting the trolley up again, jabbering among themselves in Kamalian.
They had it righted and the Number-One was again adjusting the aim.
Suddenly they froze and looked up at the sky.
A whirring shape had appeared overhead.
Rolling over a little— at great cost in terms of pain — Patrick saw the Lynx helicopter hovering a hundred feet above the adjacent dell.
The door at the side was open.
A rope snaked down.
Eight bodies tumbled out, sliding down the rope in rapid succession.
They disappeared into the neighbouring dell.
Two of the Kamalians scooped up Skorpions.
They ran to man the edge of the dell, forming a perimeter to protect the Number-One.
He had stayed with the launcher, calmly perfecting his adjustment of the aim.
Patrick knew that he was bleeding to death.
He sobbed — with helpless rage  more than fear of dying.
The launcher was only six feet away from him and in a few seconds thousands of people were going to die horribly.
From the lip of the dell came short bursts of machine-pistol fire, punctuated by the fiercer cracks of single shots.
The Number-One had kept his nerve.
Satisfied that his aim was correct he moved round to the side of the golf-bag.
Patrick saw him unzip a small pocket.
The top of a wooden box and the face of an ordinary athletic stop-watch were exposed.
The Kamalian pressed the button to start the second-hand on its journey round the face.
Patrick knew enough about improvised timing devices to be sure that after fifty-five seconds it would complete an electric circuit and fire the mortar bomb.
Now the Kamalian acted with urgent speed.
He closed the zip, looked for a gun to finish Patrick off and saw that they were all in use.
He came to stoop over the trussed man, tested his bonds with a fierce and agonising tug.
Then he loped up the eastern side of the dell and the sound of firing moved away with him.
Patrick was sure he could hear the  ticking of the stop-watch.
Despite his agony he had started to count the seconds.
29 — 28 — 27 — 26…
The parachute team from 11 Bn had been tasked to the Sandwich area that morning.
As well as providing additional cover for the VVIP at Royal St. George's Golf Club they would be available to deal with any terrorist activity.
A team from 621 Company at Ashford were on the ground in the area of the clubhouse.
Reports from secret intelligence sources had indicated that there might be another strike against Royalbion.
The Million Sterling Tournament presented an invitingly fat target.
In addition to the four members of WO1 Turner's team there were four police marksmen from the firearms unit — an Inspector and three experienced sergeants.
They were armed with 5.56 mm Enfield rifles, the new individual weapon issued to NATO infantry battalions.
Gas-operated and self-loading from a thirty-round magazine, they could be fired from the shoulder or the hip.
They had a capability of automatic or single-shot firing.
The latter was essential as the police only fired single  shots.
The role of the police marksmen was to provide cover for the EOD team and insert them in any situation where they were needed.
The high ground at Richborough Castle had been chosen as Tac HQ.
It commanded the whole area of the golf links.
An RAF Lynx had flown Geoff Turner's team in early that morning.
They had been joined on the site by the police marksmen.
Richborough Castle had been closed for the day by the Department of the Environment.
The high grey walls of the Roman fort provided a screen for these modern soldiers and their bizarre equipment.
A radio link kept them in touch with the police emergency centre and the Superintendent in charge of the security arrangements.
It had been a pleasant day out for both four-man teams, basking in the sun, playing cards, talking about women and in the afternoon watching ‘Grandstand’ on their television set.
But they were at one minute's notice to move.
The alert, relayed from Chris to the police emergency centre, came through at 5.40.
‘Large here.
We have a report that four unidentified persons have set up a rocket launcher two hundred yards west of seventeenth green.
Would you please investigate and deal as necessary.’
While the men put on their gear Turner checked the position of the 17th green on his map of the course and pin-pointed the target area on his OS map.
The police donned flak jackets of laminated kevlar and webbing belts with pouches for spare magazines and stun grenades.
They wore para-military uniform, blue by contrast with the green of the soldiers, plus berets and ankle-boots.
All eight men carried radios.
By the time they were on board Turner had given the pilot the co-ordinates.
The Lynx rose high enough to clear the grey walls, swung eastward and accelerated to a speed of 120 knots.
In one minute it was over the target area.
Peering down, Turner was puzzled by the trussed figure lying on the ground.
He could see the golf-club trolley and the feverish activity round it.
Like Patrick, he at once recognised its potential as an improvised mortar.
The pilot stationed the Lynx in a  controlled hover above a dell a hundred yards away from the target.
Turner had decided to fast-rope down.
The EOD team and the police squad all had tough leather gloves to protect their hands.
The Bergens went out first, then the RAOC men, their equipment attached to them.
For the police squad it was a new experience, but they had seen how it was done and all landed safely.
The EOD team at once began to organise their equipment.
The police squad fanned out and with their weapons at the ready advanced towards the target dell.
Their movements were professional.
All had received Army training in fire and movement, the use of ground and cover.
Turner concentrated on his own task.
It was not his responsibility to deal with terrorist opposition.
He knew that the police had come under fire when he heard a burst from a  sub-machine gun .
The sounds had come from a hundred yards east of the dell.
The battle did not last long, bursts of automatic fire interspersed with the sharp purposeful cracks of single shots.
Hardly had the team unpacked and  assembled their equipment than the Inspector reported on the radio that the dell was clear.
He had lost one man in the fire fight.
Two terrorists were dead and he had one prisoner.
The fourth had escaped towards the sea and was being hunted by two of his men.
The Inspector was waiting in the dell when the four-man EOD team arrived with their burden of complex equipment.
With his stubby, wicked-looking Enfield he was covering a quaking terrorist.
The man's hands were cuffed behind his back.
He kept throwing terrified glances at the trolley.
A second policeman had cut the civilian loose and was tending to him.
He appeared to be in a very bad way.
Turner focused his attention on the trolley which was pointing towards the area of grandstands.
Experience in Northern Ireland enabled him to recognise it for what it was.
as if he had X-ray eyes he could visualise the metal cylinder concealed within the bag, the pointed bomb with its tail fins reclining at an angle of forty-five degrees.
He wondered why it had not been fired.
There were some questions he urgently  wanted an answer to.
He detailed two of his sergeants to check the other trolleys and walked over to the surviving terrorist.
He was an awesome figure, six foot three inches of Warrant Officer Class One.
‘You speak English?’ he barked.
The man licked his lips.
‘ANSWER ME!
’ Turner roared in his parade-ground voice.
‘Yes.’
It was not much more than a whisper.
‘This weapon,’ Turner pointed to the golf-bag on the trolley.
‘Is it booby-trapped?’
‘Booby-trapped?
Ye-yes.’
Turner's huge hand swung and smashed into the man's cheek.
His head rocked.
He sank to his knees.
Turner dragged him to his feet by the hair.
He had seen what they had done to Patrick and he knew the man was lying.
It would make no sense to booby-trap the weapon in these circumstances.
‘You're lying.’
Turner showed the man his scalpel.
‘One more lie and I'll cut your tongue out.’
‘Geoff —’ the Inspector interposed.
Turner rounded on him.
‘There are  twenty thousand people over there and this thing could fire at any moment.’
He pushed his face close to the terrorist, snarling with scarcely feigned rage.
‘Now, is this weapon primed?’
A nod.
‘Why was it not fired?’
‘I fire.’
The man's terrified eyes flicked from Turner's face to the trolley and back again.
‘One minute timer.’
‘Oh, God!’
Turner took a long breath.
‘A hung timer!’
Terrorists often used an athletic stopwatch as a timing device.
They'd remove the hour and minute hands, drill a hole in the glass and insert a metal pin at the 55-second mark — not touching the face of the watch.
Leads would be attached to the pin and the case of the watch.
When the watch was started they would have fifty-five seconds to move clear.
This explained why the sounds of battle had come from east of this dell.
The minute's delay had elapsed long ago.
The second-hand had completed its circuit but for some reason the charge had not gone through.
A hung timer was what bomb disposal men feared most.
It was  even more volatile than a hang-fire on an artillery shell.
The slightest movement, even a puff of wind, could provide the jolt to complete the electric circuit and fire the weapon.
‘You firing a bomb?
What's in it?’
‘Nerve agent,’ the terrorist blurted.
Turner exchanged a glance with his staff sergeant.
They had been in dangerous situations before but none where the stakes were so high.
A member of the Royal Family and twenty thousand people were assembled less than half a mile away down wind.
Any delay could result in the ultimate catastrophe.
The wind was joggling a plastic tag attached to the handle of the golf bag and the sound made his scalp crawl.
‘Inspector.’
‘Yes, Geoff.’
‘I want everyone out of here except Staff Sergeant Gordon and me.
I don't care what you do with the other bods but see that the civilian gets some attention, will you?
Give me five minutes, then call your Super and tell him the situation here.’
Turner let them get on with it.
He concentrated his attention on the trolley.
He looked through the sight.
It was focused on the top of the grandstand where the Royal Box was.
The top was just visible through a gap in the dunes.
‘Probably using a VT detonator to give an air burst over the target,’ he murmured, more to himself than to the Staff Sergeant.
A lot of psychology came into this game, trying to read the minds of the people who had invented and planted a device.
He realised that his hands were shaking.
It was fear, yes, but even more the realisation of the responsibility he was carrying.
The slightest mistake and he would precipitate the very catastrophe he wanted to avoid.
He peered down the barrel, saw the metal nose of the bomb leering up at him.
The temptation to swing the trolley round to face the other way had to be resisted.
As Einstein had shown, an electromagnetic current moves at the speed of light and on this scale that was instantaneous.
‘There's got to be a watch and a box somewhere, Bernie.’
The pattern was usually the same.
The leads from the stop-watch would go to a box containing a small battery which in its  turn would be connected to a flash bulb at the base of the bomb.
That's where the spigot was, packed with the explosive propellant which would ignite in a flash and send the bomb on a high trajectory towards its target.
Bernie was squatting on the other side of the trolley.
‘There's a pocket here.
Something square in it.’
It was a zip-up pocket intended for golf balls and perhaps a pipe or a pair of gloves.
The zip had been half-closed.
Pulling it open would be too great a risk and Turner could not trust his own hands to hold the bag steady.
If anything, years of experience only made you more aware of what could go wrong.
He wondered whether he had made a mistake in sending the terrorist away.
But the man's presence had been unnerving and he was capable of lying.
He knew that time was ticking away remorselessly, though less than half a minute had passed.
He could have had a radiographic picture within two minutes, but that was far too long.
From the tool case he took the scalpel he had already used to persuade the  terrorist.
As carefully as any eye surgeon he made one vertical and one horizontal incision on the plastic pocket.
The scalpel sliced the material more smoothly than butter.
Gently he helped the loose piece to fall clear.
Staring him in the eye was the face of a stop-watch two inches in diameter.
The second hand had stopped where it had met the pin inserted near the 55-second mark.
Everything was set, poised, waiting to function at the speed of light.
The draught from a moth's wing would be enough to activate it.
Squatting on his hunkers, he reached for the long-nosed wire cutters in his tool-kit.
He had a choice to make.
Whether to cut the blue wire from the pin on the watch-face or the brown one soldered to the case.
‘He said it was booby-trapped.
I didn't believe him.
Did you, Bernie?’
Bernie chewed on saliva.
Turner carefully opened the wire cutters and slid them in till their twin prongs enclosed the blue wire like a thrush's beak.
A ripple of crowd laughter came up against the breeze from the direction of the main grandstands.
He took in a long breath, held it and squeezed the handle of the cutters.
Snip.
Back at the 18th green the Princess had not yet been given her cue to come out onto the dais where the presentations were to be made.
Andy Kyle and Dr. Stephen Bonnard were modestly waiting just behind it.
Manuel had quietly melted away, perhaps to leave the stage clear for Andy, perhaps to grieve alone at the cruel injustice that had robbed him of the top prize.
The announcer on the public address system was desperately ad-libbing.
The Chief Constable had hissed at him: ‘For God's sake keep them in their seats.
If we get panic people are going to be crushed to death and there will be mayhem in the car park.
’ The announcer could only guess from the urgency in the Chief Constable's voice that the situation was very, very serious.
As a former BBC war correspondent, he not only had the gift of the gab but was able to keep his head.
‘Ladies and gentlemen,’ his voice boomed out.
‘The presentation of the  prizes will take place in a few minutes…’
Here the TV producer swore silently.
He was running out of time.
’…in the meantime I would just like to explain the untimely interruption which you heard a few minutes ago.
There is no need to be alarmed, so would you all please keep your seats.’
Searching for inspiration he had glanced to the north and seen the helicopter flying low and fast from Richborough Castle towards the area beyond the 17th green.
‘The Territorial Army are using the opportunity to carry out an exercise in — ah — conditions where large numbers of civilians are present.
If you look up the line of the eighteenth fairway you will see — yes — the helicopter is hovering over its target.
Now, those of you who have not been able to watch a television set may not be aware of the really remarkable performances that we have seen here at Royal St. George's on this beautiful English summer's day.
For instance, at the seventh hole, the longest on the course…’
Hardly anyone was paying attention to him, though the voice booming out in  ‘received upper class’ English pronunciation had a soothing and hypnotic effect.
All eyes were staring eastward, where eight bodies, clearly outlined against the shining sea, had popped out of the helicopter and as if by magic had descended, light as feathers, to disappear among the dunes.
A lone jeep was careering up the middle of the 18th fairway, bucking and bouncing in its haste to reach the scene of the ‘exercise.’
From that direction there came the sound of small-arms fire, carried distinctly on the slight breeze.
‘Well, if the Army will permit,’ the announcer forced a little laugh, ‘though I must say their demonstrations could have been better timed —’General laughter.
‘An albatross, as I was saying, is one of the rarest phenomena in golf, even rarer than a hole in one which of course we have also seen today.
And here indeed…’
The Bentley Mulsanne — this was an inspiration of the Secretary's to distract attention from the noises off — had come nosing its way from behind the South Stand.
It swung round to park alongside the dais, where little Otaki was waiting to  receive the keys from R. J. O. Bryer Esq.
Unfortunately, R. J. O. Bryer could not be found.
He was not in the clubhouse, where the Lord Lieutenant was on the telephone to Downing Street, nor at the police emergency centre, where the Chief Constable was talking to the duty officer in the Cabinet Office Briefing Room.
‘Yes,’ he was saying, ‘we have things under control now.
Apparently there's a device but the RAOC team are dealing with it…
Yes, a few casualties.
Two terrorists plus one police sergeant and apparently a civilian.
We're going ahead with the presentation of prizes now.’
The time was 5.50, five minutes before ‘Grandstand’ was due to end.
Chris had to hold on to the grab handle of the jeep or she would have been flung out.
Richie was driving mercilessly.
He veered past the mound topped by the 18th tee.
The Lynx was hovering out near the sea, staying clear of a possible explosion.
The jeep careered between the 17th green and the now empty stand, then tackled the undulating terrain beyond, plunging into hollows, climbing steep sandy slopes with  all four wheels grabbing for grip.
They had gone about a hundred and fifty yards when a figure in blue combat gear loomed up and signalled them to stop.
‘You can't go any further.’
‘Why not?’
Richie demanded truculently.
‘I'm in charge of security at this tournament.
Radio your Super if you don't believe me.’
‘We have a hung timer back there.’
The police Inspector gestured towards the dunes behind him.
He was still pumped up after the brief battle.
He had seen one of his own men gunned down and two terrorists shot dead.
‘I hoped you were the ambulance.
We have four casualties.
One of them's still alive but he's likely to bleed to death.’
‘I have a nurse here,’ Richie nodded at Chris.
She was already scrambling out of the jeep.
‘Where is the casualty?’ she demanded.
‘The civilian?
We carried him up to that hollow.’
He jerked his head at a hollow twenty yards behind him.
‘Sergeant Morris and I were trying to stop the bleeding when you came.’
Chris ran past him to the hollow.
The  police Sergeant was kneeling beside the wounded man, pressing a pad against his side to stop the flow of blood.
It had seeped through his clothes and spread out in a half-circle, staining the grass and soaking into the sandy soil.
She took his wrist, located the pulse, found a faint movement there.
She looked up, saw Richie and the Inspector standing above her.
‘He's still alive but he's lost a lot of blood.
What he needs is a transfusion.’
She turned his head to make sure the breathing passages were clear.
‘Oh, my God!
Look at his mouth!
What on earth can have done that?’
The Inspector had pulled his radio out to check up on the ambulance.
Richie was staring towards the dell where the shooting had happened.
‘I've dealt with a few booby-traps in my time.
Is that Warrant Officer in there on his own?’
‘You can't go in there!’
The Inspector grabbed Richie's arm.
‘Who says so?’
Richie angrily shook off the restraining hand.
‘I don't have to obey your orders.’
‘Oh yes you do, sir.’
The argument was settled when a tall figure in a parachutist's red beret and combat uniform appeared over the top of a dune and walked towards them.
No one could have told from Mr. Turner's face that his ice-cold nerve had just saved twenty thousand lives.
‘It's safe now,’ he told the Inspector.
The look the two men exchanged spoke more volumes than would fit into any book.
‘What was it?’
Richie asked, after a moment.
‘Improvised mortar.
Firing a liquid-filled bomb with a VT fuse to give an air burst over the target.’
‘Liquid?
Could you tell what it was?’
‘We've radio'd Porton Down.
They're sending an expert in a helicopter.’
‘Could it be a nerve agent say, tabun or sarin?’
‘Tabun, sarin, perhaps even GD.
How's Patrick?’
From the direction of the grandstands came the sound of cheers and applause.
The Princess had stepped out onto the dais to make the presentations.
Richie's head turned in that direction.
The lid fell over his one good eye.
He was picturing a cloud of lethal droplets descending on the packed crowd, thousands of men, women and children staggering helpless, clutching at their throats, vomiting and squitting, drowning in their own blood…
Chris was still kneeling beside Patrick.
She had borrowed the police sergeant's knife to cut the clothing and pull it away from the wound.
Patrick stirred, rolled his head and spewed a few words out through his sliced lips and mangled mouth.
‘Bloody hell!
That hurts!’
Chris looked up, smiling.
‘He's going to be all right.
He's a survivor, this one.’