

CHAPTER 1
It could have been the extra garlic I'd put in the Rogan Josh which woke me at 2.06 a.m., but it was probably the noise Billy Tuckett made falling through the bathroom skylight and killing himself.
I knew it was 2.06 a.m. because the bedside clock told me so in orange digits big enough to divert aircraft if the curtains had been open.
I knew I'd overdone the garlic in the Rogan Josh because I'd been trying to impress Zaria.
I'd even gone to the trouble of finding a real piece of rattan jog — the dried bark which gives a deep red colour to the dish — in the fifth Punjabi deli I'd tried.
(The first four had told me to cheat and use vegetable dye.
I ask you!)
I'd been house-sitting for Nassim Nassim's cousin Sunil in Leytonstone for a week now, which meant that the five-day house-warming party where all my so-called friends drop in to see how I'm coping, how much booze I've laid on and what the music centre's like, had come to an end.
Zaria, a relatively new old friend, had been persuaded to stay over that Sunday night as I had convinced her I was missing my faithful feline companion Springsteen, who was back in Hackney guarding the flat we shared.
Apart from her obvious advantages, Zaria also took up less space in bed.
It could be a case of Back To The Futon for Springsteen at this rate.
Anyway, all that — and the Rogan Josh, which I'd took real sweat over right down to serving it with iced bottles of Kingfisher lager and quarters of lime and rice fried with egg and to hell with the risk of salmonella — was before Billy Tuckett dropped in.
I mention the Rogan Josh because it must be the reddest red food going and, like all good things, it stains.
I know  this to my cost as I spent the next few days discovering which Stain Devil cleaning stick was needed to remove most of my portion from Sunil's white bathroom carpet.
It turned out to be the one the manufacturers recommend for blood and milk stains.
That had always seemed an odd combination to me.
I mean, why should people feel so homicidal towards milkmen?
I needed it because when I finally disentangled myself from Zaria's legs (another advantage noted: no claws), I padded over to see what the noise was.
Big mistake.
At first I thought it had maybe been a cat on the roof, then possibly some inept burglar.
There didn't seem to be any sound coming from the bathroom, so I opened the door and fumbled round the corner to find the light cord.
Second, really huge, mistake.
There was a Billy-Tuckett-shaped hole in the skylight, which was actually a big picture window rather than the old-fashioned single-pane type, and a Billy-Tuckett-shaped body lying in the bath, one arm and one leg over the side.
I took a step forward so I could see over the edge.
Third, really crucial, mistake.
If the fall hadn't killed him, the large diamond of glass he'd brought with him and impaled his neck on certainly had.
That's when I threw up on the carpet.
I have a Rule of Life (No. 74, actually) which says that you can work your way out of most situations if you can give yourself enough thinking time.
With my head bent over the sink I had plenty of time to work out my options.
My problems were: I had a body in the bath right behind me, a girl I'd known for less than twenty-four hours in a bed in the next room, I was staying in the house of somebody I'd never met who was currently at a family wedding somewhere north of Karachi and somewhere down the yellow brick road I had to call the cops.
I couldn't do anything about Nassim's cousin being in Pakistan, I reasoned as I rinsed my mouth for the hundredth time.
And I couldn't do anything about the body, could I ?
(I did think about that one.)
So that meant I had to call the police, always assuming that the local Neighbourhood Watch hadn't.
But I could get Zaria out of there and home fairly quickly.
Besides, I had something for her to do.
Good.
Decision taken; something to do.
I felt better already.
I'd wake Zaria and get her out pronto, then bell the local Bill.
At the time I honestly never gave a thought to why Billy Tuckett had been poncing around on the roof in the wee small hours or why he'd chosen Sunil's bathroom to fall through.
I only just remembered to put some clothes on.
Zaria snuffled and turned on her back as I put the bedside light on.
The lamp had a ‘gentle’ yellow light bulb which gave her skin an olive tinge.
It was a pleasant sight, as all she was wearing was a gold throat chain which spelled out ZARIA in half-inch letters.
I don't know why she wore it; my memory wasn't that bad.
Maybe hers was.
‘Come on, shake a leg,’ I said.
‘That's not my leg,’ she said without opening her eyes.
‘Really?
Maybe that's where I've been going wrong all this time.
Come on, get your ass in gear.
And don't tell me, that's not…’
She flapped my hands away as she sat up.
‘What's the problem?’
She stretched her arms out in front of her like a cat, proving that Springsteen was still behind on points.
‘I think we've had a break-in,’ I said, thinking it was the best story to push and concentrating on pulling up my jeans.
‘Burgla rs?’
‘No, very persistent Jehovah's witnesses.
Now get dressed.’
I fumbled around on the floor and found her white boiler suit and one of her high-heeled shoes.
From what I could  remember, that was two-thirds of her clothing.
I flung them on to the bed where she should have been, but wasn't.
‘Where are you going?’
I said in a loud whisper.
‘I need to pee.’
She rubbed her eyes with one hand and pointed in the vague direction of the bathroom with the other.
‘Not in there you don't, believe me.’
It took a couple of seconds to sink in, then she was struggling into the boiler suit, using language, under her breath, which would have made treble word scores in Rude Scrabble.
While she was looking for her other shoe, I stuffed my feet into trainers — no socks — and pulled on my Steel Wheels Tour sweatshirt.
‘There's something I want you to do, Zed,’ I said to her perfectly formed backside.
‘What?’
Her voice was muffled because her head was under the bed, still shoe-hunting.
‘Post something for me.’
‘It's the middle of the sodding night.
Isn't it?’
She wiggled and I almost lost my train of thought.
‘In the morning.
I'm going to be tied up with the cops, I expect.’
She froze.
‘Is it anything shady?’
No, you silly cow, it's a book club return.
‘Just something I was asked to look after, that's all.’
Well, that was almost true.
‘But it wouldn't look good if the police…
A-ha!’
She started to snake out from under the bed, clutching the renegade shoe.
‘Just do it, hey.
Or do you want to wait until the Law turns up?’
‘Shit, no.
I'm outa here.’
She sat on the floor and fastened the ankle strap of the  high-heel.
I hadn't realised how small she was without them.
I held out my hand.
‘Come on.
Bag?’
‘Charming.
You've a really nice morning-after manner.’
‘No, your handbag, you Doris.’
‘Oh.
Sorry.
It's downstairs.’
We crept downstairs like naughty children and Zaria collected a leather handbag no bigger than a small keg of beer from the hallway table.
‘Wait here,’ I told her.
I hadn't put any lights on, so with a bit of luck she would stay there.
I fumbled my way into the living-room and closed the door behind me before hitting the light switch.
Whatever Massim's cousin Sunil did for a living, he did it from an old-fashioned headmaster's desk and a small personal computer.
Behind the desk was the room's single bookshelf containing one of the most boring selections of reading material I'd come across.
There were about half a dozen tax manuals, some computer books, a large-scale London A to Z and a copy of Duke Ellington's book, Music is my Mistress.
Naturally, I'd found that soon after I'd arrived.
In fact, five minutes after checking the record collection (nothing worth taping) and the obvious places where you'd lock the booze away from the hired help.
With nothing else to read, it seemed to have the edge on the income tax manuals (though non-believers would say only just), so you can imagine how bad I felt when I opened it to find most of the pages had been razored to provide a nest for a small brown envelope.
The technique's not new.
I have a bogus copy of Hugh Brogan's History of the United States which has been turned into a fireproof combination lock safe, but that was a professional job done by my mate Lenny the Lathe in return for a favour.
This was decidedly amateur night and if the book itself hadn't stuck out like a sore thumb among the  reference works, then a quick look at the floppy spine would have given the game away.
I removed the envelope and decided to dump the book which, empty, was probably even more suspicious.
The envelope was about six inches by four and almost an inch thick.
It was sealed with Sellotape and staples, a real belt and braces job.
I didn't know what was in it; I just had the feeling that Sunil wouldn't thank me if the boys in blue turned it over in their usual zeal to find something to donate to the Oxfam shop.
I found a felt-tip pen in the desk drawer and addressed the envelope to ‘Mr F. MacLean’ care of a pub I knew in Southwark where they knew me by that name.
And if there was any doubt, I always had a spare driving licence in that name anyway.
I grabbed my leather jacket from the chair where it seemed to crawl to no matter where I'd hung it earlier and found the keys to Armstrong in one pocket and a screwed-up five-pound note in the other.
Zaria was hopping from one foot to the other.
‘Do you think they're still here?’ she whispered, reaching for the front-door lock.
‘Who?’
‘The burglars.’
‘Oh yeah.
Sure of it.’
Well, I was damn sure Billy Tuckett wasn't going anywhere.
7. aria lived just up Eastern Avenue — let's face it, half the world lives up Eastern Avenue — in Redbridge, in one of those huge roadside vicarage-like houses which has had to be turned into a rest home for the elderly because no one else could afford to pay the rates.
Well, if they could they wouldn't live on Eastern Avenue.
Zaria was a day nurse, not an inmate.
The journey there and back took no more than ten minutes once I'd got Armstrong fired up.
Armstrong is my wheels.
He's a black London cab, of the traditional FX4S design, world famous on T-shirts, cheap souvenirs and postcards.
Even with a mileage clock that stopped at about 190,000 miles, he still runs to perfection, never gets clamped or a parking ticket, and blends beautifully into the city background.
They're becoming even easier to pick up once delicensed nowadays, thanks to the invasion of the upstart Metrocabs, which drive like a Panzer, look like an undertaker's second-best hearse and give the punters a ride which makes them think they're in a telephone-box on castors.
Not that I'm biased, of course.
If Armstrong has a disadvantage, then it's that he hasn't got a passenger seat.
So Zaria sat in the back, opened the glass screen and whispered frantically in my right ear all the way home.
Mostly she quizzed me about the burglars and I said they'd tried to get in through the bathroom window and one of them had put a foot through it, probably coming from the roof next door, and I generally made out that there was a whole gang of footpads up there lying in wait for Santa Claus.
It wasn't until we got to Redbridge Station that she thought — and I could almost hear her thinking — about the envelope and the fiver I'd given her.
‘It's not drugs, is it?’ she said suddenly.
‘I didn't think you did drugs, and I won't handle them.’
‘It isn't, I don't and you're not,’ I said, but I was only sure of one out of three.
‘But it is valuable and it might just be what those guys on the roof were after.’
She swallowed this, or seemed to.
Thankfully she was still half asleep.
‘Well…if you're sure…
I'll post it tomorrow in my lunch-hour.’
I pulled up outside the rest home she worked at and reached through the window to open the back door for her, the way real  mushers do without getting out themselves.
She leaned in and pecked me on the lips.
‘You've got my number?’
I bit my tongue and simply said: ‘Sure, I'll bell you tomorrow or Tuesday latest.
OK?’
‘Not the mornings, remember.
They tend to sleep in the afternoons.’
‘Got it.
See yer.’
I watched her until she'd unlocked the side door of the big house and turned on a light.
You can never be too careful these days.
The residents could have been waiting to mug her with a Zimmer frame.
She waved and I did a U-turn — taxis are ace at that — and headed back to the nightmare in the bathroom.
Why me?
Other people have spiders in their tubs.
En route, I spotted a litter-bin on a streetlamp and I screeched up to it, jumped out and deposited the hollow copy of the Great Duke's book.
If I'd known then what I knew later, the envelope would have gone in with it.
Hassle, hassle, hassle.
I suppose my call went through to Wanstead nick, but I didn't ask.
The copper on the receiving end took the details twice and I didn't blame him.
You don't often get people ringing up in the middle of the night to say they've found a body in the bath.
Well, not on Sundays anyway.
I promised I wouldn't touch anything, having no intention whatsoever of going anywhere near the bathroom again.
I hadn't anything left inside me to throw up.
The first two were traffic cops and they were on the street cruising for the house number, no sirens out of deference to the ratepayers, within five minutes.
I made sure I looked as if I'd just got out of bed and dressed in a hurry — hence no socks and the sweatshirt — and went down to front garden to wave them in.
The one who took the lead looked big enough and mean  enough to relish a ruck if there was a chance of one.
His colleague, smaller and older, made sure he was going to be second going into any dark places,
‘A break-in, is it, sir?’ asked the big one, tightening his black gloves like he'd seen on television.
I did a double-take before I realized he'd been talking to me.
I wasn't used to uniforms calling me ‘sir’.
Come to think of it, even when the taxman wrote to me, he spelled it c-u-r; which is why I never wrote back.
‘Er…
I'm not sure, Officer.
There was a guy on the roof and then suddenly he was in the bath.’
The big one looked down at me as if I'd just crawled out from under.
‘The bath?
Did you say bath?
Or bathroom?’
‘Both.
He ended up in the bath which, in this house, is actually in the bathroom.’
Watch it, watch it.
That lip of yours will get you into trouble one day.
‘There's a window in the roof,’ I said quickly.
‘More a skylight, really, he fell through that.
He actually landed in the bath itself.’
Quite convenient, really, thinking about the blood.
‘I don't even know he was trying to break in,’ I added lamely.
‘Odd place to go for a midnight stroll, sir,’ said the older one sarkily.
I didn't tell him I knew people who did much weirder things than that.
‘And just how did he get up there?’
The big one looked up at the night sky, seeking inspiration.
Then, looking at me: ‘Have you called an ambulance?’
‘No.
It didn't seem…necessary.
You see, he brought most of the glass with him and sort of…slit his throat.’
‘You haven't touched anything, have you, sir?’
The older one moved forward to take command now that it was clear the Apaches weren't waiting in ambush.
‘Not bloody likely,’ I said, then wished I hadn't.
‘Get the gloves, Dave.’
The big one looked sightly disappointed, then trotted back to their car and took a black shoulder-bag out of the boot.
They came into the hallway before opening it and taking out rubber surgical gloves.
Since the Aids scare, that was now standard operating procedure.
It hadn't crossed my mind, but I was grateful now that I'd been too busy throwing up to examine the body too closely.
‘Right, sir, lead on,’ said the smaller one.
I turned on lights as we went upstairs.
‘Lived.here long, sir?’
One of them asked as we got to the landing.
‘I don't actually live here at all,’ I answered honestly.
(Rule of Life No. 5: Always tell the truth; not necessarily all of it and not all at once.)
‘I'm house-sitting for a friend of a friend, well, a cousin of my landlord, actually.
I've been here about five days.’
‘And where are the owners?’
I noted that he'd forgotten to say ‘sir’.
‘Pakistan.
Until after Christmas.’
‘I see.
And where exactly do you live?’
‘Hackney.’
‘Hah!
Bandit country,’ said the big one from behind us.
I let that one go as we'd got to the bathroom and I opened the door and stood to one side to let them in.
I could feel the cold draught from the hole in the roof but I had no intention of getting any closer.
‘Oh, sweet Jesus!’
I heard one of them say, followed by a retching sound choked back in the throat.
‘Fuck-ing Ada!’ shouted the other.
Then the big one appeared in the doorway, ashen-faced and wide-eyed.
‘Why didn't you tell us the floor's covered in puke?’ he said angrily, hopping on one foot.
‘Oh yes.
Er…sorry.’
By 4.0 a.m.
I had a houseful of them.
A brace of ambulance men, assorted uniformed beat coppers, two plainclothes men and a white-haired, white-coated pathologist who chain-smoked Players Navy Cut.
He looked pretty fit for 75, but for 51, which is what he probably was, decidedly rough.
I made a gallon or so of tea until I ran out of milk, then a pot of black coffee, and pressed every cup and mug in Sunil's fitted kitchen into service.
The extra vehicles in the street with their flashing blue lights, had brought some of the neighbours to their doors or bedroom windows and one of the uniforms was designated to go and ask them if they'd seen anything.
From what I could see, peeping out from behind the lace curtains in the living-room, nobody was admitting to much.
The two plainclothes men disappeared for about half an hour in their Ford Escort and returned from the other end of the street.
Why walk round the block when you can drive?
They hadn't said much to me apart from announcing themselves as Detective-Sergeant Hatchard and Detective Constable White, and even when they got back inside, Hatchard talked to the pathologist while White went off for a snoop around, as policemen do.
I took a mug of coffee up to the pathologist so I could earwig what was going down.
He nodded his thanks as he took it and flipped another cigarette butt into the toilet.
Before it had hissed out, he was lighting another.
‘Thanks,’ he croaked.
‘Four sugars?’
‘Absolutely,’ I said, with the conviction of knowing I was going to live longer than he was.
‘Whatderwannaknow?’ he asked Hatchard.
‘Whatever you've got,’ said the Sergeant, his hands deep inside his overcoat pockets.
They didn't seem to mind me hanging in there, but it was getting a bit like the ocean liner scene in the Marx brothers' Night at the Opera.
Two uniforms were trying to  put an extendable ladder up to the skylight — God knows where it had come from — over the bath without actually having to look at the body.
Another civilian was trying to set up a camera and tripod to photograph the scene and everybody was trying to sidestep the vomit on the carpet.
‘If the fall didn't break his neck,’ said the pathologist in a cloud of smoke, ‘then the massive blood loss and shock did.
There's a piece of glass the size of your fist in his neck.
Damn near took his head clean off.’
I could have told him that, I thought, but kept quiet.
‘Foul play?’ asked Hatchard.
‘No Sex, Please, We're British!’
‘What?’
‘That's as foul a play as…
Oh, never mind.’
The pathologist raised his eyes to the ceiling.
I didn't think it was bad for off the cuff, but he'd probably used it a zillion times before.
‘Unless someone dropped him from a helicopter,’ he said.
patiently, ‘then I think it fair to assume he was clambering across the tiles and slipped, though God knows what he was doing up there.
If it was suicide, then it was a bleedin' elaborate way of doing it and he changed his mind half way down.’
He looked at the puzzlement on my face and the blank unemotion of Hatchard.
‘Does this house have red pantiles?’ he asked me.
‘I dunno,’ I answered truthfully.
Why the hell should I look at the roof except to see if there was a satellite TV dish.
(Come to think of it, I had and there wasn't.)
‘Bet it has,’ he said nodding to himself.
‘Yer man here —’ he jerked a thumb at the bath' — lost most of his fingernails trying to hang on.
What he's got left have got red plaster and dust under them.’
‘So he wasn't wearing gloves,’ said Hatchard to himself.
‘Pretty amateur burglar if that's what he was.’
The pathologist looked at his own hands and stripped off his surgical  gloves, dropping them into a plastic bag.
‘I'll organize the meat wagon once David Bailey here's finished.’
He nodded at the photographer and flipped another butt into the toilet, then pressed the flush.
‘Another day, another half-dollar,’ he said cheerfully.
‘Nice to have a fresh one for a change.’
I suddenly realized why he smoked so much and felt queasy all over again.
I was afraid I was going to heave.
‘Time for us to have a little chat, sir,’ Hatchard said to me.
I was afraid of that too.
‘Name, please sir?’
Here we go.
‘Angel.’
‘Pardon?’
‘Angel — as in on top of your Christmas tree,’ I said before anyone else could say it.
Sometimes, I hate Christmas.
‘First name?’
‘Roy.’
‘Is that your full name?’
‘Won't it do?’
‘Full names now save time later on.’
I noticed he'd soon dropped the ‘sir’ as well.
‘Fitzroy MacLean,’ I admitted, not relishing the idea of a ‘later on’one bit.
‘Fitzroy Maclean Angel…bloody hell…’ came a voice behind me.
It was the other detective, White, who had come into the living-room far too quietly for my liking.
I knew somebody else who could do that, but he had four feet.
‘And you don't actually live here?’
‘No, I'm house-sitting.’
‘New one on me, Guv,’ said White, slumping in an armchair.
‘It's like baby-sitting while the owner's away.’
‘To keep the break-ins to a minimum, I suppose,’ said Hatchard drily.
‘I never said I was any good at it,’ I offered.
‘And just who is the lucky owner?’
‘A man called Sunil.’
‘First name or last?’
‘Er…
I don't know.’
Hatchard put down his notebook and ballpoint and reached for a cigarette.
I'd given up about three weeks before but I was ready to beg from him.
Bodies in the bath I could stand.
Answering questions like this was really stressful.
‘He's a friend of my landlord — the landlord of the place where I live.
In Hackney.’
‘Exactly where in Hackney?’
Hatchard asked patiently.
‘Nine Stuart Street.
Flat Three.’
My heart sank as he made a note of it.
‘And your landlord's name?’
‘Nassim.’
‘Nassim what?’
Oh dear.
He wasn't going to like this either.
‘Nassim.
No, really, Nassim Nassim.
We did ask his surname and he said it was too difficult, and we had to stick to Nassim.
So…’
Hatchard shook his head slowly.
‘His address?’
I said I wasn't sure, but I gave them a phone number which I knew to be Nassim's office above a leather warehouse in Brick Lane.
I felt I ought to try and phone him at home to tip him off — if I got the chance.
‘The uniformed officers said you told them you heard a noise, got out of bed, went to the bathroom and then dialled 999.
That's it, is it?’
‘Apart from throwing up, yeah.’
‘You didn't touch anything?’
‘No way.’
‘And you were alone in the house?’
This out of left field from Mr Nasty Policeman.
‘Yes,’ I said, looking at Hatchard, Mr Nice Policeman, instead.
‘These your knickers, then?’
White flung the pair of lemon panties he'd had scrunched up in his coat pocket on to the arm of the chair I was sitting in.
‘Not my shade.’
I knew Zaria had forgotten something.
‘OK — look, I had a young lady here earlier — last night, that is.
I didn't think the owner would approve so I said nothing, but she'd gone home by then.
Went home in a taxi.’
Did I lie?
But the last thing I wanted was them chasing Zaria and her telling them about the package she was posting.
‘Honest —’ I floundered.
‘She was gone.
She never saw Billy.
God knows, I wish I hadn't.’
‘Billy?’ they said together.
Good, they'd already forgotten about Zaria.
‘Yeah, the bloke in the bath.
Billy Tuckett.’
They looked at each other.
This wasn't in their script, actually having information volunteered.
‘I here was no identification on the body.
Did you take it?’ asked Hatchard, leaning forward.
‘No, I told you, I didn't touch him.
But I could see who it was.’
‘And you knew him?’
This from Mr Nasty.
‘I used to.
We were at university together, but I haven't seen him in — what — ten years?
He hadn't changed much.’
Except for being much deader than I remembered.
‘Why didn't you tell us who he was?’ asked Hatchard.
White just sat there looking flabbergasted.
‘You never asked,’ I said.
Well, had they?
CHAPTER 2
Why did I tell them it was Billy Tuckett?
I've wondered since myself.
But they would have found out; slow they might be, stupid they ain't.
Putting me and Billy together ten years back would probably never have occurred to them.
Why should it?
But I knew that somewhere down the line there would be some formal identification or an inquest where, with my luck, I'd run across Billy's mum and the cat would be out of the bag, to coin a very sick phrase.
That would look bad and even Plod would put two and two together and make five.
It's much better to give them two and one and let them make four.
It's called damage limitation.
I'd only met Mrs Tuckett twice, once when she drove Billy down to university at the start of a term and once when she turned up to see him get his degree.
(A lucky third if I remember, but I couldn't recall in what, just the class.
My, but we're snobs at that age, aren't we?)
I had a nasty feeling she'd remember me because she was the sort of woman who would remember somebody offering to drink Newcastle Brown Ale out of her shoe on Degree Day.
And when she'd driven Billy, a pimply second-year, up to my hall of residence at the start of his fourth or fifth term, I'd been on hand to help them unload her Mercedes estate car.
Actually, I'd been waiting for somebody else but I just happened to be on hand and I couldn't just stand there and watch her struggle with all those boxes, suitcases, typewriters, bicycles, stereo systems and so on.
I remember I looked at the pile of Billy's goods and chattels which were supposed to fit inside a twelve-by-six-foot room and saying: ‘I came with a Sainsbury's carrier — and I had trouble filling that.’
And Mrs Tuckett had shrieked with laughter because  she probably was the sort of woman who laughed loudly in pubs, but would never intentionally hurt anyone, and who would be cut to the marrow when she heard of her only son's death.
She could have changed, of course.
Run off with the milkman, disowned Billy, got religion; but I didn't think so.
‘You'll look after him for me, won't you?’ she'd said to me after we'd got him unpacked and she couldn't think of anything else which might prevent her from leaving.
Billy had just shuffled from one foot to the other and blushed as all dutiful sons should do.
I'd told her not to worry and that he was one of the lads, although I'd never seen him before, and we were just waiting for her to go before we started the party.
She'd laughed at that and resisted the urge to cuddle him in front of one of ‘the lads’ and had gone.
I remember I said to Billy something like, ‘I thought she'd never go.
Where's the corkscrew?’ and he'd answered — dead straight —‘What do you want a corkscrew for?’and so I'd made an excuse and left quickly.
I tried to think of when I'd seen him after that, apart from when we got our degrees — him proud and posing for the family album, me drunk and disorderly.
I knew I had, on a couple of occasions, at student union meetings but I couldn't think why as he certainly wasn't a political animal.
It would come to me eventually.
I have that sort of brain.
I can remember stuff they thought too petty for Trivial Pursuit and then somedays I have to look up the instructions on my bootlaces.
But when I finally got to bed again it was well into Monday morning and it was Monday afternoon when I surfaced and there was a policeman on the door and it hadn't been a nightmare after all.
The uniformed copper on the door told me he was only hanging about until he got the word on his ‘talking brooch’ radio that the forensic boys hadn't forgotten anything and  wouldn't need to come back.
He personally couldn't give a monkey's whether I went out or.not as long as the CID boys knew where they could get me.
I said they did and offered to leave the door on the latch so he could sneak in for a bit of a warm.
Before I left I tried to ring Nassim Nassim, my erstwhile landlord and Sunil's cousin and, I'd decided by now, the man who had got me into this mess.
It was odds on that the cops had got to him by now, but in case they hadn't it might pay me to square things with him.
Nassim was not available, a female voice told me.
I knew it was unlikely to be Mrs Nassim as she refused to get involved in his business activities even to the point of answering the phone.
Well, that's what Nassim had once told us.
I think it was his flimsy excuse for employing a procession of nubile young secretaries.
Just in case this was one of them, I left my name and number, pointing out that it was the Stuart Street property and part of Nassim's empire, which made us almost family, didn't it?
I just managed to get in the fact that it really was quite important before she hung up.
You can't win 'em all.
One or two now and then would be nice, though.
I got Armstrong fired up and headed towards Hackney, using the back streets to avoid the worst of the rush hour.
In effect, I'd lost a day and I wondered if there had been something I'd planned to do that Monday, like work, for instance.
I couldn't think of anything I'd promised anybody and I hadn't anything musical on for a few days, so that was all right.
Being self-unemployed has its upside.
In Stuart Street I had a choice of parking spaces outside No. 9.
It wasn't so much fun nowadays, not since Frank and Salome Asmoyah, the black yuppy couple who used to have the flat above me, moved to their much plusher Limehouse pad complete with mortgage repayments delivered in envelopes with black edges.
My going-away present to them had been a pair of inflatable yellow wheel  clamps which I'd attached front and aft to their VW Golf.
Nothing could be more guaranteed to induce apoplexy in a London driver, though I never could get on side with that sort of paranoia.
Have you ever seen a taxi wearing a Denver Boot?
As I got out I caught the enigmatic Mr Goodson sneaking in through the front door, but if he'd seen me pull up, he didn't wait to say Hello.
That wasn't unusual, though.
I knew he'd be inside his ground-floor flat with the door locked before I could get into the hall, no matter how fast I was.
He rarely spoke to the rest of us peasants in the house, though when he did he was nothing but polite.
He didn't play music loud, drink to excess, have phone calls, watch television or go out at all at weekends.
I tell people he's an alien.
If I told them he was a quiet, shy, unassuming minor civil servant who read a lot of books, they'd have the weirdo squad from Social Services round straight away.
After all, this was Hackney and there were probably by-laws about such things.
I sneaked up the stairs to Flat 3, tiptoeing by the door of No. 2 so as not to disturb Lisabeth and Fenella, the two dragons who inhabited that particular dungeon.
It wasn't that we didn't get on, we did — surprisingly well, in fact.
But while I was house-sitting for Nassim, Fenella had been cat-sitting for me.
Not that that required much, it's just that not even Springsteen has mastered the tin-opener yet, though he's working on it.
Unfortunately, Fenella takes her duties terribly seriously and would have a minute by minute report of what Springsteen had been up to while I'd been away.
Lisabeth, on the other hand, regards anything male (about 48% of the population) and anything which moves faster than she does (the rest of the animal kingdom) with deep suspicion, and the combination of her moaning and Fenella enthusing was too much for me.
Springsteen was out but there were tell-tale signs that he'd been ruling the roost and no evidence that he was  pining for my return.
There was a dish of cat food down for him, plus a dish of tuna fish chunks (in soya oil as he likes to preserve his kittenish figure) and a saucer of rapidly separating cream.
He had a cat flap in the flat door if he wanted to get into the rest of the house and Fenella had thoughtfully left my kitchen window wide open so he could come and go that way via the flat roof of the kitchen extension next door.
She'd also left the heating on for him, which was doing nothing except heating the window-sill for the pigeons and running up my bills.
It looked as if I would have to have a go at the electricity meter with an electro-magnet again.
It also seemed, from the feathers on the kitchen floor, that one of the pigeons had come down for a warm and had got too close.
Ah well, one less tourist attraction.
I peeled off my clothes and took a long shower — it would be a long time before I took a bath again, and certainly not round at Sunil's — and treated myself to a proper shave with hot water and a razor.
I had been using my travelling battery shaver while house-sitting and despite what Victor Kiam says, nothing beats hot water and cold steel.
I had just time to pull on a clean shirt and a pair of Chinos — Springsteen's favourites as they show up his black hairs to best effect — before the local news came on the TV.
I flicked on the box and took a can of lager from the fridge.
The news finished at the same time as the lager.
It hadn't been a busy day in London town, but there was no mention of anybody falling through windows in Leytonstone.
I opened another can and wondered what to do next.
About the only practical thing I came up with was that I probably ought to start smoking again.
That was more than a tad retro so I distracted myself and put some music on.
I fed a CD of Hugh Masekela into the machine and fought back the urge to get my trumpet out and play along, ruminating on the injustice of a world that had taken so  long to discover him.
No doubt somebody had held a torch for him.
As a student, with everybody into punk in a big way, I'd regularly paid over the odds for Chuck Mangione imports.
So much music; so little time.
And always the social pressure to keep up to date and with the scene.
I remembered the larder was bare and took a snap decision (actually, ‘going snap’ on a decision was the latest buzzword) to hit the local late-night deli.
I picked up my wallet and a bright blue blouson with ‘Status Quo— 19th Farewell Concert’ on the back in day-glo gold.
You see what I mean about having to keep up with things.
I was almost at the corner of Stuart Street when a car slowed up into the corner of my eye.
I was either being kerb-crawled or a bunch of Quo fans were after the jacket.
It was Nassim in a battered red Nissan and if he was a Quo fan, he'd never admitted it.
I had never had him down as a kerb-crawler either, but from the state of the car it looked as if it had had a good kicking.
He leaned over and opened the passenger door so he could yell at me.
‘Hey you, Angel.
I'm coming to see and you are leaving.
You said urgent so I am come straight away.’
He narrowed his eyes.
‘The house is OK, isn't it?
You haven't set fire to nothing, have you?’
I put on my best butter-wouldn't-melt expression and stuck my head inside the car.
‘Sometimes, Mr Nassim,’ I said politely, ‘I think you have a very low opinion of me.’
He shuffled a bit at that, shrinking into his green trenchcoat which someone had told him was yuppily fashionable.
‘And anyway,’ I went on, ‘the insurance will cover it.’
‘Well, that at least is something,’ he said.
Then: ‘Cover what?
Hey, Angel, wait…’
But I'd closed the car door by then and was heading for the deli.
I waved to him to follow me in and he snuffed the Nissan's engine and climbed out.
Then he got back in and came out  holding a mobile phone, which he crammed into a coat pocket.
‘Is that a mobile phone or are you just pleased to see me?’
I asked as I held the deli door open for him.
‘Eh?’
‘Skip it.
How long have you been driving that piece of rust?’
I nodded to his car.
‘You think I'm going to park the BMW in Brick Lane?’
He had a point.
‘Now what's this about insurance?
Why do I need insurance?’
I handed him a wire basket and put a box of eggs in it.
‘Not you, your cousin Sunil in Leytonstone.’
‘What have you done?
You said you would look after things.
That's why I give you three weeks’ rent amnesty.’
‘You noted that.
Other landlords would have said three weeks ‘rent free’ or ‘credit’or something.
Nassim called it amnesty.
I added some goat's cheese to the basket.
‘I haven't done anything, except spend most of last night and all of this morning keeping the police off your back.
Can you reach the milk?’
Without thinking, he added a carton of milk to his basket.
From behind her check-out till, Mrs Patel looked at us curiously over the top of her blue-framed spectacles.
‘Police?
What police?’
‘Tall guys in blue uniforms and cars with flashing lights on top.
You must have seen ‘em.
Butter, please.’
‘Why police?
Were they looking for Sunil?
I've never trusted that damned boy.’
‘No, it's nothing to do with him.
Put that back, will you, and get the slightly salted type.
I know it's bad for you, but what isn't these days?’
I winked at Mrs Patel and to my surprise she winked back.
At the meat fridge I picked up a pack of ground beef.
‘They used to call this mince until people started making  their own hamburgers, you know.
I always use garlic and a smear of tomato puree in mine.’
By now he was totally bemused.
‘Look,’ I said, to put him out of his misery, ‘you know that big skylight Sunil had put in the bathroom when the house was done up.’
‘Of course I do.
I paid for it.
His damn wife said it was not natural to have a room without a window.
Sunil would not buy the place until it had been done.
Why?
Why are you asking?’
‘Because you're going to need another.’
I snapped my fingers as if I'd forgotten something.
‘Yoghurt.
Plain sheep's, please.
It's back there with the milk.’
It was only after he had reached for it that he realized he was carrying my groceries around.
Huffily he pushed the basket at me.
‘So what happened?
Drunken party, I expect.
Throwing beer bottles through the window.
That it?’
‘Not quite.
Someone sort of…dropped in.’
I couldn't think of any other way of saying it.
‘A guy had been on the roof.
Maybe he was doing a bit of breaking and entering.’
Well, he certainly did that.
‘And he sort of came through and landed in the bath.’
‘In the bath?’
Nassim's eyes were out like organ stops by this time.
So were Mrs Patel's, who had cocked her head on one side to listen better.
‘I can see nobody is going to believe this story first time, are they?’
I said resignedly.
‘Yes, he landed in the bath and the fall killed him.’
‘He's dead?’
‘Mostly.’
‘But it is nothing to do with me,’ he squealed, turning to Mrs Patel for sympathy.
She shook her head slowly and tut-tutted to herself.
I hoped I never got her if she did jury duty.
‘No one 's saying it is, but I'm in the house because I'm  doing you a favour.
I don't know Sunil from Adam —’ and I went on before he could ask Adam who?’— and naturally, the cops will want to check that out.
They might ask if you know if Sunil had any dealings with Billy Tuckett…’
‘Who is this Billy person?’
Nassim's arms started whirling.
Not a good sign.
‘The man who fell through your window.’
‘It is not my window, it is that good-for-nothing Sunil's window.’
‘And what does good-for-nothing Sunil do for a living?’
‘Nothing.
He works for me.’
Fair enough.
‘So that's all you have to tell the police.’
I put a hand on his shoulder.
He looked at it suspiciously.
‘In fact, all they'll probably do is ask if you can get in touch with Sunil for them.
They don't know that Billy Tuckett was actually making for Sunil's house.
It could just have been bad luck.’
‘Who is this Billy Tuckett person?’
He was getting close to foot-stamping time.
‘The man on the roof.’
‘What are these men doing on my cousin's roof?
Just how many people are going on roofs?
I don't have anybody on my roof.’
I nodded to where Mrs Patel had strung MERRY CHRISTMAS in large red letters across the drinks shelf, anchored by a bottle of Bailey's Cream at one end and a six-pack of headbanging lager at the other.
‘Well, if you don't have a visitor on your roof at this time of year, it probably means you've been naughty, not nice.’
I handed my basket to Mrs Patel.
Next to the till was a box of chocolate Christmas tree decorations.
I picked out a chocolate Santa Claus and showed it to Nassim.
‘He checks twice, you know.’
I cooked and ate and even washed up; tried to get into some music and resisted the temptation to open a bottle of wine.
Nothing worked.
My sleep/wake clock had bust a spring and I was worried about the fact that it had been Billy Tuckett who had dropped through the skylight.
Why couldn't it have been a total stranger?
Then I could have left it alone.
Instead I rang Bunny, which nine times out of eight is a dangerous thing to do.
I didn't ring him to borrow money, because he never has any to lend.
I didn't ring him because he plays a mean alto-sax, though he is one of the best reed men currently not working out of a studio in the Windward Isles (wherever).
I didn't ring him to ask his advice on how to pick up women — and if I did, it would only be to find out where he buys his chloroform.
I rang Bunny because he too had been at university with me, though, funnily enough, I didn't really know him until later.
As a student he had very quickly shacked up with a second-year chemistry undergraduate who had very definite ideas that Degree Day was rapidly followed by Wedding Day.
And once Bunny graduated, so it did.
He got a job in insurance and the marriage lasted about three years and three months, then Bunny found out that his quiet, dutiful wife had been having an affair with her boss at the food research place where she worked for roughly three years and two months.
Bunny threatened to chainsaw the flat in Muswell Hill and torch the goldfish, although maybe it was the other way round.
What in fact he did was give up his regular job, take his half of the Muswell Hill flat in cash and go out and buy an alto, followed by tenor and then soprano saxes.
Then he dedicated his life to music and the pursuit of women, and we found we had things in common.
Music, that is.
A female voice answered Bunny's phone and told me he was out seeing a man about a second-hand tenor sax but I could leave a message after the beep.
Then she yelled ‘Beep’ so loudly I ended up a yard away from our communal house  phone which is nailed to the wall just inside the front door.
I wondered where Bunny had found her.
I played along, saying I was acting on behalf of Boot-in Inc.
Recording Studios — an outfit Bunny and I had actually done some backtrack recording for when they wanted a sound they couldn't synthesize — and that it was vital that I contact Mr Warren immediately to consult on his availability for a major recording contract, and which pub was he in anyway?
‘Calthorpe Arms, Grays Inn Road,’ she said, and I said thanks and hung up.
As I turned from the phone I realized the stairs were blocked by Lisabeth, hands on hips, outside her flat door.
‘What are you doing here?’ she said as if reading from a Gestapo training manual.
‘I live here,’ I said innocently.
‘You're supposed to be away for the week.’
The prosecution rests, m'lud.
Case closed.
Pass the black cap.
‘I'm back for a couple of nights,’ I said weakly.
Why did I feel intimidated?
Maybe it was because she had the advantage of the high ground and was looking down on me.
No.
It was because she was Lisabeth.
‘Fenella's out at her French lessons,’ she said, dead straight.
I bit my tongue and simply said: ‘So?’
She brought her hands away from her hips, which had hidden them quite well, and let a tin-opener and a tin of Whiskas drop on to the stairs.
‘So feed your own damned livestock.’
And off she flounced.
I trudged upstairs and picked up the tin and the opener.
Outside Lisabeth's door I said in a loud voice, as if talking to someone: ‘That's the trouble, you just can't get the staff these days…’
Then I ran the rest of the way just in case she'd heard.
The Calthorpe Arms at that time on a Monday evening was so busy and bustling that you could hear a beermat drop.
l here were about a dozen customers, mostly middle-aged men sitting alone reading Evening Standards who only troubled the barman to the extent that occasionally he had to turn down the corner of a page of his Stephen King paperback.
It must really be business that had brought Bunny here as it wasn't his sort of pub.
There were no women.
Come to think of it, I wasn't that keen on it either, though it did serve a cracking pint of Young's bitter.
So good, I ordered a low-al lager so as not to get locked into a session.
Bunny saw me and gave me a brief nod, then went back to talking to a young black dude wearing a blue trenchcoat and nursing a colour-co-ordinated Filofax.
Only the diehards used them now, that was the first one I'd seen in captivity for some months.
Maybe only the really bad cases, those who were hooked, had to keep their habit going.
After five minutes or so, they did their deal and the black guy left in a jangle of car keys, a big bunch on an ostentatious metal Mercedes key-ring.
I bet myself he had a Skoda parked round the corner.
Bunny joined me at the bar and bought us both another drink.
‘This isn't your turf, is it?’ he asked, checking his change carefully and obviously in front of the barman.
Bunny knows lots of little irritating bits of behaviour.
‘No, I was looking for you and I wouldn't have figured you for this particular humming and vibrant example of the capital's nightscene.’
‘Business.’
He shrugged.
‘Had to see Elmore there about some instruments.
Also got a job if you're interested, on Wednesday.’
I hesitated just that millisecond too long.
Bunny works on the principle that if he asks every woman he meets to sleep with him, a certain percentage are going to say yes.
If they say no straight away, he moves on.
If they hesitate he  reckons he's in with a chance.
He gets a lot of noes that way, but a remarkable number of yesses, and when he didn't register an instant negative from me, I was as good as signed up.
‘It's a peach of an earner,’ he went on quickly.
‘And it'll be a giggle, guaranteed.’
‘All that means is it's cash-in-hand and there are women involved somewhere.
Where, when and, lest we forget, how much?’
He looked at me disapprovingly.
Well, he tried to.
‘You can be really mercenary at times, Mr Angel.
Don't you ever think of anything but dosh?’
‘Of course.
I've got a lot on my mind: the state of the economy, interest rates, disarmament in the Warsaw Pact, lead in petrol, why nobody lets England win at cricket any more, does the Aids scare mean we'll never have another vampire movie, are forty-eight satellite TV channels enough…’
‘OK, OK, lay off the ear-bashing.
Do you know St Christopher's Place up west?’
‘The precinct, off Oxford Street?’
‘That's it.
All the shopkeepers there have chipped in and hired a promo agency to drum up Christmas trade.
One of their ideas is to put a band on a lorry and drive round the block at lunch-time belting out the old traddies — the stuff you play.
If nothing else, it'll annoy the hell out of Selfridges.’
‘And on the lorry will be a clutch of nubile young ladies in red Santa Claus miniskirts and fishnet tights handing out leaflets saying come and shop in St Christopher's Place.’
He looked staggered.
‘Somebody's asked you already?’
‘No, Bunny, I just know the way your mind works.’
‘There's fifty in it for you.
An hour's work.
Two, tops.’
‘Who else is playing?’
‘I've got Trippy on piano…’
‘Does it have a full set of keys?’
‘The piano does.
I don't know about Trippy.’
I nodded agreement.
‘He's got his mate Dod bringing a snare drum and high hat — I didn't think there was much point in a full drum kit.’
Again I agreed.
I didn't personally think having a piano on the back of a truck was much use either, but it looked good and gave the band somewhere to balance their beer cans.
‘There's me on clarinet, you on horn and I've a tuba player called Chase.
Know him?’
‘He's a miserable git, isn't he?’
‘That's him.
I'm still short of a trombone, though.’
I took a felt-tipped pen out of his jacket pocket and wrote a number on a beermat.
‘Ring this first thing in the morning.
It's a direct line into the BBC.
Ask for Martin.
He's very good and he'll probably do it for nothing if he can get a couple of hours off.’
‘Cheers,’ said Bunny, pocketing the mat as he had done a million others, though the phone numbers on them were not usually trombonists.
‘What arc you doing here, anyway?’
‘Came to see you.
Your answering service said you'd be here.’
He looked down into his glass.
‘Ah yes…
Edwina.’
‘Edwina?
Where did you find her?’
‘She found me and I'm having trouble getting rid of her.’
‘I never thought that was your problem.’
Bunny pursed his lips and whispered: ‘Bitch.’
‘I wanted to pick your brains,’ I said.
‘Find 'em first.’
‘Think back to your carefree youth before the cares of the world descended on your manly shoulders.’
‘Last week, you mean?’
‘Ha-chortle-ha.
A bit further back to Uni days.
Remember a kid called Billy Tuckett?’
He thought for a minute.
‘Yeah — vaguely.
What's he to anybody?’
‘I…er…came across him the other day, that's all.’
I indicated that Bunny's glass was empty but he shook his head.
‘I've been trying to recall what Billy did at Uni, or afterwards.
Did you ever come across him?’
Bunny looked at the ceiling.
‘Didn't we used to call him…’
‘Yes, of course we did, but we were young and unsophisticated then.’
He nodded agreement.
‘Yeah, I've caught him a coupla times.
I think he lived out Romford way, but I never had much to do with him.
I saw him at the odd university reunion.
You know, when I was married to that ball-crushing vicious old cow Sandra.’
‘I'm glad to see you've got over your matrimonial difficulties without rancour,’ I said, draining my glass, knowing he wasn't listening.
‘We used to have to go to them all and raise funds for the old Alma Mater.
Actually, that sow Sandra only went to see how we were doing in the rat-race compared to her contemporaries.
Obviously we weren't keeping up with the Joneses, so she started screwing the boss.’
‘And Billy used to go?’
I tried to get him back on to the subject.
‘Oh yeah, hanging around moonfaced like he did ten years ago, all ill-fitting clothes and two halves of shandy because he had his pushbike with him.’
He saw my expression.
‘No, straight up, he always rode a pushbike.
Never learned to drive.
It was against his principles.
Cars pollute the atmosphere, all that shit.’
‘Is that why I remember him?
He was into the environment?
A Green?’
‘Sure, anything like that.
He was in all the conservation groups when he was a student, but his big thing was animals.’
‘Animals.
You mean like ‘Save the Whale’?’
‘And the rest.’
Bunny zipped up his jacket and made to go.
‘Save the Whale, rescue the rabbit, free the anaconda.
Stop animal experiments, stop fox-hunting, abolish police horses, vote your gerbil into Parliament.’
‘That's been done.
Many times.’
‘Too bloody right,’ he grinned.
‘He couldn't hold a conversation about anything else.
That was Billy.
Any chance of a lift?’
I said OK and we wandered out.
The barman didn't say goodbye.
On the street, as I unlocked Armstrong, Bunny said: ‘You never got conned into any of that, did you?’
‘What, the rat-race or going to Uni reunions?’
‘Both.’
‘No, that's right,’ I agreed.
‘I never got into the rat-race — or the brat-race as it is now — because I never wanted to.
And I only ever went to the first reunion after graduation.’
‘Couldn't hack it, eh?’ he asked, climbing in the back.
‘No, I was barred after the first one.’
CHAPTER 3
The heavy mob came round the next morning; all one of him.
He said he was called Prentice and he was a detective-sergeant and he'd been well trained in the most vicious of police techniques: politeness and reasonableness.
From the off he had me convinced that by helping him I was doing no more than carving out a new life for myself as a better citizen, a better human being.
Maybe this was my chance  to make up for all those little oversights and lapses in the past, which we all have no matter how hard we try to forget or overlook them.
If I could help him — and, after all, he was only doing the job we paid him to do, wasn't he?—; then it would be a personal shot at redemption on my part.
He almost had me going, but my Rule of Life No. 14 is that when somebody offers you the chance of a lifetime, they usually mean theirs, not yours.
I was on the communal house phone, which is chained to the wall tighter than a medieval Bible, when the doorbell rang.
Most everybody in the house had gone to work, or whatever it was they did during daylight, and as I was only two feet away I reached over and slipped the lock, taking the phone receiver with me.
‘With you in a tick,’ I said, signalling at the phone.
He nodded politely and showed me the palm of a gloved hand.
I went back to sorting out a schedule for the day with Simon, the proprietor of Snogogram International.
But I felt the hairs on the back of my neck stand up and decided that maybe I'd better not say too much in front of the stranger.
‘OK, Simon, twelve sharp down in Southwark.
You can fill me in then,’ I said and hung up.
I took a closer look at our visitor.
The soft black leather bomber jacket, the steel-rimmed glasses, the light blue Ford Escort parked out in the street behind him.
I should have known immediately.
If he'd actually had a flashing blue light on top of his head, I might have rumbled him sooner.
‘Mr Angel?
Glad I caught you in.
My name is Prentice.
Detective-Sergeant.’
‘I suppose it's about…’
‘Yes.
Mind if I come in?’
I couldn't think of a good reason why not so I ushered him towards the stairs and told him I lived in Flat 3.
Half way up, Springsteen shot through his legs and passed me  at about Mach 5, doing a handbrake turn at the bottom of the stairs and heading for the back door.
With his eyes flashing, he looked like a black furry guided missile.
Prentice turned his head to see what had just missed him, making the finger-rubbing gesture and whispering ‘Puss…puss…’ which is something I've noticed a lot of people who haven't met Springsteen do.
Maybe it works on other cats, but I wouldn't attempt it without asbestos gloves.
‘Yours?’ he asked.
‘I pay the rent and he lets me sleep here.’
I shrugged as I opened the flat door.
He waved me in first.
‘I'm a dog man myself,’ he said conversationally.
‘Well, naturally.
Dobermans, Rottweilers, attack Alsatians…’
He pushed his spectacles back into his face with the middle finger of his right hand.
I was to learn that it was his way of controlling his temper.
‘Jack Russells, actually.
My father bred them.
Of course, it's not fair to keep dogs like that in London, not natural hunters like them.’
So that's where I was going wrong with Springsteen.
Maybe I should buy him a place in the country.
Maybe a foreign country.
‘Is this going to take long, Sergeant?
I have to go to work, you see.’
‘I shouldn't think so.
Just what exactly do you do, Mr Angel?’
Now I had a number of answers to this.
Self-unemployed was the usual one, though I didn't think that would wash with Prentice.
And I would never say that to anyone who was unemployed but didn't want to be.
To anyone who was claiming unemployment benefit or social security, which I don't, I would imply that I'd registered as ‘outdoor clerical’ or similar, and wasn't it a disgrace they couldn't find me a job?
Sometimes I stick to ‘driver —’ well, I have a cab  (though you'd better not be talking to a real musher) and a Heavy Goods Vehicle licence.
But driver has dodgy implications if you're a copper.
So I compromised.
‘I'm a musician.’
‘Oh, so you have a degree in electronics?’
He said it with a faint smile.
I knew what he meant.
Possibly he was human after all.
‘Not me.
Strictly crash-bash saloon bar trad jazz.’
I pointed to where my trumpet was balanced on top of one of the stereo speakers.
People think I put it there as a piece of pop art to decorate the room.
Only I know I forgot to pack it away.
‘Have you done the ‘in’ clubs?
You know, Jazz Café, the Wag Club, places like that?’
He was well informed, probably more up to speed than I was.
‘I'm not into yuppy-jazz, so I'd never get asked to Jazz Café, though they get some good people there.’
That was true, in fact Stoke Newington was turning into the Storyville of British jazz.
‘But I never get past the bouncers at the Wag.’
‘Me neither,’ he grinned.
Maybe I could do business with this guy, I thought.
Sometimes I have the weirdest thoughts and I always promise to give up eating cheese late at night but never do.
‘Time for a cup of coffee?’
I asked, not keenly.
‘Sure,’ he said, moving a pile of paperbacks and sitting down in my fake Bauhaus leather and steel chair (one of a set, of one).
I went into my kitchenette and flicked the kettle on.
His voice carried after me.
‘Interesting mixture of reading material,’ he yelled.
‘I try to keep the grey cells working,’ I shouted back, more to reassure him that I hadn't done a runner out of the kitchen window.
‘Bit of military history, detective stories — is there any  money in these old Penguins?— P. J. O'Rourke, essays by Gore Vidal, the new Jeffrey Archer —’
‘Sorry, somebody must have left that here,’ I yelled.
‘What did you read at university?’
‘History,’ I shouted, pouring water.
‘Billy Tuckett did chemistry, didn't he?’
End of polite chit-chat.
Rule of Life No. 61: There's no such thing as off-duty.
I carried the coffee jug and filter and two cups back into the living-room and put them down on my coffee table, which sounds posh but in fact it doubles as a dining table, poker table and ironing-board.
‘Real coffee,’ said Prentice.
‘That's a treat.’
‘Never been able to drink instant since I went to America the first time.
I've no milk but there's sugar somewhere.’
‘That's OK, as it comes.’
I moved a pile of CDs off the sofa-bed and sat down, balancing my I LOVE HACKNEY mug on one knee.
‘I didn't know Billy that well, in fact hardly at all.
But yes, I think it was chemistry.
Is that relevant to anything?’
‘No.’
He buried his face in his mug, which didn't say anything but had a picture of a cat rolling a joint.
‘But it was a hell of a coincidence, wasn't it?’
‘What was?’
I asked, playing dumb.
‘Billy Tuckett being the person to drop in on you like that.’
‘He couldn't have known I'd be there.
I didn't know myself where the house was until the week before last.
And anyway, I haven't seen Billy for Christ knows how long, and I never knew him well.
And —’
‘OK, OK.’
'— another thing: what the fuck was he doing on the roof in the first place?’
‘Ah, now I think I have a theory about that.’
Prentice leaned forward and put his mug on the table.
‘Can you spare mc an hour or so?’
‘What for?’
I asked suspiciously.
‘I want you to come out to Leytonstone with me and let me show you something.’
‘Well, I…
Look, Sergeant, just what have you got on me?
There is no way I had anything going with poor Billy and no way he knew I'd be in that house.’
‘Of course not, Mr Angel.’
Prentice smiled and that made me more nervous than anything.
‘It's such a bleedin' long-shot set of coincidences, it has to be true.
Nobody, but nobody, would be daft enough to stick to a story like that if it wasn't.’
I was glad somebody else saw it my way.
‘I think I know why Billy was heading for that house,’ Prentice went on.
‘He knew someone who used to live there before it was owned by a Mr…’
He reached inside his jacket for his notebook but I said ‘Sunil’ before he could clear his shoulder-holster, or wherever it was he kept it.
‘Yes, er…
Sunil.
Now he's —’
‘In Pakistan, I believe.’
‘Been living there about a year, is what I was going to say.’
‘Oh, sorry.’
Rule of Life No. 37: When a policeman's talking, shut up.
‘Before that, the house was occupied by a Miss Lucy Scarrott.
Does that ring any bells?’
‘Should it?’
‘I happen to know that the late Mr Tuckett was very close to Ms Scarrott.’
‘But not close enough to know she'd moved out?’
‘Possibly,’ he said slowly.
‘Or maybe she sent Billy back to turn the house over, is that what you're thinking?’
He smiled and I felt the hairs on the back of my neck go rigid.
‘You've got a devious mind, Mr Angel.
Ever thought of a career in the police?’
‘Blue's not my colour.’
‘I've heard worse reasons.’
‘I can't possibly be tall enough.’
‘They're very flexible about that nowadays.’
‘I've got a degree,’ I said, getting desperate.
‘So have 1,’ Prentice checked me.
‘I couldn't stand the short working week and I really wouldn't know what to do with all that bribe money.’
‘Ah, there is that,’ he said as if thinking it over.
‘But then, you don't go into the CID straight off…’
I licked a forefinger and made a ‘nice one’ stroke in the air.
He was OK but (Rule of Life No. 38) the time to start worrying was when the policemen got nicer.
It's not that I have anything against them per se, of course .
It's just I like to know where I stand and which bit of me to tense up before the rubber truncheon lands.
It's the same in power politics.
The Russians would much rather deal with a right-wing conservative any day because they know where they stand, rather than a left-wing liberal who might do something off the wall, like act on principle, for heaven's sake.
I had the feeling that Prentice was out to kill me with kindness, or at least make me put my hands up to something I hadn't done.
But what?
‘Look, Sergeant, what's the deal?
I recognized Billy Tuckett from way back and thought I'd save you guys some time by giving you his name.
I could have kept the lip zippered.
I don't know this Lucy Scarrott female and I don't know what Billy was doing on the roof.
What more can I tell you?’
‘Maybe nothing,’ he shrugged.
‘But I'd value your input.’
‘You're not thinking of opening a sperm bank, are you?’
‘Sorry,’ he laughed.
‘Got to watch the jargon.’
‘You probably use a lot down Wanstead nick.’
‘I don't work out of Wanstead,’ he said carefully, but went no further.
‘So what exactly do you want from me?’
‘I want you to come with me to Mr Sunil's house and let me show you what I think happened to Billy Tuckett.’
‘What good would that do?’
‘I'm not sure, but you might be able to fill in the odd gap.’
I shook my head in despair.
‘How many times?
I haven't seen Billy in years and I don't know why he decided to have a night on the tiles on Sunday.
Why don't you try this Lucy Scarrott bird?’
‘We can't find her.
Bit embarrassing, really, she's supposed to be on probation but her probation officer sort of lost her about a year ago.’
‘And I'm the next best thing?’
‘The only lead to Billy we have and, I admit, a pretty slim one.’
‘As long as we understand each other on that score, fair enough.’
Going along with him seemed to be the best way of getting rid of him.
‘But I have to ask, though I think I might regret it, what is Lucy Scarrott on probation for?’
‘Breaking into an animal research centre.’
oh-oh.
Animals again.
I followed Prentice's Escort over to Leytonstone in Armstrong.
I told him I wanted to go on to work afterwards, nut really I needed thinking time to try and figure him out.
We turned into Dwyer Street and I still hadn't made any headway.
Then I realized he wasn't stopping outside Sunil's house, but carrying on to the other end of the road.
He parked ten yards or so after the last house, outside a wire-mesh fence in front of a late 1950s prefabricated school.
There was a handkerchief-size tarmac playground in front and a wooden sign, which somebody had tried to set fire to, saying Dwyer Street Infants' School.
Prentice got out of his Escort and locked it, then pointed to the gates of the school yard.
I pulled Armstrong in behind his car, got out and joined him by the gate.
There was no padlock on it and it squealed as Prentice pushed it open 
‘Your motor?’ he nodded towards Armstrong.
‘Yeah, and it's taxed.’
‘You can pick up second-hand Metrocabs now, you know.’
‘Wouldn't have one given,’ I said firmly.
‘Why?
Not as economical on the fuel?’
‘No, just no character.’
He gave me a quizzical look, then indicated to the left side of the school.
‘Come round the side,’ he said, and I followed him down the tarmac path which was about a yard wide, between the school building and a six-foot wooden fence which isolated the first house in the terrace.
‘It's not a school any more,’ he said over his shoulder.
‘Well, they have to hide the Cruise missiles somewhere,’ I said, zipping up my fleece-lined leather jacket against the rain which had started coming down in ominous big spits.
I had a sudden pang of conscience about the hole in Sunil's roof where the skylight had been.
But it was only a brief pang.
Prentice was ignoring my backchat.
‘It's a local community centre, Scout Hut, adult education centre and creche.
In fact it's probably used more now than it was when it was a school.’
He'd stopped in front of the side door, a flimsy hardboard affair with a Yale lock, distinguished by a fist-sized hole to the side of the metal keyhole.
‘Now who do you think would want to do that?’
Prentice put his left hand through the hole and flicked the lock from the inside.
‘Someone who wanted to do what you've just done,’ I said as I followed him inside.
‘But they had a sledgehammer, not a key.’
We were in a kitchen of sorts.
I presumed it had once been the school's dinner ladies' empire and there was still a stove and tea-making gear but not much else except a  funny smell.
It was musty and earthy and oaty all at once.
Prentice was watching me.
He didn't say anything, just nodded towards the big enamel sink which had a single cold water tap and a rickety hot water geyser above it.
(These ‘butler's pantry’ sinks are worth a few bob these days, either to the dockland yuppies doing up houses Jack the Ripper wouldn't have been seen dead in, or to amateur photographers who use them in their darkrooms.
I'm not sure what for.)
To the side of the sink, under the draining-board, were half-empty sacks and bags which contained cereals, wood shavings and what looked like the sort of seeds you feed to birds rather than the ones you roll with tobacco.
‘Either school dinners have really gone downhill, or there's one hell of a big parrot on the loose round here.’
‘You're getting warm,’ Prentice said.
‘Come here.’
He opened a door into a corridor and I followed him down it.
The doors of the classrooms along it had handwritten cards drawing-pinned to them saying things like ‘Course 21B: Italian’ or ‘Over 60s Metalworking’and one that said ‘Blue Tit Patrol’pinned high enough up to avoid any graffiti.
At the end was a fire door with a push bar.
Prentice opened it and wedged it open with a rusted chunk of iron left there for that purpose.
We were in a small courtyard into which had been crammed half a dozen hutches and garden-shed-type constructions.
There was also a ten-foot square pen of some sort like a small corral, made out of odd bits of timber, and in one corner, a pile of what was unmistakably manure.
‘It's a frigging zoo,’ I said.
‘Got it in one,’ said Prentice smugly.
‘Now hold it a minute,’ I said, holding my hands up.
‘Are you telling me Billy was here Sunday night, and it had something to do with animals.
These —?
There aren't any fucking animals here!’
‘The place is closed for the Christmas holidays and the  RSPCA takes care of the livestock until January.
It started when it was a school.
You know the score, give the urban kids a slice of country life.
Some teacher must have found out that most of his class had never seen a duck before, so they started an urban zoo.
There were quite a few of them back in the ‘seventies.
When the school closed, they kept the animals on for the toddlers in the local playgroups.
They use the place most mornings.
And the old caretaker lives next door, so he feeds them and mucks out.
It was no big deal, just a few chickens, a couple of rabbits, hamsters, gerbils and a donkey.’
‘A donkey?’
‘Yes.
Early retirement from Southend beach, I understand.’
‘Strewth, they're even laying the donkeys off now.
Times must be hard.’
‘It's the cuts,’ he said, playing along.
‘And you're fingering Billy to have been here on Sunday on some sort of animal liberation commando raid?’
‘If that's what it was, they were too late.
The animals were shipped out on Friday, but maybe they didn't know that.
And yes, I think your mate Billy was here…broke in here…on Sunday.
Didn't you say he was keen on animal rights when he was a student with you?’
‘No, I don't think I did,’ I said, looking him in the eye.
‘And anyway, how did he get up on the roof?’
‘I'll show you, but first, look inside the huts.’
‘Which one?’
‘Any of them.’
I opened the door of the nearest one, but gingerly in case there was a puma or something the RSPCA had forgotten.
The interior stank of wet fur and there was dirty, dried straw on the floor.
It was ten seconds or so before I realized I was supposed to be looking at the inside of the wooden door.
Someone had spray-painted, about a foot high, in bright red: AAAA, so the letters overlapped.
‘Aaaarg?’
I asked Prentice, but this time he didn't smile.
‘The four As, sometimes they just put figure 4 and capital A. It stands for Action Against Animal Abuse.’
‘So we are talking animal libbers.’
‘Not your average Flag Day collectors or the sort who give out leaflets on market day.
These are the animal fundamentalists organized into hit squads.
The SAS of the animal rights movement.
Let's get inside, the rain's set in for the day.’
Prentice kicked the iron block away so the fire door slammed behind us.
He motioned towards the classroom door with the ‘Blue Tit Patrol’ sign.
‘Look in here.’
I went in first and all I saw was standard classroom with a blackboard down one wall, two lines of plain tables and some wooden chairs.
A broken chair lay on its side in the far corner, its two front legs about a yard away.
‘So?’
I shrugged.
‘The caretaker swears blind that there were no broken chairs in here on Friday.’
‘You've lost me,’ I said truthfully, parking my bum on the edge of a table.
Prentice pulled out a chair and sat down.
‘I think your friend Billy and his fellow commandos were a bit peeved to find themselves here after the horse had bolted, so to speak.’
‘Or the donkey,’ I added helpfully.
He ignored me.
‘I think there's a good chance that Billy was brought in here and asked a few nasty questions by his fellow liberationists and maybe there was a fight.’
He stood up and picked up his chair in a sweeping movement.
‘I think Billy might just have been desperate enough to smash that chair over somebody's head so he could make a run for it.’
‘Hang on a minute.
Just rewind that, would you.
Why should Billy's Action Man friends take it out on him — unless  they thought he'd set them up?’
I was getting a bad feeling deep down about what I was saying.
‘Unless they thought he was a plant or a snitch?’
‘You've been watching too much Hill Street Blues,’ he said.
‘We still call them grasses over here.
And yes, Billy was contemplating becoming my grass.’
‘You make it sound like a mid-life career move.
Does it come with a personal pension plan?’
‘Billy was into some serious shit with these loonies.
It sounds trivial — what's a bit of spray-painting?
Who would notice?
But believe me, whatever they had really intended to do here was just the opening shot in their Christmas campaign nationally.’
‘And they aim to be in Paris by spring?’
I did my ‘let's invade Poland’ impersonation, which isn't very funny at the best of times.
It didn't impress Prentice one bit.
‘Don't underestimate these people,’ he said seriously.
‘Why should I?’
I asked, meaning: What business is it of mine?
He didn't answer and I should have walked away then and there.
If I'm not more careful, I won't live to see thirty.
Again.
‘I figure he went over the fence here,’ said Prentice when we were outside in the rain once more.
‘Why not go out the front gate, the way they came in?’
‘Perhaps there was somebody on lookout in a car or something.
They must have had transport.
I found some fibres here.’
Prentice pointed to the top of the fence.
‘A; most certainly from Billy's jeans, and there was a rubber skid mark from his shoes.’
‘And then where?’
I asked, adding: ‘Not that I'm interested, but you're going to tell me.’
‘Take a look.’
I grabbed the top of the fence and pulled myself up until I could rest my forearms there, keeping myself about a foot  off the ground by skidding the toes of my trainers — only cleaned last week as well — into the wet wood.
On the other side was the back door of the first house in the Dwyer Street terrace, which ended down the road with Sunil's at No. 16.
Although probably built as a row by some Victorian property magnate, all the houses were slightly different from the front and all had been built on to or extended differently at the back.
This first one would be No. 2, with odd-numbered houses on the other side of the road.
Somebody at sometime had converted the scullery and outside privy into a modern, one-storey kitchen.
I leaned further over until I could see down the line of houses.
Most of them had similar extensions.
No. 2's fitted on to half the back of the house, leaving a downstairs and an upstairs window free.
The extension's roof sloped up at forty-five degrees to within about four feet of the roof proper.
The owner, wisely not trusting London tap water for his greenhouse, had installed a network of guttering to catch rainwater in a pair of large aluminium beer barrels (worth over a hundred quid to the brewery and a thousand a ton to the illegal smelting operations over in Barking).
The barrels had holes cut in the top to funnel the rainwater in and plastic taps knocked into the side to let it out.
It was perfectly possible to see how Billy could have vaulted the fence, got on to the kitchen roof via one of the barrels and from there on to the main roof and all the connecting ones down to Sunil's house.
If you were desperate enough, it was the only way to travel, but on a frosty night in the middle of December, you had to be desperate.
‘The caretaker's house?’
I asked.
‘He didn't hear a thing,’ Prentice said, nodding.
Well, neither had I until Billy had either slipped or tried to open that skylight window.
I lowered myself down off the fence.
‘So?’
‘So Billy Tuckett gets badly scared and starts running for where he thinks his old friend Lucy Scarrott lives.’
‘I'd got that far.
I meant, so what's it got to do with me?’
‘You knew Billy…’
‘Like hell.
Briefly and very much in the past tense, and I don't mean 'cos he's dead.
I knew him once, a long time ago.
I don't see where I come into this at all.’
‘What if Billy knew Lucy wasn't there and it was you he was running to?’
‘Impossible.’
‘Sure?’
‘He hasn't seen me or thought about me for ten years as far as I'm aware and he couldn't have known I'd be in that house.
How many more times?’
‘OK.’
He put his hands in his pockets and walked off.
I caught up with him half way to the gates.
‘You said Billy was your grass.
Who was he grassing on?’
‘I don't know.’
Prentice didn't stop walking but he slowed.
‘We never got that far.
He was worried about what the cell was planning, thought they were going too far and he was almost ready to come over.’
‘Cell?
What are you talking about?’
Prentice began to swing the schoolyard gate shut.
‘The 4As are organized on a cell basis, with four or five members per group.
Each acts independently but to a central timetable.
This — whatever it was they planned — was just one of eight incidents across the country on Sunday night.
This one came to nothing, but you must have read about the others.’
‘No, I don't take much notice of newspapers.’
His look made me feel guilty, though I couldn't think why it should.
‘We found incendiary bombs in department stores in Leicester and Huddersfield — fortunately before they'd gone  off.
A chicken farmer in Norfolk had the front of his house sprayed with liquid manure and a pharmaceutical laboratory was broken into in South Wales and about fifty white mice released.’
‘That means there'll be a hundred on the run by now.’
He squared up to me.
‘These people are not funny.
4A is out on a limb compared to any of the animal rights organizations which have gone before.
Pretty soon they're going to kill somebody.’
‘Aw, get out of town.
You're winding me up.’
He began to unlock his car door.
‘If you won't help, fair enough.
I'll see you at the inquest.’
‘Help?
How the hell can I help?
And why should I?’
He held the Escort door open.
‘Billy came to me because he was in with a bunch of fanatics.
That's what he called them, and he was worried because something big was coming up and it would get out of control.
He wouldn't say any more until he'd had a chance to talk it over with a friend, he said.’
‘And you think that was me?’
I snapped.
I was getting ratty and the rain was going down the back of my neck.
‘Or Lucy Scarrott or maybe somebody else.
You knew Billy.
You could find his friends, find out what he was into.’
‘A bit thin, isn't it?’
‘You're a! l I've got.’
‘And why should I?’
He exhaled slowly and rested a forearm on the top of the car door.
‘Billy dropping in on you was a big coincidence and we don't like coincidences, so further investigation may be necessary.’
He put his head on one side, but kept a straight face.
‘If I read you right, you're not the kind who would welcome further investigation much.’
‘You mean really deep, persistent scrutiny and monitoring of my day to day existence?
What a less law-abiding, trusting soul might well call harassment if they were feeling uncharitable?’
He smiled and climbed into his car.
‘Remember, the Force is with you.’
I let him get clear before I turned Armstrong around and cruised down Dwyer Street.
Nassim's battered Nissan (Nassim Nassim's Nissan?
Why couldn't he have a Ford?) was outside No. 16 and there was a builder's flat-backed truck parked in front of it.
They would be repairing the skylight, I guessed correctly, and were probably a firm Nassim had shares in so he could fiddle the invoices for the insurance company.
I popped in to see what the form was, and to find out if I'd been fired as a house-sitter.
That was all I had in mind, but I ended up, five minutes later, knowing something the police and the probation service didn't know.
I found out where Lucy Scarrott was living.
And I should have kept it to myself.
CHAPTER 4
Of course I didn't realize at the time just how deep I'd get in and I can't be blamed for not seeing what would happen in the end.
As far as I'm concerned, a Tarot card is of no use unless it fits one of those hole-in-the-wall banks, preferably on somebody else's account.
(The bank card I want to get hold of is the one issued by an Arab bank called Watani Express.
No kidding, a credit card with a camel instead of a hologram!)
To be honest, I didn't give it much thought.
The morning was wasting away and I was on a promise to deliver women for Simon down in Southwark.
Simon the Stripping Vicar had also in his time been Simon  the Sex Ton, the Curvy Curate and even the Randy Rabbi.
You name it, he's taken off the clothes for it.
He used to work for an outfit in the City called Even Rudergrams, but about a year ago the market fell right out of the bottom of the stripping kissogram girl (or boy) business, and the company packed up and moved into something else.
Probably private health insurance or personal pensions.
Ever wondered where the old door-to-door encyclopaedia salesmen went?
Simon bought up the costume store and set himself up in premises in Southwark, under the name Snogogram International.
It was basically the same old idea of stripping kissograms but he had one or two speciality lines.
The most popular was undoubtedly the stripping policewoman or traffic warden — always good for a laugh among London's paranoia-ravaged motorists.
Once, when very drunk, Simon had phoned me late one night to try out a new concept, the ‘Uzi-O-Gram’, which had the catchline ‘Shoot up your girlfriend's wedding, just for fun!
’ I had explained that while this was probably in the best of taste and unlikely to be very illegal, it was already being done in California and he'd be pushed to get third party insurance cover.
This latter piece of logic was the clincher and he dropped the idea as soon as he sobered up, the following week.
He had come up with one idea, though, which had turned out to be a blinder at Christmastime.
He called it Boozebusters and the idea was that wives (and more rarely, husbands) who were fed up with their partner's non-stop round of office parties would hire a Boozebuster squad to snatch the miscreant from the pub, or wine-bar or restaurant or even the office itself at a pre-arranged time.
Needless to say, the ‘snatch squad’(yes, I know, but that's what they called themselves) were usually scantily-clad kissogram girls armed with water-pistols and cans of projectile shaving foam.
The girls all had wodges of visiting cards in their stocking tops which they threw as they grabbed their victim, and these had the Boozebusters logo — a picture of a drunk  in a red circle, with a red slash — and Simon's phone number on them.
That Christmas, the Boozebuster girls were the sharpest thing in town.
Naturally, Armstrong was the perfect vehicle for transporting a hit team, especially if they were dressed as policewomen.
At Christmastime in the City these days, there were more fancy dress police than real ones.
I checked in with Simon just after twelve.
‘Got a good one for you, Roy,’ he said.
‘A four-hander at the Princess Louise in Holborn.
Know it?’
‘Do fish swim?
There's no parking around there.’
I like to think Simon paid me for my expertise.
‘That's why I wanted Armstrong,’ he said.
OK, so he paid me for my taxi.
I didn't mind, I was happy that he still talked to me at all.
I'd once had to miss a rendezvous with him after he'd done his own stripping vicar act for some giggling secretary's twenty-first birthday and he'd shot out of the pub stark bollock naked to find me somewhere else.
Ever-resourceful, he'd stolen a copy of the Evening Standard to hide his blushes and gone home by Underground.
The Snogogram building wasn't really a building, it was a converted railway arch.
There was just one room, rather like a small warehouse.
Simon had a desk and three telephones near the door and the rest of the place was taken up with racks of costumes and boxes of party stuff such as balloons and streamers.
There was even a cardboard birthday cake about ten feet across which a couple of girls could leap out of if somebody paid for their time and the hire of a van.
I sat on the edge of Simon's desk as there were no chairs.
Behind it were several sets of screens at different angles, behind which the stripogrammers or Boozebusters got changed.
‘What time?’
I asked him.
‘About two-ish.
It's some guy called Harding and its his  last work day before he goes on holiday.
His secretary —’
He broke off as a natural brunette called Kim came from behind one of the screens.
She was wearing a red basque and matching knickers, with four suspender straps hanging loose around her white thighs.
It was a nice piece of lingerie but I'd never worked out why they named it after Spanish terrorists
‘Will you do this bleedin' thing up for me?’
She offered Simon the drawstrings round the top of the basque.
‘Oh, hi, Angel.
Christ, but it's as cold as a witch's tit back there, ever thought of investing in any heating, Simon?’
Simon didn't answer, just turned in his swivel chair and began lacing up the front of Kim's basque while still giving me my instructions.
'— his secretary has ordered a full four-hander policewomen buster to make sure he's back in the office by two-thirty so he can sign all the staff's petty cash vouchers.
He is a bit of a late lunch merchant, by all accounts.’
He finished tying a big bow dead on Kim's cleavage and as she turned to go, she winked at me.
‘Here's his office address.’
Simon had swivelled back to me and handed me a piece of paper with an address in Theobalds Road.
I was watching Kim walk back to the screens.
She was holding a suspender in each hand like she had a skipping rope.
I had a bizarre thought.
Maybe they named the Spanish terrorists after…
‘No problem,’ I drawled, checking the address.
‘Who else is coming?’
A full four-hander meant that two girls dressed as policewomen would go into the pub, locate the victim and intimidate him in front of his office cronies, then start taking their clothes off.
Two others, wearing raincoats over their underwear, would be waiting at the bar or similar, ready to join the fray shouting ‘Boozebusters’ and things like ‘Your wife/secretary/boss is taking you out of here now!’and then  they would spray foam, throw cards, pop party-poppers and so on and drag the victim out to a waiting fast car.
Or in this case, Armstrong.
Suitable scenes of red-faced hilarity would occur back at the office as someone always tipped off the entire staff to be ready at the front door.
It was not unusual for the orderer of the Boozebuster to specify a long route back to the office to give the victim's fellow revellers time to get back ahead of him.
‘Kim and Jacqui will be the cops, Frances and Eddie will shadow them with the shaving foam and stuff,’ said Simon, like it was Normandy beach 1944.
‘And my mission, should I decide to accept it?’
He looked at me blankly.
Surely he wasn't too young to remember Mission Impossible.
Oh God, he couldn't be, could he?
‘Make sure they don't leave their coats — or their underwear — hanging over the beer pumps.’
He looked up at me sharply.
‘This time.’
I looked suitably abashed.
I honestly thought he would have forgotten the Marquis of Granby incident.
I looked at my watch.
‘Have I got time to do a quick errand?
Just round the corner.’
He looked at his watch; a liquid crystal Roger Rabbit affair.
Trendier than my Tissot Seastar, but not as expensive.
It's the little things that count, I always say.
‘I was hoping you could pick up Eddie from the Blackfriars at one sharp.
She's doing a birthday kissogram before she shadows the Holborn job.’
‘Can do.
I only want to pick something up from Union Street, so it's on the way.’
‘Don't be late,’ Simon said seriously.
‘I won't be,’ I answered equally straight.
I'd worked with Eddie on a Boozebuster before.
She was a large lady, happily married with three kids, without a chemical trace of inhibition in her body.
If any Boozebuster  victim decided he didn't actually want to go back to the office or home to his wife, Eddie would gently, but very publicly, take hold of him by what she called his ‘wedding tackle’ and lead him out of the pub.
I wouldn't have believed it if I hadn't seen it with my own slightly watering eyes.
No way would I keep Eddie waiting.
I yelled a See Yer to Kim along with some friendly advice about not letting her thighs get too cold.
Simon muttered something under his breath about ‘that would show up the teeth marks’ which both of us hoped she didn't hear.
I knew the Blackfriars well enough.
It was a smartly restored pub which lovingly recreated the interior design of its psychopathic creator a hundred years ago.
The main bar had an alcove with more marble than Lord Elgin could have handled, and, at the northern end of Blackfriars Bridge, it was over-popular with the lunch-time City crowd who thought it daring to venture across the river.
This close to Christmas it would be packed solid and I doubted if Eddie would be out on time, but I wasn't going to risk it.
I stopped at the Duke of Wellington — a scruffy corner boozer off Union Street — just long enough to buy two cheese rolls and a can of low-al lager to go.
There were few customers and the landlady had been leaning over the bar reading the Daily Mirror.
‘Haven't seen you for a while, Mac,’ she said, tight-lipped as she dropped the cheese rolls into a brown paper bag.
I suddenly realized she was talking to me.
She thought my surname was Maclean.
‘I've been working up north,’ I smiled, convinced that for her the North began at Cannon Street.
‘That's rare.’
I wasn't sure whether she was referring to regional unemployment figures or the fact that I claimed to have actually worked for once.
‘Sound system OK?’
I nodded to the twin tape-deck behind the bar as she counted out my change.
I'd rigged it for her a while back in part payment for temporary accommodation after the house I'd lived in in Southwark had accidentally been sort of totally damaged.
I'd recorded some background music for her too and it didn't sound as if she'd added to her collection.
‘Not much call for it these days,’ she said sullenly.
I gave up trying to remember her husband's name so I could ask after him.
From the look of things, it was odds on he'd done a runner with either the till, a barmaid or the Christmas Club fund.
Maybe all three.
‘There hasn't been any post for me by any chance, has there, Iris?’
She shook her head.
‘Phone bill, electricity bill and a notice saying the rates are going up.
And that was just the second post.’
‘I'm expecting something from an old friend and I just remembered he only has this address for me.’
‘Nothing's come here, luv.
I'll keep it for you if it does.
It'd be quite exciting to get somebody else's mail for once.’
She went back to her Daily Mirror.
‘Well…er…
’ I couldn't think of much else to say.
‘I'll call in tomorrow, just in case.’
‘You do that, Mac,’ she said without looking up.
‘Maybe we'll be less busy.
Maybe you'll have a drink next time.’
No wonder the customers were staying away in droves.
I picked up Eddie just as it started to rain again, and we chatted all the way back to Simon's office while she dressed herself in street clothes from a Sainsbury's shopping-bag.
(That's how you know when you're going to be kissogrammed.
Watch for the woman with her hair up, dressed  in a raincoat, who leaves a shopping-bag near the bar after a quick word with the barman.
Of course, if you get it wrong, she's a terrorist and you've got about ten seconds to finish your drink.)
After she got out, more or less decent now, I readjusted the rear-view mirror back to its driving position and followed her in.
Simon was on one phone at his desk, grunting a lot but not saying much.
I motioned to the other phone and he waved me go ahead, so I parked a buttock on the edge of the desk and fished out a scrap of paper — a cigarette paper — from my wallet.
The number pencilled on it was Zaria's work place.
Or so Zaria had assured me.
‘Aurora Corona,’ said a fruity voice.
What?’
‘Aurora Corona Rest Home, who is this?’
Where did they get a name like that?
I thought that was a Mexican beer.
‘Er…
I'd like to speak to…’
‘No telephone calls accepted for residents —’ I wondered how long it had taken him to break the habit of saying ‘inmates’—‘during luncheon.’
‘Actually, it was one of your staff I was —’
‘I'm sorry —’ Oh no you weren't' — hut we do not accept personal calls until after four p.m.’
‘But it's important.’
‘Who did you wish to speak to?’ he mellowed.
‘Zaria.’
‘Hmmm.
Is it an emergency?’
‘Yes.’
‘Are you a relative?’
‘Yes.
It's family business.’
‘Zaria who?’ oh shit.
‘Pardon?’
‘Which Zaria?
We may have several on the staff:’
You bastard.
I hung up.
That would teach me to pay more attention, and to put names to phone numbers.
Now they were unfashionable, maybe it would be OK to get a Filofax.
No.
Things weren't that bad.
The Boozebuster went off without a hitch.
The unsuspecting and very sloshed Mr Harding was bundled out of the pub and into the back of Armstrong with the four girls in various stages of undress.
It was a bit of a squash but he didn't seem to mind and I'd put on a tape of golden oldies (stuff from around 1985) for them to sing along to.
Before we got to his office he'd persuaded Kim and Eddie (with a fistful of notes) to come with him and start another party at his local wine-bar after he'd ‘cleared his desk’.
I took Jacqui and Frances back to Southwark and collected my wages from Simon.
Then I headed north in the general direction of Redbridge to the Aurora Borealis Bide-A-Wee rest home or whatever they called it, determined to get Zaria well sorted.
The clever devil who'd answered the phone had said private calls after four p.m., which I guessed would be a shift change for the staff.
I remembered something Zaria had said about clocking on at eight in the morning and eight-to-four seemed a reasonable working day.
Well, to some people.
To me it sounded depressing.
With the traffic thickening and the street lights coming on, it would be after four when I got there.
London traffic now moves at an average speed of eleven miles per hour.
Cabs carrying Sherlock Holmes did better than that, and you couldn't grow roses using Armstrong's exhaust.
I was thinking about life, the universe and how much I liked Kim Carnes's voice (a voice that makes you regret moving to filter cigarettes) on the tape-deck when I began to conjure up a mental picture of Billy Tuckett.
At first it was back in university days again and then, suddenly, him  lying all bloody in Sunil's bathtub and it wasn't even funny bizarre any more.
It wasn't a vision or a psychic experience or a message from above.
(Falling over is God's way of telling you the bar's about to shut in my book.)
Maybe it was delayed shock.
Maybe it was drugs.
I made a note to get some.
I don't know what it was.
I just found Armstrong heading towards Lucy Scarrott.
On the speakers, Kim Carnes was feeling it in the air and praising the Universal Song.
I just love the old romantic ones.
So I'll blame her.
When I'd called in at Sunil's place after Prentice had driven off, Nassim was on the landing yelling orders to the builders who were crashing around in the bathroom.
It was as if he didn't actually want to go near the scene of the crime and I couldn't blame him.
The police had done a reasonable job of cleaning up and had put a plastic sheet over the hole in the window to keep the rain out.
A couple of lads who looked as if they were moonlighting from a Youth Training Scheme were trying to reglaze the window from the inside, underneath the plastic so their haircuts didn't get damp.
I hoped Nassim was making enough on the insurance claim to have the job done properly in the not-too-distant future.
‘Everything OK?’
I asked cheerily.
‘No more deadmen, if that's what you mean,’ snarled Nassim.
‘You be careful of those tiles!’ he yelled towards the boys in the bathroom who were setting up a step-ladder in the bath.
‘You'll make good any damages.’
‘He wasn't a burglar,’ I said, joining Nassim at the top of the stairs.
‘Who is a burglar?’
‘Nobody is.
The man who fell through the roof wasn't after any of the family jewels.
He didn't have a striped jersey or a bag marked Swag as far as the Old Bill are concerned.’
Nassim winced at the sound of breaking glass from the bathroom, but it was only the remaining splinters of the old stuff coming down.
I got interested as well.
I love to watch people work when they have obviously no idea what they're doing.
‘What are you talking about?
Can't you see I'm busy?’
‘The dead man wasn't a burglar is what I'm saying.
You can relax on that score.’
‘Not my house,’ he said, not looking at me but straining to see round the bathroom door.
‘Just my bloody money!’
At last, emotion.
I was getting to him.
‘OK then, Sunil can relax.’
‘He's coming home.
Mind that paintwork, you!’
‘What?’
‘I rang him last night and he's flying back today or tomorrow.
I think it a good excuse to get away from his family.
I don't blame him.
I don't like them either.’
‘I thought you were related.’
He looked at me as if I'd crawled out from under the Axminster.
‘We are.
Hey!
That toilet seat just will not take your weight!’
I shook my head and wondered if there was any room spare on the next space shuttle.
‘Well, you won't be needing me here then, will you?’
‘Correct.’
‘I'll get my gear together, then.’
That wouldn't take long.
I was wearing most of it.
‘I suppose the rent amnesty's off as well?’
‘Double correct.’
Merry Christmas.
‘Anyway, tell Sunil it wasn't my fault.’
He looked daggers at me, so I pressed on before they drew blood.
‘The guy wasn't a burglar, he was coming here because he used to know someone who lived here before.’
‘Oh, the Cat Woman,’ Nassim said casually, then yelled: ‘Care-ful!’as part of the window-frame dropped on to the bathroom carpet.
‘I know I'm going to regret this,’ I said, but still said it.
‘This…er…
Cat Woman, she wouldn't be called Scarrott, would she?’
Nassim still kept his eyes on the lads in the bathroom, one of whom had produced a seven-pound hammer from his tool-bag, but reached for his wallet pocket and produced a broken-spined red leather diary.
He wet a finger and flicked through some of the loose pages at the back.
‘Here we are.
Lucy Scarrott, 28 Geneva Street, Highbury.’
That was up near the Arsenal football ground.
I knew that from when I'd gone to watch them play in the past, but I'd been cured of insomnia for some time now.
‘How do you know that?’
‘Know what?’
‘Where she lives?’
He looked at me pityingly.
‘When we bought this place from her, she had nowhere to go.
She did not tell Sunil this until the exchange of contracts.
She was one totally disorganized lady.
So I — I —’ he jabbed himself in the chest with a finger' — had to find her alternative accommodations.’
‘One of your bedsits?’
‘For a couple of months, yes.
Her and her smelly cats.
I do not approve of animal pets in my properties.’
‘And why should you?’
I asked, looking down at my feet.
‘And I also had to take her furniture into store until she found this house in Highbury.
Then she telephones one day and says she wants her stuff delivered bloody quick.
Not one word of thanks do I get from her or from Sunil or his wife…
Hey!’
One of the apprentice glaziers had lit up a wide-mouth blowtorch.
‘When was this?’
I asked quickly.
‘Six, seven months ago.’
‘And she bought this place in Highbury?’
‘Bought?
Rent?
How should 1 know?
Said she wanted somewhere better to bring up her baby.’
‘She had a baby?’
‘One baby and maybe twenty-seven cats.
The place smelled awful as soon as she moved in.
What is he doing?’
He pointed to the lad with the blowtorch.
‘I think he's going to weld the new window into place.
Have a nice day.’
I jogged down the stairs while he began to argue with the builders.
I didn't fancy being around when Sunil got back to check his library.
So that's how I was heading north-west towards Highbury and Lucy instead of north and east to Zaria.
I'd get to her later hopefully before Sunil got to me.
But I still wasn't sure why.
Perhaps it was Nassim's mention of the baby that sparked me off, however subconsciously.
Perhaps I thought that if it was Billy's kid, then somebody had to tell Lucy the bad news and if she was skipping probation, it had better not be the cops.
But then, if it was Billy's kid, why didn't he know she didn't live on Dwyer Street any more?
One fact I did recognize and hang on to was that late afternoon was the best time to find a young mother at home.
Even if you didn't know anything about baby-feeding times, a quick look at the TV schedules would tell you that.
The programme planners assumed that most women's brains came out with the baby.
If I was a young mother I'd write in and demand re-runs of Joseph Losey movies or continuous showings of Jewel in the Crown, but then I'd never get to learn about biological cleaners working at low temperatures.
Geneva Street was a row of identical terraced houses without even different front-door paint jobs to distinguish them.
No. 28 was noticeable only because it did not have  net curtains, just long, dark purple ones which were almost drawn across the front room window.
I could see the flicker of a television set reflected in the glass, though.
I'd been right about the biological cleaners.
I parked Armstrong round the corner and walked back to press the doorbell of 28.
Before the two note ding-dong had faded, a baby had started to howl inside.
And howl, and howl.
Eventually, the door opened an inch on a chain thick enough to restrain a Rottweiler.
A lock of blonde hair and the edge of some round gold-rimmed glasses appeared at my chest height, and I'm not that tall.
I almost asked if her sister was in, then the tone of voice which said, ‘Yes, what is it?’ told me that wouldn't be too clever.
‘Er…
Lucy Scarrott?’
‘Who wants to know?’
I couldn't blame her.
I do the same if someone I've never seen comes up and uses one of my names.
Sometimes I do it if I know them quite well.
‘My name's Roy,’ I said round the corner of the door.
‘I wanted a word about Billy Tuckett.’
‘Billy's not here.
I haven't seen him in over a year.’
From behind her the baby's howl turned to a high-pitched whine, like Concorde warming up.
‘I've got to go.
Tell him he'll have to stand on his own two feet.’
The door began to close and I put out a hand to stop it.
‘I can't.
There's been an accident.’
The door eased back against the chain.
‘How bad an accident?’
‘The worse kind,’ I said, hoping it didn't sound flip.
‘He's dead?’ said the blonde voice after ten seconds silence.
‘I'm afraid so.’
More silence, then she said: ‘I'm sorry.
Thank you for  letting me know.’
And then she closed the door, leaving me on the step in the rain.
For a minute or so, I just stood there.
I hadn't really known what to expect, but it wasn't this.
To my left I saw the long purple curtains twitch in the window and for a moment I thought it was her just making sure I'd gone.
But then they twitched again and I looked down to see, just above the sill, the curls and bright blue eyes of a snub-nosed child.
I crouched down so that we were eyeballing each other and began to pull funny faces, the sort of expressions you do in traffic jams when you don't think anyone's watching.
The kid began to laugh and steam up the window-pane, then started slapping the glass with a tiny hand leaving greasy fingerprints.
After about two minutes of this, I heard the door open.
‘Was there anything else you wanted?’ she said.
I had to take my thumbs out of my nostrils and uncross my eyes before I answered.
‘I wouldn't mind a chat about Billy, if that's all right.’
I drew a pattern in the raindrops on the window for the kid while she thought about it.
The kid laughed loud enough for me to hear and then the chain snicked off.
‘You'd better come in,’ she said.
‘Before the Neighbourhood Watch get you.’
It wouldn't be the first time, but I didn't say it.
She led me into the front room where, defensively, she picked up the baby.
She was only about five feet tall, if that, and the kid, a big healthy specimen, seemed to be only a few inches off the floor.
Lucy and the kid were wearing matching outfits, jeans and blue sweatshirts with World Wildlife Fund patches.
The kid had bright yellow socks on, Lucy was barefoot and her hair was longer and she wore glasses.
Otherwise there wasn't that much difference.
The baby pointed at me and said: ‘Der…da-dat…’
‘You have a lovely daughter,’ I said, shaking my head slightly to stop raindrops running into my eyes.
She looked impressed.
‘Most men think Cleo is a boy just because I don't dress her in pink frocks.’
It had been a fifty-fifty chance, but it's better to be lucky than good.
(Rule of Life No. 1.)
‘The pink for a girl, blue for a boy thing was probably thought up by men just to help them identify their kids without having to resort to close inspection.
How old is she?’
‘Sixteen months.’
‘So she was born when you lived in Leytonstone?’
‘What is this?
What the hell has that got to do with anything?’
‘I'm sorry.’
I must have moved towards her as she took half a step back.
I indicated a chair and she nodded that it was OK for me to sit down.
She relaxed visibly as soon as I did so.
Now she was looking down at me.
‘I'd better come clean,’ I said.
‘I was in the house you used to own in Dwyer Street on Sunday.
Billy Tuckett fell off the roof and killed himself.’
‘What?’
She let Cleo slide over her thigh and down on to the floor.
The kid toddled off like a drunk trying to balance two pints of beer.
‘I don't know any other way of saying it.’
I did but not so she wouldn't scream.
‘He fell off the roof and killed himself.’
‘Suicide?’
She sat down herself but her face remained blank.
In a good light she could pass for sixteen.
‘No, no way.
It was an accident.
We think he might have been trying to find you.’
‘We?’
Suddenly suspicious.
‘Just who is we?’
‘Look, lady —’ little Cleo staggered back into the room  clutching a bright red balloon' — I just happened to be there, looking after the place while the owner was away.
That was my first bit of bad luck.
The second bit was that I had to identify Billy.
I knew him, back in student days but I hadn't seen him for ten years.’
Cleo ran to Lucy and hit her around the knees with the balloon shouting ‘Doon…doon.’
Lucy reached out and ruffled Cleo's curls.
‘I haven't seen him myself for about a year,’ she said quietly.
‘He called round one day and saw Cleo there and after that…
I think Cleo was a shock to him.’
‘Is…was…?’
‘Don't be  embarrassed , I'm not.
No, Billy wasn't the father.
That's why it was a shock to him.’
Cleo tore off towards a fold-up dining-room table on which a hairy brown cat I hadn't noticed until now had begun to stir and stretch.
‘Dat…dat…dat…’ yelled Cleo, pointing at the animal which wisely stayed just out of her reach.
‘Cleo's a constant source of worry,’ said Lucy vaguely.
‘Seems fighting fit to me,’ I said.
‘It's her words,’ Lucy went on almost as if I wasn't there.
‘Everything she says starts with a ‘D’.
She can't seem to get her mouth round anything else.’
‘Don't worry, it'll come,’ I said paternally, but not too much.
‘Was…er…
Billy…’
‘Expecting to be the father?
No.
I think even Billy knew you had to sleep with somebody before that happened.
Billy and I were just good friends, really good mates.
That's all.
Can you believe that?’
‘Sure.
Why shouldn't I?’
‘Most men can't, or won't.’
Cleo did another circuit of the room and emerged from behind a chair with a well-sucked Teddy Bear.
‘Ded…
Ded…’ she cooed as she hugged it.
‘Billy moved away to work —’ she hesitated for a fraction  of a second' — out of London about three years ago and I started seeing someone and Cleo was the result.
Billy came back just before I sold the house in Dwyer Street and saw her when she was a baby.
Yes, I can see what you're thinking.
He was disappointed in me, I think.
Anyway, I didn't see him again.
And now I don't suppose I ever will.’
She leaned over and hugged Cleo, who put a delicate finger on her mother's nose as she whispered: ‘Dose…’
‘Did you tell Billy you were moving out?’
‘I didn't tell anybody I was…’
She looked at me accusingly.
‘How the hell did you find me?’
‘Mr Nassim,’ I said quickly.
‘The guy who looked after your furniture.
The guy who helped buy your house.
He's my landlord.
I was doing him a favour looking after the house over Christmas.’
‘Have you told anyone else?’
‘No.
Any reason why I shouldn't?’
‘I don't want Cleo's father to find us.’
She stood up.
‘I'm sorry about Billy, but I don't see what it has to do with me or how I can help you.
Just what are you trying to do anyway?’
‘I'm not sure,’ I said, more or less honestly.
‘Maybe just laying a ghost.
There'll have to be a funeral.’
‘There usually is.
Thanks, but no thanks.
I have my own problems.’
Just for a moment I thought I saw a flicker of emotion in her eyes, but it was probably a trick of the light.
‘You and Billy were into animal rights campaigning, weren't you?’
That stumped her for a few seconds, then she opened the door to the hallway for me.
‘That was a long time ago.
You'd better go now, I have to get Cleo's tea.’
There didn't seem to be any point in pushing it, so I made to leave.
‘Bye, Cleo.’
I waved to the toddling girl who was over  by the window again, banging a fist on the pane and watching the rain drizzle down.
‘Dith…dith…dith…’ she said to herself.
I don't know why Lucy was worried about the kid.
I could understand every word she said.
It was dithing it down outside.
CHAPTER 5
It was dark and well stormy by the time I got to the Aurora Corona Rest Home and the residents were probably battened down for the night.
I parked Armstrong on the road and walked down the short drive to the impressive Gothic porch around the front door.
That at least had a light showing and at first I thought the rest of the building was in total darkness, but as I crunched gravel and got closer I could see they used extra thick curtains, maybe left-overs from the Blackout.
They'd help deaden the screams.
I got wet again, as the rain had set in in stair-rods.
The interior of Armstrong was beginning to smell of wet dogs and that just added to my bad mood.
Since lunch-time I'd done nothing except be in the company of women, hanging around in pubs or crawling through traffic.
I was getting hungry and frustrated because I hadn't been able to enjoy any of it.
There was a printed card fixed above the doorbell which told me I had about ten minutes before visiting times were up.
I pressed it and there was a buzz and a click and the door opened an inch by itself.
I shook the rain out of my hair and wiped my feet on the doormat, then stepped into the porch and tried the inner door.
That opened into a hallway with a huge open staircase, almost certainly pinched from an older house, and a reception desk.
If it hadn't been so quiet, it could have been Paddington station during a commuter cull.
The hallway and various passages off it were full of visitors helping pyjama-ed relatives in and out of chairs, plumping cushions for them or fetching magazines from a well-stocked rack, or encouraging them to that last little drop of cocoa from what seemed to be a standard issue purple mug.
None of the wrinklies — sorry, shouldn't be ageist — looked remotely grateful or pleased to see their visitors and the feeling was probably mutual.
They needed something to stimulate them, even I could see that, to dispel the overwhelming atmosphere of gloom.
I thought about leaving a few of Simon's visiting cards around, or suggesting they all get together and build a glider in the loft, but then I saw the frosty-eyed Matron in a blue uniform and matching hair rinse clocking me from behind the desk.
I was on borrowed time.
Better turn on the blag.
‘Good evening, Matron,’ I beamed, walking straight towards her.
‘I hope you don't mind me arriving without an appointment like this but I understood you had an Open Door policy.’
She looked as if she didn't know what I was talking about, which was OK.
That made two of us.
‘I am right, aren't I?’
I pressed on.
‘You do encourage potential residents to call in and inspect at any time, don't you?’
‘Well, actually —’ she began.
‘Of course, it's not for myself.’
Big joke, smile, show the good teeth to full effect.
‘It's my grandmother.’
‘Your grandmother?’
‘A marvellous lady.
Eighty-seven going on fifty-five, as we say in the family.’
‘She's…?’
‘Yes, you've guessed.
She's just getting too much for my sister to handle and what with me being abroad so much…
Even with Concorde I'm away for long periods nowadays.’
Steady on, don't overdo it.
‘So I thought I'd strike while the iron was hot so to speak and we were just passing and so here we are.’
‘Your grandmother's here?’
‘Well, outside in a taxi actually.
She has her things with her —’
‘I'm sorry but this is highly —’
‘And we've been recommended to you by one of your staff, I believe.
A Miss Zania, is it?
She gets on very well with my grandmother, in fact she's one of the few young people she'll actually listen to when —’
‘Sorry, we don't have…
Oh, you must mean Zaria.’
‘Zaria?’
I played dumb, having been cut off in mid-flow.
‘Zaria Inhadi.
She's one of our staff nurses.
Or rather…’
Behind me I heard one of the elderly male residents say to his visitor: ‘Oh God, it's her.’
Then another toothless male voice said loudly: ‘Quick, son, stand in front of me, she's coming.’
I sneaked a glance to my left but all I could see was a rather attractive young nurse wheeling a chair-ridden white-haired old dear down the corridor towards us.
‘I'm sorry?’
I concentrated on the Matron.
It was important not to give her thinking time.
‘You were saying…about Nurse Zaria?’
‘I'm afraid she's not here any more.
She gave her notice in and left yesterday.
She had family problems.
It was very sudden.’
‘Good Lord, my grandmother will be most disappointed.
Zaria was one of the few people who could control her when she had the moods.’
‘Well, there's nothing I can do about that,’ she said stiffly.
‘And it is certainly most unusual just to turn up on the doorstep like this, Mr…?’
‘Prentice,’ I said off the top of my head.
Behind me, one of the men seated in the hall whispered urgently: ‘For God's sake stand in front of me, son.’
I still couldn't see what the problem was but the whole hallway area had gone suspiciously quiet.
The pretty nurse with her wheelchaired lady was nearer and I could read ‘Sally’ on her white uniform badge.
‘I really don't see how we can accommodate your dear grandmother at such short notice…
’ Matron plugged on.
Then I realized most of the visitors and all the residents were watching me and I turned my head from side to side to see why I was getting that uncomfortable my-flies-must-be-open feeling.
As ‘Sally’ came level, we made eye contact and I smiled politely at her.
The rubber wheels of the chair she was pushing squeaked on the tiled floor as she passed behind me and then I felt a hand on my inner left thigh.
I think my eyes bulged and my buttocks clenched in reflex, but there was a fair amount of surprise there as I could see both of Sally's hands on the handles of the wheelchair.
I knew what she was doing but I couldn't work out how.
Then the hand got higher and the grip tighter and suddenly Sally was not looking at me but at the old lady in the chair and saying sharply: ‘Mrs Cody!
Stop that!’
I got a quick squeeze and then the hand withdrew.
As she went by, the old dear cackled loudly and yelled: ‘Did you see the arse on that, young Sally?
Eh?’
The Matron flushed.
‘Mr Prentice, I'm so sorry…’
‘Don't worry about it,’ I said generously.
‘I think my grandmother would fit in very well here.’
I meant it as well, even though I knew she'd miss the hang-gliding.
The next morning I was a day older, no wiser and put in a bad mood right from the off because I was dragged from the Land of Nod kicking and screaming (well, grunting and  stumbling actually) by the Celtic Twilight hammering on my door.
I christened the new residents of the flat above that just in case they ever decided to form a folk-singing duet and needed a stage name.
From the first moment I saw Inverness Doogie and his Welsh wife, Miranda, I had them down as a sort of suicidal Sonny and Cher.
Doogie was Scottish — well, he would be, nobody would admit to coming from Inverness if they weren't — and had absolutely no sense of humour.
It was almost as if it had been surgically removed along with his appendix when he was a kid.
On our first meeting he thought I was a removal man working for Frank and Salome who had gone on to higher things (mainly higher rates, mortgage repayments, so fourth, so fifth).
Things got worse after that, when I met Miranda: as dark and austere as a Welsh mining valley and as much fun as Chapel on Sunday.
It was she who told me that Doogie was a commis chef at one of the better Park Lane hotels (and I'd said I hadn't realized his politics were important and she'd just looked at me) and she was a journalist with one of the North London suburban weeklies.
I'm sure she wrote everything from the ‘What's On in Stoke Newington’ column to the reports of the Council's planning committee meetings with equal sincerity, convinced she was helping to change the world.
If she didn't change it, I suppose Doogie could always poison it.
Many a time I had wished that Frank and Salome were not so upwardly mobile and were back slumming it in Stuart Street.
But short of a stock market crash, a hundred per cent divorce rate and the legal profession starting to work for free, I couldn't see it.
Frank had designs on being the first black High Court judge and Salome actually enjoyed her job in the City, as well as prospered from it.
The other factor against a return was that I reckoned it only a matter of time before they stopped being DINKS (double income, no kids) and became WHANnies (‘We have a Nanny’).
An early morning call from Doogie and Miranda left a lot to be desired, especially as it was not yet nine o'clock.
I fought off the duvet and padded to the door, grabbing a towel from the bathroom to wrap around my waist and avoiding a cunning ankle-tap trip-and-throw move from Springsteen.
He'd been practising it while I'd been away.
Doogie's idea of knocking on a door was to impersonate a heavy machine-gun and I'd never heard him run out of ammunition.
The only way to stop him was to open it.
‘Good morning, sir,’ I said cheerfully, ‘Do you mind if I ask you something?
Do you actually read your Bible?
Do you know that the answer to all your questions, all your problems, is actually contained within its glorious covers.
There you can find hope.
There —’
Doogie held up a finger.
‘Ahm knocking on your door,’ he said slowly.
I hit my forehead with the heel of my hand.
‘So you are.
I'm sorry.
Force of habit.’
Behind him! the dark and diminutive Miranda rolled her dark eyes to the ceiling and shook her head.
‘Just give him the message,’ she said wearily.
‘A friend of yours called Bunny rang last night and told you not to forget that you're playing at Christopher's place this morning,’ said Doogie, then nodded to himself, pleased that he'd remembered his lines.
‘Thanks.
I hadn't forgotten.’
I had but I had no intention of giving Miranda the impression I was disorganized.
I grabbed at my towel just before it slipped.
‘C'mon, Doogie, let's get to work,’ she said, starting down the stairs.
‘Before he starts rehearsals.’
Doogie raised his eyebrows, then his shoulders and then the corners of his mouth, and set off after her.
‘Rehearsal?’
I shouted after them.
‘Don't know the meaning of the word.’
But as soon as I had the door shut I began to ransack the  flat for the sheet music I keep for special occasions such as Christmas, bar mitzvahs, weddings and so on .
In the bottom of the hi-fi cabinet I found, sandwiched between an old Ramones LP and the new Tommy Smith, the few printed sheets I possess.
In there were Santa Claus Is Coming to Town, So This Is Christmas and, of course, Do They Know It's Christmas?
I love the traditional carols, don't you?
I had a feeling that this jam session on the back of a truck with Bunny was going to end in tears even before I left the house.
If Bunny had organized it, it usually did.
But even I couldn't blame him for the phone ringing just as I was at the front door.
It was a police person telling me that the inquest on Billy Tuckett would be at ten o'clock tomorrow at Queen's Road mortuary where there was a Coroner's Court.
Detective-Sergeant Prentice had specifically requested my presence and left instructions that I was to go to Queen's Road and not Whipps Cross Hospital Mortuary.
It appeared that the roof Billy had fallen off was in one Coroner's jurisdiction, but where he'd landed was in another's.
Billy never could do anything right.
I said I'd be there, and no, I didn't need fetching.
Me being carted off with the sirens going would just about put my street cred in overdraft.
This close to Christmas, the wild West End was a militarized zone for private transport, even taxis.
So I bus-hopped into the City and took the Central Line as far as Bond Street.
I had my trumpet case on my knee and half a carriage to myself, so I pulled out a paperback of Gore Vidal's latest Essays and read the one where he thinks he gets confused with Anthony Burgess.
Funny, that; one's so much taller than the other.
I emerged on to Oxford Street where the decorations festooned the streetlamps and even the Wimpy bars had  spray-snowed their windows.
The crowds weaved around the barrow boys selling Christmas wrapping paper and ribbon and those party-popper things which went bang and sent streamers of shredded Hong Kong daily newspapers across the room.
(Not the other sort which contain amyl nitrate and are marketed — legally, so far — as ‘liquid incense’ and can be bought in the sex shops on Tottenham Court Road for 5.95p.
Or so they tell me.)
I had a back pocket full of readies as I planned on doing some Christmas shopping while up West and I had no intention of joining the Christmas Eve rush to the lingerie departments of the big stores, so the first thing was to get away from the temptation of the HMV shop.
I did that by averting my eyes and crossing the road quickly, almost tripping over a chestnut-seller at the entrance to St Christopher's Place.
I knew a self-employed barman by the name of Kenny who, the Christmas before, had thought up the wicked scheme of telling the chestnut-roasters that they had to be licensed street vendors.
He even ran up some fake City of Westminster chestnut licences and it would have been a laugh but he tried to charge for them.
They'd ganged up on Kenny and afterwards he looked as if the mean streets had come up to meet him face first.
Never mess with anybody who really does know how to roast nuts.
Martin had almost certainly made the rendezvous first, because he was keen.
And because he was a good trombonist, I was quite happy to rescue him from Chase, Bunny's tuba playing friend.
Let's face it, I'd rescue Martin Bormann from Chase, the one man I know whose conversation makes Mogadon an upper.
‘Wotcha, Marty.
Hello, Chase,’ I said, spreading the smile thinner as I went.
I'm not a racist, but (have you noticed, there's always a ‘but’?)
I hate tuba-players.
‘Any sign of a truck?’
‘Not yet,’ said Martin, all eager, ‘but we're early.’
I looked at my watch: one minute to eleven.
All over London the bolts on pub doors were tensing themselves for their daily bid for freedom.
We were roughly in the middle of St Christopher's Place, which isn't a ‘place’ in the French sense, just an alley that cuts between Oxford and Wigmore Streets.
It has a fair cross-section of shops selling fashion, books, military models and bathroom smellies.
There were also places to eat if you fancied (a) a very expensive hamburger,(b) authentic Austrian cuisine, if you didn't mind the creaking Or lederhosen as you ate, and (c) high quality Japanese food, some of it dead before it got to the table, if you had all day.
Because we were standing outside the Japanese restaurant, I told Chase to go in and order some take-aways for about two o'clock while Martin and I would scout either end of the Place for Bunny's truck.
He looked suspicious at first, and so did the Japanese waiters as they helped him pull his tuba case through the very narrow doorway.
By the time he'd got inside, I'd taken Martin's arm and we were down the alley outside the Pontefract Castle just as the doors opened.
‘Bit early isn't it?’ asked Martin, reaching for his wallet.
‘Iron rations,’ I said, tapping my nose.
I ordered two coffees with rum at the bar — Watson's Trawlerman's rum is the best, if you can get it, as drunk by Scottish fishermen — and while that was coming I emptied the pockets of my parka.
Now unless you're a skinhead of the old school, or have been time-warped for twenty years, parkas are not exactly in when it comes to neat threads.
If, however, you need deep pockets, a fleece lining and a hood because you know you could freeze your butt off on the back of a truck, they're the business.
If the parka also has USS Ticondcroga printed across the left breast and you won it in a backgammon game on San Francisco's Pier 39, then you have enough kudos to carry it off.
I pulled out some money and laid it on the bar, followed by a pair of black leather driving gloves with the tops of the three middle fingers cut off the right hand, a tube of mint-flavoured lip salve and a metal hip-flask engraved with the words: ‘I am not a diabetic; in case of accidents please rush me to the nearest public house.’
Gross, I know, but it came in handy.
‘Can I have four brandies and two shots of ginger wine to put in here, please?’
I asked the barman, who didn't bat an eyelid.
Martin peered over the top of his coffee.
‘What do you call that?’
‘What?’
‘Brandy and Stone's ginger.’
‘It's a Brandy Mac, the best thing for keeping out the cold.
And it's gonna get chilly out there.’
‘I hadn't thought of that,’ he said, looking down at his sports jacket, shirt and tie.
(He wasn't senior enough at the BBC to wear a suit.)
‘You'll need some of this too,’ I said, holding up the lip salve.
‘There's a chemist's round the corner.’
‘Good idea,’ he nodded.
In the days before Aids, I'd have thought nothing of offering it to him, but nowadays you didn't even have to mention it.
I suppose it's the same for people who used to pass joints around at parties.
I'd just finished filling the hip flask when it went dark in the bar as a truck pulled up at the traffic lights outside.
I turned to look through the windows.
It was a flat-backed Bedford, a homemade job by the look of it, with bits of a drum kit and an ancient upright piano waving around dangerously.
I saw Chase hump his tuba case over the tailboard and climb in after it, just as Dod climbed out.
The lights changed and the truck pulled off with Chase trying to keep his balance and looking thoroughly bemused.
The pub door opened and Dod stalked in.
‘Pint of Bass, please,’ I ordered, so that it was half-pulled before he got to the bar.
‘Mornin', Angel,’ he said gruffly and nodded down at Martin.
‘Anybody else here?’
‘Just Chase,’ I said.
‘You passed him on the way in.’
Dod reached out a ham of a hand for his beer.
‘He was rabbit-rabbit about a Chinese restaurant or sumfink.
Said they didn't do take-away.
What's he on about?’
He got the glass to his lips and conversation ceased for about 8.3 seconds.
‘Can't think, Dod.
What's the traffic like?’
‘Bumper to arse all round the block.
The truck won't be back for ages.’
‘Time for another, then?’ asked Martin.
He was catching on.
It was after noon by the time we actually got sorted, much to the annoyance of the lady from the Public Relations company who had hired us.
There was a delay while the truck-driver — a guy called Ali who was almost as big as Dod and who had a library edition of The Satanic Verses on his dashboard — strung banners down the side of the truck saying: ‘All your presents in one Place — St Christopher's.’
Then we had to tie Trippy to the piano.
We had to do this because some chucklehead had provided him with a typist's chair on castors and every time the truck turned left he did a circuit of the flat-back, sending everybody else flying.
He thought it a gas, but we secured his chair by a double strand of rope running right round the piano.
Fortunately, Dod and Chase had been provided with camping stools and although Dod's creaked a bit under his weight, it did mean they stayed roughly in the same place.
I took up my position near Dod as it was preferable to having my ear down the muzzle of Chase's tuba and Martin was told to hang over the back of the truck as best he could.
(Ever wondered where the expression ‘tailgate trombone’ came from?)
Bunny, with his clarinet, had a sort of roving commission, which in his case meant roving among the three promo girls dressed in red mini skirts, fake fur jackets and hoods, black fishnet tights and white boots, who would be dishing out leaflets advertising the shops.
It was quite a crush but the first circuit — left on to Orchard Street and all the way round Selfridges, then Oxford Street as far as Marylebone Lane and then Wigmore again — went off without serious injury.
Then we stopped as one of the Santa Claus girls had to go to the loo and anyway we'd forgotten the leaflets they were supposed to dish out.
One of the Santas turned out to be Kim on a moonlight from Simon's Boozebuster operation, but I promised not to tell.
We were getting on famously by half-way round the second circuit and Dod was digging in to a case of canned lager he'd hidden under his stool, then Martin said wouldn't it be a good idea if we actually played something.
We looked at him, then at each other and finally I got out the lip salve and said ‘OK, it's showtime!’ and Kim said: ‘Whatever do you mean?’
The day went downhill after that.
In a ramshackle sort of way, we actually put together a few decent tunes, though as is always the case with truck bands, or marching bands for that matter, quality loses out to volume.
We did the Christmassy stuff and the old New Orleans favourites and, with Trippy playing the top of the truck cab with a pair of spare drum sticks, I got them organized into a version of Masekela's Don't Go Lose It which lasted one and a half circuits.
Then the PR lady appeared and told us we should be playing more sing-along.
Dod was half way through his case of lager, Kim had  severely damaged my hip flask and Ali knew the route so well he was now reading The Satanic Verses while driving.
I hoped that by knocking-off time I'd be able to say that I knew someone who had finished it.
(Rule of Life No. 7: No day is wasted.)
We decided to grab some lunch on the hoof.
This involved a detour round to the McDonald's on Baker Street before the PR lady missed us.
It also involved us in playing ‘When the Saints’(which we'd resisted up to then) for the two policemen who caught us parked on a double yellow line.
They let us off after our three Santa Clausesses mobbed them and asked to play with the red furry pandas they had clipped to the aerials of their radios, on condition we played ‘Saints’ until out of sight.
We were further delayed getting back on station by a detour for me to the south end of Duke Street.
While the rest of the gang dived into the pub opposite to use the toilets, I called in at H. R. Higgins (Coffee-man) Ltd and bought six gift boxes of coffee (assorted) and two of tea (scented).
That was my Christmas shopping sewn up.
Who said it was stressful?
The PR lady had thankfully disappeared by the time we reached the Wigmore Street entrance to St Christopher's Place, which was probably just as well.
Kim, well fortified with Brandy Mac was feeding cold Big Mac to Trippy while straddling his lap, his arms around her waist so he could still play.
One of the other girls was sitting splay-legged using Dod's drums as windshield, trying to roll a joint using one of the advertising leaflets as a roach.
Bunny was chatting up the other girl, Chase was still going oompah-oompah and Martin was desperately starting his ninth solo on Tiger Rag.
I tapped Martin on the shoulder and signalled a cut by drawing a finger across my throat.
‘C'mon, guys and gals, this is falling apart.’
‘I agree,’ said Dod, popping the ring pull on another can of lager.
‘We've another twenty minutes to do,’ said Bunny, untangling his identity bracelet from Santa Claus's fishnets.
‘Or we don't get paid.’
Trippy hit a couple of bass chords, classic threatening music, and shouted: ‘The crew be turning ugly, Cap'n.’
I suspected that Kim sitting on his lap like that had perked him up no end.
‘OK, troops,’ I said.
Why did it always have to be the trumpet-player?
‘Three more times round the block doing the seasonal cheer bit, playing it dead straight.
Then off to the pub to get ratarsed.’
‘Seems reasonable,’ said Dod, like he'd seen Richard Widmark say it in a film once, really chill.
Martin and Chase nodded, Bunny buried his head into Santa's neck and Trippy yelled, ‘A wise decision, Cap'n Smollett,’ and struck up Jingle Bells with us all joining in at some point or another.
On that circuit I was vaguely conscious that there were more blue uniforms on the streets than normal, but then that was normal in the West End for the pre-Christmas rush.
Not that it was any sort of crackdown on muggers or pickpockets, but in the week before the Season of Goodwill, the Marks and Spencer store on Orchard Street gets more bomb threats than the average American Embassy east of Cyprus.
Parked somewhere nearby would be a couple of police vans with sniffer dogs and cordoning off parts of the street had become so commonplace that the cops had left reels of white tape and tripods at strategic points just in case.
It was as we started our second run and we were at the lights at the corner of Portman Square, that I saw the cops had concentrated themselves on the traffic island in Baker Street.
As I just knew that everybody on the truck had a clear conscience, they couldn't possibly be interested in us, could they?
Just in case, I bent down and told the joint-smoking Santa to get rid of it.
She did so by lifting one of Chase's Doc  Martin's (the other was keeping time) and pushing the joint under it.
Chase looked horrified but had to keep playing as he was backing Trippy's solo on So This Is Christmas (which at one point, I'll swear, had drifted into Wabash Cannonball-you had to be there).
Martin and I came back in together for a verse to give Bunny a lead in on his clarinet for three or four choruses and he was good, but probably barely audible above the traffic.
As I relaxed I took a look around to see what was going down, just as we pulled away from the lights and turned left.
It sounds crazy to say I hadn't noticed it before, as we must have driven by ten or a dozen times, but you really don't notice that much when you're trying to keep your balance and play at the same time.
A fair crowd had gathered on the Wigmore Street-Portman Square corner and at first you could have mistaken it for a queue outside a sandwich shop, or even the Post Office just a bit further down the street.
(People going there to post Christmas cards had been advised to take sleeping-bags.)
But this crowd were not queuing for anything.
They were mostly women and they were outside a fur shop called Naamen's.
One of them was dressed in a Bugs Bunny rabbit costume and was handing out leaflets.
Two were unrolling a 30-foot banner which read ‘It takes 53 dumb animals to make this coat but only one to wear it.’
You didn't have to be a genius to work out they weren't from the Lord's Day Observance Society.
As we came round on Wigmore one more time, it was clear even from a distance that the situation had flared up drastically.
The traffic had jammed up for one thing and then we were treated to the sight of the guy in the rabbit costume (it must have been male, women don't run like that) tearing down the street carrying a sledgehammer, hotly pursued by two policemen trying to keep their helmets on.
‘Far out,’ breathed Trippy.
‘Run, Roger!’ yelled one of the girls.
‘How about Run Rabbit Run?’ suggested Martin with a big grin.
I checked out what was happening ahead.
The crowd outside Naamen's had spilled into Wigmore Street, stopping oncoming traffic, but the cops were trying to clear our lane.
Women of all ages were shouting and I clearly saw a handbag swung overarm.
One policeman tripped over a litter-bin and sat down heavily in the gutter.
He had a streak of red paint across the back of his uniform, so one at least had come armed with the essential spray can.
‘Let's do How Much is that Doggy in the Window,’ I suggested and took the lead before they could argue.
By the time we got level with the riot, we had quite a crowd of supporters on our side of the street singing along.
I reckoned we were doing more damage to Naamen's image than the demonstrators.
Being higher than the policemen on the ground, I could see that most of the action was down to a half-a-dozen women wearing anoraks with the hoods up.
They were the ones nipping in and out of the general ruck, tapping ankles, trying to spray-paint out the windows and one of them even trying to set fire to a bunch of leaflets stuffed through Naamen's letter-box.
Through the window of the shop I could see two or three salesgirls cowering behind a desk, trapped and frightened.
It had been the same at university.
I had always argued against sit-ins and ‘direct action’ against campus property as it was always the poor bloody infantry — the cleaners, maintenance men and secretaries — who got the rough end of the pineapple, never the generals in command.
All they got was embarrassed.
At the traffic lights, we got into the thick of it.
One or two of the demonstrating ladies had sat down on the pavement (they should never have shown Gandhi on TV) and were singing ‘the one with the waggerly tail…’ with gusto.
About a dozen were still milling around, hurling themselves at the fur shop window, almost certainly bullet proof, the rest were arguing or wrestling with about ten policemen who were too busy to tell us to move on even when the lights changed.
A big blond sergeant, minus helmet, had gone for the ringleaders in the anoraks and had two of them in headlocks, one under each arm.
He was being waltzed around by his captives and he bellowed for help but his colleagues had their own problems.
From the other side of Portman Square I heard a police siren, which meant that the cavalry was on its way but with the traffic plugged solid it would take them a while.
A third, small, anoraked figure approached the sergeant from behind where his two captives were kicking their legs like the rear end of a pantomime horse on speed.
This one stayed back, unzipped her anorak and from somewhere inside produced a silver metal can.
I got a good look at her, and the can.
Mace in an aerosol and probably not even ozone-friendly.
It sure as hell wasn't intended to be policeman-friendly.
She zipped up her anorak and began to work her way around to the sergeant's face.
To do that she had to step out into the road near the truck.
I stopped playing and tossed my trumpet to Kim who had been showering our remaining advertising leaflets on to the melee.
She was surprised but she caught it.
Then I leaned over the back of the truck, just avoiding a long rasping glissando from Martin's slide, and grabbed the would-be mace maniac by the shoulders of her anorak.
She wasn't heavy and although I'm no weight-training freak, I lifted her until her backside was balanced on the tailboard and then it was just a matter of rolling her in to the well of the truck, the back of her head making a satisfying thud as she landed.
‘Trippy,’ I shouted breathlessly, ‘go!’
Trippy took his cue and banged the palm of his left hand  on the top of the cab and Ali must have put down his book — or got to a frightening bit — because he set off sharpish, left back towards Oxford Street.
I leaned over the girl who was squirming like a landed fish trying to get her balance and stand up.
She didn't resist when I took the can of mace from her hand and slipped it into my pocket.
I doubt she actually noticed.
‘Hello again, Lucy,’ I smiled.
CHAPTER 6
‘I just get so…so…angry,’ said Lucy with venom, ‘I just don't know what comes over me.’
‘Criminal damage, assaulting a policeman, resisting arrest.
Violation of probation orders, remand, young Cleo put in care…
That's what could come over you.’
‘Hey!
No sermons, see, or I'm outa here!’
She was almost shouting but it was the week before Christmas and we were in the Three Tuns and there were at least six different parties going on, so nobody noticed.
‘I'm sorry,’ I said over the background roar.
‘I just don't like being fucking sermonized, OK?’
‘You got it.’
I had taken her to the Three Tuns, and told the others to meet us there, on the basis that it was the second nearest pub to the scene of the demo and the nearest one to Seymour Street police station.
The last place the cops would look for her, if they were looking, which I doubted.
I had made Lucy take off her anorak so she looked a bit less like an urban guerrilla, even though the T-shirt she was wearing underneath —‘Rats Have Rights’— was a bit of a giveaway, or maybe I was just paranoid.
We had managed to squash ourselves into a corner table with two pints of strong winter-warmer beer.
I'd ordered it because brandy  always makes me thirsty (noticed that?) and Lucy because she said she liked ‘well-balanced, high gravity bitters’.
Fair enough.
I presumed it was politically correct.
I mean, there's no meat in beer, is there?
Or brandy, or whisky or wine for that matter, so we had common ground there at least.
I had a sudden thought about the swimbladders of fish used to fine beer — to take the suspended proteins to the bottom of the cask and clarify the final product.
I wondered if that counted.
I decided not to mention them just in case.
‘I know what you're thinking,’ she said before I'd had a chance to say anything.
(Rule of Life No. 72: When a woman says she knows what you're thinking, make your mind a blank and recite the twelve times table, or the Book of Genesis or the Hong Kong telephone book if you know it, just in case.)
‘It's just a bunch of crazy women making a spectacle of themselves when they should be home minding the kids.’
‘No, I really don't think that,’ I said, but I couldn't tell if she believed me.
It happened to be true, though.
I knew lots of males who were two bricks short of a wall who enjoyed making spectacles of themselves, and I'd certainly never trust them to mind kids.
She took a huge pull on her beer.
‘Why did you pull me out of the protest?’ she asked, steely-eyed.
I wondered if this was the 64,000-dollar question.
‘Somebody had to,’ I shrugged, ducking it.
‘You were just passing, eh?’
‘As a matter of fact, I must have passed you three or four times without seeing you.
Why, did you think I was following you?’
She cocked her head in a ‘maybe’ sort of way.
‘Then I was, if that's what you want to think.
I had this brilliant idea to blend into the scenery just so I could keep an eye on you.
I got half a dozen drunks and three women dressed as Mother Christmas and put them on a  truck and we drove round the West End on the busiest shopping day of the year playing loud jazz and bunging up the traffic.
Naturally, nobody gave us a second look and I had the traffic lights co-ordinated by computer so that we stopped near you just as Sergeant Plod, with perfect timing, gave you an excuse to mace him.
OK?’
She didn't say anything to that, just drank more beer and then came back with: ‘So why the interest?
Why the care and concern, why the drink and sociability?’
I wondered if she was talking to me for a minute.
Down the bar someone was trying to start a darts match despite there being a mass of people between them and the board.
It could end up like the Little Big Horn.
Behind Lucy's head, an office party, obviously continued from lunch-time, was getting slowly and inevitably out of hand and at least one guy from the Accounts Department (why is it always Accounts?) was not waving, but drowning in the typing pool.
The Tuns was a good pub, but hardly a counselling centre.
‘Yesterday, when I asked you about animal rights, you said you were out of it and clammed up good and proper.
Today you're ripping up the cobblestones and storming the Bastille to stop the fur trade.
I was curious.’
She eyeballed me some more, then finished her beer in one gulp.
‘Another?’
I asked quickly and walked off with her glass before she could reply.
I wanted to give her time to think over what harm it would do to tell me the truth.
There was no way she'd respond to a third degree, so I was hoping she'd decide I was harmless.
In fact, I gave her more thinking time than I'd bargained for as the crush at the bar was worse than when we'd arrived.
Somebody was muttering about a bomb scare at Marks & spencers , which accounted for the influx.
Most of the new customers were M & s staff.
I got Lucy another pint of the lethal winter ale and for myself, a pint of Smithwick's alcohol-free beer which looks  and smells good enough to fool anyone.
She was still sitting where I left her; that was a good sign.
‘I didn't lie,’ she said, cupping her hands around her glass.
‘I was helping out some old friends from my Women's Group today, that was all.
There's one hell of a difference between our protest here and the heavier stuff.’
‘So explain,’ I said, hoping she wouldn't ask why.
She looked down into her beer.
‘I've grown up a lot in the last two years,’ she said quietly and I silently agreed with her.
Jumping probation and knowing where to get mace cannisters — yeah, I knew people who had graduated from that particular school of life.
Some of them were still on the streets.
‘Sometimes your beliefs have to take a back seat in your life, otherwise they become obsessions to the exclusion of all else.’
It sounded as though she'd rehearsed that.
‘You mean now you've got Cleo to think about…?’
She paused just long enough for me to realize that that was not what she had in mind at all.
She'd been thinking about something, or somebody, else.
‘Yes, yeah…exactly,’ she said unsurely.
‘I couldn't let —; wouldn't let — the Cause take over my life.’
‘The animal cause?’
She nodded, sipping more beer.
She had a head on her, I'll give her that.
Two pints of winter headbanger is usually enough to stun an armadillo.
‘So why today?’
‘Like I said, to help out.
The way to stop the fur trade is to alienate the customer.
No market for furs equals no shops like that one, equals no fur trade, no species extinction.
It's one of the longest-running fights we have and we thought we were winning and we got lazy.’
‘I don't follow,’ I said, meaning it.
‘We successfully politicized a generation of women — those now in their thirties.’
She leaned forward as she  became more enthusiastic.
‘But it's a younger generation — the Yuppies, the Sloane Rangers, the rich whizzkids, women my age — who are seeing fur as a status symbol again.
Money is God, fur means money.
It's a women's problem and women have to solve it.
We can't rely on television pictures of baby seals being clubbed to death, we've got to be there on the streets where the things are sold.’
‘A lot of the stuff in that shop was labelled farmed fur, you know, and fake fur isn't the turn-off it once was, if it's marketed right.’
‘Utter bollocks,’ she said nastily.
Fair enough, I can take the honest cut and thrust of intellectual debate.
‘It's never OK to wear fake fur, it simply encourages aspirations to the real thing and creates a class division of real and fake.
And some fakes are no better than wild species.
Have you seen any cats in north Germany recently?
Do you know how much a cat pelt is worth in some parts of Europe?’
I hadn't and I didn't.
And I didn't give it a moment's real consideration.
Honest, Springsteen.
‘And even if they really are fakes — synthetic fur —’ she was on a roll now' — it's made from petrochemicals and they're non-biodegradable and therefore damaging to the environment.’
Hell's teeth, they had you all ways.
‘And don't give me any crap about hunting and fur-trading helping to preserve the primitive economies and lifestyles of Eskimos and Bantu bloody tribesmen or whatever.’
‘OK, I won't,’ I said but she didn't hear me.
‘You create a cash market tor Polar bear fur and the Eskimo spends it on booze.
You offer cash for leopard skins and the Czechs sell more rifles in Africa.’
I held up my hands in surrender.
‘I'm convinced, I'm convinced.
I'm bowled over by the logic and impressed with the religious zeal.’
She blinked at that, something she did so rarely that it was noticeable.
What had I said?
‘I don't apologize,’ she said moodily.
‘And OK, I get carried away like today when the pigs wade in and start throwing their weight about.’
Rats had rights, but pigs didn't, it seemed, but I kept that to myself.
‘But, don't you see, if it wasn't for women passively accepting fur as fashion status, there wouldn't be a problem.
It's up to women to change attitudes and if our protest makes one woman think, then it's a victory.
We've got to do it, all of us.
Women, that is.
It's a women's issue, not an animals’ issue.’
‘And that's not the heavy stuff?’
I prompted.
‘Oh no, I've pulled back from that.
That can take over your life.’
‘Stuff like breaking into research laboratories?’
This time, I hid my face in my glass.
‘How…?’
She drew back her hands from the table and put them on her lap.
The body linguists would have had a field day.
‘How did you know I'd been put on probation?’
At last, the 64,000-dollar question; but she stayed cool enough.
‘I asked a policeman.
Sorry, I shouldn't be flip.
A policeman told me — in passing.’
‘In passing what?
Have you told them where I live?’
‘Have they raided the house yet?
Have they sent in the SWAT teams?’
What on earth had she done that was so terrible?
She hadn't thought twice about trying to mace the police sergeant earlier.
‘Whatever they want you for, they won't get you through me.
What are you, anyway?
The mastermind behind the Surrey Red Brigade?’
That got to her.
She didn't like being reminded of her nice, safe, middle-class upbringing.
She mumbled something into her beer, the last few drops of it.
It was almost worth getting her another to see if she could stand up afterwards.
‘Pardon?’
‘Sussex.
I said I was from Sussex originally.
Not Surrey.’
'Close enough,’ I smiled.
‘Look, Lucy, I don't think the police have got you on their Ten Most Wanted list.
As far as I can see, your name cropped up simply as an explanation for why Billy Tuckett was trying to get into the house in Dwyer Street.’
‘Poor Billy,’ was all she said.
‘Poor Billy right enough,’ I said, coming on strongly.
‘Maybe it was poor, frightened Billy.
Something had scared him enough to make him go running across rooftops in the early hours of the morning.
He wasn't high and he wasn't drunk and he wasn't delivering chocolates to his lady-love.
I think he was scared shitless to be up there.’
Lucy's eyes widened and she pointed a finger at her own chest.
‘But it's nothing to do with me.
I wasn't there.’
‘Billy thought you were.
Maybe he thought he could hide there with you.’
‘Hide from what?’
‘Action Against Animal Abuse.’
She let her mouth fall open.
‘You heard,’ I pressed.
‘They'd been raiding the school at the end of Dwyer Street.’
‘The kiddies’ zoo,’she said quietly.
‘Except it was closed for Christmas and the animals had gone on their holidays.’
‘A soft target.’
‘What?’
‘It would have been classed as a soft target.
You hit places like that: small schools, charities, private houses and private institutions that can't afford to either repair the damage or introduce security precautions.’
‘Nice logic.
Make friends; influence people.’
‘Do you know how many animals are used, quite unnecessarily, in school biology classes?
Have you ever —?’
I shook my head and regretted not slipping a large vodka into my alcohol-free beer.
‘OK, OK, now I'm giving the sermon.
I'm not apologizing.’
‘Why break the habits of a lifetime?’
‘If only you knew how much of my life I did spend saying sorry.’
I kept a straight face somehow.
It wasn't her fault, she was sincere enough.
It was just that people saying things like that reminded me of one of my all-time favourite cartoons where Dr Watson is saying to Sherlock Holmes: ‘But if you saw the conditions these Moriartys had to live in, you wouldn't be so quick to judge.’
She shivered, pulling herself together.
‘I've got to go.
I have to pick up Cleo from the creche.’
‘The inquest on Billy is tomorrow,’ I tried.
‘So?
It was nothing to do with me.’
Her eyes were back to their natural shade of flint.
‘Just what has it got to do with you?’
It was my turn to shrug.
‘I was there when it happened.
I happened to have met Billy once or twice before.
That's two coincidences too many for the police.
They hassle me, I hassle you.’
‘You said you wouldn't tell anybody…’
‘I won't unless it gets too uncomfortable not to.’
She swallowed hard.
‘This is ridiculous.
Billy alive wouldn't hurt a soul.
Now he's causing grief when he's dead.’
‘Not just to us.’
She looked puzzled.
‘I was thinking of his parents.’
‘Them too,’ she said dismissively.
I was going off her rapidly.
‘But what's it going to cost me to stay out of it?’
‘A name, a suggestion.
Some idea of who Billy might have been with on his zoo liberation raid.
Something I can barter with, with the cops.’
‘There's no other way?’
‘Fuck it, he's dead!’
I said it too loudly and felt people looking at me.
‘This is serious.’
Quieter this time.
‘There was a guy called Geoffrey Bell,’ she said slowly.
‘Lived in Romford, where Billy came from.
Billy was very taken with him.
Under his spell you might say.
He was an animal activist.’
‘A member of Action Against…?’
‘I don't know.
I never got in that deep.
That's all I can think of.
Look, I'm out of it and I want to stay out.
You've got to believe me.’
I didn't, but I let it — and her — go.
As she fought her way through the crowd to get to the door, I bet myself that there would be another house on the market in Highbury by tomorrow night.
And this time she'd know not to ask anyone to store her furniture.
A mild uproar at the other end of the bar told me without looking that Bunny, the Mother Christmasses and the rest of the band had arrived and had walked into the middle of the darts match.
Kim fought her way through a dozen pairs of clutching hands to bring me another pint of something I hadn't asked for but wouldn't refuse.
Seeing there were only two seats at the small table, she plumped down on my lap.
Bunny and Martin wandered over with more drinks but Dod never made it past the darts game.
He was good and could win beer that way.
Between the door and the bar, Trippy and the other two girls seemed to have disappeared, but nobody was offering to send search-parties.
After all, the pub was crowded and it was nearly Christmas.
‘What happened to Chase?’
I asked.
‘I can't think,’ said Bunny innocently.
‘We specifically told him we'd meet in the Marlborough Head.’
‘But this is the Three Tuns,’ said Kim.
‘Really?
I'll be damned.’
I reached around Kim to get at my beer.
Very closely round her.
Like I said, the pub was crowded.
‘I'm glad you guys made it,’ I said truthfully.
‘I'm feeling starved of intelligent conversation.’
‘Your off-the-street pick up disappeared, then?’ asked Kim, pretending to soothe my brow and being anything but soothing in the process.
‘I've got to hand it to you, Angel, I'd never thought of that technique,’ said Bunny with genuine admiration.
‘What technique?’
‘Just cruising down the street, see one you fancy and literally pick her off the sidewalk — wallop, in the back of the truck.’
He mimed the action.
‘Just like landing a salmon.’
‘He's being serious, isn't he?’ whispered Kim in my ear.
‘I'm afraid so.
O God, what have I done?’
It was around six when the party broke up in disarray.
The shops were still open — it was more or less late night every night this time of year — I remember that.
And I remember somebody saying that my trumpet and the coffee and tea I'd got as Christmas presents were all stashed in Dod's van.
Dod had agreed with that, but couldn't quite remember where he'd left the van.
Martin said it was in the National Car Park across the road, about twenty yards from the front door of the pub and Dod said ‘Oh, yeah’ and reluctantly gave up his place in the darts game, slipping at least three five-pound notes and some coins into his pocket and not bothering to thank the guys he'd played.
Trippy had already gone — to see a man about a dog, down Tottenham Court Road, he said — and Bunny had found the other two Mother Christmasses.
They'd got changed in the Ladies and given their outfits to Kim, who was still wearing hers, as she'd borrowed them from Simon's wardrobe.
I asked her where she lived and she said Tower Hamlets, so I offered her a lift in the van.
She said that was probably  out of Dod's way.
As he lived in Bethnal Green, it was, but so was Hackney.
Bunny, Martin and the other two girls decided to go for a meal in a Swedish restaurant Bunny said he knew in Lisson Grove, the Dead Zone between the Edgware Road and Lord's Cricket Ground.
I suspect Bunny probably meant that he once knew a Swedish waitress, but I let it pass.
They managed to flag a taxi and they piled in amid a lot of shouting and general drunken bonhomie.
The cabbie's expression told anyone interested that Christmas was probably not his favourite time of year.
We found Dod's van in the NCP and I explained to Kim that as he only had one passenger seat, the two of us had better travel in the cold and bare, unheated back along with Dod's drum kit.
Kim said, but wait a minute, there was a pile of blankets in the back (which Dod used to cushion his full kit on long runs) and we could lay those out and maybe cuddle up for warmth.
I said that was a brilliant idea and by the time we were out of the car park and in the thick of the traffic, I was asking her what she was doing later.
She said there couldn't be a later as she was on duty with the Samaritans at nine, so it would have to be now.
I remember thinking that there seemed to be one hell of a lot of buttons on the average Mother Christmas costume.
But fortunately the traffic was heavy and it took ages to reach Bethnal Green.
Dod dropped me in Hackney, two streets away from Stuart Street so I could call in the Chinese take-away on the way.
I got the distinct impression that he wasn't actually too keen on slowing down so I could get out, let alone stop.
But he did.
Anyone would have thought I'd lowered the resale value of the van or something.
I had a Tsingtao beer by the neck while chatting to  Esmonde (don't ask), the proprietor of the Last Emperor, and picking my meal by numbers from the menu nailed to the counter and covered in drunk-proof plastic.
Esmonde was a really interesting guy — I've said that even when sober.
He was a movie nut and the take-away had in its time been called: the Yangtze Incident, the World of Suzy Wong (copyright difficulties) and Enter the Dragon (raided by the Drugs Squad).
It was known, I'm ashamed to say, as Aladdin's by the locals who patronized it.
I picked out a selection, deciding on even numbers only because it seemed like a sensible thing to do at the time.
To prove, yet again, that he was a good salesman as well as a good cook, Esmonde did me a special offer on a small bottle of rice wine which he persuaded me I just had to try.
Sometimes they see me coming.
And what's more, they telephone each other to say I'm on the way.
I certainly felt that way as I staggered into Stuart Street and up to the steps of No. 9.
At first I thought they were muggers, but then there were only two of them and it was the middle of the street.
Corners are the favourite spots, even at night — less windows and more places to run.
They were also Indian or Pakistani, not black or white or a mixture.
Not that, I'm sure, India or Pakistan couldn't put a mugging team in the next Olympics if they wanted to, but it was unusual.
The dead giveaway, though, was that they were both way beyond Juvenile Court status and they were both wearing suits.
And they weren't out to mug just anyone passing.
Oh no; they were after me.
They must have been waiting in a car, as neither wore an overcoat and both were suddenly there smack in front of me, blocking the pavement, tantalizingly close to home.
Even in my befuddled state I could see they meant trouble.
It wouldn't be a fair fight either; there's no such thing as far as I'm concerned.
If just one of them had sent one of their grandmothers, and I could come out of the sun, and if I could have a silenced chain-saw, then maybe it would be fair.
But then, thinking about Mrs Cody at Zaria's rest home, I still wouldn't have put money on me.
Zaria.
That must be it.
They were her brothers or cousins or similar, just trying to find out where she was.
Like me.
There was absolutely no reason why I shouldn't be straight arrow and honest with them.
‘You Angel?’ said one, the older one, who wore a black pointy beard but no moustache.
‘I'm sorry, who?’
‘Angel,’ he repeated.
‘Sorry, never heard of him.’
I shook my head and edged closer to the steps of No. 9.
‘It is.
I've seen him here,’ said the other one without taking his eyes off me.
‘Yes, I live here,’ I said, looking nervously from one to the other.
‘My name is Goodson, Flat One.
I don't quite know what this is all about but I'm sure I've never seen either of you two gentlemen…’
When in doubt, keep talking.
But it wasn't going to work.
‘Sunil wants to see you,’ said spiky beard.
Sunil?
‘About some stolen property,’ said the other, who, I'd decided by this time, had shifty eyes.
‘Missing from his home.’
And dandruff.
I had got my back almost round to the steps by this time but I knew I'd never get my parka open and the front door key out unless I had an edge.
‘You're coming with us.
Now.’
And as he said it, shifty-eyes-with-dandruff (and I'll throw in bad breath) put out a hand for my arm.
I had my trumpet case in my left hand and my Esmonde special take-away in a paper carrier and my coffee in a Higgins' bag in my right.
What the hell.
I could always get another horn out of hock and Esmonde stayed open to I .0 a.m.
I smiled broadly at Pointy-Beard and yelled ‘Catch!’ as I threw the bags up in the air in front of his face.
I do believe he almost tried to catch them but I was too busy by then, swinging up the trumpet case and trying to use it as a battering-ram into Shifty-Eyes' midriff, or private parts if I was lucky.
I wasn't.
He grabbed the end of the case before it hit him and stepped backwards using my momentum to take me forward and off balance, then he shoved back.
He was stronger than he looked and I stumbled back into his partner.
Both of us went down and rolled off the hard, wet pavement into the gutter, but it was me who cracked the back of his head en route and me who got a boot in the stomach which even my US Navy parka did little to cushion.
I had the good sense to let go of the trumpet case and try and keep rolling out of range.
Then my head hit something else and I realized it was one of Armstrong's rear tyres.
I had just time to think what a help he was being when another boot landed in my guts and I gasped for air.
When I found some it had a strange smell — of sweet and sour sauce — and it seemed to be very moist.
If Esmonde ever asked me how I enjoyed the evening's ‘specials’ I could always say I'd found them warm and soft; comfortable to land on.
I grabbed Shifty-Eyes' foot as it landed again and hung on.
Pointy-Beard was somewhere underneath me and was trying to roll me out from under Armstrong.
We probably presented quite an obscene picture and suddenly we seemed to have an audience.
I heard the pounding of rapid footsteps and I knew straight away that it wasn't a policeman (they wear rubber soles these days) and then somebody yelled, ‘Hey, you!’
Actually, it could have been ‘See, you!’— and I've even told people since that it was ‘See you, Jimmy’— but then and there, lying flat on my back looking up at Shifty-Eyes  and still holding his foot, all I really registered was that the ‘you’ came out as just ‘U’.
It was the war cry of the Scottish male in full flight.
And I do mean flight.
Inverness Doogie was actually in mid-air when I realized it was him.
Instantly.
I also realized I was going to be OK.
In fact, I was going to win a fight without landing a punch.
(My kinda fight.)
Doogie went straight for Shifty-Eyes' face with his forehead, launching himself like an American footballer going over the opposition for a touchdown.
Shifty-Eyes couldn't do much about it as I was hanging on to his foot.
The impact was sickeningly loud even to me.
God knows what it felt like from the inside.
I let go of his foot and he just kept going.
By this time, Pointy-Beard was out from under me and on his knees.
Doogie allowed himself a small smile of satisfaction as Shifty-Eyes hit the road, then he turned and grabbed Pointy-Beard's tie.
That was all he did.
He didn't physically touch him, just grabbed his tie.
Then he ran down Stuart Street.
Pointy-Beard never did make it to his feet.
He just followed Doogie as best he could on his knees.
Well, he had to really, the alternative was strangulation.
Doogie left him about twenty yards away, then walked back to me, dusting his hands off as he came.
‘You OK, son?’ he asked, helping me up.
‘Think so,’ I said, checking the pockets of my parka which gave off the odour of Hoy Sin sauce mixed with Mocha-Mysore coffee (filter-ground).
There seemed to be Chinese food everywhere.
I kicked a pile of rice off the pavement in the general direction of Shifty-Eyes, who was beginning to moan, his hands clasped to his face.
‘Is he?’
I nodded and Doogie took a pace forward and looked down.
‘He's fine.
I saw his eye move.’
Well, that was all right then.
Pointy-Beard was trying to stand and loosen the knot (by now probably no bigger than a square centimetre) in his tie.
He was doing fine too.
‘Ah nivver could stand someone with a beard but no moustache,’ said Doogie.
‘I know what you mean,’ I said admiringly.
‘They're usually religious nutters.’
‘Or sociologists,’ mused Doogie.
I suddenly felt we had a lot in common and maybe I'd misjudged him.
Miranda appeared in the doorway of No. 9 and said, ‘Are you coming in now, darling?’ like other wives would say, ‘Had a nice day at the office, dear?’
‘Aye.
We're finished here, my numptious one,’ said Doogie.
Numptious?
I realized we were still worlds apart.
‘You coming in for a nightcap?’ he asked.
Maybe not that far after all.
‘Sure.
Got a microwave?’
He looked affronted.
‘Ahm a chef,’ he said proudly.
‘Ah don't need…’
I held up the intact bottle of rice wine I'd finally recovered from the depths of my parka.
‘Thirty seconds on Defrost?’ he said professionally.
‘Let's do it.’
CHAPTER 7
Rule of Life No. 77: if you should ever have to attend an inquest or similar official/judicial function: make sure you don't have a hangover.
Rule of Life No. 76: Sometimes there are exceptions.
To be honest, it was relatively painless.
But then, so would be nuclear fusion in the state I was in.
I turned up at Queen's Road Mortuary, parked Armstrong on a single yellow line, and followed the signs to the Coroner's Court.
Like a dutiful citizen, I checked in with the Usher and he looked at his clipboard and said there would be about a fifteen-minute wait, so why didn't I take a seat?
I did, and soon learned to distrust Ushers as a species.
He was telling everybody who turned up that there would be a fifteen-minute wait: even two guys I knew who were self-employed window-cleaners looking for a contract.
Then Prentice took the seat next to me in the corridor and I just knew the day wouldn't get any better whatever the weather forecast.
‘Hello, there, Roy,’ he shouted loudly.
Well, maybe he didn't actually shout, it just felt that way as my brain recoiled on its springs.
But he was loud.
‘How y'a doing?’
I tried to inch away from him but there wasn't another seat to move to.
‘Surviving.
Just.’
‘Any news for me?’
Why was he talking so loudly?
I realized that last night's rice wine, followed by Doogie's steak cooked in Glenfiddich and then more Glenfiddich, had left my cranial suspension system shot to pieces, but he was definitely going over the top.
‘Being a bit…obvious…aren't we, Sergeant?’
I whispered.
He leaned towards me and whispered: ‘Just in case there are any of Billy's animal friends here.’
He stroked the side of his nose with a forefinger, then winked.
‘You bastard!
You're setting me up.’
Instinctively I looked around the corridor to try and spot the lurking animal activist.
Not a likely-looking suspect in sight, but then they don't all wear T-shirts like Lucy had.
Prentice came over all innocent.
‘But I thought you were more than happy to help clear up the unfortunate Billy's death.
Incidentally —’ he patted me on the knee' — we're calling it the Infenestration of Leytonstone back at the Shop.
Get it?’
‘Oh, highly droll,’ I said sarkily.
‘I'm surprised you haven't had the window-frame shipped off to the Black Museum.’
‘Ah-ha,’ he started confidently, ‘that would only happen if it had been a defenestration.
A murder.
If he'd been thrown out of a window.’
‘I know what it means,’ I snapped.
Then, a bit more politely: ‘Or is that a subtle hint that you really believe it was an accident?’
He plunged his hands into his leather jacket pockets and crossed his feet, dead casual.
‘Gotta be honest, Roy, there's not a sniff of anybody else being on that roof or near that window.’
Like they say in the movies: it was quiet.
Too quiet.
‘Except you, of course.’
‘So you're on my case now, eh?’
‘Now and for the foreseeable future, old son.’
He was pleasant about it, I'll give him that.
But should I let myself be intimidated this way?
He had nothing on me.
I did the noble thing.
‘How about a deal?’
I suggested.
‘I'm all ears,’ he said, totally unfazed.
‘I have a name,’ I offered.
‘I know, Fitzroy, and it's a corker!’
‘My, but we must have got up on the right side of the interrogation cell this morning.’
He held out his hands in surrender.
‘OK, OK.
It's serious now.
What's the name?’
‘What's the deal?’
It was my turn to lay back.
He narrowed his eyes.
‘What do you want?’
‘Out of this.
No tricky questions, no suspicion, no ‘helping  with enquiries’, no more court appearances, no officialdom of any kind.’
‘Difficult…’ he drawled.
‘Bullshit,’ I said.
‘OK, can be done; will be done.
I'll see the Coroner's Clerk before we start.
Now who've you dug up?’
I smiled.
Beamed, actually.
‘Let's wait until the hearing's over, shall we?’
His eyes had gone to positive slits by now.
He straightened himself up.
‘I've been checking on you, Angel,’ he started, quietly but firmly.
‘No regular job, but doesn't draw social security or benefits from the unemployment office —’ I knew that was a con for a start, as the cops rarely liaised with the Social Security people, let alone with the income tax ferrets, thank God' — and yet no known criminal source of income.
Background sketchy, certainly no criminal record.
Educated — oh, yes.
University, well we know that — you were there with Billy.
Haven't gone much further back but I'd lay odds on a comfortable middle-class upbringing; don't know for sure, though.
Definitely a perennial student who never grew up.
Never accepted responsibility.
No wife, no kids, no mortgage repayments.
Probably no income tax, no nine-to-five routine.’
He paused, but it wasn't just for effect.
‘Lucky little bleeder, aren't you?’
‘Jealous?’
I asked innocently.
‘Damn right.’
I spotted Billy's mum as soon as I entered the court.
Apart from extra weight, the years had not been unkind although she wouldn't get away with lying about her dress size for too much longer.
She sat quietly through the proceedings, which the Coroner conducted in a dull monotone, occasionally sniffing into a balled-up frilly handkerchief firmly gripped in her right hand.
In her left hand she held the arm  of — I presumed — Mr Tuckett, a short, wide, ruddy-faced man with white sideburns.
He could have modelled John Bull for a Victorian Toby Jug painter.
Unfortunately, Mrs Tuckett spotted me and I saw recognition click into place in her mind before I had to stand up and do my bit.
That went quickly enough with no tricky questions.
I presumed that Prentice had had a word in somebody's shell-like, or maybe nobody was very interested.
Certainly the various court officials who came and went didn't seem interested.
And once Hatchard, the CID man who'd come round to Dwyer Street on the night in question, had done his bit and told the Coroner twice that he didn't suspect foul play, then most people seemed satisfied and I could get back to enjoying my hangover.
I didn't exactly try to sneak out of the Court; funnily enough, most Courts aren't designed with that in mind.
Let's just say I tried to leave with the minimum of fuss.
My big mistake was pausing for that half-minute too long to hold the door open for the redheaded girl.
I had only just noticed her — so I must have been taking things seriously — but she was worth waiting to be polite to.
Her black suede-look high-heels put her a good three inches taller than me and a grey checked suit and crisp white shirt offset with a thin red bow tie, and the fake leather document wallet she clutched, gave her a professional air.
She also wore large red-frame glasses, although she wore them on top of her head, as if to keep in place the shock of ginger-red red hair which she'd rubber-banded into a pony tail down most of the length of her back.
As she passed me, I caught a whiff of a clean, peachy perfume — the sort of scent women buy for themselves.
She didn't even notice me.
You can't win 'em all; but one or two now and then would be nice.
It might almost be worth coming to Court again.
Then it was too late to escape and Mrs Tuckett was between me and the daylight at the end of the corridor.
But that did mean she was also between me and Prentice, who was hovering trying to cut off my retreat as well, so maybe it's true what they say about every silver lining having a cloud.
‘It's Roy, isn't it, luv?
That's what they said, wasn't it?’ she gushed as she closed on me.
I took a lungful of her perfume: the sort men buy for women because they like the ads or they can pronounce the name.
‘I'd like to thank you for coming.’
I hadn't realized it was a party, but I didn't say it.
After all, I can be sensitive to other people's feelings.
And anyway, I was giving away at least fifty pounds.
(Rule of Life No. 131: If you ever really have to fight, pick on someone two weight divisions lower.
At least two.)
‘It was the least I could do,’ I said weakly as she brushed her lips against my cheek.
‘You do remember me, don't you, luv?’ she pleaded, searching for eye contact I was trying to avoid.
Behind her, Mr Tuckett sighed loudly.
He'd realized a long time ago that he'd married a woman who cuddled complete strangers in the street and probably had a season ticket for West Ham in her handbag.
Behind him, Prentice looked at the ceiling and squirmed with pleasure as Mrs T put an armlock on me and began to walk us both down the corridor.
‘It's Bernice, Billy's mum,’ she sniffed.
‘You looked after Billy at university for me — and now this happens.’
She shook her head sadly.
I shook mine in wonderment.
Where did she get all this from?
‘I…er…didn't exactly keep in touch, you know, Mrs Tuckett,’ I said lamely.
Her grip tightened.
‘I know how it is, luv.
You have your own life to lead.
Are you married?
Children?’
I shook my head.
‘Neither was Billy,’ she ploughed on.
‘He was an only child, you know.’
She said that over her shoulder.
Mr Tuckett exhaled noisily and said: ‘I'll go get the car,’ and left us in the entrance hall.
Over Mrs T's head, Prentice hopped from one foot to the other, making ‘get rid of her’ movements with his eyebrows.
‘He never had many friends, you know.
I hoped that university would bring him out of his shell, but he kept himself to himself.’
I remembered something Bunny had said.
‘Did Billy have a car, Bernice?’
‘No, that was his father's one big disappointment in him.’
Just the one big disappointment?
I'd have thought that was a good track record.
‘We bought him one, of course, for his twenty-first birthday, but he would never learn to drive.
He used to say it polluted the environment.
Even with this unleaded petrol we have nowadays, he said it was too late for the ozone layer, or whatever it is.’
She paused.
‘Though he had been a bit more interested in driving recently.
Kept bringing the subject up, when he was home.’
She dabbed at a watery eye.
‘Why do you ask, Roy?’
I could feel Prentice hovering.
He wanted to know why as well.
‘It's just something one of the lads said the other night.
Somebody who was with us at university.
We were —’ I thought up a good lie quickly; they're the best ones' — remembering all the times we had when we were students.
Somebody mentioned that Billy used to ride a bike.’
Bernice forced a smile.
‘A ten-speed Mountain bike,’ she said proudly.
‘He asked for one last Christmas and I insisted even though Barry — Mr Tuckett — thought it a bit childish.’
My God: Barry, Bernice and Billy.
Happy Families.
‘You don't think so, do you?’
‘Heck, no,’ I said generously.
‘They're very fashionable in the City now.
People go utter mega on them.’
Well, they did during the Underground strikes, and I honestly did know a young brat-race type who went to work in the West End on a unicycle.
But then, he was in advertising, so you had to make allowances.
‘Billy went everywhere on it, even had a name for it.’
‘Really?’
How ridiculous.
‘Larry, he called it.
I don't know why.’
‘Did he live at home, Bernice?’
‘Well, we always kept his room for him and he could come and go as he pleased.
He went away a lot, with his work, but he's been back with us for the last year or so, off and on.’
Prentice was frowning at me, wondering where this was all going.
I did too.
Pretty soon I'd be putting in a claim for ten per cent of his salary.
‘What sort of work did Billy do, Bernice?
I don't remember him saying anything about a job.’
‘Oh, it was always charity work or his campaigning.
He was involved in all the things like Greenpeace, cruel sports, protection of birds, that sort of thing.
Animal mad he was.
Mr Tuckett thought it was all to get at him, but Billy was very sincere about it.
Barry knew there was never much chance of Billy going into the family business, and he was disappointed, but he's not a vindictive man.
He let Billy get on with his life.’
At that point, a new bright red Mercedes estate car eased up to the Court steps.
Mr Tuckett was at the wheel and obviously the family business was doing OK.
‘Will you be coming to the funeral?
It'll be a quiet do,’ Bernice said softly.
‘We've had to wait for today before we could fix anything.’
‘If you've something to write on, I'll give you a phone number and you can let me know the arrangements.’
I could always get Fenella or somebody to answer the  phone and I wasn't in the phone book, so I figured that if I chickened out, I could block her.
She rummaged around in a handbag as big as my trumpet case and eventually found a length of till receipt from a grocery store.
From the length of it, she must have had a truck waiting outside the check-out.
As I scribbled the Stuart Street number, Mr Tuckett honked the horn of the Mercedes.
Bernice flapped a hand at him in dismissal, so casually that her jewellery hardly rattled.
‘I've just had a thought, Roy, though I know it's an imposition,’ she said, cheering visibly.
Under other circumstances I'd have had a snappy answer for her.
I just said ‘Yes?’ and as I dropped the pen she'd handed me back into her bag, I noticed that she carried at least two fat rolls of ten-pound notes secured with circular gold clips shaped like salamanders, or maybe alligators.
I didn't get that good a look.
‘If you're not doing anything, would you come back to the house with us now?
You can stay for lunch.’
I must have looked worried.
Behind her, Prentice certainly did.
‘It's just…
Look, I know it's asking a lot, but I can't bring myself to go through Billy's things.
In his room.
Barry wants it done but I won't let him.
He won't know what to keep and would probably just throw out everything.
And I want to keep a few things to remind me of Billy.
Would you do it?
Now?
Strike while the iron's hot sort of thing, now we've had the idea?
You know what I mean.’
She managed to open her eyes even wider; wide enough to give a suicidal Spaniel decent competition.
How could I resist?
Prentice was nodding encouragement.
‘Well…if you think I can be any use…’
‘Oh, thank you, Roy, you're an angel.’
She hugged me, not realizing what she'd said.
‘As long as you can give me a lift back here this afternoon,’ I said, establishing some ground rules.
I wasn't in the adopt-an-orphan business.
‘Of course, of course .’
Mr Tuckett hooted again.
‘Come on, before the old man loses his rag.’
She frog-marched me down to the street, leaving Prentice holding the door open.
He made as if to say something, but I just beamed at him and he had to let it go.
As we approached the Mercedes, Bernice said:
‘Was that a friend of yours?
Do you want to ask him along?’
‘Never seen him before,’ I said.
Some of the people I know regard Hackney as the sticks and half expect to see herds of grazing  wildebeest when they come to visit me.
In their book, Leytonstone would therefore be real bandit country and Romford, once you'd convinced them that it wasn't actually off the edge of the map, was probably the Twilight Zone.
Barry Tuckett drove smoothly and quietly, not contributing to the conversation in the back seat, which wasn't really a conversation but Bernice's potted biography of Billy.
By the time we got to Romford, she'd said an awful lot but I wasn't any wiser.
The Mercedes slid to a halt outside a fair-sized, 1930s detached house set back from the road by a small garden which had thoughtfully been concreted over.
There was a sundial on a plinth in the middle of it, which was quite tasteful, and three faded concrete gnomes which were anything but.
From their expressions, they were wondering where all the grass had gone as well.
Mr Tuckett muttered something about having to get back to work and Bernice said that would be fine, as she could drop me back in her car.
She patted him on the shoulder and he drove off as she plumbed her bag for a ring of keys  which wouldn't have looked out of place at Balmoral.
The house had been furnished with a lot of money badly spent in a mixture of styles.
There were also no books anywhere and no immediate evidence of a sound system.
I'd noticed two separate burglar alarm circuits on the way in, but I didn't spot anything that wasn't instantly replaceable and therefore over-insurable.
I told myself not to be such a snob.
Bernice said she would show me Billy's room and leave me to it while she made lunch and did I fancy a drink?
I said a large mug of strong, sweet tea would do the job and she agreed, adding that it was the best thing ‘after a shock’.
I hadn't been thinking of stress or shock, I'd been nursing a hangover.
The adrenalin of going to a Court had kept it at bay so far but now I could feel the walls closing in again.
Billy's bedroom looked more like a student's room than his pad at university ever had.
The posters on the walls were all reproductions of newspaper adverts showing battery farm conditions or dogs and rabbits with various electrodes attached to them.
Under one of these someone had added, in pencil, ‘An Animal Auschwitz?’
There was a desk overloaded with papers and two freestanding bookcases, though they held few books.
Most of the space was taken up with piles of pamphlets and hand-outs.
I pulled out the stool which Billy must have sat at the desk on, and began to rifle through things in no particular order.
It all made depressing reading.
One four-pager told me that around 500 million animals were killed for food in the UK each year.
It made no mention of fish, so I supposed that while ‘meat is murder’, fish eating is justifiable homicide.
Nearly four million animals were used each year for experiments, eighty per cent of which were rodents, which gave the activists a problem as rats don't have good PR potential.
(It's their naked tails.
Can you think of a sympathetic animal  with a hairless tail?
Especially one that moves quickly?)
There were hand-outs on ‘Cruelty Free’ cosmetics, positively promoting cosmetic companies who did not drip shampoo into rabbits' eyes in what I knew was called the Draize Test for irritancy.
And there must have been a hundred copies of a pamphlet on the campaign against street trading in animals.
I remembered reading about the protests over Club Row just north of Spitalfields' market, where a street market in animals had been held since Victorian times.
Those particular Victorian values had been shot down about 1983.
One up to the libbers.
There were books — Peter Singer's, which had popularized the term ‘Animal Liberation’, and Robert Sharpe's The Cruel Deception.
And there were photocopies of press coverage of the famous 1982 march on the Porton Down chemical defence establishment and on the activities of the Hunt Saboteurs Association, including the famous quote from one Master of Fox Hounds advocating that horse-whipping a saboteur was, like beating his wife, a private matter.
Maybe it was true that the Devil got all the best lines.
In all of it, there was a marked absence of anything actually written by Billy.
Perhaps he had just been a delivery boy.
In the top drawer of the desk I found some more photocopies and these had at least some notes scribbled in red ink in the margins.
There were four sheets paperclipped together.
The top two were extracts from the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act, 1986, the Government legislation which required that animal experiment projects, the researcher involved and the premises where it would happen, all required licences.
Certain sections had been underlined in angry, wavy red lines, including one which read:'…anything done for the purpose of, or liable to result in, the birth or hatching of a protected animal…
' But there wasn't enough in the extract for me to get the context.
The other two sheets were copies of short press reports — one from an unidentified newspaper and the other from some sort of scientific magazine — about a Professor Brian Bamforth.
Actually, the reports concerned various research grants won by Professor Bamforth and though the reason for the grants was there in black and white, it didn't make much sense to me.
I could understand the term ‘genetic engineering’— well, as long as nobody asked me to speak for a minute without hesitation or deviation — and I recognized ‘DNA’, which was said to be the basic stuff of life.
I had friends who thought tequila was.
On both these pages, in red, at top right, was the word ‘Transgenic’ followed by two or three exclamation marks.
That didn't mean much either.
Lower down, one reference to Professor Bamforth had his name circled in red and a red line led off to the margin and another hand-drawn red circle.
In that was a plus sign, followed by ‘GB, P. & L.’ and the ‘L’had been underlined twice.
There was also the notation of a date, the 31st of the 12th month.
New Year's Eve, in about ten days' time.
I heard Bernice coming just in time to fold the photocopies and stuff them inside my jacket.
By the time she'd elbowed the door open with two steaming mugs of tea, I had was reading the first thing which had come to hand.
‘I thought for a minute you could have been Billy sitting there,’ she said as she put the tea down on the desk.
‘But I'd be kidding myself.’
I looked at her with a new respect.
‘Billy used to sit there all hunched over,’ she went on, holding her right arm up to demonstrate.
‘Like he was doing an exam and didn't want anybody to crib the answers from him.’
She gave me a little‘that's-all’ smile and looked around the room.
Then came back to me.
‘You interested in filming too?’ she asked before putting her mug in front of her face.
I looked at what I was supposed to be reading.
It was the instruction manual for a Minolta autofocus video camera.
I'd seen them in the shops marked down, as a Christmas offer, to around nine hundred quid.
I tended to regard them with some scepticism.
People who bought amateur video-making equipment, however good it was (and the Minolta stuff is state of the art), usually had little of interest to actually film.
It was people like me, with no money for such things, who led the interesting lives.
Well, that's how I rationalize it.
Still, it was a growing market and there was money to be made there somewhere by somebody.
I knew a guy who made a fortune out of CB radio when it became legal in Britain.
Not out of the radio sets themselves, mind you, but — about a month after legalization — he flogged cassette tapes on ‘How to keep a conversation going on CB’, with a follow-up manual listing good ‘handles’(mostly pinched from Lord of the Rings) for Citizen Banders with absolutely no imagination.
I thought he was conning me when he told me his plan.
He now lives in Jersey.
I don't.
‘Oh…er…well, I've never been able to afford gear like this,’ I said sheepishly.
‘Was Billy keen?’
‘Seemed to be.
All of a sudden, like.
He asked for that camera for his birthday this year.’
She looked around the room and frowned.
‘We never saw anything he videoed on it and it doesn't seem to be here.
He probably loaned it to somebody.’
I knew people who would borrow a video camera, especially if they were throwing a particular kind of party.
But I didn't think Billy knew them.
‘Lunch won't be long,’ said Bernice, sitting down on the edge of Billy's bed and letting a hand stray over the duvet.
‘I've put the oven chips in.’
She looked towards the window.
‘Worried about the neighbours?’
I asked.
She knew what I meant.
We'd arrived and Mr Tuckett  had driven off and within minutes I could be seen, from the street, through the open curtains, upstairs in a bedroom.
And now she could too.
‘Sod ‘em,’ she smiled.
‘They pay enough rates.
Something to gossip about is extra.’
I smiled politely and scalded my mouth on the tea.
‘Is there anything worth keeping?’
‘I have to say, there's nothing personal here that I can see.’
It was true.
No family photographs, no girlfriend evidence, no souvenir ticket stubs from plays or concerts or similar.
Just animals.
‘We weren't that close,’ she said softly and looked down at the floor.
If I'd been standing, I'd have shuffled my feet.
‘You must think we're a funny family, Roy,’ she said, not looking up.
‘And why should I do that, eh?’
My God, she should see some of my lot.
‘I'm not crying,’ she said.
‘I feel I ought to cry more than I have.
It's expected, isn't it?
Billy, our only child, dead.
All those years together…
All the sacrifices…
Oh, bugger it.
Who am I trying to kid?’
Yourself, Bernice.
But I kept it zipped.
She sniffed loudly and looked at me.
‘Billy was a disappointment to his father.
They've had nothing to do with each other for damn near twenty years.
And I suppose I've always sided with Barry.
I had to.
It was him I married, after all.
Billy went his own way.
Don't get me wrong, Roy.
It's not that we didn't get on together, it's just we had nothing in common.
He was like a stranger.
And now he's gone, and it…it really hasn't made that much difference.’
I moved towards her and sat on the bed and put an arm round her.
It wasn't that my shoulders are broader than anyone else's or that I have the most understanding nature in the world.
I was just the one who was there.
‘We just…we just didn't love him, Roy,’ she breathed.
‘Is that really bad?’
‘It happens, Mrs T, more than you'd think.’
I gave her a squeeze.
‘Are those chips done yet?’
‘Five minutes,’ she said, standing up.
‘How do you like your steak?’
We ate in the kitchen, though if my steak had been much bigger we would have had to move into the garage as well.
‘We've a bottle of wine somewhere,’ said Bernice, ‘if you fancy it.’
The spirit was willing, but the flesh was still recovering.
And I was eating steak for the second time in less than fifteen hours.
How could I do that after what I'd read in Billy's bedroom?
Aw hell, this cow was past saving.
‘No, thanks,’ I said with noble restraint.
‘I'll be driving again this afternoon.’
‘I've got some of those no-alcohol lagers in the fridge if you'd prefer,’ she said enthusiastically.
‘That'll do fine.’
She left her plate, eager to please.
Eager to do something.
Mothers.
Who'd have ‘em?
‘Where exactly was Billy living?’
I asked when we were munching again.
‘Here,’ she said, forking chips.
‘Well, as much as he ever did.
He would sleep here maybe one night in five.
The rest of the time, he'd stay with one of his friends when they were out campaigning for the animals.’
‘Anyone in particular?’
‘Mostly his friend Peter, in Islington.’
She saw my next question coming.
‘No, I don't know what his last name is.
The police asked me that as well.
And I don't know exactly where he lived either.
Billy used to take his bicycle up to town on the train.
Did I tell you he even used to have a name for it?
Larry.
He used to call it Larry.
Have you ever…oh, I have told you that, haven't I?’
‘Is it still here?’
‘No.
He took it with him when he went to see Peter last Friday.
It's not that I mind.
Maybe Peter has a use for it.’
‘You've never met this chap Peter?’
I was perking up under the influence of what seemed like half a ton of protein.
‘Not really.
Saw him once.
Well, I saw his van really, once when he came to pick up Billy when they were going off somewhere for the weekend.
They used to travel around a lot, handing out leaflets and things.
I remembered the van because it was just like the ones Barry bought for the business, except it was red, not white.’
‘Did Billy take the camera with him as well?’
I asked to keep her talking, but I was thinking of the scribble on the photocopies I'd found.
‘P. & L.’ couldn't be Peter and Larry, could they?
A Mountain Bike called Larry?
And there was ‘GB’ as well.
‘Oh, I haven't seen that for over a month.’
Bernice speared her last chip.
‘He probably lent it to Geoffrey.’
‘Geoffrey?’
‘Geoffrey Bell.
Used to be a great friend of Billy's until he moved away, but Billy still used to go and see him.’
‘You know Geoffrey Bell?’
‘Of course I do.
He used to be the vicar.’
After lunch, Bernice and I armed ourselves with black plastic dustbin liners and we made a concerted attack on Billy's room.
I found nothing else of interest but Bernice turned up a couple of old school exercise books of Billy's and decided to keep them in remembrance.
The piles of pamphlets and the hand-outs went in the bin.
The books and clothes we put into boxes for Oxfam.
She thanked me every five minutes or so until we'd finished.
Then she got a brand new Ford Fiesta out of the garage and drove me back to where I'd left Armstrong in Leytonstone.
Before we left Romford, though, she made a minor detour  to see Mr Tuckett at work.
In fact, she wanted to get me ‘a little something’ for my trouble from the shop we parked outside.
The little something was a nine-pound leg of lamb and it came in a plastic carrier bag which bore the same legend as the shopfront and the two white Escort vans parked at the side: B. TUCKETT — FAMILY BUTCHER.
CHAPTER 8
Back at Stuart Street I cemented my new-found friendship with Doogie and Miranda by presenting them with the leg of lamb.
Let's face it, not even with Springsteen's help could I munch through that alone.
It might have come in handy frozen, as a weapon in case Pointy-Beard and Shifty-Eyes turned up again, but then I now had Doogie on side.
Lisabeth, from the middle flat, was in danger of losing her unpaid job as my unofficial bodyguard.
Miranda even managed a smile, revelling in the fact that someone apart from herself appreciated Doogie, if only for his street-fighting qualities.
I tried to look pleased when she told me that Prentice had been ringing at half-hourly intervals since mid-afternoon and had left a multiple-choice list of numbers where I could get him that evening.
But first, I had my own problems to sort.
It took me ages to get Iris, the landlady of the Duke of Wellington, to answer the phone.
It couldn't have been because the pub was busy, it was more likely she'd just forgotten where the phone was.
But eventually she did.
‘Hello, Iris, it's Mac.
Mac MacLean.
I called in the other day to see if there was a package for me.
Remember?’
‘Oh yes,’ she said vaguely, sounding as if she'd got her valium tablets on optic.
‘Has there been anything?’
‘Through the post?’
‘Yes.’
‘For you?’
‘Yes.’
‘Not through the post, luvvy.’
‘Has anything come by carrier pigeon, then?’
I snapped, regretting it immediately.
‘There's no need to adopt that tone of voice.
This place isn't run just for your benefit, you know.
I've had enough of men just thinking they can ride roughshod over…’
‘Look, I'm really truly sorry, Iris, but this is important.’
I smiled my best smile down the line.
‘Did somebody leave something for me?’
‘Well…
’ She paused to consider whether I was sorry enough.
‘She didn't actually leave anything, but she had a parcel with her.’
‘Who had, Iris?’
‘The girl who came yesterday.’
‘What girl, Iris?’
I asked patiently.
‘The foreign one.
More than a tint of the tarbrush there, if you ask me.’
I hadn't, but never mind.
‘I think she fancies you, Mac.
She kept calling you ‘Angel’ all the time.’
‘Did she leave the package, Iris?’
‘What?
No, she took it with her.’
‘Any message?’
‘No, she just went when I said you didn't actually live here.
Though the way some people treat this place, I might as well be running…’
‘Thanks a bunch, Iris.’
I hung up and rested my forehead against the wall in despair.
Then Fenella tapped me on the shoulder and I almost had a heart attack.
Our communal phone is on the hallway wall by the front door.
Fenella, Lisabeth's younger, slimmer room-mate, had  sneaked down the stairs from their flat without making a sound.
I suspected she was taking lessons from Springsteen.
‘Oooh, sorry, Angel.
Did I make you jump?’
‘It's your natural static electricity, Binky, my dear.
You just gave me a shock.
Has anybody ever suggested plugging you into the National Grid?’
‘Is that rude?’ she asked, frowning.
‘Only if you want it be,’ I said wearily.
For some reason, Fenella thought most of what I said to her was rude.
‘Now, what can I do for you?’
She thought about that one for a second, then decided to give me the benefit of the doubt.
‘I've a message for you.’
I held up a hand.
‘I know.
From a guy called Prentice.’
‘Well, actually, no, Mr Clever Boots, so there,’ she pouted.
‘A girl?
A girl called Zaria?’
Although I'd no idea how she'd got the number.
‘Zaria.
What an unusual name.
Quite nice, though.’
‘What did she say, Binky?’
I didn't actually take her by her shoulders and shake her, but it was close.
‘Oh, it wasn't her.
I just said I thought it a nice name.
Why are you grinding your teeth?
No, it was Mr Tomlin…’
I squeezed the bridge of my nose with forefinger and thumb.
It didn't seem to ease the pressure.
‘Who is Mr Tomlin, Fenella?’
‘The man who lives down the street at No. 23.
He has Siamese cats.’
‘So?’
‘So he said that if he caught Springsteen in his back garden again, he would heave a half-brick at him.
You don't think he would, do you?
I can't stand people who are cruel to animals.’
Me neither, but it seemed to be open season on Angels.
I tried the Aurora Corona Rest Home again because I couldn't think of anywhere else.
But this time I asked for Nurse Sally, the hyperactive Mrs Cody's minder.
The woman who answered said she thought Sally had gone off duty but would put me through to the staff quarters.
Then a younger female voice with a thick Irish accent came on.
‘Sally's gone out, ‘oim afraid.
Yer've just missed her.’
‘Sally used to be good mates with Zaria, didn't she?’
I tried, as I didn't have anything to lose.
‘Zaria?
The one who left this week?’
‘Yeah, that's right.’
‘Maybe she was, I don't know.
I've only been here a month meself, and I'm on nights for the extra money.
Even when I'm on days I haven't the cash to go gallivanting up West every night.’
‘Sally goes up West, does she?’
I oozed innocence.
(Rule of Life No. 83: Approached in the right way, anyone will tell you anything and it will usually be true.)
‘Sure she does.
She goes window-shopping up Oxford Street, then meets her cronies in that dreadful French Pub in Soho.’
She said it like it was somewhere south-east of Sodom.
‘Well, give her my regards when you see her.’
‘I surely will,’ she said, and I hung up before she could ask my name.
It wasn't much, but It was something to go on.
Whatever it was I'd taken from Sunil's house — and I'd only done it as a favour to him, after all — he couldn't have said anything to Nassim about it.
If he had, my furniture would have been out on the street by now and Springsteen and I would have been queuing down the night shelter.
But whatever it was, he didn't think twice about sending his heavies to see me.
Maybe I should go and meet him and explain.
Maybe there was a Santa Claus after all.
I rang Prentice as I couldn't think how to put it off  any longer, and got him at the second number he'd left.
While it was ringing, Lisabeth appeared on the stairs and said, very pointedly I thought: ‘You are logging all those calls in the book, aren't you?’
‘Of course,’ I lied and cursed to myself for not remembering to put a pencil behind my ear like I normally do when I use the phone.
Prentice came on and I said who I was.
‘You have a name for me,’ he said.
‘I was getting worried we'd have to send out a search-party.’
‘Call off the dogs, I have three names for you, and two facts.’
‘Oh, we have facts as well?
I'm impressed.’
I hate sarcastic policemen.
I think they all take a course in it during basic training.
Prentice must have been near the top of the class.
‘First, you tell me you've called off the dogs.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘I give you the names and that's it.
Goodbye.
Don't call me; I won't call you.
OK?’
He paused just long enough to make me feel uncomfortable, then said: ‘Very well.’
‘Got a pencil?’
In the hope that he hadn't, I went straight on.
‘First thing, I think you can cross Lucy Scarrott off your hit list.
I don't think Billy has even seen her in over a year.’
‘Did Mrs Tuckett tell you that?’
‘Not exactly.
I don't think Mrs T had any idea what Billy was up to.
Now, the names.
Firstly, there's a Peter.
A friend of Billy's and Billy used to stay with him some nights.’
‘Gay?’
‘I've no idea and never thought to ask.
But here's fact one: Peter drives a red Ford Escort van and lives in Islington.
Actually, that's two for the price of one, come to think of it.’
‘Get on with it.’
‘OK, name two is Geoffrey Bell.
The Reverend Geoffrey  Bell, would you believe.
Until last year, a vicar in Romford.’
‘Rector,’ said Prentice.
‘What?’
‘He's a rector, not a vicar and he is currently incumbent in —’ I heard paper rustle as if he was turning pages' — the parish of West Elsworth near Cambridge.
I wondered if he'd turn up again.’
‘If you knew all this —’ I started angrily.
‘I didn't know it, I just have a good memory.
And I wouldn't miss having you on the payroll for anything, Angel.’
‘Payroll?
What payroll?’
‘I was speaking figuratively.’
I might have known.
‘OK, well I'll just confirm that Bell is definitely worth a look.
And that's from stuff in Billy's room and also his mum, who thinks the sun shines out of his rector.’
‘Now, now…’
‘Last one and then it's bye-bye.
Professor Brian Bamforth is the name, and the fact is a date.
New Year's Eve.’
That shut him up completely.
‘Prentice?
You still there?’
‘Yes.
Fucking hell, you save the best till last, don't you?
Fuck-ing hell,’ he said again, slowly.
‘I hope they do,’ I said.
And hung up.
He rang back, of course.
In fact, I hadn't even got to the first stair before the phone went.
And I had to answer it.
Lisabeth would have appeared to cut off my retreat if I hadn't.
And I had to give Prentice full marks for cheek when I did.
‘Listen, Roy —’ so it was ‘Roy’now?'— I've been thinking.’
And you've had all the time in the world it takes to dial seven digits.
‘If you could make contact with Bell, it might give us an in we've never been able —’
‘Hold it!
No way, Jose.
I've said it once and I'll say it again, it's bye-bye.’
‘Now wait a minute.
Think about it.
You could say you were a friend of Billy's and —’
‘Bye-bye.’
This time, after I'd hung up, I laid the phone down at an angle to the receiver tits so he'd get an engaged tone if he tried again.
It was an old trick.
But I'd never done it to a policeman before.
It felt strangely satisfying.
It was still early, not yet eight o'clock.
Back in Flat 3 I changed out of my Court Appearance gear and into civilian clothes.
In other words, I took off my tie and transferred money, keys and a pack of Piccadilly No.
I cigarettes (only three gone in a week; I was winning) from my one half-respectable navy blue blazer into my fur-lined leather bomber jacket.
I found Springsteen sitting on the draining-board gazing out of the kitchen window, which I have to open for him so he can come and go as he likes.
I'd built a cat flap in the flat door so he could get into the rest of the house and one more in the back door so that he could get out into the square yard of concrete which our landlord Nassim called our patio.
But he still liked to use the window, maybe just to maintain the impression that we mere humans were here to serve him.
He was gazing up at the stars, probably communing with the Mother Ship and receiving new instructions.
There was a full dish of cat food on the kitchen floor.
‘No appetite, huh?’
I asked him.
‘Been pigging out down at Mr Tomlin's, I suppose?’
He didn't even curl a lip in my direction and he didn't  howl when I playfully cuffed him behind the ear.
(Well, he does it to me.)
Perhaps he was off-colour.
‘You're in charge,’ I said, and turned the light off on him.
Everybody knows the French Pub, or at least they say they know it if you prompt them with ‘you know, the one in Dean Street’, though it's not in many of the guide books.
Thank goodness.
Let's face it, there wouldn't be room for any tourists, so why advertise?
After about thirty years with a genuine French landlord who only sold beer in half-pints, among his other idiosyncrasies, the brewery bowed to public opinion and renamed the place the French Pub.
It had officially been called the York Minster, or similar, but that had been too passé for Soho's artist colony.
Nowadays most of that set had moved on one way or another, though the odd one still dropped in occasionally.
Today, the French was the place to be seen in.
No one went there to enjoy themselves.
I parked Armstrong on Soho Square and hoofed it round the corner into Dean Street, keeping an eye out for the fly-posters to see if anyone interesting was playing in the vicinity.
Once in the French, I elbowed my way through the crush to the bar and ordered a lager.
I didn't get any say in the matter of how big or which brand it was, but the barmaid smiled sweetly and said ‘Merci’ when I paid her, because they all pretend to be French even if they aren't.
I scouted the surrounding faces over the top of my glass.
There were no world-famous painters or film stars, but a lot of people trying to look like them.
I did spot an up-and-coming bass guitarist I'd once played with, and in one corner, drinking champagne, was the author of what was supposed to be the definitive guide to the beers of the world.
Apart from him, I was pretty sure I was the oldest person there.
I treated myself to a cigarette and did another scan.
Nothing.
No sign of Nurse Sally or anyone looking remotely like her.
Then I felt a pressure on my arm and a soft female voice asked me for a light.
She was dressed in funereal punk: all black and chains.
The tight wool mini just wider than the belt which held it up, ended where the ripped black tights began.
She also wore black spiky, button-up ankle boots, a baggy black cardigan and enough stainless steel jewellery to make a dinner service.
Her face was a white powder mask with black eye make-up and black lip gloss.
She offered a black Balkan Sobranie for the light I offered and only then looked up from under the wide-brimmed black hat she wore.
‘Thanks.’
She blew smoke at me.
‘Glad to see you've recovered from being goosed by Mrs Cody.
We call her Buffalo Belle.’
I did a quick triple-take and having made sure there wasn't a ventriloquist anywhere, I said:
‘Sally?’
She nodded.
‘I didn't recognize you,’ I said stupidly.
‘I should bleedin' well hope not.
This is my night off.’
She stared at me and then flicked ash with a black fingernail.
‘Aren't you gonna buy me a drink?’
‘Sure.
What'll it be?
Guinness and a twist?’
I asked, eyeing her outfit.
‘What's the twist?’
‘I put a vodka in it.’
‘Sounds good.’
As I fought for bar space to order the drinks, I looked over my shoulder and caught her making hand signals to a bunch of her friends camped on the stairs leading up to the Ladies' toilets.
The message was clear enough, she'd bet the others she could con a free drink out of me, probably not letting on that she'd seen me before.
I didn't mind, I'd done it myself in the past and probably will again.
But I had no intention of getting suckered by the rest of  her crew.
I scanned them once just to make sure Zaria wasn't among them and was pretty sure she wasn't.
It was difficult to tell as, in their search for an individual expression of fashion, they had adopted what virtually amounted to a black uniform.
Only the blue and yellow vegetable dyes in their hair distinguished them.
I poured a single measure of vodka into the half-pint of Guinness without disturbing the head, and handed it to Sally, leaning over so I could get close to her ear.
There were two upside-down crucifixes hanging from it.
‘I was hoping to run into you,’ I said.
‘One of your fellow guards at the maximum security twilight home said you came here.’
‘Bet you wouldn't have recognized me,’ she said, sipping her drink and leaving a trail of creamy white on her lip gloss.
‘I've said so.
When you go off duty you really go.’
‘It's such a relief to get out of the starched uniform and the black stockings,’ she said loudly so that the crowd around us could hear.
I raised my lager, shaking the glass slightly as it came up.
‘Oh, I do like it when you talk dirty,’ I said equally loudly.
She laughed.
‘I'll never forget the expression on your face when you felt Mrs Cody feeling you.
You were a real rabbit-in-the-headlights job.’
‘Only because I couldn't work out how you were doing it,’ I said, and she laughed some more and asked if I wanted to join her friends.
‘Not tonight, I've got to run.
Listen, I wanted to ask you if you'd seen Zaria.
You know, Zaria who used to work with you.’
She thought for a second.
‘Are you the guy with the taxi?’
‘That's me.’
‘Yeah, she mentioned you.’
‘Have you seen her since she left?’
‘Nope.
You looking for her?’
‘Yeah, and more to the point, she's looking for me.’
A flash of disbelief crossed her eyeliner.
‘Straight up, she is, but she doesn't know where I live.
Have you any idea where I can find her?’
Sally shook her head as she drank.
I didn't believe her for a minute but I didn't see what I could do.
‘If she does get in touch, will you give her my number?’
‘Only if I can keep it if she doesn't.’
I considered this for a while.
‘Fair enough.’
I ripped the top from my packet of cigarettes and borrowed a pencil from one of the barmaids to scribble the address and number of the house in Stuart Street.
Sally took the strip of paper and stuffed it down the front of her skirt.
Nobody in the pub turned a hair.
‘It'll be safe there,’ she smiled sweetly.
I was probably still thinking about that as I got back to Armstrong in Soho Square, which is why I reacted so slowly when the white Ford Capri screeched alongside Armstrong's parking place and nosed into the kerb so I couldn't move him.
I was still fumbling the key in the driver's door as the two Pakistanis — one of them Pointy-Beard but the other a new one on me — piled out of the Capri towards me.
I whipped the key out and turned to run through the Square only to find Shifty-Eyes standing blocking the pavement.
And this time he had a knife.
They didn't say much and, to be fair, they didn't even touch me more than was necessary.
Pointy-Beard simply said that Sunil wanted to see me when he'd finished eating and we were going to meet him at Shazam's and did I know it.
I said yes automatically — it's just about the best Pakistani restaurant in town.
And then they made their big mistake, they let me drive Armstrong.
Shifty-Eyes and Pointy-Beard were in the back, of course, the third cousin having disappeared with the Capri.
And they kept the glass panel wide open and Shifty-Eyes sat on the jump seat, twisted round so he could keep the knife blade resting on my right ear.
If I braked sharply, I could go to a New Year's Eve party as Van Gogh.
The restaurant we were heading for was in the block opposite Harrods on the Brompton Road.
Normally a short hop by cab from Soho, via Piccadilly and Hyde Park Corner, but there was plenty of traffic around thanks to late-night Christmas shopping and the social life of the Sloane Rangers as we neared Knightsbridge.
That cut our speed some and gave me thinking time, but the traffic seemed to consist entirely of black cabs and VW Golfs full of party-hoppers.
Cabs.
Of course.
If I was lucky with the traffic, I had an idea.
What did these guys in the back know?
Just because there were two of them and they had a knife at my ear, they thought I was their prisoner.
As we rounded Hyde Park Corner, I looked in the rear-view mirror, then the wing mirror and I estimated I had them outnumbered about five to one.
Shifty-Eyes must have sensed something.
‘You just drive carefully, unnerstand?’
‘Sure,’ I said, cool as I could.
‘You nervous?’
He asked, and stropped the knife blade gently up and down the skin behind my ear.
‘Course not,’ I blagged.
‘Doesn't everybody's ears sweat?’
He didn't get that straight off and I didn't give him time to think about it.
For the first time in my life, I accelerated to catch a red light at the intersection with Brompton Road, steering Armstrong right down the middle of the two lanes, blocking both.
Before I'd hit the handbrake, another cab had honked me, and in the mirror I could see four more pulling up behind me and two across the road at the other side of the lights.
I hit the door handle and did a dip and shuffle so that my head was below the knife slash arc and made an undignified but unscathed exit, taking the keys with me.
Then I started shouting before Shifty and Pointy could react.
‘Now look you two, I'm having none of that in the back of my cab!
I paid good money for this vehicle and I won't have the likes of you doing what you're doing!
It's disgusting!
There ought to be a law against it!
There probably is a law against it!
So you can just get out right now and catch a bus or walk or whatever you want but I'm not having you doing that in the back of my cab!
This is my living, you know.
Hanging's too good for the likes of you!’
By this time, I'd walked round the front of the cab and even slapped Armstrong's bonnet to make a point.
There were hoots coming from the back of the other black cabs stuck behind me.
The lights had changed to green but nobody was going anywhere unless I moved.
Shifty and Pointy just sat there, sinking lower under the window level.
Then first one, then another and finally eight cabbies all wandered over to see what the fuss was.
And when the first said: ‘You having trouble with these two ponces, mate?’
I knew I had it made.
It's better to be lucky than good.
But on the way home, the prospect of a day or so out of sight seemed a prudent thing to consider.
I had no intention of trying to explain the whereabouts of Sunil's goods to Sunil or his henchmen until I'd made contact with Zaria, and if she didn't come across soon there was a good chance she'd find me hanging from a Christmas tree by the neck.
Sunil had sent three of them tonight and if he kept that rate up they'd need a double-decker bus to follow me by Christmas Eve.
Checking all the time that there was no one on my tail, I reviewed the situation to the sound of a pirate tape of Sade singing jazz in cabaret.
On the minus side, they knew what I looked like, where I lived and what I drove.
On the plus side, I didn't think they'd jump me at Stuart Street as long as Doogie was there.
That was it as far as the upside.
And Doogie had a job to go to.
But then I hadn't.
I could just take off.
Disappear until they got bored or Zaria finally showed up.
Back at Stuart Street I found Fenella and Lisabeth and Miranda and Doogie busy decorating the staircase with brightly coloured tinsel streamers which had clumps of real holly tied into them every eighteen inches or so.
The holly, being the sort of holly that is sold on street corners in London at this time of year, must have cost a fortune and it didn't have berries on.
(They fetched a premium price in the West End stores.)
Still, as a festive substitute for barbed wire, it was pretty effective.
Even the mysterious Mr Goodson had a cut-out paper sign saying MERRY XMAS across his door.
I suspected that Fenella had bullied him into it.
‘There you are, Angel,’ boomed Lisabeth from five steps up.
She was doing what she was best at: supervising.
‘You haven't forgotten you're responsible for getting the tree, have you?’
‘Of course not,’ I smiled as I lied.
‘Hello, Binky.’
I only said that to annoy her as Fenella was leaning over the staircase banister to fix some tinsel with double-sided tape and one more inch and she needn't have bothered wearing a skirt at all.
Lisabeth followed my eye-line and reached to pull down Binky's creeping hemline.
Fenella smiled between blushes.
‘We were thinking of having the party on New Year's Eve,’ said Miranda, spraying fake snow from an ozonefriendly aerosol on to a twig of holly.
‘Oh good,’ I said, squeezing up the stairs behind Lisabeth.
What party?
‘Well, you see, Doogie's got to work on Christmas Day — at the hotel.’
‘Sure.
Er…fine.
Whatever.
It's OK by me.’
‘Oh good.
We were worried in case you couldn't get the band together.’
Band?
What had I promised last night?
‘I'll have to see, of course, but I should think the lads will come if we get plenty beer in.’
‘Aye, that's a pre-requisite,’ said Doogie, who was doing something unspeakable to a metal coat-hanger.
It looked as if he was weight-training, then I realized he was bending them into circles so they could be covered in coloured paper and turned into Christmas wreaths.
That had always struck me as pretty morbid, but this was the season of goodwill to all men.
Even Scotsmen.
‘Have yer decided which lager we'll be having?’
Doogie asked.
Pardon?
‘It'll be a surprise,’ I smiled.
‘A cheeky little brew but you'll be amused by its pretension.’
‘Och, weel, that's all right then.’
I had made it to the door of my flat.
‘Doogie, did I promise to do my special punch as well?’
I asked as I fumbled my keys out.
‘Sure yer did,’ grinned Doogie, damaging another hanger.
‘Both sorts, the white and the red.
You're not chickening out, are you?’
The wire hanger twisted into a figure eight in his hands.
‘No, Doogie, just checking.’
As soon as I had the door closed and my jacket off I found a road atlas and turned to the Cambridge area.
It wasn't just Sunil who had convinced me that the rest of the week would be better spent out of town.
Just where the fuck was West Elsworth?