

9
9.
And Moses came down from the mount bearing the two tablets of stone.
10.
And lo, there was a whole lot of shaking going on.
11.
And Moses was well peeved and did lose his rag saying, ‘Thou shalt not Rock ‘n’ Roll, for this is the eleventh commandment…’
12.
And Elvis said, ‘Stroll on, thou art a lying git.’
The Suburban Book of the Dead
Barry lay upsidedown in the alleyway.
‘I did warn him,’ sighed the inverted Time Sprout.
‘It's not my fault if he gets his head sawn off.
I've done my best for that guy.’
That's not really fair Barry.
‘Who said that?’
It's me, Barry.
Rankin's ghost writer.
‘What, that bloke down the pub who's always fancied writing a novel?’
That's me.
‘Well, howdy.’
I thought I'd better have a word with you about the incredibly clever trick-ending.
‘It'll have to go some to beat the last two.’
Have I ever let you down?
‘Can't say that you have, chief.
So what can I do for you?’
It's more what I can do for you.
Bounce over to the typewriter and have a look at this contract I've drawn up.
‘Without my agent present?
Are you kidding?’
Barry.
I hold the little white bottle.
Do you want to come out of this covered in glory or covered in Tipp-Ex?
‘Covered in glory, please.’
That's the stuff.
Now it's quite straightforward…
The last thing I expected was to be woken from unconsciousness by an air hostess with the face of an angel, gently patting on my shoulder and telling me that the plane had just landed in Miami.
So I guess the bucket of cold water that hit me in the face didn't come as much of a surprise.
Normally I would have come up fighting.
I learned Dimac from a lama in Tibet and my hands are so deadly that I have to keep them in a locked closet when they're not in use.
It was a real drag to find them handcuffed behind my back just when I needed them most, I can tell you.
‘Wake up Widebarn.’
I knew that voice almost as well as I knew the theme from Doctor Zhivago.
‘We wanna ask you some questions.’
I kept my eyes tight shut.
I was chained into a chair, but it wasn't the one in my office.
And this place didn't smell like Fangio's bar.
I was definitely indoors, so the alleyway and the roof-top were out.
Things didn't bode too well for the four-set clause in my contract.
‘Open your eyes,’ went the voice of Johnny Dee.
‘Or I'll open them with a shovel.’
I took a little peep.
Apart from the desklamp that was shining in my face, all I could see was darkness.
I could live with that.
‘OK,’ says I with more composure than a Confucian in a comfort station.
‘You want to come quietly, or do I have to get tough?’
Something hit me across the face and it wasn't the first kiss of springtime.
‘Just tell us where it is and we'll let you off with a mercy-killing.’
‘And if I don't?’
‘Then it will be all the worse for your trenchcoat.’
‘You fiends.
What do you want from me anyway?’
‘Your means of transportation, Mr Woodbune.’
‘Woodbine,’ says I. ‘Lazlo Woodbine.’
So they were after Barry.
There was no way I was going to sell the little guy out.
‘Some call me Laz,’ I added.
‘Quit stalling.
Where's the Time Sprout?
It's not in your pockets, so where is it, inside your head?’
I figured that Barry must have taken the duck for cover back in the alleyway.
But there was no way they were going to drag that out of me.
‘I'll never talk,’ says I.
‘Saw off his head, Ed.’
‘I'll switch the chainsaw on, John.’
Now, I don't know poetry from a hole in the ground and I draw the line at having my head sawn off, even if it's to save my trenchcoat.
So, before the rhymes get too painful and the chainsaw too piercing, I decided to state the obvious.
‘Fellas.
I don't have the Time Sprout.
If I did, do you think I would be sitting here letting you rough me up?
I'd be gone in a flash, wouldn't I?’
There was a bit of silence then.
But only a bit, because Ed said, ‘Not necessarily,’ and spoiled it.
‘Not necessarily?’
I was flabbergasted, I kid you not.
‘Sure.
You might have masochistic tendencies.’
‘What?’
‘A deficient libido brought on by a set of socio-physical determinants manifesting in a psycho-sexual syndrome, whereby you can only achieve sensual gratification through the experience of pain.’
‘Now just you see here…’
‘John has a point there,’ Ed added.
‘Take all this obsession with your trenchcoat.
Most unhealthy.
Over-fastidiousness is a sure sign of mania.’
‘Exactly,’ said Johnny.
‘The trenchcoat is a symbol, a metaphor.
An overskin reflecting the wearer's inner self.’
‘You leave my trenchcoat out of this.’
‘Oh ho,’ Johnny continued.
‘Touched a raw nerve there.
It's the same with all you private eyes.
All obsessed with your peckers.
It's all lingams and yonis, isn't it?
Buttons and buttonholes.
Belts and buckles.
Guns and shoulder holsters…’
‘Probing into people's affairs,’ Ed put in.
‘I bet you really get off poking those bullets into the chamber of your pistol.’
‘How dare you!’
‘Were you breast-fed?’
Johnny asked.
‘What's that got to do with anything?’
‘Evasive.
Unable to answer a direct question.’
‘I can too answer a direct question.’
‘Yeah?
So where's the Time Sprout?’
‘Back in the alleyway where you jumped me.’
‘That's all we wanted to know.
Saw off his head, Ed.’
‘You're on, John.’
Rex decanted champagne and munched upon a sasquatch sarnie.
‘I need your help, Laura,’ he said.
Laura smiled that silly sort of champagne smile that all men (all right, some men) look for before they move in for the kill.
‘Go on,’ she said.
‘Hic,’ she added.
‘It's about the billfold.’
Rex chose his words with care.
‘I don't want to get into any trouble.
I just want to return it to its owner.’
‘I'll bet you do.’
Laura giggled foolishly.
‘I've been right through it but there's no address or anything.
What should I do?’
‘Dump it down the John if you're smart.’
‘I don't think that's a very good idea.’
‘Listen.’
Laura waggled her glass at Rex, liberally distributing champagne across the table.
‘If you've got something of theirs you don't have to go looking for them.
They'll find you soon enough.’
‘I'd be willing to pay for your help.’
Rex topped up Laura's glass.
‘What, you with the forty dollars in cash?’
‘I was just kidding about that.
Here, take a look at this.’
Rex detached his wristwatch and passed it to Laura.
‘You can take it as a down-payment.’
Laura turned the watch upon her palm.
‘But this must be worth —’
‘A very great deal and there's lots more where that came from.’
‘Let's go to my apartment,’ said Laura Lynch.
Bill was snoring away at the bar.
‘You gonna move this heap of dung?’ the barman enquired.
‘Not so loud.’
Rex hushed him into silence.
‘The station director always takes a nap at this time of the day.’
‘Station director?
This crud?’
Rex held up the crud's wrist.
‘Behold the watch.’
‘Ooh,’ said Laura.
‘He's got one just like mine.’
Rex was rooting through the slumbering cabby's pockets.
He found the car keys and availed himself thereof.
‘Give him an hour or so please, barman.
Then awaken him gently and present him with the bill.
He'll settle up with you.’
The barman fixed Rex with a real one-eyed blinder.
‘What do you take me for?’
Rex turned up his hands in all innocence.
‘You know who I am.
The chap off the telly.’
‘Yeah, I guess so.’
‘And so, farewell.’
Rex plucked out his sunglasses.
Perched them on his nose.
Took Laura by the arm and bade adieu to the Tomorrowman Tavern.
‘Wake up, asshole,’ said the barman clouting Bill from his stool.
Rex drove the cab with considerable skill.
There were two good reasons for this.
The first being that he had driven such motor cars before, and the second that he had consumed only the barest minimum of champagne.
The woman in the back, who was wildly diving amongst Rex's purchases, was a different kettle of fish altogether.
‘1010 Van Vliet Street, wasn't it?’
Rex asked.
A beautiful woman's address being something that was never likely to slip his mind.
‘First on the left after the Graceland Shopping Mall.
Rexy, can I keep this scarf?’
‘Of course you can.
The Graceland Mall, wasn't that the one on the newscast?’
‘That's the one.
Wasn't that terrible about Mojo and Debbie's baby being kidnapped by aliens and everything?’
‘Terrible.’
Rex shook his head.
There was an awful lot he didn't understand about this strange world.
But little by little he would piece it all together.
Time was on his side, after all.
Because, after all, no-one had, as yet, told him that Presley City was going to be little more than blackened rubble in just two days time.
Perhaps if they had he would have been trying just a little harder and not preparing himself, as he was, for a long night of fornication.
Rex hung a left and cruised into Van Vliet Street.
‘Do you have any mint-flavoured body-rub in?’ he asked.
‘Or should I stop off and buy some?’
‘Now just you see here,’ said I. ‘You can't saw my head off, and you know it.’
‘Oh yeah?
And for why?’
I thought faster than a fly-half in a fire storm.
‘Well for  one thing at least an hour's past since you said you would and you haven't yet.’
‘That don't mean nothing,’ said Ed Kelley.
‘This could be a flashback.’
Johnny Dee nodded in agreement.
‘Or you could be dead already.
Or we could have left you for dead.
There's loads of possibilities.’
I guessed there was.
This wasn't your everyday kind of detective novel after all.
‘Is this a flashback?’
I asked.
‘No.
It's just bad continuity.’
Ed revved up the chainsaw.
‘Say goodbye, sucker.’
‘No.
Hang about.’
‘Say goodbye.’
‘Say goodbye, chief.’
‘Goodbye.’
‘Nice place you have here.’
Rex was favourably impressed.
He had expected some sordid den with a big wardrobe, a lot of shoes and a bed laid for business.
But this was much much more.
The apartment was sumptuous.
And it was extremely elegant.
A Bakhtiari carpet of Qashqai design, interwoven with ivory cabochons, smothered the floor with a profusion of golden palmettes.
Beside the long window stood a George III satinwood side-table, edged with rosewood and fashioned in the distinguished style of Hargraves of Hull.
On this a large collection of frosted Lalique glassware captured the light to perfection.
In one corner a mahogany sofa rose upon cabriole legs, its Aubusson tapestry upholsterings augmented with hassocks of antique paisley.
In another, a chair by Carlos Bugatti, all walnut, tooled vellum and burnished pewter, glowed a dusty bronze.
Against the far wall a cocktail cabinet, fashioned to resemble a Louis XV secrétaire, twinkled grandly.
Upon  its ‘rouge royale’ marble top stood a row of baluster wine goblets.
Rex was particularly taken with the Wurlitzer 600 Model jukebox, noting the elaborate grille of nickel-plated Art-Deco-type scrolls and the way the Lucite rods of the Model 24 had been reduced to straight green verticals in a manner he considered most pleasing.
‘Can you manage all right there?’
Laura was scarcely visible beneath the better part of Rex's purchases.
‘Sure you didn't forget anything?’
‘Rexy, you're such a nice man.’
‘Laura.
This is a most exceptional collection.
How did you come by all this?’
‘Clients.’
Laura unloaded her cargo on to the sofa.
‘Little gifts from satisfied customers.’
Rex ran his finger along the ormolu-mounted record rack.
It contained a collector's dream.
LPs.
The Cray Cherubs, the Lost Teeshirts of Atlantis, Astro Laser and the Flying Starfish from Uranus, the Turbulent Priests, Sonic Energy Authority, Barisal Guns, Mike Petty sings Hank Wangford.
‘Laura.’
Rex drew himself to the business in hand.
‘Is there much you wouldn't do for the $ 87,000 worth of merchandise you have there?’
‘Not much.
Would you like to see the bedroom?’
‘Yes please,’ said Rex.
It would, of course, be unthinkable to actually put down in print what Rex and Laura got up to during the next hour.
But then again, to fudge around it and simply cut to Rex lying on a bed wearing a big smile would be a severe cop-out.
‘Where do you keep your gerbils?’
Rex asked.
‘Goddammit, Barry, you cut that a tad fine.’
I rubbed at my wrists.
There was a bit of chafing there, but nothing I couldn't handle.
‘Sorry, chief.
Got held up on a bit of business.’
‘A bit of business?’
We were back in my office.
It was once more about five minutes before we set out for the alleyway behind the Love Me Tender massage parlor.
And this time I wasn't going to show up.
You have to know how to keep ahead of this game if you don't want to wind up in a wooden trenchcoat.
‘Better late than never, I guess.’
I really wanted to thank the little guy for saving my life, but I have a hard-bitten image to keep up.
‘Just try to stay on the ball in future,’ I told him.
‘Gotcha, chief.’
I knew that he had, and he knew that I knew, etc, etc, etc.
Or thought that he did.
‘Thanks, chief.’
‘Don't mention it, Barry.’
‘So what are we going to do this time?
Hit the alleyway in a hard hat?’
‘Nope.
We are going to hit the bar.’
‘I don't think Fangio's has actually been built yet, chief’
‘And who said anything about Fangio's?’
I asked, like snow on a Russian's boot.
‘Did you ever hear me describe Fangio's?’
‘Can't say that I did, chief.
I wondered about that.’
I tapped my nose like solitaire was the only game in town.
‘It's called keeping your options open.
I never describe the bar, so I can use any bar any time without screwing up my contract.
Pretty neat thinking, eh?’
‘Pretty neat, you ungrateful two-dollar bum!’
‘What's that, Barry?’
‘Nothing, chief.’
Rex removed the crocodile clips and disconnected the car battery.
He slipped out of the pony harness, withdrew the slim plastic tube and emptied the sticky gerbils back into their cage.
The veal in the clingfilm had now thawed out so he consigned it to the wastebasket.
I walked into the bar with more finagle than a ferret in a tinker's trouser.
A guy in a bell-bottomed jumpsuit flew by me at some speed and struck the sidewalk.
‘And stay out, ya turkey!’
The barman looked like he'd had a long day's journey into night, although the monocle and the silk smoking-jacket were as natty as ninepence.
He spied me out with his lone ogler.
‘Hi, Laz,’ he said.
‘Long time no see.’
I couldn't argue with that.
I strolled over to a bar stool, mounted up and set Barry down in an ashtray.
The barman reinstalled himself behind the jump and enquired after my pleasure.
‘A hot pastrami on rye and a bottle of Bud,’ I told him.
‘Coming right up.’
I took in the surroundings and kept them to myself.
In less time than it takes to master the rules of Kabaddi, a steaming sandwich and a matching beer were pushed before me.
‘Twenty-five dollars.’
The Barman's voice was lower than an ankle bracelet on a flat-footed pygmy.
‘Put it on my slate,’ I suggested.
‘Ho, ho, ho.’
The barman put his hands to his belly and made mirth.
‘You jest, surely?
But no matter, the joke is well taken.
See how I turn up the corners of my mouth as I tell you again, twenty-five dollars.’
‘Coming right up.’
I began to pat at my pockets as if I really meant it but the barman shook his head.
‘Sorry?’
I said.
‘Laz,’ he said.
‘I notice that you are hatless and currently sporting the open-necked look.
I have reason to believe that if I were to ask you the time you wouldn't be able to accommodate me.
Am I correct?’
I hung my head, which I also nodded sombrely as I hung it.
‘I spy some chafing upon your wrists, suggestive of handcuffery.
Bruising to the cheek and, I believe, cranial  damage caused, I would guess, by the retractable section of one of those cast-iron fire escapes.
How am I doing so far?’
‘You are the Brahma of Baker Street reborn.’
‘My thanks.
And so it is my conclusion that you are at present a man without funds, clearly ignorant of the axiom that ‘there is no such thing as a free lunch’.’
I rose to take my leave.
‘You got me fair and square,’ I told him.
‘Sit down!’ ordered the barman.
‘I haven't done yet.’
I sat back down.
The barman fixed me with the kind of stare you could roast weenies on.
‘I'm not a hard man,’ he continued.
‘It's just that I get real fed up with bozos like you trying to rip me off all the time.
I have a business to run here and I ain't no charity.
But I'll tell you what I'll do.
You have obviously suffered considerable ill treatment and you are stony broke.
Just this once I am going to break the habits of a lifetime and take your IOU.’
I hung my head even further.
Sometimes you meet a guy with just so much plain humanity that it makes you feel humble.
I choked back a heartfelt tear.
‘I'll date it for the day after tomorrow, if that's OK?’
I said.
Rex switched off the suction pump, hung up the miner's helmet, divested himself of the fisherman's waders and laid his snorkel aside.
He was just scooping the lard out of the trout mask when there came a violent knocking at the bedroom door.
‘Let me in,’ Laura demanded.
‘I'm fed up with sitting out here reading the newspaper.’
I finished my fifteenth bottle of Bud and pushed my plate away.
‘Those bigfoot noses really blow you out,’ I observed.
‘You wouldn't care for a wafer-thin mint?’ the barman enquired.
‘No, I wouldn't.
I'll take a large Jim Beam.’
‘Coming right up.’
I chivvied Barry round the ashtray with a hot cigar butt and pondered fleetingly.
Things weren't looking too good for me.
I had come up real short on the gratuitous sex and violence so far.
And there wasn't even a sniff of the now legendary trail of corpses that I'm known and loved for.
What I needed now was a really violent interlude to liven up the otherwise turgid plot.
The barman passed me my Jim Beam.
‘Keep your head down, Laz,’ he advised.
‘I smell big trouble.’
The front doors swung open like a piper at the gates of dawn and two of the biggest guys I'd ever seen swaggered in wearing more black than a Valentine Dyall fan club dinner.
Now I don't know much about running gags from books previous that I ain't been in, but it seemed to me that one of them was toting a 7.62 M134 General Electric Minigun, which in my books generally spells schadenfreude.
I saw the barrels begin to spin and that's when I snatched up Barry and whipped out the trusty Smith and West Wittering.
The big guy with the big gun strafed the place.
I'd never seen so many shots go in so many directions all at the one time.
Dudes started falling, dames started screaming.
Bullets riddled the bar-top.
Glasses shattered, bottles exploded.
I came up firing.
I let off three straight into the gunman's chest but he didn't look like he felt death coming on.
He just kept pumping away.
The barman took the dive for cover as half the bar-counter went the way of all flesh, only faster.
There was a hell of a lot of smoke about and a great deal of noise.
At a time like this a man's gotta do what a man's gotta do.
And if you think that's take a powder, then you don't know old Laz too well.
As The Maniacs Came Killing  I rolled three more into  the trusty Smith and West Point and took up a manly pose.
‘Ease up on the populace, creeps,’ said I with more heroism than an entire Audi Murphy season.
A whole bunch of muzzles turned in my direction.
But like Elvis Costello, my aim was true.
I hit the gunman right between the windows of his soul and he went down with a lot of sparks and technoflash that I for one wasn't expecting.
His buddy didn't seem too concerned about that and reached down for the big gun.
I let him have two rounds in the top of the head, just to be social.
I could see the holes.
But they didn't appear to be causing him much in the way of alarm.
He came forward at me through the smoke and he wasn't smiling.
I emptied my piece into his chest.
‘Barry,’ said I. ‘Get us the Hell out of here.’
‘I'm trying, chief.’
‘Try harder, dammit.’
‘No can do, chief.
I'm all used up.
Sorry.’
‘Sorry?
What are you saying?’
The guy in black came forward through the smoke.
He was torn up real bad from all my gunfire.
All sorts of bits were falling off, exposing lots of snazzy metalwork and futuristic circuitry the likes of which I had never seen the likes of.
‘Dead or alive, you're coming with me,’ he said, which seemed to ring a bell somewhere.
‘Do something, Barry.’
‘I'm trying, chief.
Oh damn.’
It's a funny thing the way podoeroticism has never really caught on in the West, what with sex being so popular and all.
We spend half our lives searching each other 's bottoms for erogenous zones, while all the time there are two dirty great big ones lurking inside our socks.
Of course, the Chinese cottoned on to it centuries ago.
But then, as Hugo Rune said, ‘not much slips past the damn Chinese when it comes to jigger jig’.
Rune once took tea with a mandarin in Peking and he comments in his diary:
The meal itself was a pretty lightweight affair consisting of a meagre forty courses, but made tolerable by the court concubines who, whilst the great lord and I took sup, lifted our robes at intervals and fanned our privvy members with their hair.
Sadly he neglects to mention whether they also gave his feet a bit of a squeeze.
Rex had always been something of a ‘leg man’ and very much of a ‘foot man’.
And so, at this particular moment, when Laz was finding himself somewhat up against it, Rex was indulging in a little foot fellatio and thinking instep.
The big guy hit me just the one time.
But that was enough for me.
I joined the feathered legions and took to the air.
I only wish that someone had opened the exit door before I passed through it.
Rex took time-out.
If you want the earth to move for you, it's best that it starts with small tremors and works its way slowly up the Richter.
As Rex was currently at about five on the scale of ten he left Laura to steam gently and made for the cocktail cabinet.
His naked feet left perfumed imprints upon the Bakhtiari carpet and his upraised wanger bobbed before him.
He reached the cocktail cabinet and leaned over it to scoop up a couple of two-hundred-year-old goblets.
As he did so a jolt of static electricity hit him right in the tip of his unrestrained bobber.
‘Ooooooooooh!’ howled Rex, collapsing into an untidy heap.
‘Oh’ and ‘ouch’I howled as I hit the alleyway.
I landed in a heap of cardboard boxes, shredded paper and polystyrene which had evidently been laid out for the purpose and prepared to come up fighting.
Rex made with the crossed eyes and suitably pained expression.
Clutching himself he crawled back to the cabinet and ran a tentative hand over the woodwork.
Nothing.
It had been well and truly earthed.
Rex fiddled with the raised carvings.
There had to be something in there.
And of course there was.
A click, a swish and a panel slid away to reveal a…
‘TV terminal.’
Rex made a puzzled face.
‘Now what do we have here, then?’
He rose to his feet, padded silently back across the room and gently closed the bedroom door.
Returning, he examined the terminal.
Beneath the small screen was an intricate keyboard system, although nothing Rex hadn't seen before.
He jacked it up and watched as a station logo which meant nothing to him appeared on the screen.
Rex tapped at the keyboard and requested access to the menu.
Access was politely denied.
‘INSERT CARD’ flashed upon the screen.
‘Hmm,’ went Rex.
‘Insert card.’
He glanced about the room.
If it was ‘insert card’ then it was probably ‘insert Laura's card’.
Laura's card was no doubt in her handbag.
Her handbag was in the bedroom.
‘Bother,’ whispered Rex.
‘But hold on there.’
He reached over to his jacket, which had been thrown down with no particular care for its value, and pulled out the captured billfold.
‘There is a card in here, unless I am very much mistaken,’ he said.
‘Unless I am very much mistaken, Barry,’ said I, ‘We are in serious difficulty here.’
‘No more bullets for the trusty Smith and Welshman, chief?’
‘You got it, little guy.
And the way he did what he just did I find most discouraging.’
‘You mean the way he walked out right through the wall rather than bothering with the doorway, chief?’
‘That and the big gun he's carrying, yes.’
‘I think I'll just kind of duck down in your pocket if that's OK, chief.
Let me know later how it works out.’
‘Brilliant.’
‘Brilliant.’
Rex dropped the dreaded Repo Man card into the slot in the keyboard and the screen lit up with all sorts of possibilities.
Rex called up the menu once again.
The screen said:
LOGGING INPUT
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
PROFIT MARGINS
MAINTENANCE
STATUS
AUDIO/VISUAL
LOCATION
INSTRUCT
VOID
FASHION TIPS
It all looked moderately intriguing.
And somewhat too good to be true.
Rex fingered the keyboard and called up LOCATION.
An area of Presley City appeared in map form on the screen.
Enlarged and zoomed in.
A little blip went blip blip blip in the alleyway behind the Tomorrowman Tavern.
Rex called up AUDIO/VISUAL and then jumped back.
A fist flew towards him on the screen, filled it as it made apparent impact and then vanished away.
The fist's owner became visible, staggering backwards, clutching the wounded article and uttering cuss words.
A voice which didn't come from this body, said, ‘Return the stolen billfold.’
Rex glanced down at the billfold and then back to the  screen.
The voice clearly wasn't addressing him.
It continued.
‘You were carrying a concealed weapon contrary to social format and I note that you sport the open-necked look in a zany tie zone.
You are evidently a revolutionary.
Therefore you must know the location of the stolen billfold.
Hand it over or I will kill you.’
Rex whistled beneath his breath.
These Repo Men certainly went about their work with zeal.
But there was something dangerously lacking when it came to the matter of how they applied their logic to the solution of a particular problem.
‘It's a bum rap.
You got the wrong guy.’
The cries came from a face now seen in close up as its owner was being hoisted up the wall of the alleyway.
‘I ain't no Goddamn revolutionary.
I'm a Republican.’
‘I will count to three and if you do not disclose the whereabouts of the stolen billfold I will break open your head.’
‘Listen, buddy, you're making me mad.’
‘One,’ said the voice.
Rex flipped back to the menu.
He called up INSTRUCT and tapped in ABORT.
Then back to AUDIO/VISUAL.
‘Two,’ said the voice.
‘Shit,’ said Rex.
The face on the screen said something.
But nothing helpful.
Rex took to wildly tapping buttons.
On screen he saw a big hand closing over the struggler's head.
‘Three.’
Rex tapped OVERRIDE ALL PREVIOUS IMPERATIVES BILLFOLD RECOVERED AWAIT FURTHER INSTRUCTIONS.
He gaped at the screen.
The big hand froze.
The face relaxed and slid from view, the brick wall clouded and the screen blacked.
Rex breathed a very big sigh of relief.
That was close.
But close for who?
Some innocent, he supposed, in the  wrong place at the wrong time.
Rex had evidently been viewing him through the eyes of a Repo Man.
An LCP.
Liquid Crystal Person.
Some kind of robot?
Had to be.
But built by whom?
And where?
Find the central control and one might just find the Volvo.
It seemed as likely as anything else around here.
‘Goddamn.
That was close.
What happened to him?’
The voice came from the terminal.
‘Seems like he blew a fuse, chief.
I reckon we'd best be away.’
‘Chief?’
Rex did big gasps.
‘Barry!
It's you.
You're here.’
His words must have issued straight through the mouth of the now defunct Repo Man, because the next thing Rex heard was a small green cry of, ‘We're rumbled, chief,’ followed by much scrambling and scurrying and an increasingly distant voice going, ‘Faster, chief.
Get a move on.’
10
15.
And finally did the children of Elvis get their bearings and dump Moses.
16.
And they came unto Jericho, which is just up from the Dead Sea.
17.
But the people of Jericho did see them coming and shut the gate, crying, ‘Hippy convoy!’
18.
For the people of Jericho were unhip, favouring Trad Jazz and duffle coats.
19.
And so did Elvis have his road crew set up a mighty speaker system outside the walls.
And thusly did he pump up the volume.
The Suburban Book of the Dead
Four men sit in a top-secret room.
It looks very much the same as ever it did.
But it isn't.
This is a different room altogether.
There is a long black table with chairs around it for thirteen.
A big light shines down upon it, and the light isn't kind.
Three men huddle uncomfortably at one end of the table.
The fourth, who was sitting at the other, is now standing.
And he is also shouting.
‘You useless bunch,’ he shouts.
‘You puny piss-poor pathetic pack of poltroons.’
There is no verbal response to this.
Only the lowering of three heads accompanied by triple cowering.
‘A thousand years of planning has gone into this.
One thousand years.
And you screw it all up in a single  day.
Dee, Kelley, what did you do?’
Two mouths drop open.
But that's about all they do.
The lips quiver, but that ‘s not a lot of help.
‘I'll tell you what you did.
You ballsed it up.
I send you into the parallel continuum with orders to collect the final statue and do nothing more.
But can you do that?
No, you can't.
You come back here with Rex Mundi on board, and if that isn't disaster enough, you stop off for lunch, he escapes and the Volvo gets stolen with the entire Presley hoard along with it.
Everything.
Gone.’
‘And you.’
A finger points at the man with the hangover.
He is wearing a somewhat creased jumpsuit of the bell-bottomed persuasion.
‘You, Bill.
I have you pick up Mundi from the police station and deliver him to Heartbreak Hotel where he should have met with certain extinction.
And what happens?
He's away again.
And not only that.
Having arranged for you to be standing by when he surfaces today, you take him shopping.
He damn near bankrupts me and all but gets me arrested.
Then you get so drunk that he steals your cab and he's off on the loose once more.’
Bill chewed upon his knuckles.
The speaker turned his glare once more to Dee and Kelley.
‘And what do you do with Woodburn?’
‘Woodbine,’ said Dee.
‘Lazlo Woodbine.’
‘Shut up!
You were to kill him in the alleyway and capture the Time Sprout.
It's our escape route out of here.
If we can't succeed with our plan in just two days all this goes up, and us along with it.
If we can't lure Presley here and destroy him before then, we're history.
History that never happened.’
The other Rex Mundi, because, of course, it could be no other, rent hair from his head and flung it to the floor where it exploded in small sulphurous puffs of smoke.
‘A thousand years of running and hiding, and what has it come to?
Speak someone.
Bill, what are you going to do?’
‘Me…
I…?’
Bill made splutterings.
‘I will…
I will …
I will kill Mundi.
Yes, that's what I'll do.
I'll kill him, excellency.
He doesn't suspect me.
He'll be at Laura Lynch's.
I'll wait for him there and kill him.
That's what I'll do.
Yes.’
‘No!
That's what you won't do.’
‘No, excellency.
That's what I won't do.
No.
Absolutely not.
What will I do?’
‘You will drive him around.
That's what you'll do.
He will be searching for the Volvo and with his kind of luck he will no doubt find it.
When he does, then you will kill him and bring the Volvo to me.
Do you think you can manage that?’
‘Yes, excellency.’
Bill nodded his hung-overed head.
Ed Kelley raised a shaky hand.
‘What do you want us to do, excellency?’
‘What do you think I want you to do?’
Ed scratched his head.
‘Kill Woodbine, excellency?’
‘No!
Not kill Woodbine.’
‘Not kill Woodbine.
But you wanted us to…’
‘Well I don't want you to now.’
‘No, excellency.
You don't.’
‘So what do I want you to do?’
Ed gave his scalp further attention.
Johnny Dee said, ‘You want us to follow him.’
The other Rex nodded.
‘Because?’
‘Because he is also searching for the Presley hoard which is in the Volvo.’
‘Exactly.
And?’
‘And when he finds it, then you want us to kill him and bring you the Volvo and the Time Sprout.’
‘There you go.
What could be more simple?’
‘Well…’ said Ed.
‘I do foresee one or two slight difficulties…’
‘Slight difficulties?’
The other Rex put his hands to the long table-top, tore it from its legs and cast it away into the darkness.
‘You will do it!
This is my world and I'm keeping it.
I can deal with the government, the loss  adjusters, the bloody Repo Men and the accountants.
They're nobody.
Nothing.
This is all mine and I'm taking it back.’
‘Yes, excellency.’
‘You, ASMODEUS.’
The Anti-Rex glared at Bill.
‘You, BALBERITH.’
The glare turned upon Ed Kelley.
‘You, SONNEILLON.’
The glare finally came to rest upon Johnny Dee.
‘You, the last remaining of my First Hierarchy of Hell.
Stop fucking about, and get on with it.
Kill anybody who stands in your way.
I want it all, the past the present and the future.
I want Presley dead and all memory of him driven from the Earth.
I want him dead, dead, DEAD!
What do I want?’
‘Presley dead.’
‘When do I want it?’
‘Now.’
‘Good.
Then, gentlemen, you are dismissed.’
‘Phew, chief.
That was close.’
‘You said it.’
I straightened my belt buckle and tidied my trenchcoat.
There was extensive second-degree smutting and several nasty blots of what appeared to be some kind of industrial lubricant.
Normally this would have caused me considerable grief, but this time I was prepared to tough it out.
I mean, there was no way I was going to come across as an anal retentive simply because I had pride in my appearance.
‘That guy back there wasn't human,’ I observed with more perspicacity than a panty-girdle pedlar at a Tupperware party.
‘What do you make of that, Barry?’
‘Can't say, chief.
But that voice.
At the end when he froze up.
I know that voice, or knew it.’
‘You keep bad company, little guy.’
We were back in my office.
The bolt was on the door and the top was off the bottle of Old Bedwetter that I generally reserve for moments such as these.
I took a deep slug.
‘You feeling your old self yet, Barry?’
‘You mean the time travelling?
Well, no, as it happens.’
‘Not good.’
I took another slug.
‘We got a real tight schedule if we're going to make it out of here before the Big Bang.’
‘About the Big Bang, chief.
Do you know why it happens?’
‘Nope.
History is schtum on the details, but pretty graphic about the scale.
It took this city clean off the map.’
‘So what are you going to do next, chief?’
‘Well, the way I see it, Barry, we have two options.
The first is that I sit here, hit this bottle of Old Bedwetter and fall into flashbacks of lost loves and hard times past.’
‘Not too keen, chief.
And the second?’
‘The second is that we step out to the supermarket and pick up some supplies.’
‘I quite like that one, chief But I can't see exactly where it's leading to.’
‘Then let me put you in the picture.’
I leaned back in my chair and made the kind of smile that money just can't buy you these days.
‘What are we searching for Barry?’
‘The Presley hoard, chief.’
‘And where is it now, Barry?’
‘Search me, chief.’
‘Well, it has to be somewhere.’
‘Yes, chief.’
‘And I reckon it's right —’ I pulled a map from my pocket, spread it upon my desk and whacked my finger down on to it at a very particular spot ‘— here.’
Barry gave the map the once-over and went, ‘Eh?’
‘Come on, Barry.
Think about it.
Sir John Rimmer digs up the Presley hoard.
And the location of where he dug it up is on every twenty-fifth-century map.
So that's where we go.
If it hasn't arrived yet we wait.
And we take sandwiches.
Enough to last us until you get your  powers back and we can abscond with the hoard forward homeways.
Pretty neat, eh?
We know that the hoard survived the Big Bang, so if we stick with it, we survive, too.’
‘Chief I hate like damn to say this to you, but you are a genius.’
‘Yeah, Barry.
Ain't I just.’
‘Rexy.
You aren't leaving, are you?’
Rex was struggling into his leather trousers.
‘I have to see a man about something.
Or a something about something.’
‘But we were just working up to the knees and you've still got $ 85,750 left on the meter.’
‘Wait for me.’
Rex managed his finest Arnie, ‘I'll be back.’
‘I'm coming with you.’
‘No.
I don't think that would be a good idea.’
‘I do.’
Laura produced a small intricate handweapon.
As she was still naked, Rex had no idea where she had produced it from.
‘Ah,’ said he.
‘I see.’
‘No, I don't think you do.
You're not the chap off the telly.
I know that.
You are the one we have been waiting for.’
‘We?’
Who is this we all of a sudden?’
‘We.
The Children of the Revolution.’
‘Marc Bolan,’ said Rex.
‘One of my favourites.
You don't happen to have a copy of ‘Pewter Suitor’ in your collection by any chance?
I've been after it for years.’
Laura shook her head.
‘We, the Children of the Revolution, have been waiting for you to aid us.
I know who you are.’
‘You do?’
‘I do.
You are the Tomorrow Man.’
‘I am?’
‘You are.
When you flashed the Repo Man card I  thought we'd been infiltrated.
But I listened at the bedroom door when you found my terminal.
You're one of us, aren't you?’
‘I suppose I probably am.
The Tomorrow Man.
Yes,’ said Rex.
‘I certainly am.’
‘So where are you going?’
‘Back to the Tomorrowman Tavern, as it happens.
The Repo Man who stole my car is frozen there, or at least one of his companions is.
Perhaps the car might even be there also.’
‘You're going to need my help.’
‘I'm not altogether sure that we share all the same motives.’
‘Then we can help each other.
Trust me.’
‘All right then.
We shall go together.’
‘That's fine.’
Laura turned to take up her clothing.
Rex spun around and kicked the gun from her hand.
He plucked it from the carpet.
‘I'll carry this, though,’ he said.
We headed on up the alleyway, the map before us.
‘Which way is north, chief?’
‘Up thataways, Barry.’
I have an uncanny sense of direction.
Paid a fortune for it.
In this business, a sense of direction can mean the difference between laughing like a drain or getting caught with your trousers around the ankles of a friend you never had.
If you catch my drift.
And I'm sure that you do.
‘We go right at the top here.
Or is it left?’
‘Cab, sir?
Well, cut off my legs and call me Shorty, it's you guvnor.’
‘So it is,’ said Rex.
‘Something of a surprise.
You being here.
And in your cab.’
‘No problems.
I paid off the tab at the Tomorrowman and took a stroll over.
I was a little over the limit.
Thanks for looking after the cab for me.
I appreciate the gesture.’
‘Don't mention it.
You had no difficulties back at the bar?’
‘Nah.
A slight misunderstanding.
For some reason the barman got it into his head that I was the boss of your TV station.
I soon straightened him out.’
‘I'm so very glad to hear it because I'd like you to take us back there now.’
‘Back there?’
The cabby looked doubtful.
‘Well, to the alleyway behind the bar.
Could you manage that?’
‘Anything for you, me old cock sparrow.
The barman took my watch in payment by the way.’
‘I'll get you another.’
‘You are a scholar and a gentleman.
Hop in then and we'll be off.’
Rex opened the rear door.
‘Is this OK, Laura?’
‘It's OK.
Just let's go.’
‘OK.’
‘How are we doing, chief?’
‘I think we just about ran out of alleyway, Barry.
What is that up ahead, do you suppose?’
‘Damnedest thing I ever saw, chief.
Do you think that's it?’
‘Has to be.
X marks the spot.
Let's put our faith in old Sir John.’
‘OK.
Let's do.’
‘OK.’
Bill was whistling in a devil-may-care sort of way as they sped along.
Rex said to Laura, ‘Tell me all about it.’
‘All of this is wrong, Rex.
All of it.
It's designed.
It's not true.’
‘Go on.’
‘Presley City.
The Department of Human Resources runs it all.
Controls it.
But you won't find the number in the phone book.
The Department is everywhere and  nowhere, organizing everything.
We just play our roles.
There is no individual thought here.’
Rex gazed from the window.
The streets seemed even more like theatrical backdrops.
‘Actors on a film set.’
‘Just like that, yes.
It's all false, all of it.’
‘I understand.
But tell me, if you grew up in all this, how do you know that it's false?
This society appears on the surface to function.
There is law and order, well, sort of How can you be so sure that it's not what it seems?’
‘There are books, a book, that tells us the way it should have been.
It's all very complicated.
It would take time to explain.’
‘On the contrary,’ Rex put his arm around her shoulder, ‘It's all a lot more simple than you think.
I know what went wrong here and I think I know how to put it right.’
The cab driver went right on whistling.
But he'd heard every word.
‘If that's where we're going, Barry, there's one or two small things we have to do first.’
‘Like get the sandwiches in, chief?’
‘Like that.
And also.’
I ducked around the corner of the alleyway and flattened myself against the wall the way a flounder hugs the ocean floor.
Only vertically.
If you catch my on-shore drift.
And I'm sure that you do.
‘Dee and Kelley have been shadowing us ever since we left my office.
I think it's time to settle those old scores.’
‘Oh goody, goody chief.
If I had hands to rub in glee, a rubbing of them I would be.’
‘Nice couplet, Barry.
You got real class.’
‘More than can be said for you, you big girl's blouse.’
‘What's that, Barry?’
‘Nothing, chief.’
The cab came to a halt.
The traffic tailed back.
Sirens shrieked and coloured beacons went round and round the way some of them do.
‘We'll walk from here,’ said Rex.
‘You want I should wait, bruv?’
‘That would be just fine.
Don't forget to keep the meter running.’
‘Oh, I won't, never fear.’
Around the Tomorrowman Tavern there was all that pushing and shoving, toing and froing shouting and swearing, flashbulb clicking and general mayhem that ever there was.
Rex put on his sunglasses and elbowed his way into the crowd to gawp along with the rest.
Within the police cordon, ambulances stood, rear doors yawning.
Body bags were being zipped and trolleys shuttled back and forth.
Rex spied out Sam Maggott hollering at all and sundry and making good use of his over-sized red gingham handkerchief.
He also spied out the Tomorrowman's barman.
He had a strip of bandage tied around his head, a small dot of blood showing romantically above the right eye.
He was sporting a Clark Gable moustache and being terribly brave about it all.
Laura tugged at Rex's arm.
‘This way.’
They skirted the crowd and slipped away into the network of side alleys.
Just along here, third turning on the left.’
‘You know these alleyways well then, Laura?’
‘Intimately.
I once earned a thirty-six-inch George III mahogany tea table in the manner of Thomas Chippendale, behind those trash cans over there.’
‘Thank you,’ said Rex.
‘I don't wish to know that.’
They reached the third turning on the left.
‘Sssh.
There's someone there.’
Rex pushed Laura against the wall and craned his neck to see what was what.
And what was most certainly what.
The Repo Man stood, battle-scarred, speechless and stock still.
But  around it, the group of men was smartly clad, verbose and seriously agitated.
Three wore the white coats of the back-room boffin, the fourth was diminutive, little more than a boy.
But he was clearly giving the orders.
He wore a natty black business suit and a pair of sunglasses just like Rex's.
‘Oh no.’
Rex turned his face away and covered it with his hands.
‘It's him.’
‘Him, who?
Rex, look at me.
Who is it?’
‘A very bad memory.
Does the name Jonathan Crawford mean anything to you?’
‘Stick 'em up,’ said I spinning around the corner and thrusting the snout of the trusty Smith and Western Railway right up the unsuspecting hooter of Johnny Dee esquire.
‘Shit,’ said Johnny, doing a reasonable impression of a Dalek.
‘I got you fellas banged to rights.
You're nicked.’
‘You're nicked?’
Ed made the kind of face I usually keep for Tuesdays.
‘Very New York private eye, that.
You'll be taking our dabs and turning over our drums next.’
‘Don't worry about the vernacularisms.’
I waggled my piece in his crony's snoz.
‘I got a big score to settle with you two.’
‘Ah,’ said Ed.
‘You mean the matter of us costing you your wife, your job at the department, a dog named Blue and six months in intensive care?’
‘Yeah, and that.
I was thinking more about the unkind remarks you made about my trenchcoat.’
‘We were just kidding around.
It's a real nice trenchcoat.
Although I notice extensive second-degree smutting and several blots of what appears to be some kind of industrial lubricant.
You should dab those with lemon juice before they sink right in.’
‘Don't try to smooth-talk me.
You were going to saw my head off.’
‘Ah,’ said Ed once more.
‘Then I suppose a formal apology, couched in ingratiating terms, wouldn't exactly fit the bill at this particular time.’
‘Damn right.
I'm taking the two of you in.’
‘We can't do that right now, chief.’
‘Who said that?’
Ed looked hotter under the collar than a Tina Turner dress shield.
‘Never you mind.
OK.
If I can't bring you in, then I'm just going to have to make a citizen's execution.’
I withdrew the muzzle of the trusty Smith and Waistcoat from Johnny's nose and pointed it at his forehead.
‘Hold hard,’ said he, raising his hands and shaking his head.
‘You can't shoot us.
If you do you'll never recover the Presley hoard.’
‘Don't bet on it.
Offer your apologies to the deity, fellas.
You and he are about to move mouth.’
‘Is there nothing we can say to make you change your mind?’
‘Nothing.
Your time has come.’
I had that flinty look in my eyes that told Ed all he needed to know.
‘OK then.’
Ed shrugged.
‘That's the way of it, I suppose.
We've had a good innings.
I can accept my fate.
How about you, Johnny?’
‘Oh yes.
I can accept it also.
I have my regrets of course.
But there you are.
I only wish…’
‘What do you wish, Johnny?’
‘Oh nothing.
A dying man's last request.
Nothing to bother our flinty-eyed Nemesis with.’
‘Come on now, Johnny.
Certainly Mr Woodbine is a hard-boiled, tough as they come, lantern-jawed harbinger of our certain doom.
But he is also an American and before he guns you down in cold blood, in the manner you so justly deserve I might add, I'm sure he will see his way clear to giving you a dying request.’
‘Do you really think so?’
‘Why not ask him yourself?’
‘Oh, I couldn't.
It's too embarrassing.’
‘Go on,’ said I, stroking my lantern jaw.
‘It can't hurt to ask.’
‘Well…it's just that I always wanted to die clutching something that was near to the earth.
A flower perhaps.’
‘Touching, Johnny.’
Ed patted his chum.
‘I can appreciate that.
One should be near to the natural world when one meets with an unnatural death.’
‘Well put, Ed.
But where would we find a flower around here?
Or even a vegetable if it comes to that?’
‘Even a vegetable, yes.
To touch a vegetable, clasp it in your hands when you met with what fate had to offer.
What a joy.
But it would take a pretty exceptional executioner to come up with a vegetable on the spur of the moment.
Mr Woodbine's hardly going to be carrying around a vegetable in his pocket, now is he?’
‘Oh yeah?’ said I plucking Barry from my top pocket.
‘Well, check this out.’
‘A miracle,’ cried Johnny.
‘The man is a saint.’
‘Saint I may be but schmuck I ain't.
What do you guys take me for?
You really think I was going to fall for a line like that and hand Barry over to you?’
Johnny nodded his head.
‘Yes,’ said he, ‘I did, as it happens.’
‘So did I,’ said Ed.
‘Well OK then.
I just wanted to be sure you weren't trying to pull a fast one on me.’
I tossed Barry over to Johnny Dee.
‘Ain't gonna do you the slightest good any which way.
Barry's banjoed and you've got An Appointment With Death .’
‘Chief.
You're on a wrong'n.
Take me back.’
‘Let the man have his dying request, Barry.
Don't be stingy.
I'll catch you when he hits the dirt.’
‘But chief…’
‘Bye, fellas.’
I pointed my piece at Johnny and squeezed on the trigger.
There was a pretty pathetic little click, it being out of bullets and everything.
But suddenly there was something of a puff of smoke and I found myself standing all alone in the alleyway with what might well be metaphorical egg all over my kisser.
‘Barry?’ said I.
‘You bloody fool, chief,’ echoed a little green voice.
‘What's that, Barry?’
‘Nothing, chief.’
Rex took out Laura's pistol and peered along the barrel.
‘What exactly does this do?’ he asked.
‘What is its range and what are its capabilities?
Please be specific.
An opportunity like this mightn't present itself again.’
‘You are going to kill this Jonathan Crawford then?’
‘I truly feel it would be for the best.’
‘Have you ever killed anyone before?’
‘No.
Not as such.’
‘Then let me do it.’
‘Certainly not.
What does this gun do?’
‘It fires an explosive acid cap.
Doesn't matter where you hit someone.
Contact is always lethal.’
‘Ideal for home defence, I have no doubt.’
Rex took the gun in both hands.
Both hands were trembling.
‘He's evil.’
Rex bit his lip.
‘Very evil.
About as evil as it is possible to get.’
‘Then shoot him.
Don't think about it.
Do it quickly.’
Don't think about it.
Rex took a deep breath, sprang out from hiding and drew down upon the boy in the business suit.
‘Jonathan,’ he shouted.
‘Over here.’
The boy turned.
‘Rex,’ said he.
‘Well, well, well.’
‘I'm sorry, Jonathan.’
Rex squeezed the trigger.
Jonathan pulled one of the back-room boffin types into the line of fire.
The bullet struck the white clothed back.
There was a muffled report, the man rose upon  tiptoe but he didn't fall.
His body seemed to swell and distort but he just stood there.
Screaming and screaming.
Rex turned his face away.
Covered his ears.
But the cries of agony went on and on.
‘He's dead, Rex.
He's dead.’
Laura pulled his hands from his head and shouted into his face.
‘Stop screaming.’
Rex tore himself away from her.
‘Screaming?’
‘He's dead.
Look for yourself.’
Rex looked for himself.
The body lay twisted at impossible angles.
Jonathan had gone.
The Repo Man had gone.
Rex turned away and was violently sick.
11
25.
And thus did the big tour continue.
And Elvis spake unto his people regarding such matters as crude oil, gasoline and stretch Cadillacs.
26.
And the children of Elvis did hang on his every word.
And when he had spoken they did hasten unto Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and Texas, saying, ‘These also are the promised lands.’
The Suburban Book of the Dead
This was just great.
Dee and Kelley had done the now legendary vanishing act and they'd taken Barry along with them.
I wasn't a little nonplussed.
I never had a fear of going it alone, don't get me wrong.
I've gone it alone more times than a hermit with attitude.
But it was going to be a real bummer not having the little guy around to chat with while I single-handedly solved my cases.
I refilled my piece.
I had just about run myself dry of duff funnies regarding the trusty Smith and Whatsaname.
Right now I had a job to do.
Recover the Presley hoard and save civilization as we would know it.
Because, as you may, or may not have realized, this is one big number.
I wasn't being paid $ 500,000 a day to sit on my butt and watch Blue Peter.
In fact, without Barry I wasn't going to get paid $ 500,000 at all.
In fact without Barry I was possibly in the deep brown stuff up neck-aways.
I looked up at the building.
Biggest damn thing I ever saw.
And somewhere inside it, was the Presley hoard, or was going to be real shortly.
I straightened my shoulders, choked back a small tear for the loss of a good buddy and turned up the collar of my trenchcoat.
‘OK,’ said I with more determination than a sybarite in a sacristy.
‘Now's the time to nail my colours to the mast, throw away the scabbard, buckle to, go the whole hog, cross the Rubicon, grab the bull by the horns, put my shoulder to the wheel and leave a note out for the milkman.’
I wasn't looking for trouble.
But if trouble came looking for me I wasn't going to be hard to find.
Only a dog dies in Brooklyn when Frank Sinatra's in the witness box.
If you know what I mean.
And I'm sure that you do-be-do-be-do.
‘I don't know what to say, Rex.’
Laura held Rex in her arms.
They were back in her apartment.
Bill had dropped them off and was lurking outside.
‘You're feeling pretty bad, I can see that.’
‘Bad?
Laura, I shot a man in the back.
I've never killed anyone.
I don't do that kind of thing.
I get into impossible scrapes but win through in the end.
I can't live with this.
A man's death on my conscience.’
Rex covered his face and sobbed.
‘He was one of the bad guys.’
‘That doesn't matter.
I don't even know his name.
I killed him.
One moment he was alive, then…’
‘You did what you thought was right.
It was an accident.’
‘I took a man's life.
Doesn't that mean anything to you?’
Laura shrugged.
‘He was only a Repo Man.
I can't see what you're making such a fuss about.’
‘A Repo Man?’
Rex was aghast.
‘Sure.
I saw all the sparks when he went down.’
‘Saw the sparks?
Laura, you let me throw up all over the alley, all over Bill's cab.
Cry my eyes out, make an absolute wally of myself and now you tell me he was a Repo Man.’
‘I thought you knew.’
‘Laura,’ said Rex, ‘kindly take off all your clothes.’
‘How did you do that?
I didn't do that…’
Barry was boggled.
He had just materialized in a certain top-secret room in the bad company of Dee and Kelley.
‘The transperambulation of pseudo-cosmic antimatter,’ John Dee explained.
‘Surely you know all about the cross-polarization of negatively-charged beta particles.’
‘Am I a sprout, or what?’
‘You certainly are.
And a very special one.’
‘Well, thanks.
But listen, chief.
That was a pretty sneaky stroke you pulled on Laz back there.
Him and me work as a team, you know, I don't do any freelance jobs, especially not with a pair of low-down —’
‘Low-down?’
Johnny Dee gave Barry a nasty tweak.
‘Nothing, chief.
So what's all this about, then?’
Dee smiled upon the sprout and patted him kindly.
‘Turn me up the right way, chief.
I hate having my bum patted.’
‘My apologies.
It's just that we have a little surprise for you and we didn't want Mr Woodentop spoiling it.’
‘That's nice.
I think.’
‘There's someone we want you to meet,’ said Ed.
‘Close your eyes for a moment.
You do have eyes, don't you?’
‘I can't recall any mention of them, but I suppose I must have or I wouldn't be able to see anything, would I?
Unless of course I have derma-optical perception.
I do possess some pretty awesome powers, as you may well be aware.’
‘Oh we are, we are.
Now shut your eyes or whatever it is you do.’
‘You won't do anything unpleasant to me, will you, chief?’
‘Trust us.’
‘Like shit.’
‘What's that?’
‘Nothing, chief.
They're closed.’
‘All right.
Now keep them closed.’
Barry heard a door open and footsteps coming in his direction.
He was able to calculate that these were made by a man in his twenties, approximately six feet tall, weighing a little over eleven stone.
Which was a little bit awesome, but not very.
‘Open your eyes,’ cried Johnny Dee.
Barry opened them up.
Ed and Johnny were sporting foolish party hat and blowing those paper things that uncurl like a chameleon's tongue and go baarrrp.
And standing between them was…
‘Rex!’
Barry boggled anew.
‘Rex Mundi, as I live and osmose.’
‘Barry,’ the other Rex replied.
‘I can't tell you how pleased this makes me.’
Rex lay on the bed smiling wistfully at the ceiling.
‘That was wonderful,’ he said.
Laura made a face.
‘What a cop-out.
I just knew the horny sex wouldn't get a mention.
And if it didn't get a mention, then we didn't actually do it.’
Rex turned her a surprised stare.
‘What do you mean?
We've been humping away for a whole two and a half pages.
Look at these saddle sores.
And all the sandpaper I've used up.’
‘So you say.’
Rex counted on his fingers.
‘Half page 139 and pages 140 and 141.’
Laura flicked back.
‘Blank.
Tipp-Exed out!
Typical!’
‘Well,’ said Rex.
‘Well, I never did.’
‘Evidently not.
Shall I now wrap myself in the duvet and slip into the shower for a misty out-of-focus silhouette?’
‘No.’
Rex put his arm around her shoulder.
‘Speak to me.
There is a great deal I need to know if I'm going to do anything about it.’
‘All right.
Where do you want me to start?’
‘Tell me about Elvis.’
‘The Living God?’
‘God?
The King perhaps, but God?
What is all this?’
‘Elvis the Everliving.’
Laura spat in a most unladylike fashion.
‘That to him.’
‘Quite.’
Rex wiped his eye.
‘Sorry, Rex.’
‘Don't mention it.
But tell me about Elvis.’
‘You really don't know, do you?
Where are you from, Rex?
How did you get here?
You're with us, aren't you?’
‘One thing at a time.
Just tell me about Elvis.’
‘It's all in here.’
Laura reached over to the bedside table, a Sheraton satinwood cabinet, with cross-banded doors flanked by pilasters inlaid with husk chains.
She brought to light a slim black volume and tossed it to Rex.
Rex turned it to face him and read the title.
‘THE SUBURBAN BOOK OF THE DEAD’ it said in nice big letters.
‘What?’
Rex leafed through the pages.
‘This isn't my book.
The book I had all those years ago.
This is…’
‘It's a bible,’ sneered Laura.
‘The bible of the false messiah.’
‘Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear.’
Rex made a major sigh.
‘I think I'd better give this a bit of a read.
Would you mind terribly if I did this on my own?’
‘Would you chaps mind terribly if Barry and I were left alone?’ the other Rex asked.
‘We have so very much to talk about.’
‘No sweat, excellency — I mean, Rex.’
Johnny Dee winked lewdly, and he and Kelley shuffled backwards through the doorway and were gone.
‘You've fallen in with a right bad pair there, chief.
They're wanted criminals, you know.’
‘I know, Barry.
I've tricked them into working for me.
I'm trying to track down the Presley hoard.
Those two stole it.’
‘I know, chief.
That's why Laz and I are here also.’
‘Laz?’
The other Rex asked casually.
‘Who's Laz?’
‘He's a detective from the twenty-fifth century.
We work together now.
I'm the straight man, he's my comic relief.
Traditional set-up, you know the kind of thing.’
The other Rex nodded.
‘A well-tried formula.
But where is Elvis?
I thought you and he…’
‘Ah, chief.
A sad business that.’
‘Do you want to talk about it?’
The other Rex placed Barry on the table and seated himself.
‘I'm really keen to meet up with Elvis again.’
‘Not much chance of that chief.
He's…’
‘Go on, Barry.’
‘Nah, chief.
It's better that you don't know.’
‘Barry.
You and I have known each other a long time.
Elvis and me, we were, you know…’
‘Sure, I know, chief.
You were good buddies.
OK, I'll tell it like it was.
But it's a sad tale and it doesn't have a happy ending.’
Rex closed the book.
It didn't have a happy ending.
So that was it.
Elvis had travelled back to the dawn of mankind and persuaded God to let him do it his way.
And God, in his infinite wisdom, or in a moment of severe brainstorm, had actually given him the go-ahead.
Elvis had then travelled forwards in time, locating each potential mother of the Anti-Christ and wooed her away from the Satanic father to be.
Something which, no doubt, he enjoyed a great deal .
The result being that the Anti-Christ never got born.
On the face of it a most ingenious scheme.
But along the way it had all got fouled up.
Elvis's vanity had been given its full and well-quiffed head.
He'd had himself painted and sculptured again and again, and he'd been there for all the world to see.
Century after century.
Elvis the Everliving.
He had become God.
But what of Jesus?
Rex flicked back to the appropriate page and read aloud.
And Elvis said unto Pontius Pilate, ‘Listen Pont, this is a bum rap.
The guy's a first-time offender.
All he did was shoot his mouth off a little.
He's still prepared to render unto Caesar and stuff.
How's about easing up on the sentence, it is Easter after all.’
And Pilate spake thusly, saying, ‘Seeing as it's you and this is a fine case of Old Bedwetter you've brought me, I'll play the white man.
But I'll have to give him a caution at least.
What do you suggest?’
And Elvis in his wisdom replied, ‘Let the kid off with a fine.
Say thirty pieces of silver.
I can get that off Judas, he's come into some cash lately.’
And Pilate said, ‘So let it be.’
And let it be it was.
‘Got him off with a fine.’
Rex buried his face in his hands.
‘Elvis, you steaming great buffoon.
You cocked it all up.
You caused all this.’
A world that was nothing but image.
A world where style was everything and the wearing of white shoes in a blue suede shoe zone was a capital offence.
‘Brilliant,’ sighed Rex.
‘You really had the mother of all revelations this time, didn't you?
But where?’
Rex leafed through to the end of the book.
‘Where are you now?’
‘Where is he now?’ the other Rex asked.
‘Around somewhere, chief.
You see, he and I had a bit of a falling out.
It was all those statues and stuff.
And the paintings.
Everywhere, every time we were, he'd want to get his likeness done.
He had this book, see, A Complete History of the World's Art.
So every century we were in he'd say ‘We must drop in and say howdy to Michelangelo or Raphael or Donatello or Leonardo,’ and he'd get his picture painted.’
‘The Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles painted his picture?’
‘Chief, that gag was done back on page 16 and it stank then.’
‘Sorry.
Please continue.’
‘Thank you.
So, like I said, we'd drop in on Van Gogh and Dali and Dave Carson…’
‘Dave Carson?’ the other Rex asked.
‘Who he?’
‘Only the greatest artist of the twentieth century, that's who.
[All right for you, Davey?]
He drew Elvis with all these tentacles coming out of his bonce.
Not my cup of tea at all.
Now don't keep interrupting.’
‘Sorry, Barry.
Go on.’
‘Well, he got sculpted and frescoed and painted and even woven into the bloody Bayeux tapestry dressed as a Norman soldier.
Century after century.’
‘I see.
And you didn't approve?
You respected his motives but detested his vanity.’
‘No, chief.
That wasn't it at all.’
‘Then what was it?’
‘He never let me be in the sodding pictures.’
Laura returned from the shower.
She was naked and she smelled like Heaven.
‘You've read it then?’
‘I've read it.
But what I still don't understand is, if you were schooled on this stuff, how do you know it's wrong?
What are you, an atheist?’
‘An atheist?’
Laura laughed.
‘I'm one of the Children of the Revolution.
I believe in the true God.’
‘The true God.
I see.
That is most encouraging.’
‘Then you believe also?
But of course you do.
He sent you to help us, didn't he?’
‘I suppose he must've done.’
‘Yes.’
Laura seated herself on the bed and Rex gave her a good sniff.
‘This crap,’ Laura took the book from Rex's fingers and struck it with the back of her hand.
‘None of this is the truth.
Elvis was never, is never, the true God.’
‘Bravo.’
Rex moved in for a cuddle.
‘I can dig that.’
Laura shifted out of range.
‘Elvis was merely a vehicle.’
‘Eh?’
‘A vehicle for the true God.
The true God spake unto him and controlled his every movement.’
‘He did?’
‘He did.
The true God dwelt within Elvis.
In here.’
Laura tapped the back of her head.
‘He dictated Elvis's every action, whilst remaining invisible and all knowing.’
‘He did?’
Rex went again.
‘And who is He?’
‘BAH-REAH.’
Laura drew an invisible circle on her  forehead.
‘BAH-REAH is the true God and we are the children of BAH-REAH.
The Children of the Revolution.
We will cast down the towers of the false god and raise the banner of the All-Knower.
Hail BAH-REAH!’
‘BAH-REAH?’
The horrified expression on Rex's face wasn't as pretty as a picture.
‘Could that be pronounced Barry by any chance?’
‘So there you have it,’ said the sprout that several hundred well-armed revolutionaries knew as BAH-REAH the All-Knower.
‘We parted company and I took up with the bozo in the trenchcoat.
I get a laugh out of it.
Old Laz is a pretentious son of a gun, but he's got a heart of gold.
He doesn't come cheap, but he gets the job done.
With him you can expect a lot of gratuitous sex and violence, a trail of corpses and a thrilling roof-top —’
‘Yes.
I get the picture.
But where is Elvis?
Here, in the now?’
‘I guess, chief.
This was our last port of call.
Elvis had this revelation, see?
Said that the Anti-Christ was going to show up here.
Said that as Mother Demdike had escaped at the end of They Came And Ate Us, there was a loose end.
He was real concerned about it.
But not too concerned that he couldn't find time to drop into Simon Butcher's to have his picture taken.’
‘Simon Butcher, the society photographer?’
‘That's the guy, chief.
You know him?’
‘We've never met.
But they say he's the greatest photographer of all time.’
[If it's another name drop then it gets cut.
Ed]
‘Couldn't say.
I didn't stick around for the session.
Utilizing some of the truly awesome powers at my disposal, I took, as Laz would say, a powder, and went on the lam.
A sprout can take just so much and then no more.
If you catch my drift.
And I'm sure that you do.’
‘I understand.
But I'm puzzled.
You came along with Dee and Kelley without a fuss.
Why was that?’
‘Ah,’ said Barry.
‘Well I've run into a spot of bother.
I find myself temporarily incapacitated in the time-travelling department.
I can't seem to get it together at present.
It will no doubt sort itself out in a few days.’
‘A few days?’
The horrified expression the other Rex now wore was exactly identical to the one the other other Rex had been wearing only moments before.
Weird, eh?
‘A few days?
But in a couple of days the Big Bang goes up.’
‘The Big Bang goes up.
Yes, I know that.’
Barry gazed upon the other Rex.
‘But how come you know that, bucko?’
‘What's that, Barry?’
‘Nothing, chief.’
‘He has to be here,’ said the real Mr Mundi.
‘Somewhere here, in the now.’
‘Who has to be?’
‘Elvis.
He's here somewhere.’
‘He's always here.
That's what he does.
That's why he is.’
Rex flicked through to the final page of The Suburban Book of the Dead.
And Elvis went unto the House of Light and was seen no more.’
What does that mean, do you suppose?
The House of Light?
That he died, would that be it?’
‘Uh-uh.’
Laura shook her head.
‘The House of Light is right here in Presley City.’
‘And built just like a jukebox, I'll bet.’
‘You got it.
But it's not in the phone book.
I only discovered I was in it by sheer chance.
The guy who owns it was shouting all kinds of stuff and he let it slip.
I had this live eel and he liked to have me insert it…’
‘Thank you, Laura.
So who is this fish fancier?’
‘His name is Simon Butcher and he's the most famous photographer of all time.’
‘Famous photographer, it figures.
And you know him well?’
‘You gotta know a guy quite well before he trusts you to stick a live eel up his…’
‘Quite so.
Then I think we'd better pay this Mr Butcher a visit.’
I gazed up at the building.
Biggest damn piece of architecture I've ever seen.
And I've seen some.
I only say this in passing you understand.
Just to set the scene and seeing as I haven't been in the plot too much lately.
It costs nothing to say it was a big old building, not if you're standing in an alleyway.
The way I was currently doing.
I figured there were a whole lot of answers inside that building and I figured that like or not there had to be a back entrance to it somewhere.
And I figured that it would be more than a racing cert that it was situated in another alleyway.
So I struck out in search.
The sun was going down upon Presley City.
It would do this twice more and then call it a day.
As far as Presley City was concerned anyway.
Bill was leaning on his cab, spitting at the wing mirror and half-heartedly polishing it with his sleeve.
He stiffened to belligerent attention as Rex and Laura approached.
‘All better now, are we?’ he enquired in a manner hardly calculated to endear.
‘Got over our queezy tum?’
Rex opened the cab door for Laura.
‘Ready to hit the night spots, eh?’ the cabby continued.
‘I've left the meter running by the way.
Want to settle up now or later?’
‘Later,’ said Rex.
‘Do you know Simon Butcher's studio?’
‘Hardly miss it.
Biggest damn building in town.’
‘Then kindly take us there.’
‘Your wish is my command, oh master.’
‘Hmm.’
Rex followed Laura into the cab which was becoming their second home and they were driven off into A Night of Danger.
‘We going shopping again tomorrow, squire?’
Bill called over his shoulder.
‘Only this jumpsuit's going through at the arse and the bellbottoms are getting well chewed up on the pedals.’
‘I haven't decided yet.
Do you have any music you could play?’
‘I surely do.’
Bill rooted amongst a rack of laser discs.
‘I got the Cray Cherubs, the Lost Teeshirts of Atlantis, The Turbulent Priests, Sonic Energy Authority —’
‘Got any Marc Bolan?’
Rex asked.
‘I got ‘Pewter Suitor’.’
‘Well bung it on and turn it up.’
Bill bunged it on and turned it up.
Rex nuzzled close to Laura's ear.
‘I think we are going to have to lose the cabby,’ he whispered.
Laura smiled back at him.
‘Just say the word,’ she replied, without moving her lips.
‘In the meantime,’ Rex whispered on.
‘Tell me what you know about the chap off the telly.
Make it look like you're singing along.’
‘You don't ask much, do you?
OK.’
Laura sang along.
‘He's a rel-ig-ious loon
he's real loonie tune aha ha
He tops the folk on his show
and he loves the way they go aha ha
The station says it ain't real
but you can tell by how they squeal aha ha
And that's all I know
na na na nanana na
na na na nanana na
na na na nanana…’
‘Thanks,’ said Rex.
‘But that wasn't the tune of ‘Pewter Suitor’, that was ‘Hot Love’.’
‘Oh, I'm so sorry.’
Laura got a huff on.
‘But all his later stuff sounds the same to me.
And, seeing as it was only a cheap literary device anyway, and that not even the legendary Graham Gardner  owns a copy of ‘Pewter Suitor’, who's ever going to know?’
‘Point taken.
Are we nearly there, Bill?’
‘What say, guv?
Hang on while I turn down ‘Telegram Sam’, I can't hear what you're saying.’
‘See what I mean?’
Laura stuck her tongue out at Rex.
‘I said,’ Rex said when all was quiet, ‘are we nearly there?’
‘Yep.
That's it up ahead.
Pretty snazzy, eh?
Some scam that photography game.
Did you know that Cecil Beaton couldn't even load his own camera?
I had that Robert Mapplethorpe in the back of my cab once.’
‘No, you didn't.’
Rex shook his head.
‘Of course I didn't.
Just trying to enliven the journey with a spot of cabby's banter.
All part of the service.’
‘Just drive the cab.’
‘Just drive the cab.’
Bill echoed Rex's words in a sarcastic sing song.
‘No pleasing some people.
So I said to Robert Mapplethorpe, I don't call that art, having your self portrait done with a whip stuck up your…’
‘Bill, please just drive.
You really must learn where to draw the line.’
‘I'm easy, me.
I never had a lot of time for good taste.
I'm a take-me-as-you-find-me sort of guy, know what I mean?
Give me a shellsuit, a pit-bull terrier and a wife to smack around after I've had a few, and I'm happy.
I speak as I find.
There's no side to me and I look after me old mum.
The family's everything to me.
I might abuse my kids, but where's the harm in that?
Society's to blame  when you come right down to it.
If I'd had a proper education do you think I'd be driving this cab around?’
‘I really couldn't say.
But as you are, perhaps you might just do it in silence.’
‘Blokes like you,’ Bill continued, warming to his topic, ‘you're privileged.
You think you're better than me.
But you're not.
I can see right through you.’
‘You can drop us off on the corner if you like, Bill.’
‘Oh, Bill, is it?
On first-name terms, are we?
Just because you've run up $100,000 on the meter you think you own me.
Well you don't.’
‘I don't know what's brought this on all of a sudden…’
‘You bastards get right up my bum.
Bigfoot noses for lunch and a flashy whore on the end of your growler for tea.’
‘Stop the cab!’
Bill accelerated and then rammed his foot on the brake pedal causing Rex and Laura to plummet floorward.
‘Here do you, chief?’
Bill smirked round at his struggling passengers.
‘Give her one for me while you're down there.’
‘Right, that does it.’
Rex fought his way upright.
‘Step outside.’
‘Oh ho, step outside is it?
Sure enough.’
The cabby swung open his door and climbed out.
‘Let me help you.’
He opened the car door for Rex.
‘Mind your head, chief.’
That's twice with the chief, thought Rex, who rather than have his head mashed by a slamming door, put his boot against it and offered a mighty kick.
The door shot open, knocking Bill from his feet and sending him sprawling across the sidewalk.
A strangely-deserted sidewalk, Rex noted as he leapt out of the cab and stalked over to the fallen driver.
‘What's got into you?’ he demanded.
‘Why are you behaving like this?’
Bill glared up at him.
His face was a ghastly white and his eyes shone red as Cortina brake lights.
‘I hate you.’
The grounded cabby spoke the words in a low cold dead tone which left absolutely no margin for misinterpretation.
Rex took a precautionary step backwards.
He was genuinely shocked.
‘Why?’ he asked.
‘What have I done to you?’
Bill raised himself on his elbows and scowled fiercely.
‘You don't know me, but I know you.’
Rex sought a speedy solution.
He really was in something of a hurry and there was going to be nothing gained by engaging in either argument of fisticuffs with a cab driver.
‘Look,’ said he, ‘I don't know what your problem is and in all candour, I don't actually care.
Here, take this.’
He pulled several wristwatches from his pocket and flung one down to Bill.
‘I'm borrowing your cab.’
‘I think not.’
Bill's face took on an evil grin.
He folded his arms across his chest and swung upright magically upon his heels.
‘Hmm.’
Rex didn't like the look of that one little bit.
Bill glared him eye to eye.
‘I'm going to punish you,’ he snarled.
‘It will be a long painful lingering punishment terminating in a horrifying death.’
‘I really don't have time for this.’
Rex was backing towards the cab.
A voice inside him was saying ‘drive like buggery if you know what's good for you’.
‘Oh no you don't.’
The cabby shot out an arm.
He shot it straight out of his jumpsuit sleeve, through the skin and bones of his human hand and right at Rex's throat.
The hand, which missed the ducking Rex by inches, struck the cab, rocking it upon its wheels and leaving a fearsome five-knuckled intaglio above the driver's door.
The hand was broad, black, scaled and terribly taloned.
Rex rolled across the sidewalk and came up with his  hand inside his leather jacket.
Now where was Laura's gun?
Rex patted himself frantically.
Not upon his person, it so appeared.
‘Oh dear, oh dear,’ groaned Rex.
Bill turned upon him.
‘Don't recognize me yet?’
Rex gaped at the cab driver in the soiled jumpsuit.
The cab driver who now displayed a big black muscular right arm about four feet long, curtained by torn Lycra and ribbons of human flesh.
‘Let's give you another clue.
Tell me when you think you're getting warm.’
Bill began to bulge in all directions.
His shoulders spread to the accompaniment of sickening bone-cracking reports.
His head expanded, the facial features flattening, but for the eyes which popped from their sockets.
The crutch of the jumpsuit shot forwards as if under the impetus of some mighty erection.
A tiger's head sprang out from it snorting and snarling.
Rex watched in horror as the black claw tore Bill's left arm from its socket and flung it far up the street.
Another huge and hideous arm sprouted from the ruined shoulder.
Rex felt that now really would be the time to make a getaway.
With a great heave the black claws ripped away Bill's scalp, his face split from top to bottom revealing the three demonic masks of Hades rising from within.
One of a bull, one of a ram and the third a beast of terrible aspect.
‘Asmodeus!’
Rex did further backings away.
‘But how?
You're dead.
Gone into the ether.’
‘When you killed me back at the Miskatonic?
You expelled me from that plane.
Now I exist in this one.
And I'm really hungry.’
The beast-face leered at Rex and then began to laugh.
Now, it wasn't your average giggle, snigger, snicker, titter or tee hee.
Nor, it must be said, a hoot, chuckle, chortle, crow or cackle.
There wasn't even a hint of the belly wobbler or the throaty guffaw.
What you had here was your one hundred per cent pure, full-scale Hell's-a-happening, deep-down Satanic bowel loosener.
And it fair put the wind up Rex Mundi.
Asmodeus shook away the clinging remains of good old Bill.
Gobbets of cabby flesh, splinters of fractured bone and jaded jumpsuit remnants sprayed over the sidewalk.
‘That's better,’ said he, flexing his titanic shoulders and thrusting out his great barrel of a chest.
‘It was really cramped in there.
I was just supposed to keep an eye on you and let you lead us to the enemy.
But sod it, I'm really hungry.
Those bigfoot noses don't hit the spot.’
‘I could get you a takeaway.’
Rex took another step backwards and found to his unhappiness that he had backed himself neatly into a well-barred shop doorway.
The monstrous tiger on which Asmodeus sat crept forwards, sulphurous plumes of smoke rising from its nostrils.
Asmodeus dug his spurs in.
‘Gee up, Tigger,’ he cried.
For those who missed his performance in They Came And Ate Us it must be said that this wasn't a very nice demon at all.
Heinrich Kramer, co-author of the merry Malleus Maleficarum, wrote of him thus:
And how true those words are, even today.
‘Sweetmeats first,’ crowed Asmodeus.
‘I want this to last.’
He plunged at Rex, who had nowhere to run, scooped him up with a single movement and held him good and high.
‘Yum, yum, yum.’
‘No, wait.
Let's talk about this.’
‘Off with his goolies, nice and slow.’
Asmodeus prepared to make a substantial octave-raising munch.
The lad in the leather kicked, struggled and called for mercy.
But it really wasn't going to get him anywhere.
The beast-face pursed its lips and a set of those extendible animatronic teeth, which have become de rigueur for every good monster since Alien hit the screen, snuck out, dripping slime.
‘Oh no.
Don't do that.’
Rex crossed his legs and thought ‘retraction’.
The extendible teeth went ‘snap snap snap’.
‘Put Rex down!’
Rex turned his terrified eyes from the impending horrors below.
Laura stood before the cab.
She held the intricate hand weapon in both hands.
‘Put him down.’
Asmodeus took his teeth back.
‘What's all this?’
‘Put him down or I shoot.’
The three faces turned and glared back over the demon's shoulders.
‘Ah yes; you.
I shall have uses for you once I've eaten.’
‘Put him down.
I mean it.’
‘She means it,’ said Rex.
‘Don't be silly.’
‘No, she really does.
You'd best put me down if you know what's good for you.’
Asmodeus swung his faces back to Rex.
‘What's good for me at about this time is a nice supper off the bone.
Followed by a good cigar, a bottle or two of brandy and acts of gross depravity upon the whore.’
‘Shoot him, Laura!’
Laura thumbed dials on her weapon and let off three rounds into the back of the demon's head.
‘Oh ouch!
Oh shit!
Oh Hell!’
‘Oh bah!’ went the ram's face.
‘Oh snort!’ went the bull's.
Rex found himself crashing to the ground.
‘That really smarts.’
Asmodeus clawed at the back of his head.
‘Shoot him some more.’
Rex crawled away.
Laura shot him some more.
‘Oh bloody bleeding blimey.’
Rex was on his feet and running.
‘Get back in the cab.’
Asmodeus shook his head and swung his mount around.
‘Now I'm angry.
Let's kill 'em and eat.’
‘Get in the cab.’
Rex thrust Laura into the back of the car and threw himself into the driver's seat.
He scrabbled at the dashboard.
‘Where are the keys?’ he asked.
‘I haven't got them, Bill must of taken them.’
‘Aw shit!’
Asmodeus reined his devil steed around to the front of the cab.
He climbed down and smiled thricely through the windscreen.
‘You've upset me now,’ he growled, ‘and do you know what happens when I get upset?’
Rex considered that it probably wasn't anything good.
Asmodeus took hold of the front bumper and gave the cab an almighty shake.
‘Rex, do something!’
‘What can I do?
Oh no!’
Asmodeus lifted the cab and held the front of it high above his head.
‘Say good night people.’
‘Good night, Rex.’
‘Goodbye, Laura.
It's been nice.’
‘Yeah.
It's been really nice, as it happens.’
‘Goodbye!’ screamed the three faces of Asmodeus the arch-demon.
12
32.
And smoothly did they now dress.
And cool were their shades.
And well-heeled were they, what with the oil revenues and all.
33.
And Elvis did play ever to packed houses and many were the daughters of men who came in unto him.
The Suburban Book of the Dead
Your really classic science-fiction movie usually begins with the big pan across deep space.
It's a tradition or an old charter or something.
The camera pans across all those stars and galaxies and lets the audience know that this is one big number.
The audience, who have seen it all many times before, shift in their seats, chit chat and open bags of popcorn.
Then the panning is done.
And something swells into view.
It might be a dirty great slab of stone, the Starship Enterprise, a holiday craft with Predator on board, or even a free-falling sprout.
On this particular occasion however, it is a nifty little flying saucer.
One of those dome-topped affairs, circa 1958.
The saucer whizzes overhead, the camera follows it and the next thing you see is its destination.
Good old Planet Earth.
The planet grows to fill the screen, the saucer glows as it passes into the atmosphere.
Black becomes the blue of the sky.
Seas and continents fall past.
The saucer sweeps in lower.
Due to a now-realized continuity error, the blue sky turns to red, the sun goes down and the saucer flies on through the night.
Ahead the lights of a great city appear on the horizon.
A wondrous city, its high towers resembling the Jukeboxes of the Gods.
The saucer drops between the towers, flies low over strangely deserted streets and comes suddenly to a grinding halt.
Rex stared through the up-turned windscreen.
‘Cor,’ said he.
‘What's that?’
A blinding light filled the cab and a beam of raw blue energy pulsed down.
Asmodeus stiffened as the beam engulfed him, let out a roar of disapproval and was promptly atomized.
The cab crashed down on to the street and there was a bit of a hush.
The head of Rex Mundi appeared above the dashboard of the cab.
‘Golly.
Laura, are you all right?’
Laura's face peeped from the back.
‘What happened?’
‘Something.’
Rex craned his neck, but the saucer had gone.
The cab's engine burst into life.
‘I think we just had help from an unexpected quarter.’
‘Then let's get out of here.’
‘Yes.
Let's do.’
The Butcher Building was, as has been mentioned, constructed after the style of a sixty-six-storey jukebox.
For those lovers of the nickelodeon, anxious to know exactly which model it was based upon, tough titty.
I've only got the one book on jukeboxes and I've used up all the good ones.
And let's face it, as a running gag, it really wasn't up to much.
Like all that psychology nonsense.
Dead pretentious.
Bill's cab skidded to a halt.
‘Is that it?’
Laura was fixing her hair and repairing her make-up.
‘Are you sure this is wise?
Shouldn't we go into hiding or something?’
Rex adjusted himself in the driving mirror.
‘If I can find Elvis, then he and I can deal with this thing.
We can put it right.’
Laura laughed.
‘We get attacked by a monster, the monster gets zapped by a flying saucer and now you fancy a chat with God Almighty.
Life's never dull around you, is it?’
Rex might have managed a smile.
‘Elvis and I can handle it.’
‘You talk like you're old friends.’
‘We are.’
Rex got a smile on the go.
‘The very best.
Come on.’
The doorman of the Butcher Building looked suitably imposing.
Rex turned a blind eye to the fact that he was obviously Officer Cecil, poorly disguised in false moustache, tailcoat and spats.
‘Just keep walking,’ whispered Rex, as he and Laura marched up the marble steps which led to the plaza before the great building.
They were right at the top when doorman Cecil barred their way.
‘Watcha want?’ he asked.
‘I'm Rex Mundi.’
Rex explained.
‘The chap off the telly.
I've come here to have my portrait taken by Mr Butcher.
If you'll be so kind as to tell him I've arrived.’
‘Oh.
All right then.’
Doorman Cecil turned away.
Laura passed Rex the gun and Rex bopped him on the head with it.
Doorman Cecil made a slow and extremely unconvincing fall into unconsciousness.
‘Oh,’ he groaned from the deck.
‘I've been knocked out cold.’
‘Hmm,’ sighed Rex.
‘Let's get this over with.’
He took  Laura by the arm and guided her through the revolving doors.
The reception area was about as broad as it was long.
Which was very broad and equally long.
The carpet was black.
The walls were white.
The pictures which adorned them were black and white.
The celebrities, captured for posterity by the world's leading photographer, all seemed singularly lacking in clothes.
‘He's keen on a buff shot, this Butcher,’ Rex observed.
‘Say, Laura, isn't that you over there?’
‘Well…’
Laura grew somewhat rosy about the perfect cheekbones.
‘I don't remember him taking my picture when I was doing that.’
‘A small price to pay for a 600 Wurlitzer.’
‘Can I help you, sir?’
The young woman behind the expansive chromium reception desk caught Rex's attention.
She was slim, svelte and sophisticated.
Rex was no stranger to reception desk psychology.
‘Good evening Ms. My name is Rex Mundi.
Chap off the telly.
I have an informal invitation to see Mr Butcher.
You won't find it in the appointments book.
Could you just ring up to old Si and let him know I've arrived?’
‘Mr Butcher's having a session at the moment.’
Rex shunned the obvious rejoinder.
‘If you'll just tell him Rex is here.
I'm expected.’
‘Well, I'll see.
But he's very busy.’
She turned away to make the call.
Rex handed Laura the gun.
Laura bopped the receptionist on the head with it.
‘Thanks,’ Rex said.
‘Striking women always goes against the grain with me.’
‘That's funny,’ Laura replied.
‘I really get off on it.’
‘Hmm,’ went Rex once more.
‘Which way do you think?’
‘Floor sixty-six.
Come on, I'll lead the way.’
I watched the lift as it rode up the side of the building.
I didn't know who the guy riding it was, but through  my police issue 200 × 6000 macroscopic laser-prism binoculars I could see he was the same guy who had just bopped the doorman in the head.
I didn't know what he was up to and I guess I didn't care.
But you can imagine my surprise when I angled said state-of-the-art bins to the street, watched the long black car as it rolled up and saw the self-same guy step out of it.
Laz, I said to myself, Laz, something pretty weird's going on here, and if you don't get on to your agent and negotiate for the use of another couple of sets, you're gonna be standing in this Goddamn alleyway for the rest of the book
The little light filled the number sixty-six and the little bell went ping.
Rex dropped down from the ceiling.
‘Fast lift,’ said he.
‘Bum gag,’ said Laura.
‘Come on this way.’
The doors opened and she strode forth.
She made off along a long marble-floored corridor.
Rex walked close behind, appreciating every swish of her stockings.
Laura sighed.
‘Walk with me, or I'll charge for every swish.’
‘Quite so.
Where's the studio?’
‘Right here.’
The door had one of those big printed signs which shout NO ENTRY at everybody.
Rex didn't listen to it.
He said, ‘Give me the gun,’ and Laura grudgingly parted with it.
‘Now stand back.’
Rex took the gun in one hand, turned the handle with the other, kicked open the door and leapt dramatically into the studio.
The scene revealed was not without its points of interest.
The studio was large, low ceilinged and about as broad as it was long.
It was very brightly lit.
But there was no sign of any photographic equipment about.
A large portion of the large room was taken up with a large number of very large men.
And these held very large weapons which were all trained upon Rex and Laura.
And beyond all these, seated behind a nice black-topped desk with chromium legs, was a diminutive, boyish figure in a smart grey business suit.
He waved gaily.
‘Hello Rex.
I've been waiting for you.
Do throw the weapon away, you are somewhat outgunned.’
‘Jonathan.’
Rex tossed Laura's pistol aside.
‘How very unpleasant to see you again.’
The other Rex stepped over the fallen doorman.
He spoke into a handset.
‘Someone has bopped the doorman on the head.
Immediate assistance required.’
‘Jonathan, what are you doing here?’
‘What is all this Jonathan crap?’
Laura asked.
‘This is Simon Butcher.’
‘Oh great.’
Rex turned his eyes to Heaven.
‘You couldn't have mentioned this when I took a shot at him in the alleyway.’
‘I didn't see him in the alleyway.
You were being the big hero with the gun, if you remember.’
‘Children, children.’
Jonathan put up his hands and stepped from behind his desk.
‘Let's have no acrimony here.
We're all friends, after all.’
‘Still the short-arsed little git that ever you were,’ Rex commented.
‘That's quite enough of that.
How's the jukebox running, Laura?’
‘It's buggered, as it happens.
Only plays Richie Valens records.’
‘Tell Laura I love her,’ said Jonathan, painfully off-key.
'Are you going to have me shot?’
Laura ran her fingers through her hair and raised her breasts.
Jonathan gazed up at them.
‘No no, not you.
I deplore needless waste.
And I have a spiffing Regency mahogany Canterbury with fitted drawer and baluster supports, probably by Gillows.
Look very handsome in your apartment.’
‘Where does this leave me?’
Rex asked.
‘I have a little job for you.’
‘Oh yes?
Eel-handler's mate, is it?’
Jonathan's face fell.
He gawped at Laura.
‘You told him about…’
‘Sorry.
It just slipped out.’
‘Just slipped out, that's a good'n…ah.’
Rex suddenly sobered to the rifle butt which struck him between the shoulder blades.
‘I won't be made mock of.’
Jonathan waggled his finger at the fallen hero.
‘You will speak to me politely or I will split my men here into two football teams with you as the ball.
Do I make myself quite clear?’
Rex nodded bitterly and climbed to his feet.
‘Good.
As long as we understand each other.
Now, about this little job —’ A siren sounded and the room lights began to flash on and off.
‘Oh dear.
What is it now?’
Jonathan returned to his desk and tinkered at a console.
The siren ceased, the lighting stabilized and a large image sprang up on the wall behind him.
It showed the other Rex, who was standing on the plaza before the building waving his arms about.
Lots of darkly clad figures were moving around him.
They looked equally as well armed as the large lads on floor sixty-six.
And there were more of them.
‘Well, well, well.
This puts an entirely new complexion on things.
I hadn't been expecting him quite so soon.
What do you think we should do about him, Rex?’
‘Why ask me?’
‘Well, he is you, isn't he?’
‘He's not me, he's…’
‘Uh-uh.’
Jonathan shook his little head.
‘He's you, all right.
You in another reality.
A parallel reality.
This reality.
He's the Rex you might have become.
The big bad bogeyman himself.
And there's not enough room for the two of you here.
One has to go.
Seems like he's made up his mind which one.’
‘Are you sure it's me he's after?
No-one knew I was coming here.
If you ask me, you're the one he wants.’
Jonathan chewed upon a thumb nail.
‘No, no, no.
He doesn't know I'm here.
No, no, no.’
‘Well there's one way to find out.
Let's ask him.’
‘No.
I don't think that would be a good idea at all.
A confrontation now would ruin all my plans.
I think I shall have to postpone our little chat about the job.
In fact I don't think I will be requiring your services at all.’
Jonathan touched something on his wrist.
A section of floor in the middle of the room slid aside and a nice bright-red Buick aircar rose into view.
Jonathan did another couple of touchings and the large men with the large guns merged into a single figure.
This figure opened the car door for Mr Crawford.
‘Clever that, isn't it?
A little innovation of my own.
Shan't tell you how it's done of course.
Would you care to ride with me, Laura?’
‘No.
I wouldn't.’
‘Well, just do anyway.’
Jonathan produced a weapon of mightier ilk than Laura's.
‘Just get in.’
Laura got in.
‘So it's goodbye, Rex.
There isn't a back door and I doubt whether even you with that charmed life of yours can come up with a way out of this one.’
‘Don't you bet on it.’
‘Game to the last, eh?
Bye bye.’
Ceiling panels swished aside and Jonathan's nice bright-red Buick aircar rose into the night sky.
Jonathan waved down at Rex.
‘Bye bye,’ he mouthed.
Rex glanced at the image on the wall.
The plaza was  now deserted, but the corridor beyond the studio door sounded like it was pretty crowded.
With the noises of all the marching feet and everything.
‘Hmm,’ went Rex Mundi.
‘That's another fine mess I've gotten myself into.
Mmm hmm.’
13
The truth is flexible, white hot, but it soon becomes brittle if tempered with cold bullshit.
Robert Williams
Stevie Wonder felt my face.
Louise Rennison
‘There must be some kinda way outta here,’ sang Rex Mundi to no-one but himself.
The trouble was, for the life of him, he could not imagine where or what it might be.
The big white room didn't have much to offer.
It boasted a desk and a chair to its account.
But was knowingly undersold in the window department.
And it only had the one door.
Rex stepped lively.
He picked up Laura's gun and considered his options.
He could hide behind the door and club them down one by one when they came in.
Or at a pinch he might be able to squeeze himself into the desk drawer and hide.
A heroic stand against impossible odds was always a possibility.
As was his stumbling across the secret technique of effecting invisibility.
Rex numbered his options on to his fingers.
‘I'll just have to dip for it,’ he said.
‘Dip, dip, sky blue; who's it, not you.
There goes the desk drawer.
Dip, dip, sky blue; who's it, not —’
There was an almighty crash.
‘And there goes the door.’
‘Stick 'em up,’ chorused the large men with large guns tumbling over each other through the doorway.
‘Or I might just stick 'em up.’
Rex threw down Laura's weapon for the second time and stuck 'em up.
‘That's another option, I suppose.’
The latest crop of large men with large guns thundered into the studio and formed themselves into a chaotic firing squad.
‘Ready,’ cried one.
They made themselves ready.
‘Take aim.’
They took aim.
‘Fi —’
‘Hold it right there!’
Rex shouted.
‘And that's an order.’
‘Fi…oh…er…it's you, sir.’
‘Yes.’
Rex wondered how he had omitted this rather obvious option from his former list.
‘It's me.
How dare you point your weapons in my direction.’
‘I'm sorry, sir.
Just got a bit carried away with all the excitement of storming the building and everything.
No offence meant.’
‘Well, some taken, I can assure you.
Attenshun!’
The squad came to attention.
Rex reviewed his troops.
‘This is a sorry business,’ said he.
‘Sir?’
One of the ranks put his hand up.
As they all looked very much the same it didn't matter which one.
‘What is it, soldier?’
‘Sir, how come you were behind us in the corridor and now you're in front of us here?’
‘I'm glad you asked me that.’
Rex paced up and down trying hard to look glad.
‘And wearing different clothes, sir?’
‘Yes indeed.’
Rex turned upon the questioner.
‘Do you know anything about the transperambulation of pseudo-cosmic anti-matter?’
‘Er…no sir…not much.’
‘Well then.’
‘Well then, sir?’
‘Well then, clear off.
Carry on.
Dismissed.
Get moving.’
‘Yes sir.’
There was mass saluting, mass mumbling and mass pouring out of the door.
And Rex found himself once more alone in the big bright room.
He picked up Laura's gun yet again and tucked it into his jacket.
‘Rex Mundi, you genius.
Time you left the building.’
He tip-toed across the studio floor and peeped up the corridor after the marching men.
‘Up and away.
Ahhh!’
Rex felt the cold muzzle of the gun as it entered his left ear.
‘My, my,’ came the voice of the gun's owner.
A voice that Rex knew almost as well as he knew his own.
Even though he only heard it through his right ear.
‘My, my.
If it isn't the shopper.’
Rex turned slightly to view the owner of the voice.
He knew that face almost as well as he knew his own.
In fact equally well.
It was his own face.
‘Back inside,’ ordered the other Rex.
‘And you lot!’
He bawled up the corridor.
‘Here on the double!’
The gun left Rex's ear, nuzzled into his chest and pushed him back into the studio.
‘Nice jacket.’
The villain fingered Rex's lapels with his gun-free hand.
‘What expensive taste you do have.’
Rex stared into the face of his mirror image.
He'd known loathing and hatred before.
But nothing on the scale of this.
His body ached to leap upon this travesty and wring the life out of it.
‘Oh yes.
Love to, wouldn't you?
It's funny, I don't feel nearly so badly towards you.
Even though you've nearly bankrupted me!
I suppose that's because I hold your life in my hands.
That would be it, I expect.
How does that feel by the way?’
‘Not good.’
Rex gritted his teeth.
The large men were flooding largely back into the room.
They were looking largely confused.
The other Rex turned to greet them.
He kept his gun trained on Rex as he did so.
‘Gentlemen, I would like you to meet my twin brother.’
‘What?’ went Rex.
‘My twin brother, Max.
Max the psychopathic killer.
Recently escaped from the state mental institution.
Placed there —’ a plaintive tone entered the voice of the other Rex ‘— for the murder of our dear white-haired old mother, whom he killed and ate.’
‘Oh shame, shame,’ went the large men, who all had dear white-haired old mothers of their own.
‘String him up.
Shoot the bastard.’
‘Quite so, gentlemen.’
The teller of tall tales poked Rex in the chest with his pistol and steered him to the far end of the room.
‘I could just let them lay into you now,’ he whispered.
His face was far too close for Rex's comfort and his breath smelt like dog shit.
‘But there's still time for you to redeem yourself.
Where is Simon Butcher?’
‘You missed him.
He had to fly.’
The other Rex hit him hard in the stomach.
Rex doubled in pain.
‘Our mutual friend Mr Presley.
Is he here?
In the building?’
‘I don't know.’
Rex gasped for breath.
‘Pardon?’
The fiend dragged Rex up by his hair.
‘What did you say?’
‘I haven't seen him.
I don't know where he is.’
Rex felt the knee as it made contact with his groin.
‘Not much help, are you?
Where is my Volvo?’
Rex gazed up at him.
‘Your Volvo.
Ah, I begin to see.’
‘You see nothing.
And apparently you know nothing.
It's all up for you then.
But take comfort in this.’
He dragged Rex up and spat the words into his face.
‘When I'm all done here I'll be spending a lot of time in your world.
I do so look forward to enjoying all the comforts of your juicy little wife.’
‘Go to Hell.’
‘I was there just this morning, as it happens.
Getting  your room ready.
And now I think it's time for you to move in.’
The other Rex turned and strode back to his troops.
‘Take careful aim for the head, men.
I don't want the jacket spoiled.
It's just my size and I paid for it.
Ready.’
The  troops made themselves ready.
They were really going to enjoy this one.
Dear white-haired old mother and everything.
‘Take aim.
Don't forget the head now.’
No, they weren't going to forget the head.
Rex stared back at them.
This was just about as bad as it could possibly get.
He was really going to die this time.
No trick endings.
No ingenious escapes.
No unlikely coincidences.
This was it.
He'd come all this way, been through everything, just to wind up here.
To be murdered by his Satanic double who was looking forward to enjoying his wife.
Rex began to shake.
He tried to pull himself together, but it was impossible.
It couldn't end like this could it?
It was so unfair.
So unjust.
He didn't want to die.
‘Oh Max,’ his executioner called to him.
‘Any famous last words you'd like recorded for posterity?’
‘How about lay down your guns and back off asshole?’
The voice didn't belong to Rex Mundi.
Rex looked up in no small surprise.
Through the open ceiling panel, which he might easily have climbed out of, had he chosen to number pulling over the desk amongst his previous choice of options, the barrel of a trusty Smith and Wesson was visible, aiming down at the head of his other self.
His other self was staring right back up at it, and he wasn't smiling.
‘Do it now,’ said I, with more authority than a gymnosophist in a lesbian love-dungeon.
The guy looked kinda doubtful, so I let off two rounds.
Goons to either side of him took in the air through their foreheads.
‘Drop the guns.’
The guy said it like he was falling asleep, but his army took the hint.
I let down the tow rope.
‘Best climb up here, fella, if you're looking for another chapter.’
‘Yes.
Thank you.’
The guy in the black leather took to scrambling.
‘Don't you even think about it.’
I cocked my piece towards the other guy, who was definitely thinking about it.
‘We're out of here.’
I slammed into the driving seat.
The guy slammed in beside me.
‘Bill's cab,’ said he.
‘How did you get this up here?’
‘It's a flying model.’
I revved the engine.
‘By the look of what's on the meter some sucker's been driving around at ground level.
Did you steal it or what?
Where's the cab jockey?’
‘Don't ask.’
‘OK.
Then I shan't.
The name's Woodbine, by the way.
Lazlo Woodbine.
Some call me Laz.’
‘Thanks for saving my life, Liz.’
‘Laz,’ said I, letting out the clutch and hitting the air.
‘Don't bite the hand that pulls you out of the shit.’
‘Thanks, Laz,’ said he.
The cab fades into the night sky over Presley.
The camera pans to the full moon.
There's a bit of a lap dissolve and the full moon becomes a paper cup viewed from above.
Ice cubes clatter into the cup, followed by a large slug of Old Bedwetter.
I was pretty pleased with the effect.
Cinema verity, film noir, that kind of thing.
And I'd come out of it looking sharper than a Connecticut Yankee at a 2 Live Crew concert.
Four-set clause intact.
Because, let's face it, all you saw in the studio was the barrel of a gun, and on the roof-top, the interior of a cab.
The cab could have been anywhere.
Like in an alleyway, maybe.
But I don't want to split hairs.
I passed the cup across my office desk, just to make my present location clear.
The guy in the black leather took it in both hands.
‘Cheers,’ he said.
‘Likewise.’
I raised a cup of my own and took a belt.
‘How are you feeling?’
‘Still a bit shaky.
And not a little confused.
How come you pulled me out of there?’
‘Seemed like the thing to do.’
‘Well, my thanks.
This is really appalling liquor by the way.’
‘It's an acquired taste.
Do you want to tell me all about it?’
‘Well, it's the taste mostly, and the smell.
Where do you buy this stuff?’
‘Not the drink, buddy.’
I leaned back in my chair and took a slug to go with the belt I'd just had.
‘It.
Your it.’
‘Oh, my it.’
Rex hesitated.
‘Sorry, is it you or me, but one of us appears to be working in the first person.’
‘It's me.
That's the way I do business.’
‘Could get pretty confusing.
Do you mind if I just go on in the way I'm used to?’
‘You can give it a try,’ said I. ‘If it don't work out, I'm sure we can compromise.
Or at least you can.’
‘Sounds reasonable.’
Rex settled into the client chair.
‘Actually this isn't too bad.
I've tasted a lot worse.
Who are you exactly?’
‘Woodbine.
I told you.
Lazlo Woodbine.’
‘And some call you Laz?’
‘Some do.
You can.’
‘Thanks, Laz.
My name's Rex Mundi.
Some call me, well, Rex, I suppose.’
‘Good to know you, Rex.’
‘I hope you don't mind me asking this.
But what were  you doing on top of the Butcher Building, in Bill's cab, rescuing me?’
‘I'm on a case.
I'm a private detective, see.
The private detective.
Didn't you ever read Blonde in a Body Bag?’
‘I'm afraid not.’
Rex finished his drink.
‘Did you ever read Armageddon: The Musical?’
‘Can't say that I did.
So, like I was telling you, I'm a detective and I'm here on a case.
My lead takes me to the Butcher Building.
I see you go in.
Then I see you go in again, this time in real bad company.
So I just follow a hunch.
Did anyone ever tell you that you bear an uncanny resemblance to a young Harrison Ford?’
‘Once in a while.
Anyone tell you you look just like —’
‘Hush up, guy.
My face never gets a mention.
The reader projects himself on to me.
Hence the first-person.
One of the secrets of my success.’
‘Success?’
Rex looked around at the jaded office.
‘You're successful then?’
‘I'm the hero of this novel.
How much success do you want?’
‘Hmm,’ went Rex Mundi.
‘So tell me about this case of yours.’
‘I'm tracking down something called the Presley hoard.’
‘Ah,’ said he.
‘Now there's a thing.
Could I have a top-up over here?’
The other Rex shouted into his handset.
‘Dee!
Kelley!
Where are you?’
After playing their parts in a fruitless search of the Butcher Building, Dee and Kelley were now dining out at the Drowning Handbag, an up-market eatery in the best part of town.
The establishment's boast was that if it wasn't on the menu, then you could take your pick for  free.
This gourmet's challenge had been taken up successfully upon only one occasion, when a patron ordered elephant's testicles on toast and the chef was forced to admit that he didn't have a bit of bread in the house.
Ed and Johnny were enjoying an unimaginative platter of boiled sprouts.
But very much indeed.
‘Where are you?’
‘We're tailing Woodbine, excellency.’
Dee spat sprout into his portable phone.
‘That's a bleeding lie,’ said the other Rex, slipping unexpectedly into his Michael Caine persona.
‘Get out of that restaurant and get around to Woodbine's office.
If he's there and Mundi's with him, kill them both.
I'll be there as fast as I can.’
‘Yes, excellency.
Check please, waitress.’
Jonathan Crawford dumped ice into a tall Venetian baluster goblet and splashed pink liquor over it.
‘I'm sorry I had to throw old Rex to the wolves back there,’ he said, without a trace of conviction.
‘I hope you two weren't an item.’
‘No.
Strictly business.’
Laura accepted the goblet.
She was draped across a glorious Queen Anne walnut-framed settee, upholstered in gros point floral needlework.
A piece of furniture, she considered, which would look right at home in her apartment.
She ran her hand lovingly over the fabric, kicked off her shoes and exposed a length of leg.
Jonathan looked on appreciatively and filled his own glass with orange juice.
‘Nice sofa, eh?
Look right at home in your apartment.’
‘Now that you mention it.
Why have you brought me here, Simon, or Jonathan is it?’
‘Strictly business.
And it's Jonathan, by the way.
Jonathan Crawford, boy genius and future Lord of  Presley City.
And everywhere else now that I come to mention it.’
‘I like the sound of that.’
Laura didn't like the sound of that one little bit.
‘What do you think of my collection?’
‘Very nice.’
Laura had been mentally cataloguing it since the moment she entered the room.
The room was of considerable size and contained more priceless antiques than an entire Lovejoy series.
‘We have so very much in common, you and I.’ Jonathan joined her on the sofa.
His feet dangled three inches above the Marasali Shirvan rug.
‘We appreciate the finer things of life.
And we share a wish to change the system.
To overthrow it, in fact.’
‘Do we?’
‘We do.
I know all about your dreams of revolution.
I took the liberty of planting a listening device in the jukebox you…earned.
That's how I knew that you and Rex were on your way over.’
‘You little shit.’
‘Strictly business.
I can give you everything you want.
All this.
All you have to do is throw in your lot with me.
Join forces against the common foe.’
‘And who is the common foe?’
‘All in good time.’
Jonathan tapped his nose.
‘Tell me, do you know where you are now?’
Laura nodded.
‘I watched the direction monitor on your pilot's console.
We drove round in circles for an hour and now we're back in the Butcher Building.
About the thirty-sixth floor, I think.’
‘Clever girl.
The thirty-seventh actually.
Would you like to experience something truly wonderful?’
‘It will cost you the sofa then.’
Laura rose to undress.
‘No, no, no.
That's not it.
Not yet, anyway.
Come with me and I'll show you something you'll never forget.’
Rex and I exchanged expositions.
He told me his and I told him mine.
And when we'd both done I freshened our cups.
‘Thanks,’ said he.
‘I'm gobsmacked.
Fancy you working with Barry.
Does he know where Elvis is?’
‘He never even told me he knew Elvis.
But listen.
There's one thing I just have to ask.’
‘Ask on.’
‘This other you, with all the credit facilities.
Does he have an account with a dry cleaners?
I've got these real bad spots of industrial lubricant on the trenchcoat and I want to get them out before they sink right in.’
‘You might try some lemon juice,’ Rex suggested.
‘Is the trenchcoat a running gag by the way?
I like to know where I stand.’
The lift went down and it kept on doing it.
It passed the ground floor and ran out of little numbers to flash.
Jonathan looked up at Laura.
‘Intrigued, eh?’
‘Extremely.’
‘Won't be much longer.’
And it wasn't.
The little pinger went ping and the lift doors opened.
‘Go ahead, Laura.’
Laura took a step forward and then one back.
‘BAHREAH!’ she gasped.
‘Impressed?’
‘I don't know what to say.’
‘Then don't say a thing.
Step out and have a good look around.
There's a catalogue on the table there.
Take it.’
Laura took it.
The catalogue was large and glossily bound.
Only three words were printed on it and these three were THE PRESLEY HOARD.
Laura wandered amongst the treasures.
The gilded icons, the statuary, the great paintings, the bas reliefs.
She flipped through the catalogue and drew breath time and again.
Jonathan sat upon a garish garden lounger which had once graced the poolside at Graceland.
He wrung his hands in pleasure at her pleasure.
And in the pleasurable contemplation of erotic scenarios to come.
‘I may not approve of the theology,’ Laura perused a Caravaggio, which pictured Elvis as one of the three kings offering gifts to the infant Jesus; Elvis was offering a tiny guitar, ‘but the quality, the sheer magnificence.
How did you come by it all?’
‘I acquired it all as a job lot.
A kind of cosmic car-boot sale.
Except for the centrepiece.
The real treasure.
Would you like to see that?’
Laura nodded dumbly.
Yes, she would like to see that very much.
‘Follow me then.’
Jonathan led her through the vault.
To either side of them the wonders spread, daunting in their opulent splendour.
They approached a blank stone wall and the lad touched certain buttons upon the contraption he wore on his wrist.
The wall dissolved to reveal a chamber, lit subtly by muted neon.
In the centre stood a sarcophagus.
It was fashioned into the likeness of a golden jukebox, inset with precious metals and gemstones.
‘Take a look inside.’
‘Inside?’
‘Certainly.
Have a peep through the viewing glass.
I promised you something you'd never forget.’
Laura took a step into the chamber and then paused.
A curious sensation overwhelmed her.
One of unutterable sadness.
Laura shook her head, cleared her thoughts, but to no avail.
The very air was charged with a terrible heart-rending loneliness.
‘No.
I don't want to see.’
Laura turned to leave.
‘But I really must insist.’
Jonathan displayed his pistol.
‘Go on, look inside.’
Laura turned back to the chamber.
The hairs rose upon her arms.
‘Do it.’
She walked slowly over to the golden sarcophagus.
The room had become impossibly cold.
Her breath steamed before her face.
She hugged her arms.
‘Look inside, Laura.’
She leaned over the sarcophagus and peered through the viewing glass.
The head and shoulders of a middle-aged man were clearly visible.
The face was gross and swollen, heavy jowls covered by thick black sideburns.
A red silk scarf was tied around the bloated neck.
Laura stared back at Jonathan.
‘Who is he?’ she asked.
Jonathan began to laugh.
I left my office chair to pine for my speedy return and took myself over to the window.
The neon light outside flashed on and off the way some of them do and brought my profile into full play.
‘Would you say I had a lantern jaw?’
I asked.
‘What, and spoil it for all readers with weak chins?’
‘Oh yeah, thanks.’
‘So what do you propose to do next?’
‘My plans haven't changed.
Get to the Presley hoard, hole up there until after the Big Bang.
Barry knows that's where I'll be, and if he's half the sprout I know he is, he'll meet up with me again.’
As Laz was now gazing at his reflection and feeling his chin, Rex finished the bottle of Old Bedwetter.
‘I think I might join you there.
But there are several things I have to do first.’
‘Like move some mouth with Elvis, top your other self, wring the truth out of Crawford, get back your dame and generally put the world to rights.
Right?’
‘I think that covers most of it.’
‘Well, I'll help you out as best I can.
But we're working  on a tight schedule and if we're gonna keep to it, there's one thing we gotta do first.’
‘Get to the dry cleaners?’
‘Uh-uh.
Get the Hell out of here.
About half a dozen big black cars have just pulled up outside.’
‘Kindly lead the way,’ said Rex.
‘I've had about all I can take for one day.’
‘Elvis?’
Laura stared at Jonathan in disbelief.
‘That's not Elvis.’
‘Elvis the Everliving.
Except he's not any more.
Died an unnatural death in 1977.’
‘But he's so…’
‘Fat?’
‘Well, yes, and so…’
‘Dead.
That's the word I think you're looking for.
Fat and dead.’
‘A false messiah.’
‘A false God.
What do you think would happen to the fabric of this society if the truth were told?’
‘There'd be a…’
‘A revolution?’
‘A revolution, yes.’
‘Followed by a change in government and ideology.
And theology.’
‘With you in control?’
‘And you beside me.
If you want it.’
‘Do you run the Repo Men?’
‘Me?
No.
I designed them and I service them.
I have one or two for my private use.
But as for the rest, I have no control over them.’
‘Then who does?’
‘Our common foe.’
‘The Rex Mundi on the telly?’
Jonathan laughed.
‘No, not him.
I know who he is.
I've dealt with him before.’
‘Then who?’
Jonathan tapped once more at his dear little nose.
‘All in good time.
Now I am going to ask you a simple question and you are going to give me a simple answer.’
‘Go on then.’
‘Are you with me or against me?’
Laura took in the boundless wealth surrounding her, the possibilities of power, she gazed back at the golden coffin of the false messiah and back at Jonathan.
‘I'm with you,’ she said.
Jonathan smiled.
Complicated mechanisms networking his body buzzed and purred, as sensors woven into his scalp registered minuscule fluctuations of electrical resistance upon Laura's skin.
Grafts beneath his fingernails monitored her brain activity and the modified ceramic film coating his contact lenses recorded changes in her body heat to five decimal places.
The information fed directly into Jonathan's cerebral cortex.
The read-out between his ears said, ‘She's lying in her teeth.’
‘I'm so glad to have you with me,’ smiled the lad.
Laura smiled too.
You'll get yours, she thought.
Oh no I won't, thought Jonathan.
14
37.
And the children of Elvis did multiply greatly.
Even to the four corners of the world.
38.
And happy were they, what with the oil revenues and all.
And the natty duds and the good rocking tonight.
39.
And once in a while Elvis did dash off on some divine business or other.
But verily he did return, smiling, if a trifle shagged out, saying, ‘That's done.’
The Suburban Book of the Dead
The morning sun touched lightly on the eyes of Laura Lynch.
In a white exclusive bedroom, halfway up the Butcher Building.
Which somewhat spoiled the metre, but there you go.
Laura looked approvingly upon all the little ‘sold’ stickers dotting the finest furniture of the room.
A good night's work.
If a mite tiring.
Jonathan was snoring loudly as she detached his hand from her breast and slid from the bed.
The boy genius had been singularly unforthcoming and had told her no more regarding his revolutionary schemes.
But Laura had made up her own mind as to her next move.
She crept across the bedroom, stepping carefully over the unlikely collection of ‘marital aids’ littering the floor.
She entered the kitchen and took herself over to the knife rack above the Aga.
From this she selected a twelve-inch Sabatier filleting knife and ran her thumb  gently along the length of the blade.
The bead of blood gave her pleasure, she took it to her mouth and sucked upon it.
Returning to the bedroom she crept back to the bed, raised the knife and without a moment's thought drove it down into the sleeper's chest.
Rex awoke with a start in the back seat of Bill's cab.
It was parked in an alleyway.
There were a lot of trash-cans about and one of those cast-iron fire escapes with the really tedious retractable bottom sections.
Rex clutched at his chest.
Blinked at his eyes.
Focused at his vision and wondered where Laz was.
‘Breakfast, Rex.’
The man in the trenchcoat opened the driver's door and dropped into the cab.
‘Coffee, two eggs over easy, sausage, black pudding and a fried slice.’
He passed Rex a styrofoam carton labelled Old Shep Bar-B-Q.
‘Thanks,’ Rex made lip smacking yum-yum sounds, and then, ‘hang about — how could you afford breakfast?
I thought you were penniless.’
Rex wasn't slow to notice that Laz no longer sported the unfashionable open-necked look.
That he was wearing a spanking new snap-brimmed fedora.
And that stains of an industrial lubricant nature no longer besmirched his immaculate trenchcoat.
‘I got up early and pawned your watch,’ Laz explained.
‘Just slipped it off your wrist.
You were hunkered down so cosy I didn't like to wake you.’
‘How very considerate.
So what time is it now, then?’
‘About five in the afternoon.
Your breakfast, my tea.
Eat up.’
‘Five in the afternoon?’
Rex was appalled.
‘You let me sleep all day?’
‘I didn't mean to,’ said I, slipping into the first-person with more delicacy than a dog log in a dowager's duffle bag.
‘But I had to buy the hat and tie.
And supervise the dry cleaners.
These things take time.
You have to stand  right over those cleaners if you want the job done properly.
You can't skimp on good cleaning.
I skimped once back in ‘thirty-four.
That skimp cost me a learned pig of prodigious memory, two weeks in Benidorm with a beautician called Tracey, a life peerage and my entire collection of Marc Bolan records.’
‘Including ‘Pewter Suitor’?’
‘Including.’
I gave Rex the kind of nod you could tell your grandchildren about.
‘So I don't take chances no more.
The way I see it, only a plater's mate turns vegan when there's hair pie on the table.’
‘Oh, I couldn't agree more.
But tell me if you will, whilst you were attending to these sartorial niceties, the small, yet I feel not insignificant matter of our impending relegation to Sheol didn't, perchance, wend its winged way into your mercurial consciousness?’
‘Come again, fella?’
‘Well, to paraphrase one of your own charmingly idiosyncratic bon mots.
Only Beau Brummell powders his wig when his arse is on fire.’
‘Ah, I got you.
You're talking about the case.’
‘I am.’
Rex lifted a Burnt Weenie Sandwich  from his breakfast pack and waggled it in my direction.
‘What, if anything, have you found out?’
‘Some, and then some more.’
I tapped my hooter like I was shooting ducks in a cracker barrel.
‘I've been sniffing around and nothing about this city smells kosher.
For one thing, I walk into three hat shops and they ain't hat shops at all.
Just store fronts.
For another, what you got here is a city full of fops and only one dry cleaners.
And this don't even have a Gold Star Valet Service.
What kind of deal is that?’
Rex shook his head.
‘You tell me.’
‘OK then,’ says I, ‘I will.
This place ain't for real.
I bet if you walked into any of those apartment houses or office  blocks, you'd find zero.
It's all a phoney.
A big set-up.’
‘A big set.’
Rex tossed his sandwich out of the car window.
‘It's a big set.’
‘What?
Like film set?’
‘Something much more than that.
This was all designed for a specific purpose.
And it's not the work of Jonathan or the other me.
They, I suspect, are both planning to tear it down.’
‘Who then?
Some higher power?’
I get a real depth into my voice, but it doesn't come out too well in print.
‘Some higher power?’
‘Something like that, yes.’
‘Then if it's a higher power you're looking for, you should go check out the shopping mall.
There's a flying saucer in the car park.’
‘There's a what?’ went Rex, in the third person.
Eight hours earlier Laura considered her handiwork.
Jonathan was well and truly dead.
The Sabatier's hilt projected from his pigeon chest and the blade pinned him, without compromise, to the mattress.
It said ‘Gotcha’ in the manner of the now legendary tabloid of old.
‘Gotcha.’
Laura was trembling from head to toe.
‘It's done now.’
‘Just about.’
Laura's stare left the corpse, travelled through several unfocused planes and came to rest upon the ceiling.
There Jonathan stood, upsidedown, with no wires showing.
‘I won't be a moment.
Just have to close off this particular scenario.’
He tinkered away at the mechanism upon his wrist.
‘Jonathan.’
Laura was shaking hard.
‘But how?’
‘Hold on.
Ah.
All finished.
Not a very happy ending that.
But one which had to be included.’
The wrist-tinkerer strolled across the ceiling, down a wall and towards Laura.
‘But you're dead,’ she said, ever so softly.
‘Dead?
Me?’
Jonathan gestured at the bed.
The knife still impaled the mattress.
But the body was no more.
‘Insert another dollar and begin again.
Strictly business, Laura.
I won't explain because I don't have to.
Oh look what I have here.’
He produced the inevitable handweapon.
‘You will kindly get on to the telephone and call up your revolutionary children.
It's time they joined the game.’
‘A flying saucer?’
Rex asked.
‘Yeah.
I told you.
Can't be having with spaceships myself.
Ruins the detective genre for me.
You get into too much whackiness when you suddenly start bringing spaceships into the plot.
Especially this late.
It reads like a device.
Like a deus ex machina ending.’
‘I had one of those in my first book,’ said Rex brightly.
‘Worked out very well for me.
I got the girl and everything.’
‘Well, it's not for this boy.
It's the roof-top confrontation or nothing.’
‘Perhaps the lord will provide.’
Rex flung the rest of his revolting meal into the alleyway.
‘For the loss of my watch I didn't exactly come up trumps in the breakfast lottery.
Did I get any change?’
‘Some.
But I used it to pay off the barman at the Tomorrowman for the damage.
We have to go back there in the next chapter and I didn't want any bad feeling.’
‘Very big of you.
Well, I'm going to have a look at this flying saucer.
Would you care to join me?’
‘No way.
I don't work shopping malls.
Meet you back here later?’
‘I'd say half an hour.
But I don't seem to have a watch any more.’
I considered the antique Rolex Oyster which now favoured my wrist with its collectability.
‘I'd lend you mine but it looks too good on me.’
Rex made with the meaningful Hmm.
‘I really have some severe doubts regarding this partnership,’ said he, upping and awaying.
I didn't have anything to add.
The way I see it, although it takes a lot to laugh, it takes a train to cry.
Jonathan gave Laura a good poking with his over-sized weapon.
Which probably got a cheap laugh somewhere, although I can't imagine where.
Laura picked up the bedside telephone and dialled the number.
There was a short pause.
Then a brr-brr brr-brr brr-brr.
Then a voice which said, ‘Who's making that noise?’
‘It's Laura Lynch.
Is Kevin there?’
‘Who wants him?’
‘I do.
Is he there?’
‘He's in bed.’
‘Could you get him to the telephone?
It's very important.’
‘Who's that?’
Jonathan asked.
Laura put her hand over the mouthpiece.
‘Kevin's mum.’
‘Kevin's mum?’
‘Ssh.
Leave this to me.
Hello.
Yes?’
‘He needs his sleep,’ said Kevin's mum.
‘He was up late last night plotting the overthrow of the capitalist system.
So I'm giving him a lie-in.
Can you call back later?’
‘No I can't.
Get him to the phone now.’
‘Don't you adopt that tone with me young woman.’
‘Listen.
This is really important.’
‘You've called before.
I recognize your voice.’
‘Please let me speak to Kevin.’
‘He's in bed.
I'll give him a message when he wakes up.
What did you say your name was?’
‘Give me the phone.’
Jonathan snatched the receiver.
‘Who am I talking to?’
‘This is Kevin's mum.
Who's this?’
‘Police Chief Sam Maggott.
Presley PD.’
‘You don't sound like him.
He was on TV last night talking about the alien kidnapping.
His voice was much deeper than yours.
Wasn't that terrible about Harpo/ Chico?’
‘Really terrible.’
Jonathan put on the deepest voice he could manage.
‘I believe your son can help me with my enquiries.’
‘My Kevin?’
‘Please get him to the phone now.’
‘He's in bed.
I told that lady.’
‘Madam, get your son to the telephone at once or I will have Officer Cecil give you a good poking with his over-sized weapon.’
‘Kevin!
Telephone!
Get up you lazy little…’
Jonathan returned the receiver.
‘If you want a job doing, then do it yourself.
You speak to him.
I will tell you what to say.’
It wasn't a bad-looking saucer and Rex was the first to appreciate that.
It was a real George Adamski job, or a Dr Sir George King job, depending upon which contactee you happen to favour.
It's a funny thing how so many contactees are called George, isn't it?
No?
Well please yourself then.
Actually, a friend of mine who was once in the TA had a pal called George who claimed to have been spirited away to Venus in a UFO.
He was kidnapped, apparently, while taking a pee in the pub bog at the Queen's Head in Brighton.
My friend says that George was only gone for five minutes, but when he returned from the toilet he said that he had been captured, flown to Venus and then forced to have sex with several beautiful Venusian lasses, who required his ‘superior seed for the creation of a cosmic super race’.
Naturally my friend considered this a lot of malarky, but he was impressed that the previously clean-shaven  George now sported a five-day growth of beard.
But I digress.
The saucer was about thirty feet in diameter, with a smart transparent dome on the top.
It rested upon three extendible legs with big flat metal feet.
These made enigmatic holes in the tarmac for scholars to puzzle and debate over later.
Rex approached the grounded UFO and waved cheerfully.
‘Hello,’ he called.
‘Anyone at home?’
A ladder descended from the central portion of the lower disc area and a spaceman, suitably clad in inflatable atmospheric suit and weatherdome, did likewise.
He turned towards Rex and approached in slow motion.
Little lights flickered from the interior of his dome and a communication unit on his chest crackled with static.
‘’ he said.
Which left Rex somewhat stuck for a reply.
‘Hello.
Kevin here.’
Jonathan nudged Laura with his you-know-what.
‘You know what to say.’
‘Kevin.
It's Laura.’
‘Laura.
Mum says you're under arrest.’
‘Kevin.
I'm not under arrest.’
‘But mum said Sam Maggott was with you.
Do you want us to bust you out?’
‘Sam Maggott is not with me.’
‘Ah.
You're on your own in the cell, eh?
Shall we storm the station house?’
‘Kevin.
Listen to me —’
‘You just say the word, Laura.
I could come disguised as a priest with sticks of dynamite strapped to my chest and —’
‘Kevin!
Shut up!’
‘Sorry?’
‘Kevin.
Do you have a piece of paper and a pencil?’
‘Paper and pencil?
Oh, I see.
Blow dart, yes.
Roll up  the paper, bit or curare on the pencil point.
Good idea —’
‘No, Kevin, it's not a good idea.
I'm not under arrest.
I'm not with Sam Maggott.
I'm not in a police cell.
Do you understand what I'm saying?’
‘Gotcha.’
‘Right, then —’
‘You can't talk.
I understand.
Just say the word and we'll come in with all guns blazing.’
‘Kevin.
Everything is OK.
Do I make myself clear?’
‘A code word.
That's what you want.
How about ‘Pewter Suitor’?’
‘Give me that phone!’
Jonathan made a furious face.
‘No.
Let me deal with him.’
‘Who's with you?
It's Maggott, isn't it?
I recognize his voice.’
‘It's not Maggott.
Forget Maggott.
Just get a pencil and paper.’
‘Pencil and paper?
Is that the code word?’
‘No, it's not the code word!
There is no code word.
Do you understand?’
‘Yes.
I mean, no.
Why are you calling me?’
‘Kevin.
Do you have a pencil and paper?’
‘Is that why you're calling me?’
‘Yes.’
‘To ask if I have a paper and pencil?’
‘Yes.’
‘Don't you have your own?
I was in bed.’
‘I want you to write something down.
Something very important.’
‘Ah.
Well, why didn't you say so in the first place?’
‘Kevin.
Get a pencil and paper.’
‘OK.
Hold on.’
Laura put her hand over the mouthpiece.
‘He's just getting a pencil and paper.’
‘Hello.
Laura?’
‘Hello Kevin.’
‘I haven't got a pencil.
Is a biro all right?’
Laura looked to Jonathan.
‘Is a biro all right?’ she asked.
‘’ said the spaceman.
‘Come again?’ said Rex.
The spaceman twiddled at his chest.
‘Hello,’ he continued.
‘Are you Mr Mojo Nixon?’
‘Possibly,’ Rex replied.
‘Who's asking?’
‘My name is ‘’ said the spaceman.
‘But you can call me Frank.
Beta Reticuli Transportation Services plc.’
He made a sweeping gesture.
‘Whooosh.
That's the kiddie.’
‘Eh?’ said Rex.
‘There in a day,’ the off-worlder went on.
‘No distance too great.
No package too small.
No charge too large.’
‘No gag too old.’
‘Pardon?’
‘Why are you here?’
‘Why are any of us here?’
Frank whipped out a clipboard.
‘Do you want to sign for the return of your two-headed love-child?’
‘The two-headed love-child on the newscast?’
‘I never watch the telly, me.
But surely you know your own two-headed love-child.’
‘Naturally.’
‘So, if you want him back you'd better sign here.
I can't stand around all day chit-chatting.
Space-time is money you know.’
Rex stepped forward.
‘Where do I sign?’
‘Just there.’
Frank now produced a pen which worked upon an unlikely scientific principle, possibly to do with the transperambulation of pseudo-cosmic anti-matter.
Or possibly not.
Rex signed Mojo Nixon.
‘Cheers,’ said Frank.
‘Hey, Don,’ he called up the ladder.
‘Sling the kid down here, I've got a John Hancock on the body board.’
‘Bloody good thing too,’ came a voice from above.
‘Smells like he's loaded his kecks again.
Ugly little sucker.’
‘You certainly provide a caring and consummate service.’
The irony of Rex's remark was quite wasted upon Frank, who caught the tumbling tot more by luck than judgement.
‘There you go, then.’
He tossed the bundle of joy to Rex.
‘Thank you.’
Rex cradled the infant.
‘Might I just ask one question before you go?’
‘Will there be a tip?’
‘Oh, certainly.’
‘Then ask on.’
‘Why was this baby kidnapped in the first place?’
‘Well.’
Frank couldn't reach his head, so he scratched his dome.
‘The way I see it, it's probably part of some cosmic master-plan.
We get a lot of this sort of business.
Not as much as we'd like, you understand.
And not nearly as much as we used to get back in the good old days, when alien abductions were all the rage.
Generally, what happens is, subject gets kidnapped, taken off to a distant planet, clued up upon the celestial wisdom of the space folk, then dumped back here to fend for himself.
It's just the way of things.
Probably tradition or an old charter or something.’
Rex shook his head in wonder.
‘But why kidnap a baby?’
Frank leaned forward and whispered through his translator.
‘Cock up if you ask me.
The name I've got on the manifest is for a Mr George Nixon.
Typical isn't it.’
‘It certainly is.’
‘So, what about the tip then, Mr Nixon?’
Rex patted his pockets.
‘You've caught me on a bad day, I'm afraid.’
‘Bad day?
Well next time you're in a taxi getting shaken about by a monster from Hell, don't expect us to come  to your rescue again.
Bad day indeed.’
Frank made an intricate gesture, which, although of alien origin, never the less conveyed its meaning with crystal clarity.
‘Bloody skinflint.’
He turned to take his leave.
‘No wait, please, let me explain…’
'!’ said Frank as he climbed back up his ladder.
‘No.
Please…’
The ladder retracted.
The port closed.
Lights around the saucer's rim winked cheerfully.
And then, without a by your leave or kiss my elbow, the spacecraft rose silently into the sky and swept away.
And Rex was left holding the baby.
‘Well,’ said he, ‘I might have handled that a trifle better.
So let's have a look at you then.’
He turned down the cover and peeped at the baby's heads.
‘Kootchie koo.’
Two small faces peered up at him.
They were ugly little suckers.
‘Harpo's shit in our nappy,’ said Chico.
‘Chico done it,’ said Harpo.
‘I want me mum.
Take me home.’
‘No.
Take us to a TV station.
I have an announcement that will alter the course of human history.’
‘I want me mum.’
‘Shut up you.’
‘Bwaaaaaaaaaaah!’
‘Hmm,’ went Rex Mundi.
‘And hmm again.’
‘Thank you Kevin, and goodbye.’
Laura replaced the receiver.
‘I don't like this.’
Jonathan paced up and down the bedroom.
‘Are you sure you can trust these people?’
‘I'd trust them with my life.’
‘You just did.
But are they sound?
Will they do what I told you to tell them to do?’
‘I shouldn't think so.
Would you do it?’
‘What are you saying?’
‘I'm saying that not even a ten-year-old would fall for the line of crap you just had me feed Kevin.’
‘What?’
‘I'm saying, you're going about this all the wrong way.
They might turn up on time and do all the right things, or they might not.
But having read out your little list of instructions, I now know exactly what you're up to.
And if you'll just let me handle it, I also know exactly how you can get everything you want.
Including me.’
Jonathan's inbuilt circuitry went through its magical motions.
The read out between his ears said, ‘She's actually telling the truth this time.’
And indeed she was.
But for all the wrong reasons.
‘Where did you get to last night, chief?’
Barry enquired.
‘A bit stiff leaving me in the lead bucket.’
‘For your own protection, Barry.’
‘You went to Simon Butcher's studio, didn't you?’
‘I did as it happens.’
The other Rex did a bit of pacing, up and down the top-secret room.
‘I had the building searched, but I didn't find Elvis.’
‘You won't find him, chief.’
‘I have to find him.
Find him and…’
The other Rex held his words in check.
‘How can you be so sure I won't find him?’
‘Just a hunch, chief.
You know you've changed.
Can't quite put my finger, if I had one, on just how.
But there's something.’
‘I —’ The door swung open and Johnny Dee stuck his head into the room.
‘We've found them, excellency.’
‘What's with all this excellency business, chief?’
‘Nothing to worry your little green head about, Barry.
Back in you go for now then.
Recuperate, eh?’
The other Rex tossed the Time Sprout back into the lead bucket and screwed down the lid.
‘Where are they?
Is Bill with them?’
‘There's still no sign of Bill, excellency.
It's like he just vanished off the face of the Earth.’
‘I'll deal with him in my own time.
So where are they?’
‘They're parked in an alleyway off the Graceland Shopping Mall.
And it looks like they've got a kid with them.’
I bounced the bambino on my knee.
Kids bring out the natural father in me and I get a crinkly mouth every time I look at an ankle snapper.
It's those little innocent faces, I guess.
Looking up at you with all that trust.
When I finally hang up the fedora and donate the trusty Smithsonian to the Smith and Wesson Institute, I'm gonna have a whole floor-covering of codlings.
Kids, yeah, I love ‘em.
They plum choke me up.
‘Really ugly pair of suckers you got here, Rex,’ says I. ‘Smells like they've loaded their kecks.’
‘You're a real New Man , Laz.’
‘Aw, Shiva's sheep!
Look at this, will ya?’
I hefted the bouncing bantling off my knee.
There was a wet patch the size of the Bay of Pigs right across the lap of my trenchcoat.
‘Take this dump shute back.’
‘I demand to be taken to the plush offices of a disreputable publicity manager,’ Chico demanded.
‘I have a destiny to fulfil.’
‘I want me mum,’ cried Harpo.
‘Get rid of this thing, Rex.
I'll drive us to the rear door of a Doc Barnado's or something.’
‘You can drive us to the front door of a pharmacy.
And with what ever you have left of my watch money we will buy baby food, nappies, bum wipes…’
‘You have got to be joking,’ said I, slipping unexpectedly into my John McEnroe persona.
‘Trust me.
I know what I'm doing.’
Rex went dandle dandle with the smelly brat.
‘I'm going no place until we get this sorted.
Lazlo Woodbine doesn't work with animals or children.’
‘I thought you had a dog named Blue, a fish called Wanda, a learned pig, a horse with no…’
‘Only in passing references, buddy.
Never on the job.
Nothing and I do mean nothing is gonna make me move from here until you agree to dump the munchkin.’
The synchronized fire of two 7.62 M134 General Electric Mini-Gun machine-guns strafed the alleyway.
Coming out of the sun, the long black ground-to-air limo dropped down between the buildings, shot up the trash cans and made a real mess of the cast-iron fire escape with the retractable bottom section.
‘Let's get out of here,’ said I brrrming the engine and engaging drive.
‘I still want me mum,’ screamed Harpo.
‘Don't mess about.’
The Anti-Rex shook his fists.
‘Shoot them up.
Go around and come in again.
And do it properly.’
‘They're moving.’
Johnny Dee was at the wheel.
Ed Kelley manned the gun ports.
‘Shall I start dropping the grenades?’
Ed asked.
‘Not yet.
You have to build up the excitement first.
Bring us in low for another assault, Johnny.’
‘Will do.’
‘Get us out of this alleyway,’ Rex shouted.
‘Get into the main street, we can try to lose ourselves amongst the other cabs.’
‘I don't work main streets, Rex.
You know that.’
The long black flying car came in low for another run along An Alleyway called Death.
The machine-gun fire tore into the cab, narrowly missing all concerned.
‘You're carrying the future of the human race here,’ cried Chico.
‘Drive!’
‘Mummy!’ cried Harpo.
‘Drive!’
‘Drive!’ cried Rex.
‘Just drive!’
‘I'm driving!’
I cried.
‘I'm driving already.’
The cab thrashed along the alleyway, mashing dumpsters and scattering bums from central casting.
Big sparks sprayed off the brick walls and tyres screamed on the wet pavements.
The big black car loomed overhead, its big guns spitting big big bullets.
‘Hit the streets,’ cried Rex.
‘Or better still hit the sky.’
‘Woodbine ain't licked yet.’
I hung a right which cost us a fair amount of starboard body work and a couple of hub caps.
‘We can lose them.’
‘We can lose them?
Ye Gods.’
Rex cowered in the back seat shielding Harpo/Chico as best he could.
‘We're sitting targets.’
‘Never say die, buddy.
I've been in worse scrapes than this.
Back in ‘sixty-two I was in a car chase with Gilles ‘de Rais’ Gordon, the Bloomsbury Bluebeard.
That chase cost me my twin sister Wilma, a night at the opera —’
‘Clarence the cross-eyed lion and a weekend in a lift shaft with a sex-starved gorilla?’
‘I told you about that, huh?
Well, I won through.
Stick with me kidder.
Aw shit!’
There were further rattles of machine-gun fire and Rex found himself looking up at a troubled sky.
‘We just lost the roof,’ said he.
‘Put your foot down or let's put our hands up.’
‘Have a little faith in the hero.’
I hung a left and wondered about the driver's door which parted company with us as we struck a portside wall.
‘Getting a mite drafty in here.’
‘All right Eddie.’
The other Rex rubbed his hands together.
‘I think we might employ the grenades now.
Just lob one down through the open top of the cab, will you?’
‘No problem, excellency.’
Ed Kelley opened a case of evil-looking grenades.
Took out the largest and pulled the pin.
‘Take us in nice and low, please John.’
‘Pleased to.’
The big black car dropped down.
Rex could make out all the fine detail of its undercarriage.
He saw all the rivets and the little oily spots, the weld marks and the silencer mountings.
All the things that you take a curious interest in when you are lying under a car after a road accident, waiting for the ambulance to arrive and thinking that you'd far rather be anywhere else but there.
Ed Kelley was a good shot.
The grenade dropped right on to the cab floor in front of Rex.
‘Oh my God!’
Rex plucked it up and made to throw.
He glimpsed the little digital readout on the lighted grey panel as it went 03.00 02.00 01.00…
During the 01.00 and the 00.00 Rex gave a whole lot of things a whole lot of thought.
He could have had his whole life flash before him.
But he didn't.
You don't really.
I once cut my wrist on a guillotine machine at a picture-frame makers where I was working.
The blood came pumping out and I was sure I was going to die.
All I could see, that I now remember, was this fellow in blue overalls wandering down the street outside, drinking a can of Coca Cola.
And all I thought was, I never liked Coca Cola and I suppose I'll never get to like it now.
Rex wasn't thinking about Coca Cola.
He was thinking, what if this wally Woodbine really is the hero of this novel…
oo.oo ‘Oh gO.Od gOd.’
The explosion ripped the cab apart.
The black car soared away as mangled fragments spiralled into the sky.
The tyres went and the petrol tank ignited.
The alley walls  absorbed the shock and a bloody mushroom cloud rose above the devastation now occurring behind the Tomorrowman Tavern.
‘Gotcha!’
The other Rex clapped his hands together.
‘Mission accomplished.
Let's go and have a drink.’
15
53.
And so great was the love of the people for Elvis that they made many laws.
That all should honour him by being like unto him.
54.
That all should dress as him and be as him in all ways of thought.
55.
And they did cry aloud in one voice saying, ‘There is no God but Elvis nor has there ever been.’
The Suburban Book of the Dead
‘Well, well, well.’
The barman at the Tomorrowman Tavern wiped his gloved hands on his leather apron.
‘If it isn't the chap off the telly again.
I never saw you come in.’
Rex blinked at him.
‘What the…
I mean…how…
I?’
The barman eyeballed Rex's bundle.
‘What you got in there?
Money, I hope.
I cashed in your driver's watch.
It was a bleeding Piaget copy.
You still owe me bucks for those bigfoot noses.’
‘What am I doing here?
Surely I'm…’
‘Dead?’
I tipped my hat, for I was there also.
‘Yes, dead.
Blown up.’
‘Blown up?’
The barman fixed Rex with another of his one-eyed show-stoppers.
‘Was that your racket in my alley just now?
If you've damaged any of my trashcans you're in for it.’
Rex gave me the glance.
‘What happened?’
‘Search me.’
I was more baffled than a pregnant postulant in a eunuch's prefab.
‘We were there and now we're here.’
‘Get the drinks in then,’ says Chico.
‘Mine's a Pernod and lemonade.
The lemonade's for Harpo.’
‘You what?’ said I.
‘Get the drinks in and I'll tell you how I did it.’
‘How you did it?’
‘What have you got in that bundle?’
The barman craned his head across the counter.
‘That a dwarf in there or what?’
‘It's a ventriloquist's dummy,’ said Rex hurriedly.
‘For a new show I'm doing called Rex Mundi's Big Night Out.
It's a quality act.
Gottle a geer, gottle a geer.’
‘You're wasting your time,’ said the barman.
‘Two bottles of Bud, a Pernod and a lemonade,’ said I.
‘Nice hat,’ said the barman.
‘Take it,’ said I.
‘I want me mum,’ said Harpo.
‘Very poor,’ said the barman, taking my titfer and perching it on his head.
‘If it's quality you're looking for, then I'm your man.
I do them all.
Songs from the shows.
Oldies but goodies.
Great literary figures past and present.
Who's this then?’
He pulled the hat down over his eye and made a peculiar face.
‘I haven't the faintest.
Give us the drinks, please.’
‘Not until you've guessed.’
‘Oh, all right then, Iris Murdoch.’
‘Got it in one.
Told you I was good.’
The barman turned away to fetch the drinks.
‘Iris Murdoch?’
Rex asked.
‘Sure, who did you think?’
‘I thought it was Doris Lessing.’
‘Doris Lessing?’
I let a smile dwell upon my lips.
‘Buddy, in my line of work, knowing your Iris Murdoch from your Doris Lessing can mean the difference between  chewing on the curate's egg or sighing for the fleshpots of Egypt.
If you catch my drift.
And I'm sure that you do.’
‘Absolutely.’
Rex made a peculiar face of his own, but I couldn't put a name to it.
‘You see to the drinks.
I'll take Harpo/Chico over to a nice quiet corner.’
‘Sounds about right to me.’
I swapped a couple of impersonations with the barman.
He nearly caught me out with his C. S. Lewis, but I had him sewn up like a kipper with my Hermann Hesse.
He thought it was Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.
Must have been the trenchcoat.
I left him to muse on my brilliance and joined Rex in the quiet corner, where the brat was holding court.
‘I bring greetings from a distant star,’ said Chico Nixon.
‘I have been made privy to the wisdom and knowledge of the Galactic Great Folk, and have returned here to solve all the world's problems.’
‘That sounds most encouraging,’ said Rex, who was changing the cosmic messenger's kecks.
He had got himself a bar cloth and a bunch of paperclips and looked like he meant business.
‘I haven't any talcum, I'm afraid, and you've got a bit of nappy rash here.
When was the last time you were changed?’
‘Time is a human concept.
It has no universal existence.’
‘Fair enough.
I'll just clip you up, then.’
‘Please spare yourself the trouble.’
I don't know how the little sucker did it.
But the next thing we knew he was all kitted out in a blue and white sailor suit, smelling sweetly of baby lotion and with not a wet patch to be seen.
Real cute he looked.
Except for the two ugly heads, of course.
‘How did you do that?’
Rex asked, which spared me the bother.
‘The same way I got us out of the alleyway when the grenade blew up.’
‘Does it have anything to do with the transperambulation of pseudo-cosmic anti-matter?’
‘Nothing whatsoever.
This is the power of The Word.’
Well, I've never had a lot of truck with the power of the word so I'm not into oral sects.
‘How does that work exactly?’
I enquired.
‘Through forces beyond your wildest imaginings.’
I give the kid the kind of wink you could make a movie out of.
‘My imaginings are pretty wild,’ I told him.
‘Oh, I don't know.
Making jungle love to a lady wrestler across your office desk, while her twin sister rubs halibut oil into the epaulets of your trenchcoat isn't all that wild.
Weird, but not wild.’
‘How did you know I was imagining that?
If I was.
Which I wasn't.’
‘He was,’ said Chico.
‘I'll bet he was,’ said Rex.
‘Do you want a straw with that Pernod?’
‘No, I can manage thank you.
You'd make a good father, Rex.
You were very protective back there in the cab.
I appreciate that.’
‘And I appreciate you saving my life.
Thank you very much indeed.’
‘Now see here.’
I took a wet from my bottle.
‘This is all very cosy.
And I thank you likewise.
But what is all this about?
What do you want?’
‘I want me mum,’ said Harpo.
‘Pass my lemonade please.’
Rex passed it over.
‘I could phone your mum if you like.
Get her to come and collect you.’
‘Very civil of you.’
Both heads nodded, but Chico did all the talking.
‘The number's in the book.
Please inform the parents that my brother and I are in the best of health.
But that we are being held in protective custody in a special private clinic.
No visitors allowed.
We have a serious mission to accomplish, we four and I don't want them getting in the way.’
‘We four?’
My Bud went down the wrong way and I had a fit of choking.
‘What is this we four all of a sudden?’
‘Talk it out amongst yourselves.’
Rex dumped the two-headed sailor-boy back on my knee and took off for the phone.
‘Here's looking at you, kids,’ said I, raising my bottle.
‘I'm thinking,’ Johnny Dee raised his glass and took thinking sips, ‘perhaps we acted just a tad rashly.’
He, Kelley and the other Rex were back in the top-secret room.
Barry was still locked in the bucket.
The bucket was locked in a cupboard.
‘This thought has taken the occasional jaunt through my mind,’ Ed agreed.
‘Now that we have killed off Rex and Woodbum, we seem to have killed off our chances of having them lead us to the Presley hoard.’
The other Rex took a slug of Old Bedwetter and spat it in a flaming plume at the both of them.
‘You craven dullards.
Haven't you worked out where the hoard is yet?’
His cowering cronies raised their heads above the table-top.
‘No, excellency,’ they said.
‘It's in the Butcher Building.’
‘No sir, it's not.’
Johnny shook his head, which was a trifle singed on the top.
‘We searched that place from top to bottom.
It's not there.’
‘Oh yes it is.’
‘Oh no it's not.’
The other Rex took another large swig.
But this time he swallowed it.
‘Reason it out for yourselves.
Barry leaves Elvis there.
We go there.
Rex is there and Woodbine is there.
All roads lead to the Butcher Building.
And this,’ he pulled Lazlo's map from his pocket and flung it across the table, ‘The great detective left this behind when he and Rex fled from his office last night.
X marks the  spot.
You really should have known about this, shouldn't you?’
‘But excellency, we searched the building.’
‘All of the building?’
‘All, yes.’
‘Tell me, Ed, if you were in possession of the most valuable collection of artworks in mankind's history, where would you keep them?’
‘In a bloody great…ah…’ said Ed.
‘A bloody great vault.’
‘I knew you'd get there in the end.’
‘But the lift buttons only went down to the ground floor.’
Ed made little finger pointings.
‘Really?
You didn't happen to notice another big button with SECRET VAULT FULL OF STOLEN TREASURE printed in big letters above it then?’
‘No, excellency.
I'm sure I would have noticed.’
The other Rex rose from his chair, leaned across to Ed Kelley and bit off his right ear.
‘Oooh and owww!’ wailed Ed.
‘Give it back.’
The other Rex spat the ear on to the table.
Ed snatched it up and tried vainly to stick it back on.
‘Let me put it simply for you.’
The villain licked his lips.
‘In a little over twenty-four hours Presley City vanishes from the face of the Earth.
We know that it does, but we don't know why.
No-one seems to know why.
Do you know why, Johnny?
Take your hands away from your ears, Johnny.
Do you know why?’
No, Johnny didn't know why.
‘Barry languishes in the bucket, bereft of his awesome time travelling powers.
The Volvo is gone to who knows where.
Do you know where?’
No, Johnny didn't know where.
‘So where does that leave us?’
‘Up shit creek,’ Johnny suggested.
The bottle of Old Bedwetter flew past his ducking head and smashed against a wall.
‘It does, I agree, present certain difficulties regarding my intentions to destroy Presley, wipe out all memory of him, rewrite history and let chaos and evil reign supreme.
But all is not yet lost, because I have a plan.’
Ed had got his ear back on.
Upside down.
‘I like a plan,’ said he.
‘Are we talking demonic stratagems here?’
‘We are.’
‘Fiendish plots of an unsurpassingly vile nature?’
‘That's the fella.’
‘A Satanic conspiracy aimed at the total destruction of all that is good, pure and true?’
The Anti-Rex smiled sweetly upon Ed Kelley, leaned forward as if to kiss his cheek and ripped off his other ear.
‘I am talking no more Mr Nice Guy,’ said he.
Rex returned with a tray of drinks, which I raised an eyebrow to.
‘I've just given the barman his own show on the telly,’ he explained, handing them around.
‘I told Mrs Nixon her offspring were blooming.
She said to say hello to Harpo for her.’
‘Hello, mum,’ said Harpo.
‘What about me?’
The head called Chico wore a wounded expression.
‘I'm sure she loves you too,’ Rex did an encouraging, but unconvincing, face.
‘Chico's been telling me all kinds of interesting stuff.’
I patted the brat.
‘Seems he's been chosen to be the voice of Interplanetary Parliament here on Earth.
And he's picked you out to help him Rex.
That's why he had Frank and Don, the space guys, zap Asmodeus.
And he can do all kinds of really neat magic.
Show Rex the trick with the beer mats, Chico.’
‘Are you sure mum didn't ask after me?’
‘Would lying help?’
‘No, I'd see right through it.’
‘What is the trick with the beer mats?’
‘Chico can change them into twenty-dollar bills.’
‘But there aren't any beer mats on the table.’
‘Not any more.’
I patted my pockets.
Rex took a seat.
I kept a firm hold of the lovable little rascal on my knee.
‘Could you make diamonds out of pocket fluff?’
I enquire, in an avuncular fashion.
‘Laz, before you get your trusty Smith and Whatever platinum plated, don't you think we should be getting down to the business, which is your business.
If you catch my drift.
And I'm sure that you do.’
‘My mum doesn't love me,’ wailed Chico.
‘Got outta town.’
I gave the kid a chooky-chooky on the chin.
‘I only met you a half hour ago and I love you like one of my own.’
‘It's because I'm ugly, isn't it?’
‘Ugly?
Kid, you're beautiful.
Now about this pocket fluff.’
‘My mother hates me.’
Chico made the kind of face that only a mother could love.
But obviously not his.
‘Kid,’ I told him.
‘You're lucky.
I never had a mother.’
‘Laz,’ said Rex.
‘Everybody had a mother.’
‘Not me, buddy, I was conceived by a writer of detective fiction.’
‘There is no answer to that.’
‘I'll have myself decerebrated,’ moaned Chico.
‘Surgically removed.’
‘I'll do it for you,’ Harpo chipped in.
‘It's no skin off my nose.’
‘Oh, got a sense of humour all of a sudden, have we?
Take that.’
Chico caught Harpo on the chin with a right uppercut.
Harpo countered with a left hook.
‘Children.’
Rex waded in to hold the struggling arms apart.
‘This is no way to behave.’
‘Chico started it.’
‘Yah to you, mummy's boy.’
‘That's enough.
Chico, you should know better.
You're  supposed to be the voice of Interplanetary Parliament.’
‘Yeah,’ said I. ‘You got more important things to do than fight with your brother.
You should be using your magical powers for the good of mankind.’
‘You're quite right.’
Chico made with the nods.
‘I have a destiny to fulfil.
Tell you what, I'll say The Word and transfer Harpo's head on to your shoulder.’
‘No, no.
Hold hard there.’
I bounced the bonny bicephalous back to Rex.
‘Stick him on your pal here.
He's the good father.’
‘Oh no I'm not.’
‘Oh yes you are.’
‘That's enough!’
Rex put on a fierce face.
‘Quite enough.
We don't have time for all this nonsense.’
‘Nonsense?’
If I'd had my hat I'd have taken it off to the guy.
You need a certain kind of front to breeze in from an alternative reality in the back of a time-travelling Volvo and sit in a Presley City bar, with a two-headed nipper on your lap, complaining to a private dick from the twenty-fifth century that you don't have time for nonsense.
Or perhaps you don't.
‘OK,’ said I. ‘Let's talk turkey.’
‘Harpo/Chico?’
Rex asked.
‘All right.’
Chico shrugged his shoulder.
‘Harpo?’
‘Just tell Chico to stay off my back.’
‘Our back.’
‘Our back then.’
‘All right.
Sorry bruv.’
‘Good.’
Rex bobbed the babe.
‘Now the way I see it, we all want something.
Laz here wants the Presley hoard.
Chico wants to solve all the world's problems.
Harpo wants his mum.
And I want —’
‘Rex.’
I interjected ‘We don't have enough hours left to hear all the things you want.’
‘Quite so.
But I'm sure if we all pool our resources we might all be able to get exactly what we want.’
‘I can dig that.’
I could dig that.
‘Speak on,’ said I with more encouragement than a Brahman temple dancer at a Brown Shirt's bump supper.
‘I shall.
Now I don't pretend to have the answer.
Because I don't know what the question is.
But I know this.
Crawford is here, the Devil himself is here, dressed up to look like me.
I'm here, you're here.
Everybody's here and something very big is about to happen.’
‘Er, Rex?’
Harpo put his hand up.
‘Yes, Harpo?’
‘Rex, did you have a lot of success in your other books?
Excuse me for asking, but you seem a bit of a…’
Harpo made wrist jerks at his nappy region.
‘Oh thanks very much.
I happen to be the hero, you know.’
‘I'm the hero, Rex.’
I gave the old trenchcoat a tap or two.
‘I'm the hero.
I mean, we are the hero.’
Harpo/Chico did synchronized chest drumming.
A little green voice in a lead bucket said, ‘I'm the hero actually, chief.’
But none present heard it.
‘All right.’
Rex threw up his hands and nearly sent Superbrat tumbling.
‘Everybody's the hero.
I don't care.
All I want to do is get out of this one alive.
Go back to my wife and garden.
Dig my septic tank and live happily ever after.’
‘Then you'll really go for my plan,’ said Chico.
‘And that is my plan,’ said Laura to Jonathan.
‘What do you think?’
Jonathan stroked his pointy little chin.
‘I like it,’ said he.
‘In fact, I love it.
As long as your revolutionary chums do their bit, I can't see anything standing in our way.’
‘And that's Laura's plan,’ said Kevin.
‘What do you think?’
‘Is that all of it?’ a Child of the Revolution enquired.
‘It seems a bit short.
The way it just sort of ends in the first sentence.’
‘My biro ran out.’
Kevin explained.
‘I went off to get another one and when I got back to the phone she said ‘have you got it?’ and I thought she meant the new biro, so I said yes and she said goodbye and hung up.’
‘And that is my plan!’ screamed the evil Anti-Rex.
‘And I don't care what you think of it.’
‘I love it to death.’
Johnny Dee nodded enthusiastically.
‘It's a real unholy stonker of a plan.
With Rex and Woodchip out of the picture and the forces of darkness set loose upon the land, how can we fail?
What do you think, Ed?’
Ed pulled his fingers from his newly-refitted ears.
‘Pardon?’ said he.
‘And that's my plan.’
Chico made smiles all round.
I looked at Rex and Rex looked at me.
‘I like it,’ said I. ‘Especially the roof-top showdown.
What about you, Rex?’
‘I like the bit where I get to go home at the end.
You are sure it will all actually work?’
‘Trust me.’
Chico finished up his drink.
‘What could possibly go wrong?’
‘Well…’ said Rex Mundi.
16
65.
And they were all as one and worshipped they one and the same.
And worshipped they only Elvis for He is King.
66.
And Elvis said, ‘Aw shit!’
The Suburban Book of the Dead
Rex Mundi, Lazlo Woodbine and the two-headed offspring of a popular show-biz couple put up for the night in a room above the Tomorrowman Tavern.
The barman had been most amenable, what with his new TV show coming up and everything.
Laz had paid him handsomely with Chico's magic money and he was sporting once more his new fedora.
Rex pulled the bed covers in his direction and switched off the light.
‘Do you know,’ he whispered, as Harpo/Chico was sleeping.
‘This is the first time I've ever shared a bed with a two-headed baby and a twenty-fifth-century detective.’
I pulled the covers back towards me.
‘You've never lived, fella.
I remember one time back in ‘ninety-eight.
I was on a case.
I shared a sleeping bag with a male stripper from Delaware, a trained hound called Daniel and three members of the US Senate.
That night cost me…’
‘Zzzzzzzzzz,’ went Rex Mundi.
‘My virginity,’ said I. 
His Satanic Unpleasantness the Anti-Rex, Lord of the Flies, King of the Shadow Realm, fallen angel, father of lies, Supreme Spirit of Evil and locker of Barry in a bucket, paced the floor of his top-secret room.
His shoes were off and his cloven hooves showered sparks across the concrete floor.
At intervals he stopped, raised clenched fists, belched brimstone and roared things such as:
‘This time I shall prevail!’ and
‘This time all will be mine!’ and
‘Today Earth, tomorrow the universe!’
But for the most part he shouted, ‘How come if I'm the Devil Incarnate, I've spent half this book down here in this poxy little room?’
Johnny Dee lifted the manhole cover and peered without enthusiasm into the depths beneath.
‘Down you go, then.’
He nudged Ed Kelley in the ribs.
Ed leaned forwards and took a sniff.
His ears might have been a bit wonky but his nose was working just fine.
‘Smells a mite niffy down there.
Are you sure this is a good idea?’
‘Eddie, my pal.
Have we not spent half the night listening to a plan of almost inconceivable fiendishness?’
‘Well, you have.’
‘And I told you all about it when his excellency had finished kicking you around.’
‘You did, yes.’
‘And, as Bill seems to have done a runner, is it not down to ourselves, as the very last of the First Hierarchy of Hell, to aid our evil master in his plan to unleash the forces of darkness upon this planet?’
‘It certainly is.’
‘Then down you go, then.
I'll keep a look out here.’
Ed took another disdainful sniff.
‘There's only one thing that puzzles me about all this.’
‘And what is that?’
‘How come, if he's the Devil Incarnate, does he spend half the book down there in that poxy little room?
Aaaaaaaaaagh!’
‘Sorry Ed, I accidentally pushed you.
Are you all right down there?’
Other things were going bump in Presley City's final night.
Kevin and his revolutionaries carried out several daring raids upon government munition dumps, military vehicle compounds, hi-tech weapon factories and sweet shops.
The barman at the Tomorrowman polished up his impersonations and looked forward to the day after tomorrow, when Rex had promised him his own show.
He counted the night's takings, swept the floor and then got really upset when he discovered that all his beer mats had been stolen.
Laura and Jonathan engaged in certain forbidden acts of love.
These included such classics as, bow stringing, shouting at the wolf, doing the Rapids City roll, French whispering, taking tea with the person and grooving on the inner plane.
Any one of which could get you either hospitalized or excommunicated.
Except for the last one, which is a track on a Robyn Hitchcock LP.
Police Chief Sam Maggott was having a ‘rough one’.
At Police Headquarters alarm bells rang in from government munition dumps, military vehicle compounds, hi-tech weapon factories and sweet shops.
Sam despatched all the men he could spare and paced the floor for several hours, the bells jangling around him.
When he could stand it no longer he put out an ‘all points’ to demand progress reports.
The drunken voice of Officer Cecil informed him that he and his fellows were taking the calls one at a time.
And as soon as they'd finished questioning the Tomorrowman's barman about the beer mat heist, they'd get around to the rest.
‘You should see his impersonation of Ray Bradbury,’ Cecil added.
In the bucket in the cupboard Barry the Time Sprout woke suddenly to find he was in the wrong chapter.
‘And that is my plan,’ he said.
I woke suddenly with my hand on my piece.
Rex and Harpo/Chico were all nuzzled up in the land of nod, so I took myself over to the window to watch the sun rise over Presley City.
Now stirs the earth before the water's run.
And watch our dust rise to the restoring sun.
A new sunrise always brings out the poet in me, even here in this Godawful town.
I guess that if I hadn't taken up the trenchcoat and fedora to walk the alleyways of history as the greatest detective of them all, I might well have become a poet.
Or an estate agent.
Or a bank clerk.
It's all the same when you get right down to it.
A job with a suit.
Except for the poet, of course.
Or the detective.
Although you can wear a suit as a detective if you want to.
Not that I ever wanted to.
I figure that wearing a suit makes you look like an estate agent or a bank clerk.
And the thing I don't like about poets is, they never wear really decent hats.
Except for John Betjeman, that is.
That guy had more hats than Gary Glitter's had come-back concerts.
So I guess I had no choice in the matter really.
When fate marks you down for immortality you'd just better bite the bullet and lace your boots up tight.
Because only a logomachist weaves a rope of sand when the saints go  marching in.
If you catch my drift.
And I very much hope you do.
The sun had got his hat on, so I took time out from the deep and meaningful stuff and studied my reflection in the glass.
‘Laz,’ it said to me, ‘you are one handsome sucker.’
And on this we both agreed.
‘But you ain't had a shave, changed your kecks, nor been to the bathroom since this whole fiasco began.
Perhaps now might be the time.’
And perhaps it would.
Because it was now precisely twelve hours from the big bang.
And counting down.
11.59
High upon the roof of the Butcher Building the boy Jonathan was up and about.
He was up and about and shouting at all and sundry.
Above him vast silver dirigibles moved in the morning sky, great black crates strung beneath them.
These were being lowered to the roof-top, where Repo Men guided them on to powered sleds and steered them into the lift.
‘Careful, careful’ the lad ordered.
‘This stuff is worth a fortune.
Don't knock it about.’
High upon another roof-top, not so far distant, stood a tall dramatic-looking figure robed in black.
He studied the dirigibles through a pair of those really amazing computerized binoculars that you see in movies.
The ones with infra-red night-sights, little flashing digital displays, electric zooms and whatnots.
The ones that you waste your time describing to the blank-faced school-leaver behind the counter in Tandys.
The ones that a friend of mine who was once in the TA has been promising to get me for three years now.
‘Just as I suspected.’
The man in black lowered his binoculars to reveal that he was none other than the Anti-Rex himself.
‘Big black crates arriving.
If I'm not very much  mistaken, they would be for packing up the Presley hoard in.’
He was very much mistaken, of course.
But at least he was out of his top-secret room and getting a bit of fresh air for a change.
High upon Old Bedwetter and barbiturates, Sam Maggott lazed back in his office chair and smiled placidly upon the bleary-eyed officer now lounging in his doorway.
‘Anything to report?’ he asked.
Officer Cecil grinned inanely.
‘Not much, sir.’
‘Not much, sir.
I see.
And would it be impolite of me to enquire exactly where you and the other officers have been for the last eight hours?’
‘No sir.
We have been following up leads.’
‘Following up leads.
Jolly good.
And what leads might these be?’
‘Well sir, we figured that the beer mats might have been stolen by some rival bar-owner.
So we've been systematically checking out all the other bars in the city.’
‘I see.’
Sam popped several coloured capsules into his mouth and washed them down with another slug of firewater.
‘And regarding the break-ins at the government munition dumps, military vehicle compounds and hi-tech weapon factories.
Any thoughts on those?’
‘Well…’
Cecil gazed about the office as if in search of inspiration.
His gaze fell upon the alarm board.
‘I notice all the bells have stopped ringing,’ he said brightly.
Sam rose shakily to his feet and pointed a fat finger at the grinning buffoon.
‘They've stopped ringing because I pulled the bloody wires out of the wall.
You useless, no good, drunken —’
But he never got to finish that particular line.
His words were lost in the sudden explosion which took the front off Police Headquarters.
11.29
High upon life, I returned from the bathroom.
Cleanly shaven, smelling good and feeling better than a basketeer at a codpiece competition.
The room was just as I'd left it, except that it was different.
Nothing major and it took me a minute or two before I could make out what it was.
And what it was, was that Rex and Harpo/Chico had gone.
‘Fellas?’
I gave the place a twice-over.
‘Fellas?’
The bed was made and I noticed a large handwritten note lying upon the pillow.
A clue?
I checked it out.
Dear Mr Woodbonn (it began) There has been a last-minute change of plan and your services are no longer required.
All the very best.
Yours sincerely, Harpo/Chico Nixon
‘What?’ said I.
P.S. I really hate to mention this, but if you take a look around you, I think you'll notice that you've blown your four-set clause.
‘What?
What?’ said I.
P.P.S. The magic with the beermats will be wearing off around now.
I'd head for an alleyway if I were you.
‘What?
What?
What?’ said I.
‘Open up in there!’
It's the voice of the barman and it's not a happy voice.
‘Open up in there, you lousy crook, or I'll bust the door down.’
Not high upon anything much, Rex Mundi lifted Harpo/ Chico up to the payphone across the street from the Tomorrowman Tavern.
‘That was a bit mean on Laz.’
‘The man is a complete prat.’
Chico lifted the receiver.
‘But he saved my life.’
‘People are always saving your life.
I saved your life.’
‘But Laz and I were partners.’
‘Well, we're partners now.’
‘Yes, but…’
‘Listen Rex, I'm sure this Woodworm is a very nice chap —’
‘Woodbine.
The name's Lazlo Woodbine.
Some call him Laz.’
‘Woodbine then.
Nice chap, fine.
But we have a lot to do.
We really don't have time for all the trenchcoat humour, the meaningless catchphrases, the phoney reminiscences, the lame gags about the trusty Smith and Wee Wee, the —’
‘The working in the ‘first person’.’
Rex put in.
‘Got right up my nose, that.
And he thought he was the hero.’
‘There then.
So what do you say?’
‘The man's a complete prat,’ said Rex Mundi.
‘OK.
Then put the coin in the slot, please Rex, and we'll get on with the new plan.’
‘New plan?
I don't remember actually being told the old plan.’
‘Put the coin in, Rex.’
Rex put the coin in.
Chico spoke into the receiver.
‘Hello operator.
Could you put me through to MTWTV?
Thank you…
MTWTV?
Newsroom, please …
Newsroom?
Ah, hello.
This is Chico Nixon here…that's right, of Harpo/Chico fame.
I'm in a spot of trouble so I can't talk for long.
I am being held captive by Simon Butcher, the society photographer.
He intends to perform unspeakable medical experiments on me…will I what?…
World exclusive with MTWTV?
Yes, of course.
That's exactly what I had in mind.
I'll have to go now, I think he's coming back.
Get the cameras over here fast.’
Chico replaced the receiver.
‘There,’ said he.
‘That should start the ball rolling.
Now if you'll just tuck me back into your jacket, I think we should go and have some breakfast.’
Sam Maggott's head rose from the debris of his office.
‘We're under attack.
Break out the weapons.
The big ones.
Cecil, fetch the assault cannon from the armoury.
We're at war here.’
‘Yes sir.’
Cecil dusted down his uniform and sloped off.
‘Attention Police Headquarters.’
Kevin's amplified tones boomed from the public address system mounted on the roof of the recently-commandeered military vehicle.
This vehicle was chock-a-block with government munitions, hi-tech weapon systems, bags of sweets and Children of the Revolution.
‘Now hear this,’ Kevin stuck a gobstopper into his mouth, ‘grmmm mmmph mmmph mmm.’
He spat out the gobstopper.
‘Excuse me.
Release all your prisoners and come out with your hands up.
Or we will destroy the building.’
Sam crawled over to a shrapnel hole and peeped out.
‘I feel a rough one coming on,’ quoth he, digging in his pockets for further pharmaceuticals.
‘Cecil!’
I could have lost my rudder, burnt my boats, turned turtle in a sea of heartbreak or gone down with all hands.
But I didn't.
A lesser detective might have.
Or possibly a merchant seaman.
But not me.
Sure, my partner had taken off with the two-headed bankroll.
Sure, I was standing here with a hole the size of an elephant's nose guard in my four-set clause.
Sure, there was a barman with a problem trying to bust down the door.
Sure!
But who are we dealing with?
This is Woodbine.
The doyen of dicks.
That trench amongst trenchcoats.
That man with the wherewithal and the know how to do.
Come on now.
I took the fedora from the hat peg and perched it over my brow.
Snapped my piece into my shoulder holster.
Slipped into my coat and belted up.
Then I took a walk past my chair, desk and watercooler and over to my office door.
‘Good morning, sir,’ said I, turning the handle.
‘And how might I help you?’
The barman burst past me like salt in the suntan lotion.
‘I got a cash drawer full of beer mats you lousy low-down no-good rotten —’ He paused in mid rant, took a look around and made with the befuddlement.
‘How did you do that?’ said he.
‘How did I do what?’ asked I.
‘This room, that watercooler, the desk, and that…’
He points a finger at my unspeakable carpet, which had escaped mention for many chapters and would continue to do so for those remaining.
‘And what have you done with my spare bed?’
‘Spare bed?’
I enquired, with more dignity than a bandy-legged clog dancer at a Star Trek convention.
‘I never have a bed in my office, fella.
I'm not that kind of detective.’
‘Your office?
What is all this?
Where's my bed?’
I sniffed the air.
Sniff, sniff, and then I said, ‘Do I detect the twang of the brewer's craft about your laughing gear?’
‘Do what?’
‘You been drinking?
You appear somewhat red of face and pink of eye.
Perhaps you've got the DTs.’
‘What was it you were saying?
Spare beds in my office and beer mats in your cash drawer?
I'd ease up on the hard stuff if I were you.
Or take a little water with it.’
‘No I…
I mean…how did you do that?
How…er…’
‘Sure like to chew the fat with you, fella, but I got a busy day on.
Call back tomorrow, eh?’
I steered the boggled barman right out through the door that bears my name etched into its glass and slam it shut upon him.
‘Pull one over on Woodbine.
Some chance.’
I took myself to my desk.
Parked my butt upon my chair.
Pulled the bottle of Old Bedwetter from my drawer.
Uncorked it, took a king-sized slug and stared up at my ceiling fan.
‘How the bloody Hell did I do that?’
I asked it.
‘You didn't, chief,’ said a small green voice coming from my top pocket.
‘I did.’
11.15
Jonathan was hard at work.
The top-floor studio of the Butcher Building was now crowded with electronic apparatus.
Banks of TV monitors, mixing desks and technical wizardry of a high order.
The lad tinkered happily with a multi-pronged screwdriver that couldn't possibly work in real life.
He called to Laura, who was lolling in the kind of leather teddy, which I for one, would dearly like to see in real life.
‘Open the case over there, would you?’
Laura studied her exquisite finger nails.
Opening crates wasn't really her ‘thing’.
‘Jonathan,’ Laura purred.
‘This stuff.
Did you invent it?’
‘All my own work.’
The lad adjusted the torque of three screws in the top of an inter-rositor of advanced design.
‘So only you can assemble it correctly?’
‘Only me.
What are you on about?’
‘Well, I was just thinking.
There's so much of it and so little time.
Couldn't you get one of your copies to help you?’
‘Oh no, they're single-function only.
I have to do all this myself.’
‘I rather thought so.’
Laura smiled to herself and leaned forwards to pry open the packing case.
A keen observer, or possibly any male over the age of twelve, might well have noticed the small hand-gun nestling in her cleavage.
Jonathan was a bit too busy, though.
‘Attention Police Headquarters.
We don't have all day.
Release your prisoners now and make it easy on yourselves.’
Cecil crept up behind Sam and poked him with his over-sized weapon.
‘All loaded up sir.
Shall I blast the bastards?’
‘Not just yet.
Who do we have in the cells?’
‘Usual complement from central casting.
A drunk who takes his orders from a higher source.
A pimp who's ‘gonna be walking’ as soon as his solicitor gets here.
A brace of homeboys in headbands and the Count of Monte Cristo.
Same old crowd.’
‘No terrorists?’
‘None, sir.’
‘Fetch me my bullhorn, officer.’
‘Aw sir.
You're not going to try and reason with them?
Let me blast the bastards.’
‘Fetch me my bullhorn!’
‘Spoil sport.’
A convoy of five trucks moved out from MTWTV.
The leading lorry was a large and swanky affair.
A sort of luxury office suite on wheels.
In it, seated around a grand-looking boardroom table in splendid high-backed chairs, were Mojo and Debbie Nixon, their agents, managers and solicitors.
The head of MTWTV, his private  secretary, right- and left-hand men, accountants, concubines and confidants.
Intense conversation was on the go, centered around product placement.
‘The way I see it,’ the head of MTWTV drew upon his big fat cigar.
‘We're talking major marketing strategies here.
Tell me Mojo, when your kid got snatched by the aliens, was he wearing any brand-name designer-label clothing?’
‘Barry.’
I pulled the little guy from my pocket and set him down on my desk.
‘It's you.’
‘It's me, chief.
Barry to the rescue.
Back from my vacation at glorious unsunny Bucket World.
Refreshed, revived and reinvigorated.
And really cheesed off about being left out of the action for so long.
My agent is going to have plenty to say about this, I can tell you.’
‘Agent?
I didn't know you had an agent.’
And I didn't.
But then Barry has more sides to him than the Sunday Football League.
‘Agent?
Did I say agent?
I meant of course my…er…ageratum.’
‘Your what?’
‘Ageratum, chief.
American tropical houseplant.
Close personal friend.’
‘If you say so.’
‘I do.
So how have you been making out without me, then?
The going been getting pretty tough, I bet.’
‘Not a bit of it.
I've nearly got the whole case sewn up.
Piece of cake.’
I made a gesture that had more breeziness and gay abandon to it than a freezer full of fellators.
The way I figured it; the little guy knew how much I'd missed him.
And he knew I knew he knew.
And he knew how much I needed him to wind up the case.
And he knew I know he knew that too.
But he also knew I have a hard bitten, tough as old boots, ice cool and unemotional image to keep up.
He knew all this and he knew I knew it.
Barry and me had an almost mystical rapport when it  came to stuff like this.
So the one thing he didn't expect from me was a thank you.
‘No chance of a thank you, then?
You ungrateful palooka.’
‘What's that, Barry?’
‘Nothing, chief.’
‘OK.’
Rex wiped his mouth with a napkin.
‘You're running the show.
What do we do now?’
‘Well, I'm for another round of toast,’ said Chico.
‘And I'd like some more milk,’ said Harpo.
‘But I'd like some of me mum's better.’
‘All well and good.
But I want to know exactly what's really going on here.
I can piece some of it together, but you know the rest.
I'll help you, but I have to know it all.
Are you going to tell me?’
‘I thought you'd never ask.’
Chico sipped coffee.
‘Of course I'll tell you.
Lean over here and let me whisper.’
‘Oh no,’ Rex shook his head.
‘This time I want to hear it out loud and see it in print.’
‘Show me that map again.’
Johnny Dee snatched the thing from Ed Kelley.
‘We're lost, aren't we?’
‘No, we're not.
I know exactly where we are.’
‘You lying git.’
‘I'm not.
See that manhole cover up there?’
‘I see it.’
‘That's just outside the Butcher Building.’
Johnny Dee studied the map of the Presley City sewerage system.
‘You lying git,’ he said again.
‘This is Police Chief Sam Maggott.’
Sam shouted through the bullhorn.
‘Identify yourselves.’
‘We are the Children of the Revolution.
42nd Street chapter.’
‘What do you want from us?’
‘We want you to release all your prisoners.’
‘Let me blast the bastards, sir.’
‘Shut up, Cecil.’
‘Who are you telling to shut up?
And my name's not Cecil, it's Kevin.’
‘I didn't mean you.
Do you have a specific prisoner you'd like released?
We'd hate to lose all of them.
Especially the Count of Monte Cristo.’
‘Send out Laura Lynch.’
‘Laura Lynch?’
Sam switched off his bullhorn.
‘Cecil, do we have a Laura Lynch here?’
‘We did.’
Cecil put on a lopsided smirk and giggled in his silly way.
‘Her and me ‘took tea with the parson’ in the men's locker-room a couple of days back.’
‘You disgusting pervert.
You can be excommunicated for that, you know.’
Sam switched on his bullhorn again.
‘Hello, Children of the Revolution.
Laura Lynch has left the building.
She is no longer here.
Now lay down your weapons and come out with your hands up.
You are all under arrest.’
‘Fat chance.’
Kevin pressed buttons and further sections of Police Headquarters fell into ruination.
Sam switched off his bullhorn.
‘Blast the bastards!’ he told Cecil.
11.00
The dirigibles had drifted away and the morning sky was clear and cloudless above the Butcher Building as the long black air-car dropped silently on to the roof.
The driver's door hissed open and the Anti-Rex stepped out.
He consulted his watch.
10.59 and counting down.
‘Dee and Kelley will be in position by now,’ he inaccurately informed himself.
‘Everything is proceeding according to plan.’
Battle waged wildly around Police Headquarters.
Kevin's commandeered military vehicle had some pretty awesome firepower.
But Presley's finest were now coming  into their own with big guns blazing.
Shells burst in many directions other than those intended.
There had, as yet, been no loss of life.
But there was no shortage of gung ho machismo posturing.
Somewhere, right in the middle of no-man's land in fact, a manhole cover flipped aside.
‘Bloody noisy up there,’ Ed complained.
‘Bit of thunder probably.’
Johnny prodded Ed in the trouser seat.
‘Go out and have a look around.’
‘Well, I don't want to get wet.
I'll just take a peep.’
Ed took a peep.
A ricocheting bullet took the top off his head.
‘Which brings us to the matter of World Rights.’
The head of MTWTV sucked upon his cigar.
‘Naturally we shall expect to hold these.
But I know you'll agree that the up-front payment and future percentage scales are most favourable to you both.
Cigar, Mojo?’
‘I don't mind if I do.’
‘Excuse me.’
The driver slid aside a little panel and addressed the assembled company.
‘Sorry to interrupt, but there seems to be some kind of disturbance going on around Police HQ.
Should I stop and check it out?’
‘No.’
The station head spoke through a plume of cigar smoke.
‘We have important negotiations in progress here.
Take a detour.’
‘As you say.’
The driver hung a left and left the combat zone.
‘Look at my head.’
Ed bobbed up and down in fury.
‘I just get my ears straight and this has to happen.
It just won't do.’
‘You go up there and tell them,’ Johnny urged.
‘I'll back you up.’
‘You lying git.’
‘I will.
Go on.
Tell them.’
‘I bloody well will, too.’
Ed climbed from the manhole.
A bouncing grenade blew off his right arm.
Ed bitterly regarded the gory stump.
‘You're making me mad,’ he howled.
‘You're telling me what?’
Rex howled.
‘This is all a what?’
‘A game.’
Chico offered Rex the kind of comforting smile Rex had offered him the night before.
It was equally uncomforting.
‘A game.
The game in fact.
The only game in town, and you're in it.
Part of it.’
‘Do you mean like ‘life's a funny old game’?’
‘No, I mean like ‘life's a great big virtual-reality computer game being played with real people’.’
‘It's the Phnaargs.’
Rex made a foul face.
‘It's them behind it.
Has to be.’
‘No, Rex.
More powerful than them.’
‘More powerful than them?’
Rex scratched at his chin.
A look of enlightenment, the like of which we haven't seen in this entire book, appeared on his face.
‘The Gods.
It's the Gods.’
‘More powerful.’
‘More powerful?
Who could be more powerful than the Gods?’
‘Their accountants, that's who.
Care for another coffee?’
‘Who's that guy?’
Sam Maggott peeped through his shrapnel hole.
‘Where did he come from?’
‘Came out of a manhole, sir.’
Cecil hefted his over-sized weapon.
‘Shall I blast him?’
‘Looks like he just got blasted.
Blast them.’
‘Sure thing.’
Cecil inserted another high-calibre short-range evil-doer into his assault cannon and pulled the trigger.
The missile whistled past Ed Kelley, setting his clothes on fire.
‘I'm losing my temper!’ stormed the smoker.
‘Did you see that?’
Kevin gestured through a gun port.
‘They fired on an unarmed one-armed civilian.
Strafe the blighters.’
‘Now just you all see here.’
Ed waved a charred arm in the air.
Rapid machine-gun fire from the military vehicle engulfed him.
‘Right!’ screamed the ventilated Ed.
‘That's the last straw.’
The Anti-Rex climbed over the roof parapet of the Butcher Building and then proceeded down the wall, fly fashion.
It wasn't a pleasing thing to behold.
But then, he wasn't a particularly pleasing individual.
I stood in the alleyway and took a shufty through my police-issue 200 × 6000 macroscopic laser-prism binoculars.
‘There's a guy crawling down the wall up there,’ said I. ‘You wanna take a look, Barry?’
‘No, chief.
I can make him out just fine, thanks.
Now, as soon as the action switches to the next scene, let's make a run for the Butcher Building.
Then I'll try and fix it for you to have your roof-top ending.’
‘Gotcha.’
‘Not that you deserve it.’
‘What's that Barry?’
‘I said now, chief.’
‘AAARRRRRRRRGGGGGGGHHHHHHH!!!!!’ went Ed Kelley, who was, as they say, going through changes.
The arch-demon Balberith gets a mention in Joseph Glanvil's Sadutismus Triumphus.
A volume bound in human skin which had once passed through the hands of a certain Jack Doveston.
In it old Joe writes:
…by eck as like lad I'll tell thee this.
Yon Balberith is reet big orrid ruffy beast wi gurt black beard full o rats and green teeth gnashing and a grinding and flames  coming out o bum that'd take wallpaper off front parlor.
And if thee don't eat thy black pudding reet this minute he'll come doon chimney and out o feature coal-effect bar fire and gobble thee op.
Or I'll go t' foot of our stairs.
Put kettle on, mother.
It probably loses something in the translation from the original Latin.
The beast which now tore its way from Ed Kelley's shattered human form didn't look like a lot of laughs.
It was abominable, atavistic and atrocious, big, black and brutal, cruel cold and callous, and so on.
It rose, a good eight feet in height, a shimmering energy body pulsating with pure malignant evil.
‘I don't like the look of that,’ croaked Sam Maggott.
‘Blast it, Cecil.’
‘I'm getting a bit low on ammo, sir.
Best let the guys in the military vehicle take a pop, eh.’
‘What in BAH-REAH'S name is that?’
Kevin gaped through the gun-port.
‘Don't ask me,’ a Child of the Revolution replied.
‘You're the one with the speaking part, you figure it out.’
‘Eh?’ said Kevin.
‘What's all this?’
‘We want proper parts,’ another Child spoke up, ‘or we're going home.’
‘This is hardly the time.
Come on gang.’
Silence reigned in the military vehicle.
But not without.
‘Listen gang.
Be fair.’
Kevin switched on the public address system and shouted into it.
‘Send out Laura Lynch!’
‘Eat my shit!’ cried Balberith, raising long black talons to the sky.
‘Er…um.’
Kevin dithered, but not for long.
‘She clearly isn't in there,’ he told his nameless companions.
‘I think we should try the Butcher Building now.’
He brrrrm'd the engine and put the vehicle into reverse.
‘Look at that!’
Sam did a silly dance.
‘They're getting away.
Officer Cecil, get the cars out.’
‘We're going in pursuit, sir?
You have to be kidding.’
‘The cars, officer.’
‘Yes sir.’
Balberith was up and running.
His reptilian feet, with their three splayed claws, ripped chunks from the tarmac and left more enigmatic impressions for scholars to wonder over later.
His long black scaled body rose into the air and fell upon the now swerving military vehicle.
‘Let's get gone,’ cried Kevin.
‘After them!’ cried Sam Maggott.
‘What's all the hubbub, bub?’ asked Johnny Dee.
‘Ed?
Hello?
Where are you?’
He stuck his head out of the manhole and a police car drove over it.
17
67.
And BAH-REAH spake unto Elvis saying wisely, ‘I think we've screwed up here, chief.’
The Suburban Book of the Dead
The Anti-Rex crawled down the wall of the Butcher Building and in through an open window.
He dusted down his dark and dapper duds, drew out a really splendid hand-gun, which appeared to have been borrowed from the Robocop props cupboard, and released the safety catch.
One floor above, a light blinked from the implant on Jonathan's left wrist, but he tinkered on with his impossible screwdriver.
Information exchanged and fed into his cranium.
Without looking up from his work, he flipped the top from his left thumb and spoke into the minuscule microphone housed within.
‘Intruder in room B, floor sixty-five.
Seek and destroy.
The intruder is AAA category.
Proceed as previously informed.
Also we have another, bumbling around in the lobby.
DDD category.
Best put a stop to him as well.’
The armour clad military vehicle was making considerable headway.
Presley City's up-town morning traffic was less than a match for it.
The steel tracks ground along at a steady rate, flattening glorious highly-finned autos, scattering pedestrians and levelling lampposts.
Inside there was a whole lot of arguing going on.
Up  on the roof Balberith drove his fists at the steel plate and howled obscenities, the way some of them do.
Ahead, the MTWTV convoy was halted at a red light, and behind, Presley's finest followed the armoured car with its onboard demon, at a leisurely and unhurried pace.
‘Get your foot down, Cecil,’ Sam shouted.
Cecil wasn't keen.
‘There's a speed limit in this city, sir, and as an officer of the law it's my duty to set a good example.’
Sam cuffed the dawdling example in the ear.
‘You cringing coward.
Get your foot down.’
‘But sir, that's an armoured car, bristling with hi-tech weapons and there's that thing on its roof.
It is my considered opinion that we should stay at a safe distance and await further developments.’
‘Get your foot down and switch on the siren.’
‘The siren?’
Officer Cecil crossed himself.
‘Now.’
The MTWTV station head sucked at his cigar.
‘We come to the matter of film rights.
Obviously there is a TV movie in this.
I suggest a three-parter, prime-time; how does The Harpo/Chico Story sound to you?’
He didn't wait for a reply.
‘So shall we discuss possible actors for the lead roles?’
‘I'd rather like to play myself.’
Debbie fluttered her eyelashes.
‘And me me,’ said Mojo.
‘I've been taking acting lessons at the David Bowie Academy.’
The station head nodded in agreement.
‘And what about Harpo/Chico?’
‘Animated model!’ said Mojo and Debbie.
‘My feelings entirely.
But it will have to look convincing.
We'll need to hire a top animatronics team.’
The driver slid back his little hatch.
‘Sorry to interrupt again, but the guys in the catering truck at the tail of our convoy are getting real excited.
They say there's a big  army tank with a monster on its roof bearing down on them.’
‘Monster?
What kind of monster?’
‘I'll ask them, sir.’
The driver spoke into his handset.
A torrent of words came in ready reply.
‘Golly, they say it's about eight feet tall, black as pitch, covered in scales, breathing brimstone and smashing in the top of the army tank.’
‘I like the sound of that.’
The station head made further puffings.
‘We could write that in.
Tell the catering guys to take some polaroids and fax them through to us.
And ask them if they can find out who's doing the animatronics.
We might well be on to something here.’
‘Will do, sir.’
‘Ed?’
Johnny clutched his dented skull, climbed from the manhole and peered around.
Police Headquarters was merrily ablaze, as were numerous other buildings in the vicinity.
The earthly remains of Ed Kelley were liberally distributed about the street.
Johnny consulted the map.
‘You had it upside down.
His excellency isn't going to like this.’
His excellency crossed the floor of room B. It wasn't a particularly interesting room and it's doubtful whether it would have got a mention at all, had the Anti-Rex not chosen to enter it.
So, the least said about it the better.
He pressed his ear to the door.
Click clack click clack clock, came the sounds of weapons being cocked in the corridor beyond.
‘Hmm,’ went The Anti-Rex, withdrawing his ear.
‘Hmm,’ went the real Rex Mundi to Harpo/Chico.
‘So where exactly do I fit into all this?’
Chico munched further toast.
‘You're the spanner in the works, Rex.
You're not supposed to be here.’
‘You're preaching to the converted.’
Rex gazed around  the cafe.
It wasn't a particularly interesting café and it's doubtful whether it would have got a mention at all had…do you ever get that strange feeling of déjà vu?
‘Listen, Rex, you're the only one who can put it right.
That's your purpose.’
‘So what do I have to do?’
‘Win the game.
Get your initials up for the ultimate high score.’
Rex made one of his most doubtful faces to date.
‘But I don't know how to win this game.
Even what this game is.
Can't you be a bit more specific?’
‘I'll tell you this, Rex.
The game goes on and on, again and again until someone wins it.
But it can be won, believe me, and when it is…’
‘Then what?
Tell me.’
‘And spoil the trick ending?
No way.’
‘Trick ending?’
Rex's doubtful face became a very sour face.
‘There's going to be another one of those, is there?’
‘Loads.’
Chico finished his toast.
Harpo drained the last of his milk.
‘You'll sort it out, Rex, you'll win through.
I shall be with you.
Fear not and things of that nature.
Now, shall we take a stroll over to the Butcher Building?’
‘Sounds good to me.
Check please, waitress.’
Rex called over to the waitress, who was hovering near at hand hoping for a walk-on part.
She wasn't a particularly interesting waitress and in truth it is doubtful whether she would have got a mention at all if…
Balberith tore a section of reinforced steel roof from the military vehicle and glared down through the hole.
Five faceless individuals gaped up at him.
‘Bloody Hell!’
Kevin applied the brakes.
The lads in the catering truck, who had been happy-snapping through the rear windows, suddenly dropped both their jaws and their cameras.
They saw the big armoured car shudder to a halt and the great black beast as it left the roof and plummeted towards  them.
‘Oooooooh!’ they went, ducking variously.
Balberith smashed through the rear doors of the catering truck, careened along the spotlessly clean linoleum floor and came to rest in the fruit and salad bar.
‘Ahoy there, intruder,’ called one of Jonathan's Repo Men through the keyhole of room B, floor sixty-five.
‘We are a heavily-armed militia, low on intellect but high on company loyalty and the work ethic.
In precisely one minute we will come bursting in and shoot you.
You may wish to give yourself up, or possibly make a getaway through the window.
But quite frankly we'd prefer it if you put up a bit of a fight as we're a right sadistic bunch.
Real nasty.’
‘Real nasty?’
The Anti-Rex cocked his Robocop special.
‘You don't know the meaning of real nasty.’
‘All done.’
Jonathan straightened up and flipped a switch.
Banks of electrical jiggery-pokery burst into life.
Lights flashed, buzzers buzzed and multiple telescreens shone with 3D views of Presley City, interiors of the Butcher Building, close ups of Jonathan, graphs and charts, curious looping graphics and an old Marc Bolan video.
‘Is he singing ‘Pewter Suitor’?’
Laura enquired.
‘Nah.
That's ‘20th Century Boy’.
Not even I have got a copy of ‘Pewter Suitor’.’
‘Is the equipment complete then?’
‘All set.
This lot can override the World Casts, jam out all the competition, run the game scenarios side by side for the final showdown.’
Jonathan looked upon all that he had made and found that it was very good.
‘Not even my dad could have set this lot up.’
‘Your dad?
You've never talked about your family.’
‘We weren't close.’
‘What does your father do?’
‘Not a lot, I shouldn't think.
He was dead the last time I saw him.’
‘Oh, I'm so sorry.’
Laura wasn't of course, but you have to say that, don't you?
‘I'm not.’
Jonathan smiled grimly.
‘Dad had this accident.
He fell into a big flywheel.
Very messy.
Very final.’
‘A big flywheel, where was that?’
‘Nowhere you need trouble your pretty little head about.’
‘My pretty-little-feather-brained-only-good-for-one-thing-bimbo-know-nothing-woman's-head, would that be?’
‘What?’
Jonathan asked.
‘Nothing.
Are you really sure that only you alone could have constructed all this?’
‘Only me.’
Jonathan did shoulder swaggers.
‘I'm so glad.’
Laura pulled the gun from between her breasts and pointed it at Jonathan.
‘Then you're dead, sucker.’
Balberith rose shimmering from the fruit and salad bar.
RRRAAAGGGH! he went, wiping the residues of plum, pulse, pimento, pomegranate, pepper and passion fruit from his chest.
‘AAAGHRRR!’ he continued, stepping amidst the mess of pear, peach, pomelo, pineapple, papaya, parsnip and potato.
‘GHAAMPRH!’ he added, as he plucked a sprout from his left ear and crunched it to oblivion.
The catering personnel were taking the opportunity to depart via the fire exits.
‘Run for your lives,’ they went, and things similar.
Balberith swept his great arms wide, mangling the hostess trolley and spoiling the spice rack.
One reckless fellow with an eye on the main chance (for there is always one) picked up a discarded camera and prepared to take another polaroid.
‘Smile please,’ said he.
Balberith ripped the remains of the fruit and salad bar from its mountings and flung it through the roof.
Then he advanced on the reckless fellow.
‘Just one more.
Oh, ouch.’
Balberith grasped him by the crisp, clean lapels of his waitering jacket and hoisted him aloft.
‘What's your game?’ growled the monster from Hell, gazing with sickly yellow eyes into the face of the far-from-happy snapper.
‘A c-couple of p-pictures for the station head,’ stammered the lost soul, wetting his pants.
‘Pictures?’
A long forked tongue darted from the scaly mouth and licked the tip of the stammerer's nose.
Lick, lick, lick, it went.
‘They're c-casting for a m-m-movie…’
‘Movie?’
The black tongue vanished from view.
‘There'd be a p-p-part in it for you…’
Balberith lowered the damp-trousered main-chancer to the floor.
‘A starring part?’ he enquired.
Kevin stuck the open-topped battle wagon into gear and swerved into Lonely Street.
On-coming cars skidded to either side, slamming into basement dwellings, ploughing along sidewalks, overturning and bursting into flames.
‘We're well rid of that,’ cried Kevin.
‘Anyone got a jelly baby?’
There was silence all round.
‘Aw, come on, gang.’
‘Not until we get proper descriptions and solid characterizations,’ said a short plump girl with a freckled face and a shock of ginger hair.
Her name was Alison.
‘Could I have a jelly baby, please, Alison?’
‘Plump?’
Alison screamed.
‘I'm not plump!’
‘Calling all cars.
Calling all cars.’
Sam Maggott did his finest Broderick Crawford (no relation of Jonathan).
‘Heavily-armoured terrorist vehicle proceeding north along Lonely Street.
Set up roadblocks on King Creole and Roustabout.
Halt and detain.’
‘Do what?’
Drunken police voices filled the airways with talk of pressing beer mat investigations.
‘We're coming in now,’ called Jonathan's Repo Men.
‘Time to die.’
‘Yours, not mine.’
The evil one stood his ground, raised his supergun and let off rapid and devastating fire through the door of room B, floor sixty-five.
Cries of distress poured through the bullet holes.
‘Damned unsporting,’ someone complained.
‘Charge!’ cried someone else.
And charge they jolly well did.
The punctured door was carried from its hinges and borne into the room.
A mighty shield in the van of an avenging army.
The Anti-Rex emptied his pistol into it, but to little avail.
He was outnumbered and outgunned.
The mob poured at him, over him and then all around him.
He flung aside the door he was suddenly lying beneath, stared up bitterly and ran a black shirt-cuff across his bloodied nose.
‘You are going to pay for this,’ he spat at the gun muzzles forming a circle of steel above him.
‘You don't know who you're messing with.’
‘Oh, but we do.’
The circle of steel expanded and a Repo Man approached.
He was rather a curious-looking Repo Man.
Far from being the standard blank-faced, broad-shouldered six-foot-sixer, he was short, white-haired and portly.
He was dressed in the garb of a Catholic priest and he bore an uncanny resemblance to the now legendary Spencer Tracy.
He was carrying a bible and a large silver crucifix.
‘Big guns up,’ he ordered.
The big guns went up.
‘Water-pistols out.’
‘Water-pistols, what?’
The stinker on the deck looked uneasy.
‘Holy water capsules in.’
‘Holy wa — oh no…’
‘Inane childish chant.’
The Repo Men armed their holy water-pistols and angled them down at the devil-made-flesh.
‘We know who you ar-are.
We know who you ar-are,’ they chanted in their silly way.
‘I'd advise you to say your prayers.’
The Spencer Tracy lookalike beamed down at the Anti-Rex.
‘But who'd be listening, eh?’
‘Barry, I can't see a goshdarn thing.’
It was blacker than a coal heaver's codpiece in a Blitz blackout.
‘Of course you can't see, chief.
You've got your eyes shut.’
‘Ah, sure, that would be it.’
I cotton on pretty quick to this kind of stuff.
‘Why do I have my eyes shut by the way?’
‘So you can't see where you're going.’
‘Which would explain why I keep bumping into things, I guess.’
‘You got it, chief.’
‘Barry, excuse me for asking this, but why wouldn't I want to see where I was going?’
It seemed a reasonable question to me.
Barry made an agitated sighing noise which I didn't take to one bit.
‘Because, chief, if you can't see where you are, then nobody else can.
Pretty neat, eh?
Remember that movie of yours, Death Wears Patent Slingbacks?’
‘Yeah, sure.
The one with the subjective camerawork, where the audience saw the whole film through my eyes.
The Camera is Woodbine.
Bombed out at the box office, I remember that.’
‘The world wasn't ready, chief.
So, do you want to  keep your eyes shut while I get you up to the roof, or open them now and get a nasty surprise when you and all your millions of fans see where you are?’
‘I guess I'll keep 'em shut.
But I don't like this one bit.
Doing a whole scene in the dark ain't gonna look too good on the screen.
Deaf people will think the film's over and take a hike before I get to do my roof-top ending.’
‘Can't help that, chief You got to stick to your four-set clause and I can't spare the energy to beam you up.
Now take a step to the right here, there's a —’
THUD!
‘Ouch!’
‘Pillar, chief.’
The non-subjective reader saw Laz (in the third person) bump into the pillar and stumble blindly on across the lobby of the Butcher Building, clutching his skull.
The same reader also saw the conga-line of Repo Men that followed him, tittering into their hands and nudging one another.
And as Laz reached the lift, this very same reader now observed the Repo Men form themselves into a firing line and cock their weapons noisily.
‘Did you hear that, Barry?’
I put my hand to my ear with more awareness of danger than an ashtray full of broken promises.
‘Er, chief.
Could you just lift me up above your shoulder and kind of swivel me round a bit?’
‘Sure can.’
I sure did.
‘What's to see?’
‘Nothing you'd probably want to hear about, chief.’
‘Laura, no, don't do it!’
Jonathan covered his face.
‘You don't want to shoot me.’
Laura smiled and cocked the trigger.
‘But I do, Jonathan.
I really do.’
‘No, you don't.
Think about all I can give you.’
‘I have.
With you out of the way I can have it anyway.’
‘Laura, please listen to me —’
‘No, Jonathan.
You are the enemy.
You belong dead.
I shall take all this.
The Presley hoard, the dead messiah, the power.
I shall make it right.’
‘You don't know what you're saying.
You can't stop what is going to happen.
Only I can stop it.
This time I know how —’
‘Sorry.’
Laura squeezed the trigger.
‘You're making a terrible mistake —’
There was a bang and a thud.
Jonathan gaped down at the neat little hole in his chest.
‘You shot me.’
‘This is true.
You are shot.’
‘But I'm not dead.’
Laura's latest wristwatch was an antique Patek Phillippe, emerald encrusted, very exclusive.
She studied the tiny diamond-tipped second hand.
‘Bet you can't count up to five.’
‘One…two…three…four…’
Jonathan laughed nervously.
Laura looked on expectantly.
‘Five?’ she asked.
‘Four and a half…’
Jonathan plunged forwards on to his face.
Sparks flew from his wrist implants.
His little feet twitched and kicked and then were still.
‘Told you.’
Laura strode over and booted him on to his back.
The beady little eyes stared up at her reproachfully, but they didn't see anything.
‘Nobody likes a smart-assed kid.’
Laura grinned, placed her right foot upon the dead boy's face and ground down hard with her three-inch heel.
It was an act of needlessly gratuitous violence and one which ensured for good and all, that Meryl Streep would be declining to take the female lead in the film version of this one, just like she had with the last two.
Laura twisted her heel a second time.
‘I never liked her anyway,’ she sneered.
‘I'd rather be played by Cher any day.’
‘Go on then.
If you're going to do it, do it!’
The Anti-Rex glared defiance at the selection of water-pistols pointing down at him.
‘What's the matter with you?
Do it!’
But none of the gunmen looked like they were up to doing very much of anything.
‘What's all this?’
The evil one climbed warily to his feet, carefully avoiding the unmoving guns.
The Repo Men stood stock still.
So many shop-window dummies, suddenly bereft of all life.
Anti-Rex gave the nearest a violent shove.
It toppled sideways and struck the floor, still frozen in its final pose.
‘Perhaps I have a guardian angel,’ mused the stinker.
He retrieved his supergun, reloaded it and shot the head off the Spencer Tracy lookalike.
‘Go on Barry.
Tell me the worst.’
I could take it and Barry knew that I knew that he knew I could take it.
‘Seems like a false alarm, chief.
I thought you were a gonna there, but it looks like you're not.
Perhaps you have a guardian angel.
Now, just reach out your hand and, whisper, whisper, whisper…’
‘Press the lift button, did you say?’
‘A complete no-hoper.’
‘What's that, Barry?’
‘Nothing, chief.’
‘I never said you were plump, Alison,’ Kevin complained.
‘Well, someone did.
I suggest we all do our own descriptions.
All in favour say aye.’
‘Aye,’ said all in favour, including Kevin.
‘Now, that's democracy.’
Alison smiled.
She was tall and tanned and young and lovely, with long golden hair and large passionate grey eyes.
‘I can dig this,’ said Kevin, the Tom Cruise lookalike.
‘Which way do we go at the traffic lights?’
‘Left,’ said Reg, the Tom Cruise lookalike.
‘No, I'm sure it's right,’ said Jason, who also bore an uncanny resemblance to the Hollywood star.
‘Now see here…’ said Kevin.
‘He is what?
And he wants what?’
The MTWTV station head spat out his cigar.
The driver spoke over his shoulder.
‘The guys in the catering truck, well guy, the others split apparently.
The guy says it's not an animatronics job.
It's a real monster from Hell.
And it wants a part in the movie or…’ the driver paused.
‘Or what?
The station head snatched up his smouldering cigar and patted furiously at his smouldering fly.
‘Or he'll rip up our trucks and tear us all into little bite-sized chunks of meat, sir.’
‘Does he have an agent?’
‘I'll ask, sir.’
‘Stupid pillock.’
Johnny Dee, he of the flat-top skull and map-reading talents, wandered amongst the flaming buildings in search of a cab.
‘Can't read a sodding map, gets his human body splattered all over the street, then takes off without a by your leave or kiss my elbow.
You just can't get the help nowadays.
Oi, taxi!’
The passing taxi crawled to a halt.
And very strangely it did so too.
It was literally carbonized, lacking a roof and rattling  noisily upon four tyreless rims.
On the bare and blackened springs of what once had been the driver's seat, sat the bare and blackened remains of what once had been something or other.
It wasn't human and it wasn't nice.
It was very angry though and in chapters past it had rejoiced in the name of Bill.
(Some cheers from supporters of the away team.)
‘Cab, sir?’ barked barbecued Bill the driver, raising the charred relic of what once had been his cap.
‘Hop in, Johnny, we've got work to do.’
Johnny Dee tried to open a rear door.
It disintegrated in his hands.
He climbed into the wreckage and sat where he could.
‘Is there anything you'd like to tell me about, Bill?’ he asked.
‘You look a mite off-colour.’
‘I haven't been in this for ages,’ said Rex Mundi.
‘What am I doing now?’
‘Smuggling my brother and me into the Butcher Building.’
Chico replied.
‘Do try and pay attention.’
‘Cor,’ went Rex.
‘Look at that lot.
What aren't they doing?’
‘They aren't shooting anyone, by the look of them.
Let's go over and check them out.’
‘Sure thing.’
Rex carried the double-header across the lobby and inspected the row of frozen Repo Men.
‘What happened here?
Why are they just standing there like that?’
Harpo said, ‘If you ask me, it's some kind of contemporary sculpture.
Big enterprises like this always like this kind of stuff.
It's probably got some pretentious name and cost a small fortune.’
‘No, Harpo.’
Chico shook his head.
‘That isn't it at all.’
‘Yeah, well you would say that, wouldn't you?’
‘Because you're wrong.
Kindly shut up.’
‘Don't tell me to shut up.
You shut up.’
‘Come on now, you two.’
Rex gave them a shake.
‘Don't you shake my brother,’ said Harpo.
‘Nor mine,’ said Chico.
‘I looked like Tom Cruise first,’ Kevin complained.
‘So?’ asked Reg.
‘So?’ asked Jason.
‘So we can't all look like Tom Cruise.’
‘You could be triplets.’
Sharon suggested.
She was tall and tanned and young and lovely, with a mane of golden  hair and large passionate grey eyes.
‘And it's straight on at the lights for the Butcher Building, by the way.’
‘Put your foot down further and switch that siren back on,’ demanded Sam Maggott.
‘No agent, eh?’ said the MTWTV station head.
‘I think we can do business with this guy.
Take his name and tell him he's got a deal.’
‘I got zapped by a flying saucer,’ Bill explained.
‘It hasn't done much for my temper.’
‘Simon Butcher!’
The Anti-Rex waved his gun in the air.
‘I'm coming to kill you!’
‘My hair's blonder than yours,’ said Alison to Sharon.
‘Oh no it's not.’
‘Oh yes it is.’
Laura seated herself before the controls.
‘I think I can work all this out for myself.’
She rubbed her hands together.
‘I bet you don't get the chance though.’
The voice belonged to Jonathan Crawford.
Laura looked up in horror.
Jonathan's face grinned at her from the telescreens.
Laura smiled.
‘Still a little bit of you left in the machine, eh?’
She touched buttons on the console and the faces of Jonathan blacked out.
‘Soon have all your little tricks out of there.’
‘I doubt that.’
The voice was Jonathan's once again.
Laura studied the telescreens.
‘Say that again.’
Her hand hovered above the console.
‘I said, I doubt that.’
A pistol butt caught her on the side of the head.
Laura fell from her chair on to the dead boy on the floor.
‘Not very nice of you, stomping on my face like that.’
Laura gazed up.
Jonathan gazed down.
‘I told you you were making a big mistake.’
Laura wiped blood from her eyes.
‘But this was you.
You said that only you could assemble the apparatus.’
‘Yes, I did, didn't I?’
Jonathan swung his foot at Laura's face.
Before it struck home the chapter came to a hasty conclusion.
18
Rock 'n' Roll is making love to the Justice of the Peace's daughter in the back of a stolen Chevy, drinking beer you bought on a fake ID, at a drive-in showing Vanishing Point or something.
That's what Rock 'n' Roll is.
M. Nixon
I'm only dancing cos I can't stop shaking.
John Spencer
Jonathan dragged Laura to her feet.
He hadn't really kicked her in the face; you've got to draw the line somewhere, although I've never been exactly sure where.
‘You've worked out very well,’ Jonathan told her.
‘I knew I couldn't trust you, although you checked out OK on my instrumentation, I'll have to look into that.
But, you've been good value for money.
Two different game scenarios for the death of the boy genius.
They will go down a storm with my business partners.
The big question is now, what should I do with you?
It wouldn't come across as very credible if I trusted you a third time.
The second time was pushing it a bit.’
‘You could let me escape,’ Laura suggested hopefully.
‘Not knowingly of course.
I could just, well, escape when you weren't looking.’
‘You could.
But I don't like it.
Better if I just end your scenario right here and now.’
Laura looked down at the boy.
He was clearly insane.
‘Not very imaginative,’ she heard herself saying.
‘Not for the great Jonathan Crawford.
The genius who turned life on Earth into a virtual-reality computer game for the Gods.
That is what you've done, isn't it?’
Jonathan made a smug face.
‘It's a bit more complicated than that as it happens.
But you're close.’
‘So you can hardly just kill me off now.
I'm the female lead, the hero has to get me at the end.
It's tradition or an old charter or something.’
Jonathan stroked his pointy little chin.
‘Seems to me that just about everybody's had you already.
But I take your point.
Winner takes all, and as I intend to be the winner, shooting you would be a bit of a waste.
Tell you what, I've got a far better idea.
One that's always popular.
Come on, this way.’
Jonathan gestured towards the lift door.
‘We're going up, aren't we, Barry?’
‘Chief, press that button there.
That one and be quick about it.’
‘Barry, you're giving the game away now.’
‘Chief, if you know what's good for you, press the damn button.’
‘This one?’
‘That one.’
Laura and Jonathan stood before the sixty-sixth floor lift door.
‘Press the call button, Laura.’
‘Where are we going?’
‘Where do you think?’
‘Down.’
Laura's voice had that doomed quality about it.
‘You got it.
Where is that lift?’
Ping went the little bell, the way some of them do.
The lift doors opened.
The lift was empty.
‘Barry, where are we?’
‘Sixty-fifth floor, chief.
And in the nick of time.’
‘Is it all right for you to say sixty-fifth floor?’
‘Do you see a sixty-fifth floor, chief?’
‘Not with my eyes closed I don't.’
‘There you go, then.’
‘Barry, this is just plain stupid.’
‘Should suit you fine, then.’
‘What's that, Barry?’
‘Nothing, chief.’
‘You lying git, I heard you that time.’
The lift passed the ground-floor level and made for the vault.
‘Down here,’ whispered Laura.
Ping went the little bell.
The lift doors opened.
‘In you go then.’
Laura hesitated.
Jonathan prodded her with his average-sized weapon.
‘Get moving.’
‘Jonathan, I don't think I —’
‘Please shut up and go on.
You know which way.’
‘I don't want to go in there again.’
‘But you must, my dear.
You really must.
Heroine trapped in the treasure cave, time ticking away until the Big Bang; can the hero reach her in time?
If that's not a classic scenario, then I don't know what is.’
They moved amidst the massive paintings.
The portraits of Presley, clad in the regal fineries of ancient times.
The gilded icons, busts and figurines.
The images of the false messiah.
They approached the blank stone wall.
‘No, Jonathan, please.’
The bad boy tinkered at his wrist.
The wall dissolved  to reveal the chamber containing the juke-box sarcophagus.
‘In.’
‘No, please.’
‘Get in.’
Jonathan thrust her forwards.
And then she felt it again.
That terrible loneliness.
That fear.
The sorrow.
Jonathan's laughter rang in Laura's ears in the traditional manner as the wall closed upon her.
‘We missed the lift,’ said Rex.
‘Never mind, we'll catch it when it comes up again.’
‘All right,’ said Kevin.
‘All right.
There's five of us.
Three look like Tom Cruise and the other two like Julia Roberts.’
‘I look much more like her than Sharon does.’
‘Oh no you don't.’
‘Ladies, please.
We are supposed to be revolutionaries, fighting for a sacred cause.
Followers of BAH-REAH the All-Knower.
We have to rescue our high priestess Laura and overthrow the system.
We can't carry on in this bloody silly fashion.’
‘I don't know about you lot,’ said Jason.
‘But I think Kevin looks just like Danny De Vito.’
Officer Cecil finally switched on the siren.
‘Happy now?’ he asked in a petulant manner.
‘Overtake those trucks, then,’ ordered Sam.
‘With the greatest of pleasure.’
Cecil swerved past the MTWTV catering truck.
Inside Balberith was on the car phone.
‘And I've always wanted to do a kiddies’ series like Sesame Street,’he was saying ‘but of course I'd want to eat a couple of the little bastards afterwards, if that would be OK with you.’
‘Can't see any problem there, fella,’ the MTWTV  station head put his hand over the mouthpiece; ‘get your foot down,’he told the driver, ‘lose this maniac.’
The Anti-Rex strode along a corridor of floor sixty-five.
The Robocop super-gun swinging to left and right.
He turned a corner and stopped in no small surprise.
Coming in his direction was a man in a trenchcoat and fedora.
A man who should surely have been blown to pieces in the alleyway behind the Tomorrowman Tavern.
He was feeling his way along a wall with one hand and carrying a sprout in the other.
A very familiar-looking sprout.
‘Rex,’ said Barry.
‘Hi there.’
Ping went the lift bell at ground-floor level.
‘Bother,’ said Jonathan.
The lift doors opened.
Jonathan looked out.
Rex Mundi looked in.
‘Oh!’ said he.
‘Oh indeed.’
Jonathan aimed his gun at Rex.
‘What the Hell is that ugly-looking sucker sticking out of your jacket?’
‘Barry,’ said the Anti-Rex.
‘I thought you were still —’
‘In the bucket, chief?
Nah, I got fed up with that.’
‘So you've got your awesome powers back then?’
A cruel smile appeared on the stinker's lips.
‘Can I open my eyes, Barry?
It's Rex, isn't it?’
‘Shut your rap, ass-wipe.’
‘That's not very nice, chief.
What's got into you?
And where did you get that gun?
That's the one out of Robocop, isn't it?’
‘Toss Barry over to me, slimeball.
And keep your eyes shut.’
‘I don't know that I wish to be tossed anywhere as it happens.
What's got into you Rex, you're not yourself at all.’
‘I think you might just have something there, Barry.’
‘You're a bit early, Rex.’
Jonathan beckoned with his gun.
‘I wasn't expecting you for another hour or so.
But as you're here, you might as well stay where I can keep an eye on you.
Come on, and quietly now.’
Rex came quietly.
‘Floor sixty-six please, press the button please.’
Rex pressed the button.
The doors closed and the lift rose.
‘What's with the freak?’
Jonathan waggled his gun at Harpo/Chico.
‘Starting up your own circus?’
‘I don't like this big boy,’ blubbered Harpo.
‘Turn him into a bunny rabbit.’
‘Not yet, bruv.’
‘How does it do that?
It's too young to talk.’
‘How's the big game going, Jonathan?
Anyone getting close to winning it yet?’
Rex leaned over to the lad in a chummy sort of fashion.
‘Back off please,’ Jonathan raised his gun.
‘And what exactly do you know about the game?’
‘Just about enough to win it.’
‘Oh, I do hope so, Rex, I really really do.’
–Now!’ shouted the Anti-Rex, cocking his great big pistol.
‘Toss Barry over.’
‘What should I do, Barry?’
‘I think I shall have to check this out.
I know I shouldn't, but I'm just going to pop forwards half an hour and see what's going to be going on.
If you catch my drift, and I'm sure that you do.’
‘No, Barry, wait.
Take me with you.’
‘Hold him or you're dead!’
‘I'm trying.’
But it was all too late.
Barry was gone.
Laz had an empty hand and the Anti-Rex had a loaded pistol.
‘Oh dear,’ said he.
‘Oh dear, oh dear.
Seems like you're dead, then.’
‘OK OK,’ cried Kevin.
‘We're freedom fighters and as such we're all free to look like whoever we want.
Now, can we go and rescue Laura?’
The Tom Cruises and the Julia Roberts lookalikes nodded their beautiful heads.
One of the twins (I think it was Alison) said ‘There's an MTWTV truck belting up behind us and a load of police cars.
Can't we go any faster?’
‘Spin the gun turret around and take a pop at them, will you, Tom.’
Reg and Jason hastened to oblige.
In the lift Jonathan suddenly said, ‘Oh golly.
In all the excitement I've let the Repo Men go off-line.’
He tapped furiously at his wrist.
‘It's all the fault of that Laura.’
‘How is Laura?’
Rex did another chummy lean-forward job.
Only this time he kneed Jonathan in the groin and tore the gun from his hand.
‘Nice one,’ said Harpo.
‘Do you want to open your eyes before I shoot you?’ the Anti-Rex asked.
‘I'd prefer not, thank you.
Barry might well be back any second to get me out of this.’
‘Mr Woodbarf, nothing is going to get you out of this.’
The evil one stuck the barrel of his super-gun into Laz's left ear.
‘Any last words?’
‘Pardon?’
‘I said, any last words!’
‘No need to shout.’
‘Well?’
‘BARRY, HELP!!!’
‘Nice try.’
Cock and click went the super-gun.
Rumble  rumble, shout and holla, came the sudden commotion in the corridor.
So many big Repo Men and so many holy water-pistols all at once.
‘Oh bollocks,’ muttered the Anti-Rex, ‘Dee and Kelley, where are you?’
‘Talked all night,’ said Johnny Dee to blackened Bill.
‘Waffle waffle waffle.
All kinds of plots and plans and evil schemes.
All crap, if you ask me.
Ed and I had to go along with it, of course.
We were supposed to blow our way into the basement of the Butcher Building.
The Presley hoard is in there, you see.’
‘Oh, that's where it is.
I was taking Rex there when I got blown up.
Found my cab out back of the Tomorrowman.
Frankly, I'm quite upset about the whole thing.’
‘You look upset,’ said Johnny.
‘Where is Laura?’
Rex inquired.
Jonathan clutched at himself.
‘Where you'll never find her,’ he mumbled.
‘Jonathan, surely you've noticed.
Half the plot of this book appears to revolve around people holding guns on other people.
Now, at this moment, as you can see, I'm holding the gun on you.
Tell me where Laura is, or I will have no hesitation in shooting you.’
‘Floor sixty-five,’ said Jonathan, with no hesitation of his own.
Rex pressed the button.
‘You'd better not be lying.’
The youthful blackguard crossed his black heart.
‘as if I'd dare.’
‘Just sign here.’
The MTWTV station head passed Mojo the fountain pen.
‘The truck's swerving around a lot.
What's going on out there?’
‘Nothing to worry about.
Steady yourself on the table.
Here you go.’
Shell-fire suddenly tore into the roof of the mobile boardroom.
‘Shit,’ said Mojo.
‘Sign,’ said the station head.
‘Well, I'm not too sure.
What do you think, Debbie?’
‘Hello!’ shouted Balberith into the car phone.
‘Anybody there?’
For those who like a time check once in a while, it was now 9.30 hours to go and still counting down.
Laura hugged her arms.
The room was impossibly cold.
The sarcophagus lay before her.
Within it the body of Elvis.
The false God.
The reason behind it all.
Behind everything she loathed and despised.
But something more.
Laura was shaking.
She found genuine fear in this tiny room.
Beyond the walls life was unreal.
It had been made to become unreal.
But in here there was some kind of crazy reality.
The reality of death perhaps?
The inevitability of age and ruination?
The very pointlessness of if all?
Laura placed her trembling hands upon the coffin's lid.
‘Elvis,’ she said.
‘What are you?’
Ping went that little bell again.
This time at floor sixty-five.
The lift doors opened.
It was an interesting tableau.
Lazlo Woodbine with his hands over his face.
The Anti-Rex with his hands in the air.
And a whole lot of Repo Men.
Those who weren't training water pistols on the other Rex, swung other weapons in the direction of the real thing.
‘I'll take my gun back now, if you don't mind.’
Rex handed it over.
‘I've never liked you, Jonathan,’ said Rex.
Jonathan smiled and then kicked Rex between the legs.
‘Nor me, you, as it happens.’
‘Drive us into the car park.’
Jason rattled away at the gun turret.
‘How many police cars can you see?’
Kevin asked.
Jason counted as best he could.
‘About a dozen.
And some MTWTV trucks.
We'll all be on television tonight.
Must make sure we get home in time to watch it.’
‘How much ammunition do we have left?’
‘Not much.
But we've got plenty of sweets.’
‘And we have each other,’ said Alison.
‘Do what?’
‘Kevin,’ cooed Alison.
‘Don't you think it's about time for a love scene?
Something steamy, you know.’
‘What, you and me?
Not half.’
‘No.
I was thinking about me and Reg.
No-one ever does a steamy love scene with Danny De Vito.’
‘I don't look like Danny De Vito.
Stop sniggering, Reg, or I'll give you a smack in the mouth.’
‘Well, well, well, well, well,’ crowed Jonathan.
‘The gang's all here.’
‘You!!!’
The Anti-Rex threw up his hands.
‘Crawford.
You filthy stinking —’ Several Repo Men took the opportunity to club him to his knees.
‘Told you you were in for a nasty surprise,’ Rex smirked awfully.
The bruised genitals were almost worth it just to see the look on his enemy's face.
‘And You!
I thought you and this moron with the shut eyes were dead.’
‘Hi, Rex,’ said Lazlo, not opening up for one little peep.
‘Guess we walked into some deep shit here, eh?’
‘Hi, Laz.
Say hello to Lazlo, Harpo/Chico.’
‘The man is a prat,’ said Chico.
‘Language,’ said Harpo.
‘I'll tell mum if you talk dirty.’
‘What an ugly little sucker,’ said the Anti-Rex.
‘I don't think there's room in the lift for all you old pals,’ Jonathan smiled hideously, ‘we'd best go up other ways.’
He tinkered once more at his wrist.
The ceiling spread.
The sixty-fifth floor rose and soon they were all on the sixty-sixth.
‘We're not on the roof, by any chance?’
Laz asked.
Things were relatively quiet down in the car park.
The big military vehicle was quiet.
Two dozen police cars were quiet.
Four of the MTWTV trucks, which were assembled, were quiet.
The fifth was a bit noisy, though.
‘Hello?’ shouted Balberith.
‘Someone answer me or I'm gonna lose my rag.’
Jonathan took a little peep at his watch.
‘Nine hours and twenty minutes to detonation.’
‘Rex,’ Laz whispered through his fingers, ‘are we on the roof yet?’
‘Are you back in the first person?’
‘I guess not.
So where are we?’
Jonathan spoke.
‘You are at the very centre of operations, Mr Woodbrain.’
‘Woodbine, fella, the name's Lazlo Woodbine, some call me —’
‘I don't really give a toss what they call you.’
Jonathan swaggered to and fro before his private army.
The Repo Men aimed their weapons at Rex, Laz, Harpo/Chico and Rex's dirty double.
They had plenty of choice really.
‘So,’ said the swaggering one.
‘What are we all going to do now?’
‘My brother could turn you into a bunny,’ Harpo suggested.
‘Rex, kindly keep your pet quiet.’
‘What is all this for?’
The Anti-Rex indicated Jonathan's improbable electronic set-up.
‘All this?’
The lad's smile passed over his creation.
‘You'd really like to know all about it, eh?’
‘Before I tear your heart out of your chest and ram it down your throat, yes.’
‘Don't you just wish!
OK, why not.
I can edit it out later.’
‘Where is Laura?’
Rex demanded.
‘Where is Elvis?’
‘One thing at a time, please.
All that you behold is for the most part, simply broadcasting equipment.
Although of a somewhat specialized nature, with certain modifications.
But you'll find out all about them later.
I propose to broadcast on a world-wide scale, a message to the good folk of this fair planet.’
Harpo looked at Chico.
Chico looked at Harpo.
‘Everybody wants to get into the act,’ Chico said.
‘What message?’ the Anti-Rex asked.
‘That Elvis is dead.’
‘Dead?’
The Anti-Rex sprang forward.
Water-pistols rose up to meet him.
Rifle butts clubbed him down.
‘I love it when they do that,’ said Rex Mundi.
‘What do you mean, dead?’
The Anti-Rex rose, none the worst for wear.
‘I thought you'd be glad to hear it.’
‘You killed him?
You?’
‘Not me.’
The black heart was crossed once more.
‘He killed himself.’
‘He did what?’
It was a bit of a chorus really, even some of the Repo Men joined in.
‘He committed suicide, 16 August 1977.
Not a lot of people know that,’ he continued, dropping unexpectedly into his Michael Caine persona.
‘You lying git,’ said the Anti-Rex.
‘Oh, but he did, you know.
That is partly what all this is about.
He came here to me.
To the House of Light.
You can read it in the scripture.
The Suburban Book of the Dead.
It tells you all the mistakes he made, before he finally saw the light.
My light.
I formulated the suicide pill for him.
No-one back in 1977 suspected suicide.’
‘But why?’
Rex asked.
‘Why would he want to kill himself?’
‘You have to ask me that?
You've read his little bible.
Seen the Presley hoard.
You know how he screwed up.
It was guilt that made him do it.
Guilt for how he'd screwed everything up.
He changed history, he tried to make it right.
It ended with all this, Presley City.
Him being worshipped as a god.
So he had no choice.
The only way he could make amends was to go back and kill himself.’
‘Ah,’ said Rex thoughtfully.
‘I see.
What you're saying is that by committing suicide in 1977, none of this could occur.’
‘Exactly.’
Jonathan made a smug face.
‘Er?’
Puzzled head-scratching suddenly became all the rage.
‘Is it just me?’
Laz asked.
‘Or is there a rather obvious flaw in the little punk's reasoning?’
‘Bunny the big boy,’ said Harpo.
‘I think he just bunnied himself, bruv.’
‘Shut up!
The lot of you!’
Jonathan had a bit of a rant.
‘Elvis is dead.
That's all you have to know.
And in a little over nine hours you'll all be dead too.
This city will be gone, nothing but blackened rubble.
And do you know why?’
The puzzled head-scratching continued in some quarters, but helpless shrugging had now become the latest craze.
That and head shaking.
It was all a matter of taste, really.
‘Interesting that, isn't it?
We all know that it happens, but none of us know how or why.
Rex, pardon me, but you don't seem to be shrugging helplessly or shaking your head.
In fact, correct me if I'm wrong, but you're nodding, aren't you?’
‘I certainly am.’
‘And why might that be?’
‘Because,’ said Rex Mundi.
‘I've just figured it all out.’
‘Right,’ said Kevin.
‘Plan, anyone?’
‘Uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh,’ went Reg and Alison steamily.
‘You're proving a real disappointment to me, Reg.’
‘Couldn't care less,’ Reg drew breath.
‘When did you ever get to give Julia Roberts one?’
Kevin bit his lip and shook his head.
‘Jason, do you have a plan?’
‘Uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh,’ went Jason and Sharon with much gusto.
‘Aw, come on, gang.
We've come all this way.
We have to do something.’
‘But we are, Danny,’ said Jason, Sharon, Reg and Alison.
‘We are.’
Balberith munched upon the main chancer.
‘Sorry,’ said he, ‘I lost my rag.
That's showbiz!’
The MTWTV station head said.
‘OK, the shooting's stopped and we're all parked up outside the Butcher Building.
Mojo, have you signed the contract?’
‘The pen's run out.’
Mojo shook the thing fiercely, spraying ink over the station head.
‘Sorry.’
‘Just sign the contract.
The cameras are ready to roll.’
‘Er, if I might just interject,’ Mojo's agent removed the pen from his client's hand and screwed back the top, ‘I have certain reservations regarding several of the clauses.’
The bespattered station head rolled his eyes.
‘Oh, you do, do you?’
‘If we might just look at clauses 3–8, 17–19, 28–29, 56–58, 103–105, 130–134…’
The station head lit another cigar.
‘I'm going to tell him.’
Bill drummed his charcoal stumps on the steering wheel.
‘Tell who?’
Johnny Dee shifted uncomfortably.
‘His excellency.
I'm going to tell him.’
‘Tell him what?’
The devastated cab rattled and groaned.
Sparks flew from the wheel rims.
Bits dropped off and clattered into the street.
‘Tell him I quit.’
‘You can't do that.’
‘I can.
I've been giving the matter a lot of thought.
I really quite liked being a cabby.
Got me out and about.
Met interesting people.
If you run your own cab, you're your own man, you can choose your own hours, plan your holidays.
It's a smart job.’
‘Bill, you're a demon from Hell.
And a burnt-out one at that.’
‘I had this revelation.
Would you like me to tell you about it?’
‘Not really.’
‘You see,’ Bill continued.
‘It's like this…’
‘Officer Cecil.’
‘Yes, sir?’
‘Officer Cecil.
We now have what is called a ‘containment situation’.
The terrorists are surrounded.
We have them ‘in the net’.’
‘In theory, sir.’
‘In practice, officer.’
‘Do you think they know that, sir?’
‘Officer Cecil, I want you to immobilize their vehicle.’
Officer Cecil fell about in mirth.
‘Yes, I bet you do.’
Sam ignored him.
‘Get out of this car.
Creep over to them and blow the tracks off their battle wagon with your over-sized weapon.’
Officer Cecil studied the face of Sam Maggott.
It was a big fat sweaty face.
The face of a police chief who was having a ‘tough one’.
It was unshaven.
The mouth of the  face had bad breath.
The eyes were red-rimmed.
There was a bogey up the left nostril.
‘You want I should creep over to that great armoured tank of a thing risking life and limb, and casually blow off its frigging tracks.
Is that what you're saying, sir?’
‘That's right.’
‘OK then.’
Officer Cecil saluted his superior.
Climbed from the police car and marched away.
But not in the direction of the terrorist vehicle.
In quite the opposite, in fact.
‘Officer Cecil, come back or I'll put you on a charge.’
‘Go stuff yourself.’
Officer Cecil raised two departing fingers.
‘I'm going for a beer.’
‘Spit it out, Rex,’ Jonathan advised.
‘Tell us what you know.’
Rex smiled.
‘Well, for a start, I know this.
Presley City, all of it, is some kind of big computer game.
And it doesn't take the brain of Einstein to figure out that you're behind it.’
‘I never thought much of Einstein.
He was a Phnaarg.
But is that it, is that what you think you know?’
‘I know you're stuck.’
‘What do you mean?’
The lad made a brave face.
It didn't look all that brave.
‘Stuck?
Me?’
‘The game ends in just over nine hours.
What happens to you after that?’
‘Well…
I…’
‘Go back and start again.
Is that it?
Is that what you have to do each time, if nobody wins?
How long do you get, each time?’
‘What is all this shit?’
The Anti-Rex made furious fists.
‘What game are you talking about?’
‘Ask the boy-genius.’
‘It's rubbish.
All rubbish.’
‘I don't think so.
It all stems from here, from you.
The Department of Human Resources, the Repo Men  monitoring information, maintaining order in a city that isn't really a city.
You're stuck here, Crawford.
You can't get out until the game is won.
And you don't know how to win it yourself.
That's why we're here.’
‘Rubbish.’
Jonathan had a fair old sweat going.
‘No, it ain't.’
Lazlo Woodbine opened his eyes.
‘Well, that's you out of it.’
Jonathan sneered.
‘You only had the four sets.
You just lost.’
Rex turned to the man in the trenchcoat.
‘What is all this?’
‘I hate this stinking city,’ Laz stared bitterly at Jonathan, ‘but I never realized why until right this minute.
It's a game all right.
A big game and I've been here and played in it before.
The Tempus Fugitives.
My case.
The only case I ever get.
Time after time after time.
I remember now.
I've done this again and again.’
‘And you always cock it up,’ Jonathan managed another sneer.
‘You never amounted to much anyway.
A bit of nostalgia for the old folks.’
‘And me?’
Rex asked.
Jonathan shrugged.
‘You're supposed to be the hero, aren't you?
So you'd better do some heroing.
You've got nine hours left to win the game.
Because, if you don't…’ the boy's eyes narrowed.
‘You'll be in this again and again.
Just like me.
And I'll make sure you know it.
I always wipe the detective's memory.
But I won't wipe yours.
Now you're in it, you'll stay in it.
So you'd best win it now, eh?’
‘Boo and hiss ,’ said Harpo.
‘This big boy is a rotter.’
‘How is it won?’
‘You've got to get the gold, Rex.’
Jonathan danced a manic little dance.
‘You have to get the treasure and neutralize the bomb.
Then you win.’
‘Where is the treasure?’
‘It's in the vault under this building,’ sighed the Anti-Rex.
‘Hero?
You have to be joking.’
‘So where's the bomb?’
Rex turned back to the little blighter.
Jonathan threw up his hands.
‘I don't know!
If I knew where it was, do you think I'd get blown up time after time.’
Rex turned to his loathsome double.
‘Where is the bomb?’
His other self glared back at him.
‘Not my bomb,’ he replied.
‘I don't know.’
‘So what are you planning to do?’
Rex gave Jonathan another glance.
‘To you, nothing.
You want to live.
So, find the treasure, stop the bomb and win the game.’
Rex laughed.
‘But then you win, don't you?
You are free.
And you sell the game to —’ he pointed skyward ‘— and go on running the show.
In your own sweet fashion.
Thinking up new scenarios, and in complete control.’
‘Sounds OK to me,’ said Jonathan, preening generally.
‘But not to me!’
The Anti-Rex made mighty fists.
‘I'm going to run this planet, you little shit.’
‘Don't be so silly.’
Jonathan fluttered his hands in the air.
‘You're no threat to me.
But I do so like having you in the game.
Comic relief, you know.
But enough of all this chit-chat.
Time is against us.
And you must be getting on with your exciting adventures.
So I shall say ta-ta for now.’
There was a grinding of gears and a meshing of cogs and a steel wall plunged down, effectively separating Rex, Harpo/Chico, Laz and the Anti-Rex from the boy in the control room and his private army.
‘Best get to it,’ came Jonathan's closing comments.
‘Nine hours left.
Every man for himself.’