

5
They met at the Bab es Zuweyla, one of the old gates of Cairo, now the centre of the native city.
As they approached the gate the street narrowed and became more mediaeval.
The houses with their heavy wooden windows leaned over the street until they almost touched in the middle, making it always cool and dark.
At ground level the street was lined with traditional little native shops, most of them carpenters, it seemed; and as they came through the Tentmakers' Bazaar, with its gay awnings and saddle-cloth and leather work, they saw ahead of them in the archway of the gate the gleam of the blue tiles of the tiny Dervish mosque.
Most of the bazaars were on the other side of the gate.
There were nine main ones; the Silk Bazaar, the Cotton Bazaar, the Tunisian and Algerian Bazaar, the Silversmiths' and Goldsmiths' Bazaar, the Sudanese Bazaar, the Brass Bazaar, the Shoemakers' Bazaar, the Turkish Bazaar, and the Scentmakers' Bazaar.
The Scentmakers' Bazaar, which was where Mahmoud was taking them, was one of the oldest and most traditional of the bazaars.
The shops were mere cupboards, little dark recesses, six feet high, six deep and four wide, lined with shelves, in front of which was a long, low counter on which the owner sat, like some carved idol in a niche.
Beside him on the counter were large dirty bottles of gilt glass from which he would take out the stoppers and daub them on the sleeves of passers-by.
On his other side was an array of cheap, gaudy small bottles for the scent he sold; and on the floor in front of him were ivory balls with cavities for scent.
Behind him, on the shelves of his dark recess, were large brown bottles criss-crossed with gold and rows of foolish otto-of-roses bottles, cut and gilt, but with hardly more inside than a thermometer.
Sometimes, too, there was an  assistant, a boy for fetching the bottles, a woman for modelling the perfume, but always, in this most traditional of bazaars, totally concealed in shapeless black.
Mahmoud, hesitantly, had asked Owen if Zeinab could possibly come too.
Owen had put it to her and, slightly to his surprise, she had agreed.
The Scentmakers' Bazaar was not normally a place she would have allowed herself to have been seen dead in.
Like many well-to-do Cairenes, she took her perfumes, with her fashions, direct from Paris.
However, on this occasion she was intrigued and agreed readily enough.
As soon as they began to walk along the shops Owen was very glad that she had come.
She addressed herself to the task with her usual imperiousness and dragged Owen and Mahmoud along in her wake.
She entered into technical discussions with the shopkeepers in a way totally beyond the capacity of Owen and Mahmoud, explaining that while she normally wore only French perfume, she was considering experimenting with a combination of French and Arab scents: ‘une vraie Cairéenne, n'est ce pas?’
She treated coldly all attempts to dab the scent on her own sleeve, rejected any suggestion that it could suitably be tried out on Owen and Mahmoud, and insisted that it be tested on a woman, an assistant, perhaps, or, preferably, the shopkeeper's wife, a suggestion which, with its hint of superiority, would have had shopkeepers in the more Westernized parts of the city grovelling but was treated simply commercially in the bazaar.
There were three Coptic scentmakers in the bazaar.
One was an elderly, rather exhausted man who was unable to produce either assistant or wife and had to borrow a lady from his neighbour for the purpose.
One was a middle-aged man, rather corpulent, who sent a message into the depths behind his recess which finally produced an abashed female servant: and one was a spare man in young middle age who had his wife helping him in the shop.
She was used to helping with such requests and come forward at once when asked.
Zeinab spent a lot of time with this shopkeeper.
Several of his perfumes seemed promising and in the end she took away samples in three small bottles and promised that she would return when she had tried them out.
She asked the shopkeeper's name so that she would know to whom to send her servant.
It was Zoser.
Zoser served her politely but with an air of detachment, as if his mind was on higher things.
There was an ascetic quality about him.
He gave the impression that he had come straight from fasting; and there was a mild hint of irritation at his fast being interrupted.
At the last moment Zeinab dithered.
She wanted to try just once again a perfume she had already rejected.
When Zoser dabbed a little on his wife's sleeve she took the sleeve and held it up to her nose.
The wife obligingly lifted her arm and for the first time there was a flash of something pale, as if to show that there really was flesh and blood beneath the shapeless black garment.
‘No,’ said Zeinab, ‘no, I think I was right after all.
I'll just take these.’
They continued on along the line of booths, each with its owner sitting on the counter among his stained, dirty jars like some vast black spider, past the long, carpet-covered benches in front of them with the rows of men drinking coffee and smoking and talking, past the assorted smells of rose and  jasmine , amber and banana, past the odd little restaurants with their grand brass jugs of hot water, their servants hurrying with coffee in glasses to some merchant about to strike a deal, past all this and then suddenly through the arch of the Bab es Zuweyla with its two soaring and fantastic minarets and out once more into the Tentmakers' Bazaar with its donkey-saddles of red brocade and its camel-trappings adorned with cowries and little bits of looking-glass, its gaily-striped awnings and brilliant tent linings.
With its crowds, too.
Owen loved the bustle of the bazaars, of the whole native city, in fact; but after you had spent some time in them, especially when it was as hot as  this, you felt an overwhelming need for space and air, and after forcing their way through the blocked thoroughfares of the Tentmakers' Bazaar they were glad to emerge into the more open streets.
Mahmoud summoned an arabeah, one of the two-horse kind, and they sank into it gratefully.
Zeinab agreed that she would like a coffee and Mahmoud wanted to talk about what they had seen, so they stopped the arabeah when they reached the Ismailiya Quarter with its more Westernized restaurants into which women could go, and got out.
It was late in the afternoon, almost evening by now, and the restaurants were beginning to fill up as people emerged from their siestas and began to promenade the streets.
The shops took on a new lease of life, the street-sellers, with their lemonade and nougat, ostrich feathers, mummy-beads and scarabs, carnations and roses, and the street-artists, with their boa-constrictors and baboons, took new heart, and the city in general resumed its normal manic rhythm.
They found a restaurant in a side street, where they would be pestered less, and took an outside table.
‘Of the three, he's the most likely,’ said Mahmoud.
‘Yes, but how certain are you that it's one of the three?
How certain are you in the first place that it's a scentmaker?’
‘Not at all,’ Mahmoud confessed.
‘I mean, it's a brilliant deduction,’ said Owen, ‘but it's just a deduction.’
‘Just a deduction?’ said Mahmoud, a little sharply.
‘There isn't any real evidence.’
‘There is real evidence but not much of it.
So you've got to use what there is.
Hence deduction.’
Owen was silent.
He was tempted to ask if Mahmoud had learned that in college.
Mahmoud, unlike Owen, had been trained for the job he was doing and sometimes reminded Owen of the fact.
Owen did not like being reminded that he was, so far as police work was concerned, an amateur.
‘Is there any corroborative evidence?’ he asked.
He rather distrusted Gallic logic.
Brilliant, yes, but was it sound?
The Parquet lawyers, French-trained and  French in style, had a name — among the English — for unreliability.
Sometimes they homed in on the right conclusion with remarkable speed; sometimes they missed the point altogether.
‘A bit,’ said Mahmoud.
‘Three other people noticed the woman.
One of them remarked on the scent.’
‘Did they see her with the man?’
‘Two of them did, including one who noticed the scent.’
‘Anyone get a good look at him?’
‘No.
None of them would be able to identify him.
Except as a Copt, that is.
They'd all noticed that.’
‘They would!’
‘Yes.
You'd prefer it not to be a Copt, wouldn't you?’
‘Just at the moment I would.’
‘It's rather pointing that way, though.’
‘What else have you found out?’
‘Nothing to link Zoser directly with the Zikr.
One person thinks he saw him there.
That was earlier in the evening, though.’
‘Have you checked whether he was in his shop?’
‘Yes.
He wasn't.’
‘Have you asked him why?’
‘Haven't asked him anything yet.
I was hoping for a positive identification.
I don't suppose —?’
Owen shook his head.
‘No,’ he said, ‘I didn't see him.’
Mahmoud sighed.
‘I was afraid of that,’ he said.
‘That leaves us with Miss Postlethwaite.’
‘That girl!’ said Zeinab.
‘Yes.
You see,’ said Mahmoud, turning to her, ‘she was the only one who really saw them.’
‘Notices everything, doesn't she?’
‘Yes,’ said Mahmoud enthusiastically.
‘She's an extraordinarily good observer.’
Something must have told him that he'd not said quite the right thing, for he looked at Zeinab uneasily afterwards.
Mahmoud stood a little in awe of Zeinab.
It was partly her  social position, partly her father, the formidable Nuri Pasha.
Mahmoud detested everything that Nuri stood for: the old, near-feudal Egypt, with its hereditary great landlords, of whom Nuri was one; court-based politics, in which Nuri was adept; the power of the old order to block and frustrate all attempts at reform.
But although he looked down on Nuri he also looked up at him, and because of that Nuri had a unique ability to touch Mahmoud on the raw.
Something of all that had rubbed off on Zeinab, although Zeinab was Nuri's daughter only by a slave girl, a well-known courtesan, who had had mind enough of her own to refuse to join Nuri's harem.
That was another thing which made Mahmoud uneasy, for modern and emancipated though he was, he could not completely shake off the attitudes and sexual constraints of the old, Islamic society.
He even felt slightly awkward sitting out with her in a public place having coffee.
Zeinab added to his unease by opening her handbag, taking out the three small bottles of perfume and dropping them deliberately on the floor.
She summoned a waiter to clear them away.
‘Presumably you've done some background checking?’ said Owen.
Mahmoud turned back to him with relief.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘I had my people check out the three scentmakers.
One of them, the first one we saw, I think we can rule out straight away.
He's not very strong physically, suffers from some sort of debilitating illness, hardly ever goes out.
The fat one doesn't go out much either but in principle we can't rule him out.
The third one could do it physically and gets out far more.
He's very active in his local church, attends services there at all hours, mortifies himself, fasts, that sort of thing.’
‘A zealot?’
‘Devout.’
Like Nikos, Mahmoud did not wish to be pushed into too firm religious characterization.
‘Politically active?’
Owen pressed.
‘Not so far as I am aware.’
‘I'm looking for motive.’
‘That's the problem.
I can't find one.
That applies to them all.
As far as I can tell, they have all three led blameless lives, had no criminal connection, kept themselves to themselves and as separate from Moslems as they could, and had no occasion to even meet a Zikr, let alone enter into a relationship with one which might lead them to want to kill him.
They, and Zoser particularly, don't seem to have had much personal life at all.’
‘They sound very dull,’ said Zeinab.
‘What church does he go to?’ asked Owen.
‘Zoser, I mean.
You said he went to a local church.’
‘The Mar Girgis — Church of St George.’
‘By the Tunisian Bazaar?’
‘Yes.
You know it?’
‘I know someone who goes to it,’ said Owen.
Mahmoud shrugged.
‘Nothing special about it.
Very Orthodox, a bit fundamentalist.
Zoser's quite well known there.
He's not one of the elders, he's not rich enough for that, or educated enough.
He's just there at all the services.’
‘With his wife?’
‘With his wife.’
He looked at Owen.
‘I was wondering —’ he said tentatively.
‘Yes?’ said Owen.
‘What were you wondering?’ asked Zeinab.
‘If you would like to go to church next Sunday,’ Mahmoud said, looking at Owen, ‘with Miss Postlethwaite.’
‘Why her?’ asked Zeinab.
‘She's the only one who could make a positive identification,’ Mahmoud explained.
‘She's important.’
‘I can see that,’ said Zeinab.
‘It would be difficult in a church,’ said Owen.
‘The women are kept separate from the men.’
‘She could see him, though he wouldn't be able to see her, That might be an advantage.’
‘Why do you have to go?’
Zeinab asked Owen.
‘She would have to be escorted,’ said Mahmoud.
‘Couldn't you do that?’
No, Mahmoud couldn't.
He knew that and so did she.
It would have to be a white man, an Englishman preferably.
Zeinab knew that perfectly well.
She was just trying to be awkward.
And she was succeeding as far as Mahmoud was concerned.
He flushed and his face went a little stiff.
‘I am afraid it would have to be Captain Owen,’ he said.
‘Very well,’ said Owen.
‘I'll ask her.’
Zeinab rose from the table in a fury and flounced out.
‘What have I done?’ asked Mahmoud, bewildered and uncomfortable.
‘It's nothing,’ said Owen, wondering whether he should follow her.
It looked a bit silly if you followed a woman around like a lap-dog.
On the other hand there would be trouble tonight if he didn't.
He decided to strike a balance.
He stayed at the table talking with Mahmoud for another moment or two and then went out into the street.
Zeinab was nowhere to be seen.
From the far end of the corridor came the sound of angry dispute.
After a while Owen could stand it no longer and went along.
‘What the hell's going on?’
Outside the door, where the orderlies sat on the ground in a row, their backs to the wall, a woman was berating the coffee orderly, Yussuf.
When she saw Owen she stopped, abashed.
Yussuf gave her a great push.
‘Away with you, woman!’ he shouted furiously.
‘You bring me shame.’
The woman fired up again.
‘Yours is the shame,’ she said.
‘Yours was the shame already.’
Yussuf tried to urge her away but she resisted his efforts.
‘You bring shame on your family,’ she called out, so that everyone could hear.
Heads began popping out of windows.
The other orderlies watched with delight.
Yussuf caught hold of her and propelled her towards the  gate.
At the last moment she twisted away from him and ran back towards the orderlies.
Yussuf bore down on her in a fury.
Afraid that he was going to hit her, Owen intervened.
‘Enough of this!’ he snapped.
‘Be quiet, woman!’
The woman fell silent, though she kept darting angry glances at Yussuf.
‘Who is this woman?’
Owen asked Yussuf.
‘Your wife?’
‘My sister, effendi.’
Owen remembered the boy in the Coptic Place of the Dead.
‘I have met your son, I think.’
The woman looked startled, then pleased.
Then worried.
‘He is a good boy, effendi,’ she said hastily.
‘He runs a little wild but there is no harm in him.’
‘He is clever beyond his years.’
The woman looked even more worried.
‘But he means no harm, effendi,’ she insisted.
‘He is a good boy,’ said Owen reassuringly.
He turned to Yussuf, associating him with family merit.
‘And you have a good nephew, Yussuf.
You must come and speak to me about him when he is older.’
The remark, with its suggestion of possible patronage at his command, soothed Yussuf's ruffled pride.
It also impressed his sister, who quietened down and looked at him with new respect.
‘What is all this about?’
Owen addressed himself to Yussuf.
When Yussuf made no reply, Owen turned to his sister.
‘What has brought you here?’
‘I wanted him to speak to his wife,’ she said in a low voice.
‘Indeed?
And what about?’
‘He has put her away.
And now he expects me to clean and cook for him.’
‘Our mother is dead,’ said Yussuf, ‘and I have no woman in my house.’
‘I have my own to look after,’ she protested.
‘That is true,’ said Owen.
‘She has her own to look after.
Cannot you pay a woman to come in?’
‘Why should I pay,’ asked Yussuf, ‘when I have a sister?’
‘Why should your sister work for you,’ the woman retorted, ‘when you have a wife?’
‘I have no wife.’
‘You had one last week.’
‘But I haven't one now!’
Yussuf roared.
‘What was the difference between you?’
Owen asked.
Yussuf did not reply.
‘Nothing worth losing a wife over,’ his sister said.
Yussuf turned on her in a fury.
‘You be quiet, woman!’ he shouted.
‘What do you know about it?’
‘I know what all the world knows,’ his sister maintained stoutly, ‘and that is that Fatima has always been a true wife to you.’
Owen was rather relieved to hear this.
If she had been unfaithful it would have been tricky to intervene.
‘Is her fault so bad that it cannot be overlooked?’ he asked.
‘No doubt she already repents.’
‘You might not be so lucky next time,’ Yussuf's sister observed.
Yussuf glared at her.
‘He won't find it so easy to get another wife,’ she said to Owen.
‘They all know what he is like.’
Yussuf boiled over.
‘I?’ he shouted dramatically.
‘I?
What about her?
Is she not to blame?
I have given her house, clothes, a good bed.
I do not beat her.
Much.
I give her money —’
‘No, you don't,’ his sister said.
‘That is why she is always on to you.’
Yussuf raised his hand threateningly.
His sister, a woman of spirit, squared up to him.
One of the orderlies, in defiance of the Prophet, began to lay bets.
Owen stepped in.
‘Be off with you!’ he said to the woman sternly.
‘Take this up at another time.’
He ushered her firmly towards the gate.
‘I will speak to him,’ he said to her when they had got out of earshot, ‘and see if I cannot resolve this matter.’
She went quietly enough.
Owen admired her independence, but felt that reconciliation was more likely to be achieved in her absence.
Georgiades had asked Owen to meet him at a donkey-vous beside the Ezbekiya Gardens.
Owen liked the Ezbekiya, though Garden it was not.
What it was was a dirty patch of fenced-off sand with a few straggly trees and occasional tufts of scrawny grass.
In a land where, with a little water, anything would grow, and private gardens were a blaze of bougainvillaea and oleander, Cairo's public gardens remained bits of desert, and the only colour in the Ezbekiya was provided once a week by the uniforms of the incredibly incompetent Egyptian regimental band.
The Ezbekiya did indeed have its moments, in the very early morning when there were few people about and the big falcons sailed over it with their unexpectedly musical cries and the Egyptian doves cooed softly in the palm trees, but on the whole what Owen liked was the Ezbekiya's outside.
All round the Gardens were railings.
And all along the railings were open-air stands, shops, stalls, restaurants, street artists and tradesmen.
Everything the ordinary Egyptian needed was there.
The barber sat on the railings while his customers stood patiently in front of him to have their heads shaved.
The tailor hung his creations on the railings.
The hat-sellers marked off their territory with towers of tarbooshes, all fitting one on top of the other.
The whipmakers plaited their whips through the railings and hung them from the trees.
There were trees all round the Ezbekiya, most of them comparatively young.
Circular spaces about a yard wide had been cut in the pavement to receive them.
To guard their roots the spaces were covered with gratings except for a few inches round the trunk.
In this hole the chestnut-seller lit his fire, and on the gratings he set out his pans of roasted chestnuts.
At night the coffee-sellers and the men who sold cups of hot sago brought their wares, too; and all through  the day there were sweet-sellers and nougat-sellers and nut-sellers and lemonade-sellers and tea-sellers and pie-sellers and cake-sellers — everything the sweet-toothed Egyptian might be persuaded to spend his little money on.
Around each stall there were usually people talking, and the place which attracted the most conversationalists, after, perhaps, the pavement restaurants, was the donkey-vous.
This was the donkey-boys' stand.
The donkeys, the little white donkeys of Cairo, lay about in the road and on the pavement among the huge green stacks of berseem brought there for their dinner by forage camels.
They were very rarely disturbed, at least by foreigners, since to hire a donkey cost a foreigner as much as a cab and pair of horses.
But in their saddles of red brocade and their necklaces of silver thread with blue beads they looked very picturesque and the tourists loved to photograph them.
For that, of course, they paid, and that, during the tourist season, was what the donkey-vous was all about.
That, and conversation.
There was more than one donkey-vous in the Ezbekiya but Owen knew which one to make for.
It was next to a postcard-seller, and to get to it you had to go past a row of very strange postcards stuck on the railings: views of Cairo, oleographs of Levantine saints, scenes of the Massacre of the Marmelukes and from the Great War of Independence, portraits of the Madonna and of St Catherine, and, of course, hundreds of indecent photographs, very precise in some respects, strangely vague in others.
At the end of the row, their backs turned to all these visual riches, was a ring of donkey-boys squatting on the ground.
Among them was Georgiades.
He stood up when he saw Owen approaching.
‘Here's my friend,’ he said to the donkey-boys.
‘I've got to go.’
He shook hands with several of the boys and exchanged farewell salaams with others.
‘I wouldn't mind a cup of something,’ he said to Owen, so that the donkey-boys could hear, ‘and perhaps a bite or two.
Have we got time?’
‘Sure,’ said Owen.
‘No hurry.’
They went over to the nearby tea-stall and then, with their glasses of tea, drifted over to one of the trees where a chestnut-seller was just lighting his fire.
Georgiades peered into his basket.
‘These look good ones,’ he said to the man.
‘How about doing a handful for me and my friend?’
‘It will take a moment or two,’ the man said, ‘but it will be well worth the wait.’
Owen and Georgiades went a little way off and squatted down beneath the trees to wait.
The sun had set and it was already quite dark in the Gardens.
Beneath the trees it was darker still.
As they sat there someone came up and, as was not unusual, joined them in their conversation.
It was the boy they had talked to in the Coptic Place of the Dead, the one who had given them information — and kicked Georgiades on the shin.
‘Kick me again,’ said Georgiades, keeping his voice at the gentle, conversational level, ‘and I will kick your balls so hard that they will fly out of your backside.’
Even in the darkness Owen could see the boy's teeth flash white in a big grin.
‘That was good, wasn't it?’ he said with pride.
‘They didn't suspect a thing.’
‘It was good,’ said Georgiades, ‘at my expense.
However, we need not pursue this now.
Ali wanted us to meet here,’ he said to Owen, ‘so that we should not be seen by his little friends.’
‘Your name is Ali, is it?’
Owen asked the boy.
‘Yes, effendi.’
‘And your mother is Yussuf's sister.’
‘Yes, effendi,’ said the boy, pleased that Owen had remembered.
Relationships were important in Egyptian society.
They conferred obligations.
If a man was lucky enough to get a job it was expected that he would use his position to find jobs for others in his family or village.
But they were also a guarantee.
When a misdemeanour was committed, it  was not the offender alone who was shamed but his whole family.
‘Well, Ali,’ said Owen, ‘you have helped us already and I am grateful.
Help us again and you will not lose by it.’
‘Unless they find out.’
‘They will not find out.’
The boy was silent.
‘Where do you want to begin?’
Georgiades asked Owen.
‘Let us go back to the Place of the Dead.
That night.
You saw the men and you told us whose men they were.
What about the man who took the dog into the tomb?
Whose man was he?’
‘The same.’
‘Are you sure?’ asked Owen.
‘My friend —’ he meant Georgiades —‘he asked among the men and they say he was not one of them.’
‘That is so,’ said the boy.
‘Then —’
‘He follows the one I spoke of.
But not him alone.’
‘He follows another too?’
‘He is a Zikr.’
Afterwards a lot of things fell into place.
For the moment, though, Owen was so caught by surprise that he could only repeat foolishly: ‘A Zikr?’
‘Yes.
Do you not know the Zikr?
They are dervishes who call upon the name of God.
Also,.
sometimes, they dance.’
‘I know the Zikr,’ said Owen, recovering.
‘Well, then.
This man is a Zikr.
But he goes to the holy one's mosque.’
‘Which mosque is that?’
‘It is close to the Bab es Zuweyla.’
‘The Blue one?’
‘Yes.
The Blue one.’
The Blue Mosque, which Owen had seen the previous day on his visit to the bazaars, was a dervish mosque, used almost exclusively by such as the Zikr.
‘He dances, then,’ said Owen.
‘Yes.’
‘Did he dance the other night?’
‘I do not know.
I expect so.’
‘If we brought you to where you could see the Zikr, could you pick him out for us?’
‘It was dark when I saw him,’ said the boy unwillingly.
‘We would bring you where you could not be seen.
And we would pay you better than well.’
‘In that case,’ said the boy, ‘I will come.’
‘Do you think you will be able to pick him out?’
‘I remember now,’ said Ali, ‘that although it was dark that night, there was also a little moon.’
The chestnut-seller laid out the chestnuts on the grating to cool and then brought them over to Owen and Georgiades.
Ali slipped back into the shadows.
When they looked round, he had gone.
‘Will you be able to find him again?’
‘No,’ said Georgiades.
‘But the little bugger can always find me.’
He cradled the chestnuts in his hands, enjoying the warmth.
‘What was so special about him being a Zikr?’
‘I've got something else on with the Zikr.’
He told Georgiades about the killing.
‘Sounds as if Mahmoud's got it sorted out,’ Georgiades said.
‘Zoser, you mean?’
‘Isn't it?’
‘Almost certainly, yes,’ said Owen.
‘Still, it would be nice if it was someone else.
Not a Copt.’
‘At least you've got him.
That ought to keep the Moslems happy.’
‘What about the Copts?’
‘They'll be happy too,’ said Georgiades, ‘if you get the Moslem who put the dog in Andrus's tomb.’
‘That's why I'm hoping Ali will be able to pick him out.’
Georgiades skinned a chestnut and popped it into his mouth.
‘Have you thought,’ he said, ‘that he might be the one who's not there to be picked out?’
6
Owen had been to the Coptic Cathedral before but not to a Coptic church; so he was surprised to find that most of the congregation appeared to be on crutches.
Closer inspection revealed that the crutches were in fact walking-sticks; and the need for such support soon became apparent.
The service was interminably long and the congregation had to stand throughout.
The men, that was.
The women were better provided for and were allowed to sit down.
They were, however, segregated in a separate compartment off to the right and screened by a heavy grille, through which, nevertheless, some of the women contrived to allow themselves to be seen.
The compartment gave only an oblique view of the altar, which perhaps accounted for the distinct murmur of conversation behind the grille.
Owen had borrowed the wife of a Coptic colleague as a companion for Jane Postlethwaite.
The two were now inside the grille together and Mena Iskander had been given strict instructions to try to secure Miss Postlethwaite a seat from which she could see Zoser clearly and if possible his wife as well.
A tall order, perhaps, though Mena Iskander was a lady of resource and intrigued by the whole situation.
Fortunately, Zoser, who was the more important of the two, was also the most easily seeable.
He stood in the front row of the congregation immediately beneath one of the huge, heavily-ornamented lecterns, and during the readings his rapt, upturned face caught the light from the lectern's candles.
Watching his total absorption in the service and the way in which he hung upon the holy  words, Owen could not help feeling a moment of doubt.
Had they made a mistake?
However, in his time in Egypt, and before that in India, he had met many men of real devotion who yet had done the most terrible things, often in the name of the religion they served.
It might be that Zoser was another such.
Of course it was not certain either that Zoser had done it or that, if he had done it, he had done it for sectarian reasons.
But it had all the signs of a sectarian killing.
Mahmoud had been unable to uncover anything of a personal nature which might have prompted the attack.
Indeed, so far he had not been able to discover any previous relationship at all between Zoser and the Zikr.
And, unfortunately, sectarian attacks were not at all uncommon.
Cairo was a city of many nationalities and many different systems of belief.
There were large communities of Greeks, Armenians, Jews, Turks, Levantines, Italians, French and English, as well as the more indigenous Copts, Arabs, Berbers from the south and Negroes.
And each community, Cairo being Cairo, had at least two rival sects.
Owen found it hard to keep track of all of them.
But keep track he had to, for the sects were always at odds with each other and sometimes their differences spilled over into killings.
What one tended to get, too, was not just sect against sect, but a fundamentalist sect of one religion against a fundamentalist sect of another, Christian against Moslem, another Coptic sect against — Zikr?
A sudden crash of cymbals pulled him back to the present.
At regular, but otherwise apparently arbitrary points during the service an acolyte would emerge from a recess, face the congregation and clash the cymbals violently together.
Then he would retire.
Owen suspected that it was to make sure that nobody fell asleep.
There was some danger of this since hardly anyone present could understand a word.
The service was conducted throughout in traditional Coptic, a language found only in churches and a few schools, and which very few even of the Copts understood.
They habitually spoke Egyptian Arabic.
There was another mighty crash and a priest began walking through the congregation swinging a censer and  laying his hand on the head of anyone who offered.
Among those who offered was Zoser.
People began to stir and Owen got the impression that the service was approaching its end.
The priest completed his circuit and disappeared behind the altar screen, leaving in his wake a long trail of incense which gradually mounted into the roof and lost itself among the ostrich eggs and silver censers suspended there.
There was a final reading, mercifully brief, and a last clash of cymbals; and then from behind the altar screen came a procession of priests and acolytes and small boys holding lighted tapers and carrying a large picture.
They paraded round the church showing the picture to all parts of the congregation.
Then they, too, retreated behind the altar screen with a last puff of smoke and the chanting came to an end.
Outside, he joined up with Mahmoud and waited for the two women.
They came up the steps with a Coptic woman in a long black gown and veil.
As they stepped out into the sunshine Mena Iskander's reticule slipped and fell on the ground.
She walked on without noticing.
The Coptic woman hesitated, then picked up the reticule and hurried after Mena.
Mena thanked her profusely, taking her impetuously by both hands.
The woman's sleeves fell back and there was the handpainting.
The ladies parted.
The Coptic woman went to one side and stood waiting for her husband, who was delayed in the church.
Mena and Jane came towards them.
‘Brilliant!’ said Owen.
‘Mrs Iskander,’ said Mahmoud, ‘you are remarkable!’
Mena Iskander looked bashfully at the ground.
She was not used to receiving compliments from men in public.
‘Did you see?’ she asked.
Owen looked at Jane Postlethwaite.
She nodded.
Zoser came hurrying out of the church and joined his wife.
From under her huge hat and the light grey veil she had thoughtfully donned for the occasion Jane Postlethwaite regarded them steadily.
When they had returned Mena Iskander to her amused husband they went with Jane Postlethwaite back to her hotel, where Owen earned unmerited credit for his morning's occupation.
‘Copts,’ said John Postlethwaite.
‘They would be a sort of Nonconformist here, would they?’
‘Sort of,’ said Owen.
Paul, who had accompanied John Postlethwaite to an Anglican service, gave Owen an approving glance.
‘That's more like it, Gareth.
Keep it up.
The Pyramids tomorrow.
Yes?
Please?’
Their credit was increased, in John Postlethwaite's eyes, when they ordered coffee.
Most of the British in the hotel were drinking something stronger.
Mahmoud, of course, as a Moslem, did not drink alcohol, and Owen, who habitually took on protective colouring, fell into line without thinking.
They took it on the terrace where there was more air and a slight breeze ruffled Jane Postlethwaite's sleeves.
‘Get what you wanted?’
Owen asked.
Mahmoud looked at Jane Postlethwaite.
‘She had touched up her hands,’ said Jane Postlethwaite, ‘but the pattern was the same.’
‘It was the woman you saw?’
‘Yes.’
‘You would be prepared to swear to that?’
‘I would,’ said Jane Postlethwaite firmly.
‘And Zoser?’
‘He was the man I saw.’
Mahmoud sat back with a little sigh of relief.
‘Thank you, Miss Postlethwaite,’ he said.
‘There was always the chance that you might not.’
Jane Postlethwaite sipped her coffee meditatively.
‘When so much depends upon it,’ she said, ‘it seems wrong to be so certain.’
‘But if you were certain —?’
‘I know,’ she said, ‘I should say so.
Well, I am prepared to say so.’
‘A man's life was taken,’ Mahmoud pointed out.
‘Yes.
That is why I am prepared to testify.’
Owen felt that things were moving a little too fast.
‘That may not be necessary, Miss Postlethwaite,’ he said smoothly.
The British community would not be very happy about the involvement of one of its ladies in a public trial.
Nor, it occurred to him, in the special circumstances of John Postlethwaite's visit, was the Consul-General likely to be overjoyed.
Jane Postlethwaite looked puzzled.
‘Don't you want me to give evidence?’ she demanded.
‘Well, it's not quite that —’
‘Yes,’ said Mahmoud.
Jane Postlethwaite looked uncertainly from one to the other.
‘It may prove distressing for you, Miss Postlethwaite,’ said Owen.
‘And you would like to spare me?’
‘Of course.’
Jane Postlethwaite looked down into her lap.
Then she raised her head.
‘Captain Owen,’ she said, ‘do you think that proper?’
‘Well…’
‘When so much is at stake?’
‘Well…’
‘Captain Owen: why do you wish to spare me?’
‘Because…because…’ he fumbled.
‘Because I am a pretty girl?’
There was no answer to that one.
‘Or because I am British?’
‘Both.’
Jane Postlethwaite rose from the table in a fury.
‘That is not right, Captain Owen,’ she said icily.
‘That is not right.’
As she reached the door, she turned.
‘If you wish me to give evidence, Mr el Zaki,’ she said, ‘I certainly shall.’
‘Sorry!’ said Mahmoud.
‘Christ!’ said Owen.
They walked a little way in silence.
It was the hottest part of the day, and apart from them there was nothing moving in the streets.
Even the donkeys were lying down.
‘It's not much,’ said Mahmoud.
‘Not much?’
Mahmoud, however, was thinking of the case.
‘It's not much to go on.
A positive identification, yes, but only by one person.’
Owen allowed his mind to drain back.
‘Any corroborative evidence?’
‘Hardly,’ Mahmoud admitted.
‘It's not strong,’ said Owen.
That was another thing; if it was Jane Postlethwaite's word against Zoser's, the court would almost certainly convict.
But it would look bad.
The word of a European against the word of an Egyptian.
It would be OK if there was other evidence.
But to convict on her word alone!
The Nationalist papers would pick it up.
They might make quite a thing of it.
They'd do it deliberately to embarrass the Government.
And, my God, they would certainly succeed if it came out that she was Postlethwaite's niece.
‘I thought you wanted to wrap it up quickly,’ said Mahmoud in injured tones.
‘I do,’ said Owen.
‘But it's got to be watertight.
Suppose we don't clinch it?
The Copts will say we tried to put it on him and the Moslems will say we let him off.’
‘I could always pull him in for questioning.’
‘Think he'd talk?’
‘They sometimes do.’
Sectarian killers especially.
They usually didn't even bother to deny the charge.
They saw it, rather, as something to boast of.
‘Think he would?’
Mahmoud was silent.
‘No,’ he said.
‘Not unless I could shake him.’
‘And for that you need something to shake him with.
Are your men going to come up with anything?’
‘At the moment,’ said Mahmoud, ‘there doesn't seem to be a lot for them to come up with.’
‘No previous contact?’
‘Apparently not.
Zoser keeps himself pretty much to himself.
All his contacts seem to be within the Coptic community.
Apart from work.
And that doesn't help us much because, so far as we have been able to ascertain, the Zikr doesn't appear to have bought a bottle of perfume in his life.’
‘It's not the sort of thing he would buy, is it?’
‘No, he's not that sort.
And that's another thing.
The two men are as different as chalk and cheese.
It's hard to see how they could ever get to know each other long enough for it to come to this.
Zoser's withdrawn, doesn't have much to do with people.
Religion is everything to him.
The Zikr must have been devout too, of course, but he got round a lot more than Zoser, mixed with people, liked crowd and noise and a bit of fun.
Something of a character, too.
People say he was a bit of a joker.’
‘A joker?’
The idea came to him.
Or came back to him.
Something that Georgiades had said.
‘I know,’ said Mahmoud.
‘It's hard to imagine a Zikr being a bit of a joker, isn't it?
Still, they can't always be chanting and dancing.
They've got lives of their own too.’
‘It's not that.’
‘No?
Well, anyway, my men have been unable to find any connection between the two at all.
Which almost certainly makes it a sectarian killing.’
‘Yes,’ said Owen, ‘but why him?
Him particularly?’
Mahmoud shrugged.
‘He was the nearest?’ he suggested.
‘But he wasn't, was he?
Zoser picked him out.’
‘We don't know that.’
‘OK.
Put it another way: what made Zoser start picking?’
‘He doesn't like Moslems.’
‘Yes.
But what made him decide to do something about it?
Now?’
‘It suddenly came over him?’
‘Something triggered it off.
What was that something?’
‘I don't know.
Do you?’
‘I might,’ said Owen.
‘I might.’
‘What the hell's this?’ said Georgiades, staring into his mug unbelievingly.
‘Yussuf's got problems,’ said Nikos from his desk.
‘I'm going to speak to him,’ said Owen.
‘For God's sake speak to him quickly,’ said Georgiades.
‘Otherwise I'll have problems.’
‘I've got one for you already,’ said Owen.
‘Thank you.’
‘The problem is this: how do we find out whether the Zikr who put the dog in Andrus's tomb is also the Zikr who got killed?’
‘I see your problem,’ said Georgiades, after a moment's reflection.
‘Get that boy to have a look at the body,’ said Nikos.
‘He's only a child,’ Owen objected.
Nikos shrugged his shoulders and went on with his writing.
‘Look,’ said Georgiades.
‘I hate to shatter these gentle English illusions —’
‘Welsh,’ said Owen.
‘That's right,’ said Georgiades, ‘somewhere over there.
But that innocent child earns his livelihood robbing corpses.’
‘Bloody hell!’ said Owen.
Nikos looked up.
‘What else do you expect him to do?’ he asked.
‘He's living in the graveyard, isn't he?’
‘Yes, but —’
‘It's not much of a living.
Everybody knows about it so they don't leave anything valuable on the body.’
‘Except Copts,’ said Nikos.
‘He robs Moslems too,’ said Georgiades.
‘No sectarian prejudice here.
No,’ he said, turning to Owen, ‘that's not the problem.’
‘What is?’
‘Where's the body?’
Owen thought for a moment.
‘I'd assumed it was in the mortuary.
Either still at the lab or somewhere else.’
Georgiades shook his head.
‘No.
Too crowded.
They need the space.’
‘You mean it's been handed back already?’
‘They don't keep them for long.’
‘If you just rush down now,’ said Nikos, ‘you can interrupt a Moslem funeral and desecrate that too.’
‘I didn't desecrate it.’
‘You could always take a dog.’
‘Shut up.
What are we going to do?’ he appealed to Georgiades.
‘Find out where the body is.
If it's in any of the mortuaries, OK.
If it's been handed back I'll find out where the tomb is.
They always bring them the same day so there's not much point in looking anywhere else.
Anyway, there would be too many people around.’
The implications of what Georgiades was saying sank in.
‘Break into the tomb?
Christ!’
‘There's no other way.’
‘Yes, I know.
But —’
‘Look,’ said Georgiades patiently, ‘do you want this settled or don't you?
Is it important?
If it's not, well, I'm not exactly keen.
But if it might stop a massacre…’
‘It might stop a massacre.’
‘OK, then.’
Owen was still not happy.
‘Suppose we were seen?’
‘You will be seen,’ said Nikos.
‘Yes,’ said Georgiades.
‘Those little bastards.’
He rubbed his chin.
‘I've got an idea,’ he said.
‘Why don't I have a word with  that little sod Ali and see if he can arrange it all?
It would need money but it would be worth it.
If he's seen, or they are seen, that's OK.
There's nothing out of the ordinary.
Whereas if we're seen it'll start a Holy War.’
‘You won't be able to use his evidence,’ said Nikos.
‘Not in court.’
‘We wouldn't anyway.’
‘Why do it, then?’
‘It sets his mind at rest,’ said Georgiades, looking at Owen.
‘It would give a motive,’ said Owen, ‘and once you've got that, you've got other lines to work on.’
‘All right,’ said Nikos.
‘Can you trust Ali?’ asked Owen.
‘No,’ said Georgiades, ‘but you can trust money.’
‘I mean afterwards.
Is he going to talk?’
‘I don't think he'll talk,’ said Georgiades.
‘His mates may.’
‘We wouldn't want it to get out.’
‘I'll speak to Ali.’
‘It's risky.’
‘Got any better suggestions?’
‘No,’ said Owen regretfully.
‘Want me to get on with it, then?’
‘Yes.’
As Georgiades went out, Nikos said: ‘At least it will bring the Copts and the Moslems together.’
‘What?’
‘When they find out it's the Greeks that are breaking into their tombs.’
Owen was pursuing Garvin about the Camel Watering Account.
‘It's damned silly,’ he said.
‘We always need money at this time of year.
And we always transfer it out of the Camel Watering Account.
Why the hell can't we do it this year?’
‘Because they're looking, that's why.
Usually they don't bother.
They've got other things to think about.’
‘And this year they haven't?’
‘This year they've got Postlethwaite looking over their shoulder so they're making damned sure they're being strictly kosher.’
‘I don't mind them playing their little games,’ Owen complained.
‘It's just that they have real effects.
On me.
It affects my work.’
‘Does it?’ said Garvin, not really very interested.
‘Yes, it does.
I rely on it to supplement the Curbash Compensation Fund.’
‘What?’
‘Curbash Compensation Fund.
It's what I pay the bribes out of.’
‘The curbash was abolished years ago.’
One of Cromer's first acts had been to abolish the use by government officials of the curbash, the whip, as a means of enforcing obedience.
‘I know, but the Fund still exists.
When the curbash was abolished they set it up to compensate anyone who was whipped after the abolition.
You see, they couldn't rely on the local beys not to forget it had been abolished.
So they set up this fund to compensate victims in serious cases of abuse.
They didn't want to make too much fuss about it, otherwise the whole population would come along claiming they'd been whipped.
So the fund's administered by the Mamur Zapt.’
‘Have there been any claims?’
‘Not recently.’
‘And there's a grant each year?’
‘That's right.
That's what makes it so convenient.
The trouble is, we've been having to spend more money on bribes lately.
It's never enough.
So,’ concluded Owen, ‘I have to transfer money from the Camel Watering Account.’
‘Otherwise you'll have to cut back on bribes?’
‘Yes.’
Garvin toyed with the ebony paperweight on his desk.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘I see your point.’
He thought for a moment or two.
‘Can't you use some other account?’
‘No.
It's nearly the end of the financial year and most of the money's been spent.
Anyway, why the hell should I?
The system's worked all right up to now.
The Consul-General wants the work done, doesn't he?’
‘Yes, but he doesn't want to know about it.
And above all he doesn't want to see it appearing in the Accounts.
They are scrutinized, you know, by a Parliamentary Committee back at home.
How do you think it would look if there was a Mamur Zapt Bribes Account?
All the little Postlethwaites would go berserk.’
‘We don't have to call it that.
‘Special Purposes’ or something like that.’
‘Create something new in finance,’ said Garvin, ‘a new code, a new sub-heading, and that's always the thing that gets picked out.
Stick to what they're familiar with.’
‘OK,’ said Owen.
‘I'll stick to the Curbash Compensation Fund.
But I still want some more money in it.’
‘That's what they all say.
Including the Khedive.
He wants his allocation upped, too.’
‘It's his money, isn't it?’
‘No.
It's ours.
He doesn't have a bean, other than what we lend him.
That's why we're here.’
Of all the countries in the world, Egypt was perhaps the most thoroughly in debt.
Its international indebtedness had reached such alarming proportions under the previous Khedive that its Western creditors had become seriously alarmed.
Britain, as the largest of these, had stepped in to sort out the country's chaotic finances.
But that had been thirty years before, and the British were still there.
Egypt's finances, they claimed, were still unsettled.
‘Besides,’ said Garvin, ‘all he wants it for is to go to Monte Carlo again.
So we're not keen.’
‘But my money —’ Owen began.
‘Is part of it.
He wants a larger allocation in any case.
That means more taxes.
And here there's potentially big trouble, because the way he wants to do that is by taxing the Copts more.’
‘Just them?’
‘Just them.’
‘They won't be pleased.’
‘They're not pleased.’
‘I've not heard anything about this.’
‘You wouldn't have.
It's still being fought out inside the Ministry.
Finance are resisting it strongly.
No wonder.
They're all Copts.’
‘If this gets out —’
‘Yes.
You'll be busy, won't you?’
‘I'll need more money.’
Garvin shook his head.
‘No chance.
There's a veto across the board on any increase.
Until the main thing gets settled.’
‘What do I do, then?’
‘You'll have to use the resources you've got,’ said Garvin; and smiled ambiguously.
‘Well,’ said Georgiades, ‘I've found out what you wanted.’
He came into the room and poured himself a glass of water from the earthenware jug which stood, as it did in all the offices of Cairo, in the window so that the air currents could cool it.
Although it was very hot, Owen had not put the fan on.
It was a huge, three-bladed affair suspended from the roof and when it was at full blast it was hard to keep papers still on his desk.
‘It was the Zikr?’
‘The man who put the dog in Andrus's tomb and the man who got stabbed are one and the same Zikr.’
‘You're sure?’
‘Ali is sure.’
‘I'm not going to ask you how he made sure.’
‘It cost a lot of money.’
Owen winced.
‘He had to do deals.
Each of these gangs have got their own territory.
Ali's territory is the Coptic graveyard so he had to make arrangements with the gangs in the Moslem graveyard.
It's a big one and there are three gangs involved.’
‘The more people in it, the more it's likely to get out.’
‘If anything gets out,’ said Georgiades, ‘it won't be linked with us.’
‘I hope so.
I certainly hope so.’
Georgiades put the glass down and mopped his brow.
He was a bulky man and had been walking the streets and the sweat was running off him.
‘What are you going to do now?’
‘It gives us a motive, doesn't it?’
‘Does it?’
‘That's why Zoser killed him.’
‘Why should Zoser care?
It's not his tomb.’
‘Zoser doesn't think like that.
For him it's a religious matter.
It was an affront to his God.’
‘Which he decided to avenge?’
‘Yes.’
‘All by himself?’
‘Why not?’
‘He's only a little man,’ said Georgiades, eyeing the glass again.
He made up his mind and poured out some more water.
‘Are you saying you think someone put him up to it?’
Owen demanded.
‘What do you think?’
‘I think,’ said Owen, ‘that at least we've got bloody Zoser.
That'll satisfy the Moslems.
And the Copts are hardly in a position to complain.
We could look for the people who put him up to it.
In fact, we might well do that.
Quietly.
No hurry.
But we don't have to.’
‘You'd prefer to see it ended?’
‘Yes.’
‘OK.’
Georgiades finished the glass and put it down.
‘As long as everybody else sees it the same way,’ he said.
‘I can't use this?’ said Mahmoud.
‘You can use it,’ said Owen, ‘but not in court.
My informant is not in a position to testify.’
‘A pity.
There's no chance you could persuade him?’
‘No chance at all.’
‘What about the first identification?
The Zikr who planted the dog?’
‘That too.’
‘Pity.
You see if I had the original identification I could at least match it up against a description.’
‘Afraid not.’
‘The same informant?’
‘The same informant.’
‘You're relying on him a lot.’
‘I think he's pretty reliable.’
‘But he won't talk?
In public, I mean?’
‘That's right.’
‘Well,’ said Mahmoud, ‘it's something, at any rate.
Now that I know what I'm looking for I'll see if I can dig it out by other means.’
‘Are you going to pull him in?’
‘Not till I've done some more checking.
I'd like to have a bit more before I go for him.’
‘Don't leave it too long.
Otherwise he mightn't be there when you go to pick him up.’
And that was the trouble.
For when, two days later, Mahmoud's men went to call on Zoser, they found that the bird had flown.
7
‘Didn't you even have a man on him?’ said Owen incredulously.
Mahmoud flushed.
‘I don't have as many men as you,’ he replied angrily.
‘Even so!’
Owen was furious.
He had counted on wrapping this up.
With Zoser inside, at least he would have headed off trouble from the Moslems.
Now he couldn't count on that.
And suppose they found out that a man had slipped through their  fingers?
It would be even worse.
Mahmoud had bungled it.
Not to pick Zoser up was fair enough, he had advocated that himself.
But not to put a man on him.
That was bloody stupid.
In fact, Mahmoud had put a man on Zoser but he preferred not to admit it.
The man had gone to sleep, or at least that was what Mahmoud suspected, and that, to Mahmoud, was an even harder thing to admit than that he had not posted a man in the first place.
Not being able to post a man was a matter of economics.
Having one go to sleep on the job, well, that was just incompetence; and Mahmoud was very sensitive to the charge of Egyptian incompetence.
Especially as, privately, he thought the charge was often justified.
It was in a case like this, too, that the weakness of the Egyptian system became apparent.
The Parquet, the Department of Prosecution of the Ministry of Justice, which Mahmoud belonged to, and the Police were two entirely different and separate organizations.
Mahmoud was responsible for collecting the evidence, deciding whether there was a case, and then carrying through prosecution.
In doing so he had to rely on the police for manpower.
Working to his instructions, they would collect evidence, do low-level questioning, keep people under surveillance, and if necessary arrest.
The trouble was that since they were not directly under his control he was unable to ensure the quality of their work in the way that, for example, Owen could.
What made matters worse was that the police were so badly paid that they could be recruited only from poor, country districts and lacked the sophistication, education and even, Mahmoud suspected at times, mother-wit of city people.
Owen, because he could pay more, was able to draw his own men almost exclusively from the city.
That was another thing that Mahmoud felt was wrong.
Owen's reaction touched him on a sore spot; and it was made all the sorer by an angry feeling inside him that there had indeed been incompetence, Egyptian incompetence, that he, Mahmoud, was ultimately responsible for it — and  that there was absolutely nothing that he could in practice do about it.
‘There must have been a leak,’ he said sullenly.
Owen was taken aback.
This was something that had not occurred to him.
‘A tip-off?’
‘Yes.
How else would he have known?’
‘The church?
The visit to the Scentmakers’ Bazaar?
Your men's inquiries?’
This upset Mahmoud still further.
His men again.
‘Their inquiries were general,’ he said harshly.
‘They are always making such inquiries.
There was nothing to link them directly to Zoser.’
‘Surely they asked questions about Zoser?’
‘And others.’
‘That might have been enough.
Or maybe, seeing us the second time, he might have suspected.
Especially if he spotted that it was the third time, for Miss Postlethwaite and me.’
Mahmoud was silent.
‘How much notice did you give your men?’
Mahmoud was now in one of those moods in which he found implied criticism hard to take.
Owen half-realized this and if he had had any sense would have shut up, but Mahmoud's moods blew up very suddenly out of an apparently clear sky and once again he was slow in reacting.
‘They had no notice.’
Mahmoud did not say that this was because he did not trust them.
‘I made up my mind, collected them and went straight down.’
‘Anyone else in your office know?’
‘No.
Anyway,’ said Mahmoud, ‘I don't have any Copts in my office.
What about you?’
Nikos.
Owen pushed the thought immediately aside.
‘If I did,’ he said, ‘they are people I can trust.’
‘Are you sure?’
‘Yes,’ said Owen.
‘I am quite sure.’
Mahmoud shrugged his shoulders.
The gesture came  across offensively.
In some way it conveyed utter disbelief.
Owen boiled over.
‘Well,’ he said.
‘Now that you've lost him, you'd better find him.’
The way he put it made it sound like an order.
Mahmoud turned on his heel and went off without a further word.
‘Well,’ said Georgiades, ‘he could be right, couldn't he?’
‘No,’ said Owen, ‘he couldn't.’
Georgiades spread his hands.
Owen distrusted these Cairene gestures of openness.
‘Look at it this way: two loyalties.
One to you, one to his people.
Both real, both genuine.
If he can serve one without hurting the other too much, what the harm?’
‘It would hurt me.
It would hurt the Department.’
‘How much?’
‘It hits at the work we do.’
‘How much?
Just this one instance?’
‘It's his people I'm trying to help.’
‘And the Moslems.’
‘I'm neutral.’
‘He's not.’
‘He's neutral when he works for me.’
‘Mostly.
Mostly.’
‘Are you saying that in this case he's playing a game of his own?’
‘I'm only saying that he might be.’
Owen was silent.
Before transferring to the Egyptian Service he had been a Regular Army officer in India and at times his military background reasserted itself.
He liked things, or at least people, or at least those people near him, to be straightforward.
He found it hard, almost impossible, to accept any deceit on Nikos's part.
Internally, that was.
So far as the rest of the world was concerned he could conceive of almost any deception.
But among themselves…
‘It's only a hypothesis,’ he said.
‘Sure!’
Georgiades agreed quickly.
‘Sure.’
‘You don't know anything that makes it anything more?’
‘No, I'm just figuring out all the angles.’
‘It could be someone else.’
‘It needn't even be in this office.’
‘OK, then.’
‘If I were you,’ said Georgiades.
‘I'd forget about it.
Only…’
‘Only what?’
‘Be careful.’
Owen knew what he meant.
While they were working on this case there were some things which Nikos had better not know.
‘OK.’
Georgiades smiled cheerfully.
He had just suggested that his closest colleague might be, in this at least, a traitor.
But there was nothing personal in it.
Nikos was still his friend.
Georgiades still trusted him.
As much as he trusted anybody.
Owen was going through the accounts with Nikos trying to find pockets of money which might still be emptied.
They came to the end of one set.
While Nikos was collecting the papers Owen said casually:
‘When they went to find Zoser, he wasn't at home.’
Nikos understood immediately.
‘A tip-off?’
‘It looks like it.’
Nikos's mind began automatically to turn over the possibilities; as it always did.
‘That's funny,’ he said.
‘Why?’
‘Zoser doesn't strike me as the sort of person who would have contacts.’
‘Maybe it was just a sympathizer.’
Nikos nodded.
‘Yes.
Perhaps you'd better review all Copts working in the office.
Including me.
Do the same with Mahmoud's office.’
Owen did not say anything.
Nikos's thoughts moved on to a different tack.
‘He doesn't have many friends.
And they're all Copts.
He must be in one of the Coptic parts of the city.’
‘And there are plenty of those.’
‘Mahmoud will be checking his friends,’ said Nikos.
‘That's obvious.’
He frowned for a moment in concentration.
‘The centre of Zoser's life is the church,’ he said.
‘I'll get you a list of the people who go there regularly.’
‘Do you think you'll be able to?’
Nikos looked at him with scorn, scooped up the remaining papers and went out.
It was the old, normal Nikos.
Owen was a hundred per cent sure that he was OK.
Well, ninety-nine per cent.
Owen had other fish to fry and for the next two days he was busy on other things.
He kept his men off the case, too.
Mahmoud would be going over Zoser's contacts with a fine-tooth comb and, especially after their last exchange, Owen did not want to queer his pitch.
There were developments, however.
He was sitting at his desk on the second morning when Nikos stuck his head through the door.
‘Here they are again,’ he said.
‘They’ were the assistant kadi and the two sheikhs who had been before.
This time it was the kadi who did most of the talking.
‘It's about that murder,’ he said.
‘My friends are concerned that nothing seems to be happening.’
‘Oh, a lot is happening,’ Owen assured him.
‘It's just that we need to be absolutely sure before proceeding.
Especially in a case like this.’
‘Not ‘absolutely sure’,’ said the kadi legalistically. ‘'Reasonably certain’will do.’
‘Reasonably certain, then,’ Owen amended.
‘And you are not in that position yet?’
‘Pretty nearly, I would say.
Of course, the case is in the hands of the Parquet.’
'It is just that my friends are coming under great pressure from their communities over the incident.’
The two sheikhs nodded in unison.
‘I am sorry that should be so,’ said Owen.
‘I can assure them that we are making every effort.
And, as I said, I think that we shall shortly be in a position to proceed against someone.’
‘Rumour has it,’ said the kadi, ‘that the Parquet sought to arrest someone and were unsuccessful.’
‘I'm afraid you'll have to ask the Parquet about that.’
‘The trouble is,’ said the kadi, ‘that apparently the man was a Copt.
That makes it especially difficult for my friends.
You see, there is word in the bazaar that perhaps the man heard beforehand that the Parquet were coming.
And the communities are asking whether that was, perhaps, because he was a Copt.’
‘On that at least I can set your friends’ minds at rest.
Whether the man was Copt or Moslem would make no difference.’
‘So there was a man?’
‘I was speaking hypothetically.
If there was a man, it would make no difference whether he was Copt or Moslem.
The Mamur Zapt is even-handed.’
The two sheikhs looked a little perturbed.
One of them tried to say something.
The kadi affected not to notice and went smoothly on.
‘I am sure of that,’ he said.
‘The doubt was rather about the impartiality of the offices.
There are a lot of Copts in them.’
‘I am sure they are loyal and honest servants of the Khedive.’
‘I hope so.
But things like this make one doubt, don't you think?’
Owen judged it best to make no reply.
He just smiled winningly.
The sheikh, now, would not be restrained.
‘This is a bad man,’ he said, ‘and he must be punished.’
‘He will be.
Of that I can assure you.’
‘My people are angry.
They say that the Government is not even-handed.’
‘Tell your people that the Government seeks to stamp out wrongdoing wherever it is found.’
‘We have told them that,’ said the other sheikh unexpectedly.
‘But they will not listen to us.’
‘My friends are coming under great pressure,’ said the kadi.
‘I appreciate that.
And I will do what I can.
But one must not hasten justice at the expense of justice.’
‘True.’
The sheikhs nodded agreement.
‘But,’ one of them said, ‘it is important that no one who has done wrong should escape justice.’
‘I will see,’ said Owen, ‘that he doesn't.’
The sheikhs suddenly looked satisfied.
Owen realized that was what they had come for.
The personal assurance of the Mamur Zapt.
In a society that was still traditional and oral, personal promises counted for a lot.
In a way it was flattering that they should take his word.
However, he knew that if he failed to live up to it they would not take his word again.
The kadi rose to his feet.
‘Thank you for seeing us.
My friends are very anxious that there should be no difference between their people and the Mamur Zapt, and will do all they can to see that things go no further, at least for the time being.
Unfortunately —’ he caught Owen's eye meaningfully —‘they cannot answer for others.’
With the usual extended Arabic farewells, the party was shown out.
Owen accompanied them to the front entrance himself.
He wanted to keep Nikos in the background.
The two sheikhs managed to keep control in their communities but in other ones there were disturbing incidents.
Shops owned by Copts were attacked and wrecked and there were increasing instances of individual Copts being set upon in the streets.
Zeinab became involved in one of these.
She frequently made use of Coptic craftsmen and one of them, a leather-worker, who had been repairing a handbag she was particularly fond of, was bringing it to her flat with his small son when he was attacked by a gang of youths.
The boy ran on to the flats where Zeinab lived and rushed in at the entrance.
Two of his attackers followed him and caught him and were about to drag him back out into the street when Zeinab came down the stairs.
Zeinab had no great love of Copts but she wasn't having anyone attacked in the entrance of her building and pitched into the youths with such fury that they ran off.
The boy, weeping and bleeding, recognized Zeinab as the lady they were coming to see and managed to stammer out the story of the attack on his father.
Zeinab, who tended to see things in personal terms and who, having been brought up in her father's house, had something of the great lady in her, took it into her head to protect her servants and rushed out into the street in a passion.
She came upon the leather-worker further along the street surrounded by a mob of youths who were beating and kicking him.
Without thinking, she plunged into the mob, caught hold of the leather-worker and tried to drag him away from his assailants.
The youths, being Moslems, were not having this from any woman, even if she were a great lady, and things would have gone ill for Zeinab if Owen had not arrived at that moment, on his way to her flat.
He caught hold of the two nearest him and knocked their heads together, kicked two more and grabbed the ringleaders.
The others, thinking there was more of him, fled.
Fortunately, none of them were armed.
If they had been, it might have been a different story, for Owen himself only carried arms when he had reason to believe he might need them.
He put a neck-lock on the youth he was holding and looked around for help.
Now the fighting was over there was plenty forthcoming.
He got some of the men to carry the leather-worker to Zeinab's flat.
Others went to fetch a policeman.
When, some time later, one appeared, Owen handed the youth over to him with strict instructions to keep him in the local caracol until Owen would question him.
Then he went to Zeinab's flat.
Zeinab was sponging the boy's face.
His father had already been attended to and lay quiet and grateful on one of Zeinab's sofas.
‘You're going to have to do something about this,’ said Zeinab, looking up at him.
The caracol, one of the old ones, consisted of a single room underground.
It was hot and foetid in there and Owen had the ringleader brought upstairs for questioning.
The boy was about fourteen years old and had the long, fuzzy hair of the Dervish.
He looked scared, not so much, Owen judged, because he was in the hands of the police but rather because he was in different surroundings from those he was used to, the modern, built-up, Europeanized part of the city and not the warren of tiny mediaeval streets he normally inhabited.
Owen sat on a chair in the cramped little office and made the boy stand in front of him.
‘What is your name?’ he asked.
‘Daouad.’
‘Where are you from?’
‘I am from near the Sukkariya,’ the boy growled.
‘Well, Daouad, you will not see the Sukkariya again for a long time unless you answer my questions.’
The boy looked around like a trapped animal.
‘Whose man are you?’
‘I am no man's man.’
‘You come from the Sukkariya.
You are a Dervish.
Who is your sheikh?’
‘The Sheikh Osman Rahman,’ the boy said reluctantly.
‘Did he tell you to do this?’
The boy was silent.
‘Will he be angry if I tell him what you have done?’
‘No,’ said the boy proudly.
‘He will be pleased.’
‘Because you have done his bidding?’
‘Because I have done what he wants.’
‘How do you know it is what he wants?’
The boy would not say.
After a moment, though, he looked away and muttered: ‘It was only a pig of a Copt.’
‘There are always Copts.
Why attack one now?’
‘To avenge!’ the boy said hotly.
‘To avenge the blow against one of ours!
A death for a death!’
‘Is that what the Sheikh says?’
‘It is what we all say.’
‘There are other sheikhs who do not say it.’
‘They turn the cheek,’ the boy said, ‘when they should set their face in anger.
They fold their arms when they should lift their hand in wrath.
They let the faithless strike them when they should strike the faithless.’
The words had the ring of preacher's rhetoric.
‘Is that what the Sheikh Osman says?’
‘Yes,’ said the boy defiantly.
Owen had him taken back to the underground room.
In a few days he would release him.
There was no point in acting against him.
The Sheikh Osman Rahman, however, was a different matter.
Owen came up with him that evening.
It was in a tiny square of the Old City.
There was a raised dais on one side of the square on which the Sheikh Osman sat cross-legged.
All around him, squatting on the ground, were his followers; and beyond them, around the outskirts and blocking up the mouths of the little streets which gave on to the square, was a wider, more disinterested audience.
Those nearest the dais carried raised torches in their hands, so that the dais was illuminated and the Sheikh clearly visible to all.
Owen stayed in one of the side streets and listened.
The Sheikh was only just getting into his stride.
He spoke vehemently but quietly.
He was expounding a Sura, one of the parable-like stories of the Koran, extracting from it lessons for the faithful.
As he pointed up the moral, contrasting the way of the good with the way of the bad, his voice  deepened and became more indignant.
Almost imperceptibly the exposition became a harangue.
The crowd stirred and became involved.
There were sympathetic cries.
The Sheikh now had moved into denunciation: of the wrongdoer, the infidel, those who mocked Islam.
Of those who protected the infidel from the just wrath of the servants of Allah.
Owen waited for the words which would justify his own intervention.
They came.
Incitation to riot.
His men, who knew the law as well as he, looked at him expectantly.
‘Not yet.’
He did not want to do it in front of the crowd.
That might provoke a riot, the very thing he was trying to avoid.
He did sometimes break up meetings but that was usually when they were political.
Religion you handled with kid gloves.
Afterwards.
When the crowd was beginning to disperse.
He could sense his men fidgeting.
This was always the difficult time.
They were disciplined, though, Sudanis, hand-picked ex-soldiers from the south.
They would do what they were told.
The Sheikh began a final exhortation.
The last part of his serman, or speech, was accompanied by continuous cries from his followers.
His voice rose to a howl and drew the audience up with it into an excited, almost exalted, crescendo.
And then it stopped.
The shouting went on, though, for several minutes.
People leapt to their feet and milled around excitedly.
This was the moment when, sometimes, a procession formed and they would march off to take action.
If they did on this occasion Owen would be ready.
His men drew their truncheons.
For a moment or two it seemed as if that was what would happen.
A little group of men had got together and appeared to be trying to enlist others into a formation of some kind.
There was so much untidy milling about, however, that in the confines of the tiny space they found it hard to organize themselves and eventually seemed to abandon the attempt.
The excitement died away and the crowd began to drift off down the side streets.
The throng in front of Owen  melted away, leaving his men exposed, so he drew them back into the shadows.
In the square the torches began to go out, until there were only one or two left near the dais.
The Sheikh Osman sat on, relaxed now.
A few of his followers had joined him on the dais.
Then he, too, rose to his feet.
The square was quite empty by now and he and the little group of men with him made their way across it without difficulty.
They disappeared down one of the side streets.
Owen's men moved unhurriedly after them.
They came up with Osman just where the street joined up with two others.
The street was wider there and Owen's men found it easy to slip round the Sheikh separating him from his followers  and surrounding him.
The Sheikh looked up, startled.
‘What is this?’
Owen stepped forward.
‘Come with me,’ he said.
Then Osman understood.
He opened his mouth to shout.
One of Owen's Sudanis put a hand over his mouth preventing him.
There was a little struggle and Osman half dragged himself free.
‘There will be blood!’ he shouted.
‘It will be yours,’ said Owen, and signalled to his men.
They closed round Osman and now he was silent.
Muffled and tied, he was quickly shepherded away.
For good measure Owen took several of his followers too.
The others were left, startled and winded.
One lay on the ground.
The passers-by at the end of the street had not even noticed.
Osman was taken to one of the cells beneath Owen's office in the Bab el Khalkh.
The building was the police headquarters and well away from the Old City.
It was also big and strong.
Just in case.
Owen, though, did not expect any difficulty.
It would take some time for the news to get around.
Osman's followers would have to get together; and Owen would see that they did not find that very easy.
He had warned the Assistant  Commissioner, McPhee, and together they would ensure that for the next two or three days the City was flooded with agents who would alert them at once to an assembly.
By then perhaps Zoser would be caught.
The crowd would have other things on its mind and Osman could be released.
It might even be possible to scare him into silence, although when he was brought to Owen's office in the early hours of the morning that did not seem very likely.
‘There will be blood,’ he said again as he came through the door.
‘There has been too much of that already,’ said Owen.
‘That is why you are here.’
‘There will be more,’ Osman promised.
‘It is bad there is blood,’ said Owen, ‘either Moslem or Copt.’
‘Where there is a blood debt,’ said Osman, ‘there must be blood.’
‘There was no debt originally,’ said Owen.
‘There was just a foolish act.’
Osman did not reply.
‘A sacrilegious act,’ Owen pursued, ‘which you, as a holy man, ought to have done your best to prevent.
Instead of encouraging it.
And perhaps instigating it.’
‘I did not instigate it,’ said Osman haughtily.
‘But you knew about it.
He was one of your men.’
Osman shrugged.
‘He was his own man,’ he said, ‘in this.’
‘But you knew.
And could have stopped.’
‘Why should I stop?
It was only a Copt.
Besides, have not the Copts —’
‘Be quiet!’ said Owen.
‘Such talk will not help you now.
You allowed this thing to happen and so must bear some of the guilt.’
‘There is no guilt.’
‘You treated heavy things lightly,’ said Owen, ‘and that does not accord with the Book.’
‘You quote the Book at me?’
Osman glared at him.
‘I do.
Where the Book itself is taken lightly the offender is not worthy of respect.’
Osman was plainly taken aback.
He had not expected things to go like this.
Owen pursued his advantage.
You have done wrong,’ he said, ‘and you must put things right.’
‘I?’ said Osman.
‘I?’
‘You.’
‘I have struck no blow.’
‘You have caused many to be struck.
It must be stopped before someone is killed.’
‘Someone has been killed,’ said Osman.
‘A Moslem.
By a Copt.’
‘That is for me,’ said Owen.
‘Not for you.’
‘There is a debt.’
‘Which I will see is paid.’
‘The Christians protect the Christians.’
‘And the Moslems too.’
Osman looked at him.
‘See that it is so,’ he said.
Owen did not reply.
After a moment Osman said: ‘Why have you taken me?’
‘While I am pursuing the offender I do not want blood on the streets.’
‘If you take me there will be blood on the streets.’
‘It will be Moslem blood,’ said Owen, ‘and I would not have it so.’
‘What do you want?’ asked Osman.
‘I want you to hold your hand,’ said Owen, ‘for a time.’
‘Why should I do that?’
‘I suggest you go to some holy place, preferably out of the City, and pray for forgiveness for the levity which started this business.’
‘What if I don't?’
‘You will stay here.
And if there is blood you will have to pray for forgiveness for that also.’
Owen sent him back down to the cells to think about it.
He did not expect Osman openly to agree but he thought  it quite likely that the Sheikh might indicate his willingness to accept Owen's proposition.
He thought he saw in Osman, beneath the intransigence and fanaticism, a certain uneasiness as to his own role in the affair.
‘Lightness’ was not an easy charge for a religious sheikh to bear, especially if he felt there was some justification for the charge; and in his heart of hearts, away from the public arena, Osman might well accept the need for some self-examination.
Owen hoped so.
He would probably try releasing Osman even if he gave no outward sign of acquiescence.
That might, in fact, make it easier for him.
And, of course, if he did stir up trouble he could always be put inside again.
However, Owen did not want to do that if it could be avoided.
It would be better if the Sheikh went away quietly by himself.
The attacks on the Copts brought, as Owen had expected they would, bitter representations from the Coptic community.
Among the leaders who came to complain was Andrus.
‘If you do not take action,’ he said, ‘we shall.’
‘You have said that to me before.’
‘And you took no action.’
‘I took action.
But so did you.’
Andrus looked shaken.
‘What do you mean?’
‘Did you not take action?’
Owen pressed him.
‘If we did,’ said Andrus, ‘who can blame us?’
‘I blame you,’ said Owen.
‘Without your action there would not have been blood, Coptic blood, on the streets.’
‘I do not know what is this action you refer to.’
‘Don't you?’ said Owen, looking him straight in the eye.
‘No,’ said Andrus, returning the look.
Owen was not sure.
The contradiction was direct and on the whole he believed Andrus to be an honest man.
But he sensed an unease beneath the directness.
Perhaps although Andrus had not been personally involved, he knew more than he pretended.
Andrus returned to the burden of his present complaints.
They were the same as last time but with, probably, more justification.
And whereas previously, under the shock of the immediate offence, he had been fiercely indignant, now there was a savage bitterness which was in a way more alarming.
He answered Andrus, as he had done the other Copts, with assurances and counsels of patience; and with a touch of iron.
‘Do not be drawn into reprisals,’ he said as Andrus left, ‘or there will be trouble.’
‘Do you think we should just sit back and take it?’ asked Andrus.
‘There won't be any taking it.
I'll see to that.’
‘I hope you will,’ said Andrus.
‘I hope you will.’
Andrus's name, of course, appeared on the list that Nikos compiled.
Owen was surprised to see how extensive the list was.
The church seemed to be a microcosm of Coptic society, with representatives of all social layers.
Perhaps because it was conveniently placed on the edge of the Old City closest to the modern, developed parts where the more well-to-do lived, there were surprisingly wealthy people in its congregation.
The Zosers rubbed shoulders with men with a hundred times their income.
Another way in which the church was comprehensive was in the range of cultural levels among its members.
Primitive fundamentalists like Zoser stood alongside sophisticated civil servants like Sesostris and Ramses.
Sesostris Owen could understand; he was a fundamentalist too.
But Ramses?
He asked Nikos about it.
‘It's a very old church,’ Nikos said.
‘Lots of people prefer it.’
Georgiades had another explanation.
‘They all stick together,’ he said.
Owen could also understand that.
A minority which believed itself to be persecuted might well stick together.
It would look after its members, even erring ones like Zoser, especially if the grounds for the offence were ostensibly religious ones.
Zoser appeared to be a man of few friends.
Even so, in the diffuse community which centred on the church there might be those willing to shelter him.
It was worth checking.
But he would have to go through them all one by one.
That was a task to stretch even the Mamur Zapt's resources (especially with the Curbash Compensation Fund so depleted).
There were so many of them.
Where to start?
The obvious place to start was with the known agitators and trouble-makers.
But when he asked Nikos to check the congregation against his other lists, Nikos said:
‘That's no good.
You won't find any.
They're all respectable people.’
‘How do you know?’ asked Georgiades.
‘They're all Copts,’ said Nikos, but went to look in his files.
Georgiades sighed.
‘Unfortunately, he's right,’ he said.
Copts were law-abiding.
Their crime rate was far lower than that of any other community.
Even with Owen's political definition, they came out below other national and ethnic groups.
On the whole they saw the British as allies from the point of view of protection, as insurance against massacre, and as offering opportunities for advancement.
They flocked into Government service.
Just as Jews, in other countries, were traditionally identified with financial services, so the Copts, in Egypt, were identified with the civil service.
Their critics said there was no need for them to break the law; they made it.
They were on the inside.
Like Nikos.
A thought struck him.
Nikos made the lists.
He had drawn up the list of church members and he maintained the other lists too.
Any name that was on the list was there because Nikos had put it there.
Would it be surprising if some names were not on the lists?
A feeling of helplessness came over him.
All investigations, no matter what the books said, depended on bureaucratic processes.
Especially his kind of investigation.
It was only partly the men he had out on the streets and in the bazaars, the special agents like Georgiades.
All these would be useless  without record-keeping and, more than that, record-keeping of the intelligent sort that Nikos provided.
If you couldn't rely on that, how could you even start?
He came to a decision.
He would start with Nikos's list.
Until Nikos was found wanting Owen would continue to trust him.
But he might ask Georgiades to do a little independent checking.
Because of the heat all work stopped about lunch-time and the city came to a halt.
The streets emptied, the shops shut, the donkey boys retreated into the shade, and government offices closed.
Most people took a siesta.
A few British officials, however, in whom northern habits died hard, preferred to go to one of the clubs and have a drink and lunch there.
Owen was one of these.
He was unable to sleep during the day, and used the dead time to keep up with the newspapers and journals in the reading-room and to swim in the club pool while it was comparatively empty.
Afterwards, about five, when the club started to fill up with people arriving for the daily hockey and cricket matches, played always, by personal decree of the Consul-General, in the cool of the evening, he returned to his office.
The buildings were empty except for the occasional orderly and the Assistant Commissioner at the other end of the corridor, and sometimes Nikos working late, and he was able to get a lot of work done.
His friends, however, were familiar with his habits, so Mahmoud knew where to find him.
Mahmoud was another one who didn't take a siesta and just at the moment, still simmering over the way Zoser had slipped through his fingers, he was driving his men hard.
Even Mahmoud, however, could not get them to work in the afternoons and he too, like Owen, normally used the afternoons to catch up on desk work and reading.
This afternoon, though, he had been unable to concentrate on the case he was preparing.
His thoughts kept drifting back to Zoser.
He kept  analysing and re-analysing the probabilities.
And then he had his idea.
‘It's logical,’ he insisted to Owen when they met.
‘When he's not at home and he's not working, that's where he is.
Why shouldn't he be there now?’
They were sitting outside at their usual table.
The heat was beginning to go off the streets and the shadows were creeping out from the walls.
It was still early, however, and they were the only ones at the tables.
‘There are lots of places he might be,’ Owen objected.
‘He could be anywhere.
He might have left the city altogether.’
‘No, he wouldn't have done that,’ said Mahmoud.
‘He's never been out of the city in his life.
He would be frightened.’
‘OK, but there are lots of places in the city.’
‘He's a creature of habit,’ said Mahmoud, ‘and very rigid.
He has a few basic routines which he sticks to.
He keeps to the places he knows, the ones he feels confident in.
That's why he could be there.’
‘Someone would be sure to come across him.’
‘They might not say if they did.
Anyway, they might not come across him.
It's always dark, there are lots of little odd corners and he probably knows it well.’
‘It's a possibility,’ Owen conceded.
‘You see,’ said Mahmoud, ‘we've been assuming somebody is helping him and we've been going round all his contacts.
It's easy because there are very few of them.
Well, we've drawn a blank.
We could have missed it, I know.’
Mahmoud thought of the way Zoser had escaped before and wavered slightly.
‘But I don't think we have,’ he said determinedly.
‘Not this time.
We've not found anything because there isn't anyone else involved.’
‘There must have been someone else involved at some point.
Someone put him up to it.’
‘Well, do we know that?
Are we sure?
Maybe he just heard about the Andrus business and took it into his head to avenge it.
All by himself.’
Mahmoud happily following a logical trail was a different Mahmoud from the one sensitive to charges of Egyptian  incompetence.
He had forgotten all about his previous difference with Owen and was now totally caught up with his argument.
‘It's a possibility,’ said Owen.
‘I don't know I'd go any further.’
The intuitive, Welsh side of Owen always responded to Mahmoud's Arab inspirationalism; the pragmatic English side damped it down.
‘But do you think it's worth trying?’
‘Well — yes.’
‘OK, then,’ said Mahmoud.
‘Will you help me?’
The Parquet, true to its French origins, was completely secular and made no distinctions among Cairo's many religions.
Mahmoud, however, like most of the Parquet lawyers, was Moslem.
Usually this didn't matter because the Parquet confined itself to criminal offences and there was no religious dimension involved.
Occasionally, however, there was and then, Cairo being Cairo, the Parquet trod very carefully.
Mahmoud clearly thought this was one of those times.
‘You see,’ he said, ‘it's the church.’
How would it look if a Moslem took his men into a Christian church on the pretext, as the Copts would see it, of conducting a search?
Wouldn't it come perilously close to desecration?
Almost as close, say, as putting a dog in a tomb?
But would it look any better if a Christian Mamur Zapt were to do it?
In Cairo there was almost as much difference between Christian and Christian as there was between Christian and Moslem.
And the Mamur Zapt wasn't even an Egyptian Christian.
There was another thing, too.
So far he had been able to maintain a claim to even-handedness on the grounds that he treated both sides, Moslems and Copt, with equal severity.
Wouldn't this be seen as tipping the balance?
Mahmoud was watching him anxiously.
If Zoser was hiding in the church and they caught him it would be worth it.
But suppose he wasn't?
They would have  stirred up trouble for nothing.
Just at a time when the Copts were especially sensitive.
Wouldn't it be better if Mahmoud did it?
After all, it was the Parquet's business.
Treat it as he would any ordinary issue and any ordinary criminal.
If it had been a brothel or a gaming club Mahmoud wouldn't have hesitated.
He would have sent his men in at once.
Why couldn't he do that now?
But as soon as he posed the question, Owen knew the answer.
Mahmoud was quite right.
He couldn't do it.
The Copts would object very strongly if Owen were to invade the church; but if Mahmoud did it they would riot.
‘OK,’ he said.
‘I'll do it.’
They moved fast.
This time they were taking no chances.
Owen did not even go back to his office.
He got Georgiades to bring his men to the Bab es Zuweyla and only then told Georgiades what he had in mind.
‘OK,’ said Georgiades instantly.
He looked at Mahmoud.
‘How many men have you got?’
‘Ten.’
‘Get some more.
Enough to put a ring round the church.’
‘I've got enough to watch the roads.’
‘Yes,’ said Georgiades, ‘but he won't use those.’
Mahmoud found some more men and Georgiades showed him where to station them.
Mahmoud was quite content to follow Georgiades on this.
Good investigator though he was, he preferred to leave this side of the business to others.
Georgiades would handle it better.
‘If he comes running out,’ said Georgiades, ‘at least they'll see him now.
Though whether they'll be able to do anything about it if they do see him…’
Georgiades had no high opinion of the police.
He gathered his own men into a little bunch and gave them careful instructions.
He had used them before and they knew what to do.
Intelligence was the thing in a case like this, not brawn.
Intelligence — and speed.
It would have  to be done quickly.
The more time they took, the more time there was for a crowd to gather.
What Owen wanted was to be in and out fast.
The men rushed in and fanned out quickly.
At least there wasn't a service going on.
A few black-gowned priests looked up startled.
For a moment or two they couldn't understand what was happening.
Then one of them rushed off.
One of Georgiades's men intercepted him.
‘Where are you going?’ he asked.
‘To fetch the Father,’ the priest snapped at him.
‘You stay here,’ said the man.
The priests were shepherded into a little knot.
They seemed completely bewildered.
Bewildered first and then angry.
It was not long before they began to complain.
As the angry voices rose higher and higher other black-gowned figures came in.
Among them was an impressively-dressed figure whom Owen recognized to be the Father of the church.
He went across to him.
‘I am sorry, Father, that this should be so,’ he said.
‘We will not be long.’
‘Why are you here?’
‘We are looking for an evil man.’
‘Here?
In the church?’
‘I am afraid so.’
‘But why here?
What reason have you to look here?’
‘One has told us.’
It was easier to put it that way.
To say that they were here only because of a hunch would not do at all.
‘It is an outrage!’ the Father said angrily.
‘We will not be long.’
Owen walked away.
The Father joined the other priests.
They crowded round him and began to talk excitedly.
‘Have you thought what the Metropolitan will say?’ said Georgiades in an aside as he hurried past.
The Metropolitan was the head of the Coptic church in Egypt.
He would not be pleased.
‘And the Patriarch?’ said Georgiades, the next time he went past.
The Patriarch.
Owen had forgotten about him.
The Patriarch was head of the whole Coptic Church, including the Abyssinian one, which was Coptic too.
Abyssinian.
There could be an international complaint.
The Patriarch would use the country's ambassadors.
They might go straight to the Foreign Office.
The British Government would have to respond.
And the British Government, churchgoers like Postlethwaite, would hardly be likely to take kindly to one of its servants invading a church.
A Christian church too.
Owen cursed himself for having been so foolhardy as to get involved in this affair.
Why hadn't he stayed out of it?
Got Mahmoud to go in?
Even if Mahmoud had refused, would it have mattered so much?
They could always have had the church watched and perhaps picked up Zoser when he came out.
If he was there, that was.
He might not even be there and the whole thing would have been for nothing and all he would have got out of it would have been kicks.
This, he told himself, is a big mistake.
It began to look increasingly like it.
Georgiades had split his force into two.
The first group had taken up position in all the key intersections so that they could control anyone who attempted to pass.
The second group had moved immediately into the hekals, the Coptic apses, of which there were many, screened off from the rest of the church by fine, heavily-pictured screens.
Beyond there was the baptistery and beyond this a whole host of little rooms used by the priests.
The men went methodically through these.
They knew what to do.
They were used to the job.
They performed similar raids every week; not on churches, admittedly, but on printers' premises, warehouses, gambling dens, brothels and private houses.
Garvin himself, before he became Commandant, had been responsible for training them.
He had needed expert searchers for his battle against the drug traffic.
There were none and he had had to train them.
Once trained, they could be used for other things too.
Georgiades went past again.
This time he didn't say anything.
His brow was furrowed in concentration.
The sweat ran down his face in streams.
His men were beginning to return from their searches.
They came and stood in a little group, disciplined and obedient.
Owen didn't need to ask.
They had found nothing.
Georgiades, vexed, went off on a search of his own.
His second-in-command re-divided the men and sent them back for a second search of the places they had searched before.
Owen had hoped to avoid this.
It all took time.
He went to the door of the church and looked out.
Already a little crowd had gathered.
He saw Mahmoud, who caught his eye questioningly.
Owen shook his head.
Back in the church the priests were shouting angrily at the men.
The men, who were mostly Sudanis from the south, ignored them but looked uneasy.
Georgiades came back mopping his face.
He stood in the centre of the church beneath the great dome and began to look carefully all round him.
The men, returned from the second time, stood waiting.
‘Have you done the crypt?’
Georgiades nodded without speaking.
His eyes were now on the roof.
The Father broke away from the knot of priests, shrugging off the efforts of the men to restrain him, and came across to Owen.
‘I am not having this,’ he said.
Owen ignored him.
He thought he could hear a growing murmur outside.
‘You have no right!’ the Father said hotly.
‘The Mamur Zapt has the right,’ said Owen.
Strictly speaking, he was correct.
The Mamur Zapt had right of entry to all premises in Cairo.
However, it was a right which it was sometimes as wise not to use.
‘This is sacrilege!’
‘My men have been very careful.’
He turned away.
The Father hesitated, looked for a moment as if he was going to come after him, then shrugged his shoulders and rejoined the knot.
The door of the church opened.
The murmur of the crowd became more distinct.
Mahmoud came in.
‘Soon,’ said Owen.
He would not be able to hold them for long.
Mahmoud went out.
The door closed firmly behind him.
He would hold the crowd as long as he could.
Owen had no doubts on that score.
But he was a Moslem and the crowd would be Copt.
Owen himself would have to go out soon.
Georgiades made a sudden dart.
There were no towers to the church, no staircases going upward.
But there would be access to the roof, if only for care and maintenance.
Georgiades had found out.
It was a series of pegs in the wall going upwards.
He began to climb.
Two of his men followed him.
Georgiades was a bulky man, not good at this sort of thing.
It would have been better to have let the men go first.
He could see Georgiades stop to catch his breath.
No doubt he was thinking the same thing.
He went grimly on.
The pegs went up to the level of the bottom of the big dome.
Now Owen looked, he could see a thin gallery running round it.
It could be no more than a foot wide.
In the darkness it was hard to see but it looked as if there wasn't even a railing.
‘Light the lamps!’
Owen said.
The men ran round the church seizing any lamp they could find.
Some of them brought candles and torches.
There were indignant shouts from the priests.
As the lamps were raised, the shadows chased back towards the top of the dome.
In the less than half light Owen saw that Georgiades had come out on to the gallery.
There was a sudden shout.
Below Georgiades his men leapt up the last few pegs.
Georgiades began to go one way round the gallery, his men the other.
Their shadows loomed grotesquely on the sides of the dome.
And with them another shadow, smaller hunched, desperate.
The shadows converged.
And then, before they quite met, the smaller shadow seemed to detach itself from the wall and move out into space.
It hung there for a moment.
Then it fell.
8
‘Dead!
In his own church!’ said the Moslems with satisfaction.
There was general agreement — among the Moslems — that justice had been done.
It was accepted without question, even by the Copts, that Zoser had been the Zikr's killer and the Moslems were pleased that the matter had ended in such a satisfactory and clean-cut way.
The British, it was agreed by all, on this occasion, were men of justice despite their many other faults, only they did have a habit of making tidy things untidy by over-insistence on bureaucratic process.
Better that it should end like this, when justice was not only done but manifestly seen by all to be done.
Surprisingly, however, some Moslems, mostly at the upper end of the social scale, disagreed.
‘It's this tax business,’ Paul explained, ‘this levy the Khedive is proposing.
Word of it is beginning to get round and the Copts are already showing signs of growing restive.
The Khedive is starting to realize that he might have trouble on his hands.
So he doesn't want incidents like this.’
‘It's a mess,’ was the way Garvin put it later.
‘Administratively, I mean.
It would have been better to have taken him prisoner.
We could have delayed the trial until the tax business was settled.
Then it wouldn't have mattered.’
‘Jane Postlethwaite wouldn't have been here to give evidence.’
‘You weren't planning to use her, surely?’ said Garvin, rubbing his chin.
That was one good thing to come out of the affair.
Jane Postlethwaite wouldn't have to give evidence.
When the news was broken to her she suddenly went white.
‘Poor man,’ she said.
‘Poor, poor man.’
Zeinab took a more  practical view.
‘It was a good job you didn't have to climb up that ladder,’ she said.
‘What ladder?’ asked Owen.
Zeinab was always imprecise about detail.
The reaction of the Copts was strangely muted.
The Metropolitan, of course, complained — that was what Garvin was seeing Owen about.
Various local delegations came to Owen to protest about the invasion of the church.
Zoser was scarcely mentioned.
Andrus was a member of one of the delegations.
On this occasion he said unusually little.
So far there was no word from the Patriarch, or from Abyssinia.
Owen began to hope that they viewed the incident as too small to bother about.
Perhaps it had not even been reported to them.
Mahmoud, busy as ever, had immediately switched to another case.
It was clear that he regarded the matter as closed.
Owen was not so sure.
Tit-for-tat exchanges between the communities of Cairo did not necessarily end just because a man had been killed.
He was waiting to see if there were any further attacks.
As the days went by, however, and no further incident was reported, he began to relax.
His words to Osman appeared to have had some effect.
On the Copt side, too, all was quiet.
One morning he went so far as to say to Nikos that he thought the affair was now over.
‘Yes,’ said Nikos, ‘provided that it was the simple case.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘The simple case,’ said Nikos, ‘is that the matter began and ended with the Zikr.
He desecrated the tomb; he has paid for it.’
‘Well?’
‘The other case is when it doesn't end there.
Suppose Andrus were right?
Suppose it were not the whole thing but part of a pattern?
That gets more complex.’
‘Polo,’ said Paul.
‘What?’
‘Polo.
It's a game you play on horses.
There's a match tomorrow.
Would you like to go and see it?’
‘No!’ said Owen.
‘Pity.
I've arranged for you to take Miss P.’
‘I don't want to watch polo.
I've got better things to do.’
‘Hasn't everybody?
However, that's not the point.
I need her out of the way tomorrow afternoon because things are reaching a juicy stage and I've got to work on her uncle.’
‘Couldn't you find somebody else?’
‘I've picked you.
Though not with the confidence I used to.
However, with polo you ought to be all right.
Just confine yourself to watching the game, that's all.
If a horse has to be shot, or, I suppose, a rider — perhaps they do that sort of thing in polo; I expect they do since the Army has a hand in it — you don't have to go out of your way to ensure that she has a ringside seat.
Nothing nasty this time, please.’
‘It will be very boring,’ Owen complained.
‘I certainly hope so.’
‘Mightn't she find it boring, too?’
‘Oh, I don't know.
There are the horses.
Don't girls like horses?’
‘I would have thought she'd have outgrown that.’
‘I would have thought so too, but last night I spent a whole dinner sitting between two girls who talked about nothing but horses.
That's what gave me the idea.’
‘I think she may be different.’
‘So she may, and tomorrow's the chance for her to find that out.
I've arranged for you to pick her up from her hotel at four o'clock.’
The polo took place at the Khedivial Sports Club, or Gezira, as it was familiarly known, and the following afternoon found Owen walking dutifully about its spacious grounds with Jane Postlethwaite's hand resting lightly on his arm.
He had been somewhat apprehensive about the encounter in view of the way their last meeting had ended, but fortunately she seemed to have put her irritation behind her.
They stood beneath the trees for a while watching the game.
‘Do you play polo yourself, Captain Owen?’ she asked politely.
‘A lot of people did in India,’ he said.
Honesty compelled him to add: ‘I didn't.
I couldn't afford the ponies.’
Jane Postlethwaite turned her candid gaze upon him.
‘They are very expensive, I presume?’
‘Not in themselves.
It's the things that go with them.
Stabling, a syce — that's a sort of groom — that kind of thing.
You couldn't really manage it on a subaltern's pay.
Of course, most of the officers had private incomes.’
The play moved over to the other side of the field and they stopped their conversation for a moment to follow it.
Then a long hit sent ponies and riders thundering away.
‘It seems wrong,’ said Jane Postlethwaite.
‘What does?’
‘To spend your money on this sort of thing.’
‘There are worse things to spend your money on.’
‘And better.’
She turned away.
‘Shall we walk through the grounds?’
The grounds were beautiful and well kept.
There were marvellous flowerbeds, rose-gardens and herbaceous borders, well-established trees and shrubberies in full bloom.
Yet the pride of the Gezira was its turf.
Lush, green fields stretched in all directions.
They were heavily watered each day in both the morning and the evening and kept their greenness in spite of the wear and the sun.
All the pitches were lined with trees under which spectators could sit and which made splendid spots for picnics when no game was going on.
There were several families under the trees now, with little children running around and babies crawling about in the grass.
Jane Postlethwaite watched them with pleasure.
‘I can see now,’ she said.
‘I can see how it might be possible to bring up a family here.
I wondered how an English family could manage it.
It's so hot.
It would drain the energy out of you.’
‘You get used to it.’
‘Especially with children.’
‘Lots of men send their families home to England in the summer.’
‘I wouldn't like that,’ said Jane Postlethwaite with a decided shake of her head.
‘I wouldn't like that at all.’
They made a wide circle through the grounds.
By the time they came back to the club house the sun was already setting.
Through the trees they could see the spectators returning from the polo.
Because of the heat games never started before four and they had to finish soon after six because of the early Egyptian twilight.
There was time for one innings only if you were playing cricket.
All matches had to be two-day ones.
They approached the club house through a fine avenue of tall mimosas.
Jane Postlethwaite dawdled.
‘It's lovely,’ she said enthusiastically.
‘It's just like one of those avenues you sometimes see in Italy.
Different trees, of course.
But against the sky, especially when it's beginning to get dark…
Have you ever visited Italy, Captain Owen?’
Owen hadn't.
To him Italy was as alien and remote as — well, as England was.
It was ten years since he had been in Europe.
He had left England when he was nineteen.
The landscape he knew was that of the East.
Jane Postlethwaite went happily up the steps of the club house and off to the ladies' room.
Owen waited outside.
At this time of day it was cooler outside than in the airless rooms of the club.
He took a turn along a path between the great bougainvillaea bushes.
A man came along the path towards him, obviously taking the air, as he was.
He looked at Owen, stopped and stretched out his hand.
‘Hello,’ he said.
‘Enjoying the polo?’
‘The grounds more,’ said Owen.
It was Ramses, the civil servant from the Ministry of Finance whom he had talked to at the Consul-General's reception.
‘Me too,’ said Ramses.
‘I bring my family out here for a picnic.
The boys like watching but I can't say I greatly enjoy it myself.’
They fell into step beside each other.
Owen asked how John Postlethwaite was getting on in the ministry.
‘All right.
He's very thorough.
He knows his stuff.’
‘I wish I did.
Accounting has always been a closed book to me.’
‘I don't suppose it figures large in an officer's training.’
‘No.
But when you move into administration you find you need it.’
‘All administration is ultimately money,’ said Ramses, who had a professional bias in the matter.
‘Money.
And people.’
‘The two go together.’
‘Especially in Cairo.’
They both laughed.
‘I'm having problems,’ said Owen.
‘A soldier's pay doesn't go far,’ said Ramses neutrally.
‘No, no.
It's not that.
I'm having problems with my viring.’
‘You don't have powers of virement, surely?’
‘I've sort of had in the past.’
Ramses grinned.
‘But they've found out?’
‘Yes, but I need to vire, if that's what you call it.
I get my money through all sorts of old accounts.
It might have been all right in the past but it doesn't work now.’
‘That's the problem with Egypt's finances as a whole,’ said Ramses.
‘And that, actually, is why Lord Cromer suspended all delegated powers of virement.
Everyone was switching money from one account to another and usually into their own account as well.’
‘I'm not doing that.
I'm just trying to make things work.’
‘You won't get them to agree to virement.
What you'll have to do is to ask for your allocation to be increased.’
‘Garvin said I wouldn't get anywhere doing that.
It's mixed up with the levy on Copts, apparently.’
‘The proposed levy.
It's not been agreed yet.
Yes, that's quite true.
There's an across-the-board freeze on any increases in allocation until the levy business is settled.
But  there usually is at this time of year anyway.
It's getting near the end of the financial year.
You won't get any increase this year, but if you put in a good bid now you might get your allocation upped for next year.’
‘Well, thanks,’ said Owen.
‘It's now that I need it.’
‘That's what they all say.
Including the Khedive.’
They headed back towards the club house.
‘It's not just the levy,’ said Ramses.
‘It's the general political situation.
The levy's only a pretext.’
‘I thought the Copts didn't like it?’
‘They don't.
But that's not the only reason for introducing it.’
‘The Khedive needs money.’
‘He always does.
No, it's not that either, though that also is true.
No, the real point is to make it impossible for Patros Bey.’
‘Make what impossible?’
Ramses looked sideways at him.
‘You haven't heard?’
He hesitated.
‘I thought you would have.
Otherwise I wouldn't have spoken.
Oh well, you'll soon know, or else you'll find out: the Consul-General is trying to get the Khedive to make Patros Prime Minister.’
‘A Copt?’
‘It's all these people wanting increases in their allocations,’ said Ramses.
‘You need someone who is both competent at finance and honest.
In Egypt the two don't usually go together.
Especially in politicians.’
‘Just in Patros.’
‘He's come up through the Ministry.
The Consul-General knows he can trust him.’
‘He's one of the blokes that stops me viring?’
‘That's right.
Only he left the Ministry some time ago to go into politics.’
‘Is he in favour of the levy or against it?’
‘A good question, the answer to which the Coptic community would dearly like to know.
The point is, however, that whether he's actually in favour of the levy or not, he can't accept the Prime Ministership while the issue is still  on the agenda.
He would lose all credibility with the Coptic community.
So, if you don't want him to become Prime Minister you keep the issue on the agenda.’
‘Which the Khedive is doing.’
‘Which the Khedive is doing for different reasons.
He just wants money to go to France.
The politicians around him are encouraging him in his insistence on the levy because they want to stop Patros.’
‘And when is all this likely to be resolved?’
‘It's coming up to the boil, I would say,’ said Ramses, ‘coming up to the boil.’
‘I went to a funeral yesterday,’ said Georgiades.
‘I'm sorry.
It —’ Owen began.
Georgiades cut him off.
‘On business.’
‘What business?’
‘Zoser's.
At least, it was his funeral.
It was in the Mar Girgis.
I thought I'd go and see who attended.’
‘And who did attend?’
‘Pretty well the whole congregation.
Top to bottom.’
‘Ramses?’
‘And Sesostris.’
‘Andrus?’
‘Certainly.
And did a lot of talking afterwards.’
‘What did he say?’
‘Couldn't get close enough.
I didn't want to make myself too obvious.
In view of my last visit.’
‘A lot of people there?’
‘Yes.’
‘That worries me,’ said Owen, ‘a bit.’
‘It surprised me,’ said Georgiades.
‘I'd thought he was a loner.’
‘It looks as though, on this occasion at least , a lot of Copts identify with him.’
‘It might be just that he's one of their flock.’
‘Wife there?’
‘A woman smelling of perfumes.’
‘Anyone talk to her?’
‘I couldn't see what went on behind the screen.
But she didn't come with anyone.
And afterwards she left on her own.’
‘You don't know where she went?’
‘As it happens,’ said Georgiades, ‘I do.’
‘You followed her?’
‘No,’ said Georgiades.
‘I wanted to hear what the others were saying.
I got someone else to follow her.
A small boy.
For a large reward.’
‘Not Ali?
That boy in the cemetery.’
‘That little bugger,’ said Georgiades, ‘may be most places in Cairo but he's not everywhere.
No, another urchin.
Equally unscrupulous.’
‘Anyway, he followed her home?’
‘That's right.
She's moved, but not far.
Still within a stone's throw of the Scentmakers’ Bazaar.’
‘She could still be important.’
‘Yes.
So I've set this boy up with a regular income.
He's keeping an eye on her.
Debit the Curbash Compensation Fund with a few more milliemes.’
The Mamur Zapt winced.
Eventually Owen had to summon Yussuf.
‘Yussuf,’ he said, ‘things can't go on like this.
You'll have to sort things out between you and your wife.’
‘I have no wife,’ said Yussuf obstinately.
‘Yes, I know all about that,’ said Owen, ‘but it won't do.
We haven't had any decent coffee for days.
Besides, it's depressing everybody.’
That was true.
Yussuf's unhappiness had spread a cloud over the whole orderly room.
Normally it buzzed with cheerful conversation.
The orderlies didn't do a lot of work but they did do a lot of talking, and their general cheerfulness had a lifting effect on the corridor as a whole.
Owen would hear them as he sat at his desk; and if by some incredible chance all the bearers at once were sent out with messages and the orderly room fell empty he was at once conscious  of a gap.
Since Yussuf had fallen out with his wife, however, the sounds from the other end of the corridor had become more subdued.
At first the other orderlies had merely seized upon it as an excuse for extra banter.
Gradually, however, they had all been infected by Yussuf's low spirits and now the orderly room was an oasis of gloom.
Even McPhee, the Assistant Commandant, had noticed it and that morning he had come along to see Owen.
‘We can't have this,’ he said.
‘It's depressing everybody.
You'd better have a word with him.
I'd do it myself but he's your bearer.’
Although, strictly speaking, the bearers were not assigned to individuals and worked as a pool, carrying messages for anybody in the building, in practice they identified themselves with particular people.
When Owen had first arrived in the building Yussuf had decided, unilaterally, to be his bearer and now it was a source of great pride to him that he was the one who carried the Mamur Zapt's messages.
Owen did not in fact have many messages — he preferred to use the telephone — and Yussuf had time on his hands.
It had seemed to him a natural extension of his duties, and somehow consistent with Islamic notions of hospitality, to assume responsibility for seeing that Owen was properly supplied with coffee.
The same generous spirit had seen him extend his service to the rest of the corridor, and now the whole floor depended on it.
When the service faltered, therefore, everyone along the corridor was afflicted; and Owen, as the person responsible in custom for Yussuf, was seen as the man to put it right.
What precisely he could do about it was not immediately clear since even the Mamur Zapt's writ did not normally extend to the domestic relationship between man and wife.
The consensus along the corridor was that Yussuf's wife was all right really apart from her inability to produce any children and that this was the root of the trouble.
The other bearers took the traditional view that the right thing to do was for Yussuf to get rid of her and find another one; but for reasons known only to himself Yussuf was reluctant to  do this.
A refinement was therefore suggested, namely that he should keep his first wife and merely add a second.
Here too, though, there were difficulties.
Yussuf couldn't afford it and his first wife wouldn't allow it.
She had marched indignantly out when the proposal had been put to her and the matter had remained unresolved ever since.
‘I have no wife,’ Yussuf repeated obstinately.
‘Then it's time you did,’ said Owen.
‘Either take Fatima back or find yourself another woman.’
Yussuf was silent.
‘Fatima has faults,’ Owen pursued.
‘No woman is without faults.
Nor no man either.
You yourself, Yussuf, are not without blame.
Fatima has been a good wife to you.
For the sake of that, take her back.’
Yussuf stared straight in front of him.
He gave no sign of having heard.
‘You have shown her you are a strong man, one who must be obeyed.
If she didn't know that before, she will know it now.
She has learned her lesson.
Be just as well as strong, O Yussuf.’
Owen had fallen into the familiar rhetorical style of the Arab.
It was partly the language itself that suggested it.
When he had first come to Egypt Garvin had insisted that he stay with an Arab family perfecting his Arabic.
Owen had a facility for languages and had learned his lessons well.
He spoke Arabic now without strain and from the inside, not needing to translate, thinking in the Arabic mode.
Yussuf stirred, responding, possibly, to the familiar patterns.
‘She has done wrong,’ he said.
‘Indeed she has,’ Owen agreed hastily.
‘But now she knows better.’
‘She should acknowledge her fault.’
‘And probably wishes to,’ said Owen, hoping that Yussuf's wife was not as formidable as his sister.
‘She has not said so.’
‘Well,’ said Owen, ‘you can hardly expect her to.’
‘She will have to say so before I take her back.’
‘Do not be too hard,’ Owen counselled.
‘The wise man is merciful as well as just.’
‘If she acknowledges her fault,’ said Yussuf, with the air of one making a great concession, ‘then I will take her back.’
Owen praised Yussuf's justness and mercifulness, wondering, however, whether such an acknowledgement could be secured.
‘There will have to be someone to go between you,’ he said.
Yussuf was prepared to accept that.
‘Though not Soraya,’ he added darkly.
‘Who is Soraya?’
‘My sister.’
Owen thought that rather a pity as she had seemed very competent, quite capable of sorting out both Yussuf and his wife.
However, this was a point Yussuf stuck on, so in the end it was agreed that they would ask Leila, the wife of the senior bearer.
Privately Owen intended to make sure that she was given a very strong briefing beforehand.
For the moment, however, it looked as if the matter was on its way to being resolved.
‘Fatima will know,’ he said to Yussuf, ‘that she has a husband who is just as well as strong, merciful as well as just.’
‘She is a fortunate woman,’ Yussuf agreed.
‘And you will take her back.’
Yussef hesitated.
‘It — it may not be so simple, effendi.’
‘Why not?’
‘Effendi —’
‘Yes?’
‘I have already pronounced the divorce,’ said Yussuf with a rush.
Under Islamic law it was possible to divorce by simple declaration.
The husband merely had to say, in the presence of witnesses, ‘I divorce thee.’
‘Did anyone hear you?’
Yussuf hung his head.
‘Yes, effendi.’
It transpired that the whole street had been summoned to hear the declaration.
‘That is a pity.
However, you can revoke your word and take her back.’
It was allowable under the law for a husband who changed his mind to receive his wife back without ceremony.
Twice.
Yussuf's head dropped even lower.
‘Effendi —’
‘Yes?’
‘It was the triple vow.’
If the words were spoken once, or even twice, the woman could be taken back.
When the words were spoken for the third time, however, the divorce was irrevocable.
And that applied whether the words were spoken on separate occasions or all together.
Thus if a particularly irate husband pronounced the words three times in the heat of the moment the divorce was permanent and could not be reversed.
‘You said it three times?’
‘Yes, effendi,’ said Yussuf unhappily.
‘That's all right, said Zeinab, ‘it happens all the time.’
‘They say it three times?’
‘Yes.
And afterwards they're sorry.
It is too late then, of course.’
‘He'll have to marry someone else.’
Zeinab curled her legs up under her on the divan.
‘Why?’
‘Because we can't go on like this.
It's affecting everybody.’
‘I didn't mean that.
I mean, why does he have to marry someone else?
I would have thought it mightn't be too easy.
You say he's got a bit of a reputation as a skinflint.’
‘I didn't say that.
His sister did.’
‘Well, she should know.
If it's true, he might find it difficult to get anyone to agree.
Mothers are not going to let their daughters go to someone who's mean with money.
A  bit of beating is all right, you can put up with that, but if a man is tight with his money there's always trouble in the house.
Besides, there's nothing in it for the family.’
‘I would have thought a family would have been only too glad to get an unmarried daughter off its hands.’
‘Not if they're going to come back again immediately because their husband is forever divorcing them.’
‘Yussuf's not like that.’
‘It's the money, you see,’ explained Zeinab, who tended to take a very practical view of these things.
‘A lot of families will say that as soon as he's got the dowry you'll get the girl back.
And then you'll be worse off than when you started.
You've still got the girl but you haven't got the money.’
‘Perhaps he'd be willing to take someone without a dowry.
In the circumstances, I mean.’
‘Him?
Yussuf?
Not if what his sister says is true.’
‘If I leaned on him.’
‘That might help,’ Zeinab conceded.
‘I could even pay the dowry.’
‘I'd watch that if I were you.
Otherwise they'll all be doing it.’
‘There are lots of poor families.’
‘If you were prepared to pay the dowry —’
‘It might be worth it.’
‘What I can't see, though,’ said Zeinab, ‘is why bother with all this?
Wouldn't it be simpler just for him to marry Fatima again?’
‘He can't.
That's the whole point.
He's used the triple vow.’
‘But that's no problem.
I've told you.
People are always doing it.’
‘But —’
‘There's a way round.’
‘There is?’
‘Yes.
It's simple.
What you've got to do is to get her to marry again.
You go to a friend, or if you haven't got one there are people who specialize in it, and then you get them  to marry her on condition that they divorce her immediately afterwards.
Once that has happened you're free to marry her again.’
‘The triple vow doesn't apply?’
‘Not any more.’
Seeing that Owen was having difficulties in getting used to the idea, she took him by the hand and pulled him down beside her on the divan.
‘It's all right,’ she said.
‘In fact, it's quite common.
Men are always divorcing their wives and feeling sorry afterwards.
So there's got to be some way round it.’
‘It happens all the time?’
‘Sure,’ said Zeinab, snuggling down.
‘All the time.’
And then the trouble started.
The first sign was slogans daubed on the wall of a kuttub, a religious school where small children went for their first instruction in the Koran.
The slogans were in ill-formed, illiterate script and Owen at first put it down as the work of children; not the children who went to the kuttub, who were infants, but older youths.
‘It's the youths,’ he said to the Moslems who complained.
‘I don't know what things are coming to.
Children have no respect for their elders nowadays.’
That at least they could agree with and went away shaking their heads, believing it to be merely another instance of the general moral decline which was overtaking the world.
But when the slogans appeared on the wall of two mosques and camel dung was dropped on the entrance of one of them they were very angry and came back to Owen and said that these were godless young and should be put down.
The connection with sectarianism was made gradually and only came after a succession of similar events.
Women going to the mosque had their veils snatched off; a Moslem waterseller was set upon and beaten; Moslem stalls in the market were upset; and during the evening call to prayer a bell had been rung loudly.
Owen found it hard to take such incidents seriously.
‘These things happen all the time,’ he said sceptically when Nikos came in to report them.
‘And people don't notice them.
But now they are.
That's the difference.’
Nikos also brought in some leaflets which his agents had confiscated.
‘This is a difference too,’ he said.
‘This is the first time we've had ones like this for quite a while.’
The leaflet accused the Moslem of kidnapping children and using them for ritual purposes.
Afterwards, it was alleged, the victims were placed in the children's brothels in which Cairo abounded.
There was, of course, no point in trying to check the veracity of the allegations.
The matter was mystic as much as factual, drawn from deep-lying sub-strata of racial prejudice and religious fear.
Similar accusations were made at different times against all the churches.
They surfaced at intervals, burned hot for a time and then slipped back underground, to be stored again in layers of social and religious memory.
If there were leaflets there was organization.
And if there was organization there was money.
And if there was organization and money, then there was design and planning.
The incidents were not spontaneous.
They were part of a pattern.
He had hoped that the affair of the dog and the death of the Zikr were isolated instances, that with the death of those responsible the matter could end there.
It looked as if it was only beginning.
9
The Moslem response was not long in coming.
Fighting broke out in one of the markets, two people were stabbed and a third sprained his ankle when a stall of onions collapsed.
The stab wounds were presented to Owen when he went down to inspect.
Both victims were brought to him limp in the arms of their supporters and their condition  appeared dire.
However, closer inspection suggested that the volume of groans was in inverse proportion to the extent of the damage and Owen soon pushed them away.
More important was the fact that one was a Copt and one a Moslem, which gave hope that, honour being satisfied on both sides, the exchanges might not be carried further.
He lectured all sides sternly, posted a constable conspicuously, and went back to his office relieved that matters were no worse.
Over the next few days, however, there were a number of such incidents and some of them did not end so happily.
There were other stabbings, some of them serious.
Attacks on individuals became so frequent that there were notably fewer people on the streets after dark then was usual.
Gangs of youths gathered outside shops.
At first they contented themselves with shouting insults and throwing stones.
Then one gang went further.
It broke into a shop and wrecked it, terrifying the owner.
After that, such attacks became the pattern and often, now, the attackers were not satisfied with merely terrifying the owners, they beat them up as well.
One gang set fire to a shop after wrecking it and then that too became a feature of the attacks.
Similar incidents occurred all over the Old City and the manpower Owen could command was stretched to its limit.
McPhee had all the ordinary police out in support and Garvin brought in extra police from the country districts around Cairo.
‘We need more,’ said Owen.
‘It's still growing.
That won't be enough.’
‘It's got to be enough,’ said Garvin.
‘There aren't any more.’
‘Can't you transfer some from Alexandria?’
‘What happens if it spreads there?’
‘It would be better to have city police.
They're better at this sort of thing.’
The country police were sufficiently confused simply by being in a big city, without adding in all the complex requirements of urban policing under riot conditions.
‘Can't you grow your own?’ asked Garvin.
‘Take more people on to your payroll?’
‘Haven't the money,’ said Owen, remembering the Curbash Compensation Fund with bitterness.
‘I spoke to you about that.’
‘I suppose I could try again,’ said Garvin.
‘There might be some spare cash floating around since it's getting near the end of the year.’
He rang back later.
‘No chance,’ he said.
‘They're up to their eyeballs in balance sheets, especially with Postlethwaite looking over their shoulder, and won't even listen to me.’
‘They're all bloody Copts in the Ministry of Finance, that's the trouble,’ said Owen.
The pressure now, though, seemed to be coming from the Moslem side.
Crowds gathered outside the main mosques and there were huge demonstrations; spontaneous, according to the Moslems, organized according to Owen.
‘Osman?’ he asked Georgiades.
Georgiades nodded.
He had been out on the streets all day and his face was running with sweat.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘Osman.
Plus money.’
The following evening there was a particularly ugly incident, although this time, against the tide, it appeared to be the Copts who were responsible.
It took place not at the Blue Mosque but further along the street in front of the great Mosque of El Mouayad.
Some Moslem students who had been visiting the Mosque were set upon as they left by a much larger gang of Copts and in the fracas at least one of the students appeared to have been killed.
Owen was unable to check every incident himself and sent one of his men over.
The agent, a good one, reported that the affair wasn't quite as dramatic as first accounts had suggested and had been on a far smaller scale, but that students had definitely been involved and at least one of them appeared badly hurt.
The involvement of students was something that Owen had been hoping to avoid.
The students of el Azhar, the great Moslem university  of Cairo, were only too ready to take to the streets in defence of religion or, indeed, anything at all, and once they were participating it would be very difficult to keep the matter localized.
His worst fears were realized when the next day word came from Georgiades that a monster procession was being formed which would march from the gates of el Azhar through the Old City to converge on the Mar Girgis, where a demonstration was planned.
The only good thing about all this was that the procession was going to march through the Old City.
‘It will be a shambles,’ Nikos confidently predicted.
And on the whole it was.
The streets were thin and crowded anyway.
When hundreds of students tried to proceed along them they very speedily became totally blocked.
The organizers of the march had foolishly neglected to warn the shopkeepers in advance, with the result that shops were still open and their goods, as was the custom with Cairo shops, spread across the pavement.
Agitated shopkeepers rushed out into the street when they saw the marchers approaching and tried to rescue their wares.
The marchers, who were initially good-humoured, slowed down in an effort to help.
Those behind ran into those in front, some tried to crowd past, and in a very short time the result was, as Nikos had forecast, a shambles.
One bewildered donkey was enough to block off a street — and that was without any help from Owen.
The marchers became impatient with the slowness of their progress and spread into neighbouring streets.
These filled up and blocked too and the whole Old City was brought to a standstill.
Confused marchers mingled with bewildered shoppers, excited but ill-informed spectators tried to sort things out and soon everything was in total chaos.
It was hours before the first students managed to permeate through the streets and come to within a hundred yards of the Mar Girgis.
Where Owen was waiting.
McPhee had put carts across all the streets leading to the church, barricading them  completely.
In front of each barricade a row of hefty constables was drawn up with truncheons in their hands.
Behind the carts were other men.
Owen took care to let the demonstrators see that these were armed.
The demonstrators came to a halt.
Because they had arrived independently and in twos and threes they had outstripped their organizers and were at a loss what to do.
As their numbers grew they formed a wedge between the barricades and the main body of the procession, which was forced to stop short some way away from the barricades.
Owen could see the head of the procession from where he stood.
It appeared to be carrying something.
It was some time before the organizers were able to sort things out.
Eventually, however, they managed to open a channel in the wedge and bring the leaders through to the barricades.
Among them was Osman.
Owen could see now what they were carrying.
It was a stretcher.
On it was a pale-faced corpse with an arm flipping over the edge of the stretcher.
The corpse was that of a young man.
Presumably the student had died.
As it approached, the cries of the students rose to a frenzy.
Everywhere now was a sea of raised fists and shouting faces.
Banners tossed and lurched among the faces.
The first stone hit the carts.
Osman Rahman pushed his way forward.
‘Why have you done this?’ he said, pointing to the carts.
‘To stop you from going any further,’ said Owen.
‘Tell your people to go home.’
‘They have a right,’ Osman protested angrily.
‘Tell them to exercise their rights peacefully.’
Osman turned round and began to harangue the crowd.
He was, of course, telling them no such thing.
He was using the opportunity to denounce the British as well as the Copts, bracketing them together as Christians combining against true believers.
The voice rose on a wave of passion.
Owen could not tell whether this actually was the demonstration, conveniently moved in view of the circumstances, or whether Osman meant to whip things up to the point when the  crowd would storm the barricade.
The rhetoric was violent enough.
On the other hand Osman was a practised orator and knew what he was doing.
The crowd had settled to listen to him.
No more stones were being thrown.
The stretcher was being passed over the heads of the crowd.
Once or twice as a hand grabbed and missed it lurched and threatened to tilt the corpse on to the crowd.
Somehow it always righted itself and reached the front, where new hands seized it and raised it high so that everyone could see it.
There was Osman, raised on the knees of his supporters, and the corpse limp on the stretcher beside him.
From time to time Osman turned and gesticulated at the stretcher and every time he did so a cry of anger rose from the crowd.
The constables twitched apprehensively.
McPhee slid along in front of them and stood beside Owen.
‘Do we wait?’ he said.
‘Or do we hit them before they come to the boil?’
Although McPhee, as Assistant Commandant, was nominally ranked higher than Owen, in operations of this sort the Mamur Zapt, responsible for order in the city, was in control.
Owen was undecided.
It was usually best to break up a demonstration in the early stages.
It might already be too late.
On the other hand it could still all end peacefully.
Out of the corner of his eye he saw the stretcher give a great jump.
One of the arms holding it was getting tired.
Something about the corpse attracted his attention.
The stretcher jerked again.
The corpse seemed to brace itself against the tilt but that could not be, unless —
Owen watched it carefully and waited for the arm to tire again.
When the jerk came he was ready for it.
‘Have you a cigarette?’ he asked McPhee.
McPhee was surprised.
‘Thought you didn't smoke,’ he said.
However, he fumbled in his pocket and produced his usual cheroots.
Owen had seen it done during his time in Alexandria, where hysterical prostitutes were quickly restored to life and reason by an experienced old Austrian police officer of the Labban Red Light quarter.
He lit the cheroot and, concealing it in his curved palm, edged towards the stretcher.
The corpse's hand hung stiffly over the side.
Owen pressed the glowing end of the cheroot on to the dead man's hand.
If things were as they seemed it wouldn't matter.
The ‘corpse’ shot upright with a yell.
As it did so the death-like covering of flour fell from its face.
There was a moment or two of stunned silence.
And then the crowd began to laugh.
The next morning the episode was the talk of all the bazaars in Cairo; and the bazaars enjoyed it greatly.
From the bazaars the tale passed via servants into households and thence to the clubs, not so dissimilar from bazaars in their capacity to retail and embellish a story.
Word came that the Sirdar liked it and Garvin was obliged to pass on to Owen a note of approval from the Consul-General.
‘At least no one was killed,’ said Garvin sourly.
More to the point, the affair earned Owen a few days' breathing space.
Not everyone in the Old City was an admirer of Sheikh Osman and there were quite a few Moslems as well as Copts who rejoiced in his discomfiture.
For a few days Osman could not bring himself to show his face in public and there was a noticeable lull in hostilities.
‘It won't last,’ said Georgiades.
‘Some brainless Copt is sure to attack a Moslem.’
‘Or vice versa,’ said Nikos.
Meanwhile Yussuf's affairs were progressing.
The go-between had produced some degree of accord.
Yussuf's wife, Fatima, was flattered by Owen's interest in the state of her marital relationship and after some hard bargaining agreed to return to Yussuf.
The only problems now were  technical.
Here, too, progress was made.
A man was found, a friend of one of the bearers, named Suleiman, who agreed — for a consideration — to become the temporary bridegroom.
Yussuf applied to Owen, who after swearing aloud to Allah that never again, under absolutely any circumstances, etc., etc., found the necessary money.
And the very next day Yussuf, supported, as was proper, by every bearer in the place, went forth to tie and untie and retie the marital knots.
An hour or so later Owen was working peacefully in his office when the door slammed at the end of the building and feet came running along the corridor.
A bearer burst into the room.
‘Effendi!
Oh, effendi!
Something terrible has happened!’ 'Has Suleiman pulled out?’
‘Oh no, effendi.’
‘The marriage went ahead?’
‘Yes, effendi.
But afterwards —’
‘Yes?’
‘He wouldn't divorce her.’
‘Not divorce her?’
‘No, effendi.
He said he had changed his mind.
He said that Fatima's beauty was like the moon and the stars —’
‘Yes, yes.
He refused to use the vow?’
‘That's right, effendi.
We pleaded with them.
We said it was wrong.
But Suleiman said that Fatima's beauty —’
‘OK, OK.
The upshot is they're still married?’
‘Yes, effendi.
Suleiman said —’
‘We've had that.’
The bearer looked injured.
‘— that it wouldn't have counted anyway because he would not have been able to use the words with a true heart.’
‘Of course it would have counted.’
‘That's what we said, effendi.
But he wouldn't listen to us.’
‘Bloody hell!’ said Owen.
‘They went back to Suleiman's house,’ said the bearer, gratified, ‘and barred themselves in an upper room.
We heard them laughing, effendi.
And then they made the noises.’
Yussuf was in a state of deep shock.
Later in the afternoon Owen went along to the bearers’ room.
He found Yussuf squatting on the floor with his back against one of the walls staring dazedly into space.
He did not even look up.
Both Georgiades and Nikos made use of the lull.
‘I've found out something,’ said Georgiades, coming into the office the morning after the crash of Yussuf's hopes.
‘What?’
‘Where Osman gets his money from.’
Owen laid his pencil down.
‘The Goldsmiths’ Bazaar.
He's taken to going there regularly.’
‘To borrow?’
‘I wouldn't have thought so.
To be given.’
‘Who's giving it him?’
‘A Jew.’
‘A Jew?
Odd, that.’
‘He's obviously just an intermediary.’
‘He gets the money from someone else and passes it on to Osman?’
‘That's right.
That's, my guess, anyway.’
‘Have you talked to the Jew?’
‘Not yet.’
‘Will he talk?’
‘He might.’
‘It would be interesting to know who he gets it from.’
‘Want me to ask?’
‘Might be better to wait.
Have you got a man on him?’
‘Yes.’
‘Leave it like that for a day or two.’
Nikos had been busy, too, and he summoned them to show them the result of his labours.
On the wall in his room was a large map of Cairo.
Pinned to it were a lot of little paper flags.
Each flag stood for an  ‘incident’, green for Moslem-inspired ones, red for those initiated by Copts.
‘Notice anything?’
The geographical pattern was clear.
Four-fifths of the flags were within half a mile of the Bab es Zuweyla, the Old Gate, near which was both the Blue Mosque of the Dervishes and the old church of the Copts, the Mar Girgis.
Nikos had marked the church in white, the mosque in blue.
‘Osman territory,’ said Owen.
‘And Andrus territory?’ asked Georgiades.
Owen looked at Nikos.
‘Mar Girgis territory, at any rate,’ said Nikos.
‘A church is the centre of any Coptic network, and all the incidents fall in the territory that the Mar Girgis covers.’
‘Someone at the church, then.
Not the priests —’
Uncomfortable memories of what had happened on his last visit to the Mar Girgis flooded into Owen's mind.
‘No, no, no.
They don't go in for this sort of thing.
Someone else.
Someone in the congregation.
They're in the congregation so they naturally think of using the network.
It's the sort of thing a Copt would think of, the sort of way they think.’
‘Zoser was in the congregation,’ said Owen.
‘Yes,’ said Nikos, ‘that's one of the things I had in mind.’
‘And Andrus.’
‘That too.’
‘The Zikr,’ said Georgiades, ‘was in Osman's congregation.
In a manner of speaking.’
‘Is that it, then?’ asked Owen.
‘Is that what's happening?
Andrus and Osman are slugging it out?’
10
‘It's hotting up again,’ said Garvin.
‘Yes,’ said Owen, ‘I know.’
‘Pity.
I was hoping you'd got it under control.’
‘It was just a lull.’
‘It didn't take long for him to bounce back.’
‘Someone's feeding him money.’
‘Any idea who?’
‘Not yet.
We think we know how but we don't know who.’
‘Only a question of time, then.
The trouble is,’ said Garvin, ‘that time is exactly what you haven't got.’
‘It's still two weeks to the Moulid.’
Garvin brushed it away.
‘Not that.
The Consul-General's been on to me.
He would like things to quieten down.’
‘Well…’
‘Yes, I know,’ said Garvin.
‘Wouldn't we all?
Only I gather he's got a special reason for wanting it just now.’
‘Are we allowed to know what it is?’
Owen waited while Garvin thought it over.
‘No,’ said Garvin finally.
‘I don't think so.
Political.
At the top.’
‘These things have a way of working down.’
‘And then a way of leaking out.’
‘The effect, I meant.
Not the information.’
‘The information won't help you.
Still,’ said Garvin relenting, ‘I could tell you something, I suppose.’
He liked to remind Owen that, out on a privileged limb though the Mamur Zapt might be, he, Garvin, had access to levels that Owen could only aspire to.
‘It's to do with the succession.’
Garvin said.
‘The Consul-General wants the Khedive to reshuffle his Cabinet.
And he has a particular person he would like to see become Prime Minister.’
‘Patros?’
Garvin looked at him in surprise.
‘You know?’
‘I had an inkling.’
‘Well,’ said Garvin, recovering.
‘I suppose it's the sort of thing you ought to have an inkling of.
Though it's meant to be secret.
Well, then, you'll know why just at the moment  the Consul-General doesn't want trouble between Moslems and Copts.’
‘There's always trouble between Moslems and Copts.
It's a fact of life.’
‘Yes, I know.
But at some times it's apparent and at other times it's not.
I want this one to be one of the times when it's not.’
‘You can't just damp these things down.’
‘Can't you?
I thought you just had.’
‘I was lucky.
And it earned us a lull, that was all.’
‘Earn us another one, then,’ said Garvin, ‘only a bit longer this time.’
Owen wanted to say it couldn't be done.
Wisely, he didn't.
‘OK?’
‘How much longer?’
‘It's hard to say.
A month?’
‘The Moulid's in two weeks’ time.’
‘Ah yes,’ said Garvin.
‘I was forgetting.’
He frowned and fidgeted with his pencil.
‘I'll talk to the CG,’ he said.
‘Mind you, I'm not promising anything.
There's a complete log-jam at the moment.’
‘The levy business?’
‘Yes.
The Khedive won't agree to anything until he's got that.’
‘Why is he insisting on that?’
‘Because he wants the money.’
‘Yes, but why does it have to be raised by means of a levy?’
‘Because otherwise it would have to be financed through a general increase in taxation.
That would increase the Khedive's unpopularity, and he's unpopular enough already.
Whereas if he raised it through a levy on Copts that would be wildly popular with everyone else.
His Ministers are telling him it's a masterstroke.
They're Moslem, of course.’
‘So he's not going to give way?’
‘No.
And nor is Patros.’
‘So it could take some time?’
‘That's right.’
‘And the Moulid is in a fortnight's time.’
‘I'll do my best.’
‘If the Khedive got his money in some other way,’ said Owen, as he turned to go, ‘would that help?’
‘If I were you,’ said Garvin, ‘I'd stick to the Curbash Compensation Fund.’
Mahmoud rang, puzzled.
‘What's going on?’ he said.
‘They've put me back on the Zikr case.’
‘I'm still on it,’ said Owen.
‘I thought that one had been settled.
Didn't Zoser —?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then why —?’
‘It might be part of a bigger picture.’
‘Connected with what's going on at the moment?’
‘Possibly.’
‘Have you found a connection?’
‘No.’
‘Then I don't suppose I shall.
Still, if that's what they want, I'll go through it all over again.
Afterwards Owen wondered why Mahmoud was back on the case.
Could it be that someone had an interest in keeping it alive?
Probably not in the Parquet itself.
Higher up, almost certainly.
The Minister?
Anxious that no opportunity for keeping relations between Copts and Moslems on the boil should be lost?
‘Don't you have a guilty feeling?’ asked Paul.
‘No,’ said Owen.
‘What should I have a guilty feeling about?’
‘Jane Postlethwaite.
You've been neglecting her.’
‘No, I haven't.
I'm always seeing her.’
‘You haven't seen her this week.’
‘I've had one or two things on this week.
Like the whole of Cairo up in arms.’
‘Keep these things in perspective.
Remember what I told you.
Jane Postlethwaite is important.’
‘Her uncle is important, I see that.
Our jobs at stake, etc.’
‘More than that.
Your whole life, for instance.
Aren't you missing a chance?’
‘What chance am I missing?’
‘Jane Postlethwaite.’
‘Look, she's a nice girl, but —’
‘She's a nice girl and.
And her parents are dead, and her uncle is rich and influential, and for some strange reason he is quite attached to you, and Jane Postlethwaite is quite attached herself, and it's time you got married —’
‘Oh, come on.’
‘It is.
You're quite old —’
‘Oh really.’
‘You are.’
‘I'm just over thirty.’
‘You see?
That's quite aged.
Especially in this climate.
Maturity becomes senility very quickly here.
It's the heat and the sex and the drink.
I've noticed it in a lot of my friends.
Besides —’
‘For goodness’ sake!’
‘— you need to get married if you're going to go any higher.
At the top a single man is suspect.
You wonder what he does with his time.
Is he quite sound?
And who will look after the entertaining?’
‘Some brainless aide-de-camp.
There are lots of those around.’
‘Do not try to deflect me.
We were talking about your career, in which I am taking a fatherly interest.
Besides, I want you to take Jane Postlethwaite to the opera tomorrow night.’
‘I can't.
I'm taking Zeinab.’
‘Take them both.
Jane Postlethwaite hasn't met many Egyptian women.
She certainly hasn't met anyone like Zeinab.’
‘Can't you get someone else?’
‘No.
I've tried.
None of the army officers will do because they're all tone deaf.
Besides, opera isn't British.’
‘How do you know Jane Postlethwaite will like it?’
‘She sings, doesn't she?
I thought all Nonconformists did.
You hear them on a Sunday morning.’
‘Yes, but that's different.
It's a different sort of singing.’
‘There you are!
A Welshman knows that sort of thing by instinct.
Just the chap.
Pick her up from the hotel at nine tomorrow.’
Jane Postlethwaite was not sure about opera.
She had not, she confided in Owen, actually been to one before and the glamour and glitter plainly made her uneasy.
Since the plot had the usual operatic complication he had advised her to read the programme notes beforehand, and she perused them with a certain grim incredulity.
When the audience broke into applause on first beholding the characteristically extravagant set she at first appeared dumbfounded and then sat back in her seat rather stiffly.
However, as the evening progressed she seemed to relax and even to be enjoying the music.
Zeinab, on the other hand, entered into the opera totally.
Dramatic herself, she enjoyed drama in art; and the music swept in over emotional defences that were already down.
Owen could hardly bear to look at her, so much was she at the mercy of the music, plunging with it into pits of despair, rising with it to heights of exaltation that were almost unbearable.
By the time they reached the interval she was already emotionally shattered.
Intervals were always protracted in Cairo.
The whole performance, which started late anyway because of the heat, sometimes went on till four in the morning.
So there was plenty of time to leave the box and promenade around.
Owen saw several people he knew.
Hadrill, for instance, the Adviser to the Ministry of Justice.
Should he ask him what was going on at the top of the Ministry and why they were resurrecting the Zoser case?
But Hadrill was carrying a huge score and looked as if he took opera seriously.
Then there was an aide-de-camp, slightly bored, piloting a bemused, middle-aged group to a table which had already been set out with refreshments.
Important visitors, clearly.
Owen started taking Jane and Zeinab across to join them but on the way they ran into a group of journalists whom Zeinab knew and got into conversation with them.
They were all a-bubble with the opera and the state of the arts in Cairo generally and Jane Postlethwaite was a bit out of it.
Fortunately he saw a nice couple from the Ministry of Education and was able to guide her over to them.
They were talking to a Coptic family, parents and two children.
‘Hello,’ said Ramses, turning round ‘how's the Curbash Compensation Fund?’
‘What?’ said the man from the Ministry of Education, whose name was Lampeter.
‘Captain Owen is deep in the toils of the accountants just at the moment.’
‘Same here,’ said Lampeter.
‘It's the end of the year.’
‘I'm deep in the toil of accounts, too,’ said Molly Lampeter.
‘It's the end of the month.
Do you like opera?’ she asked Jane Postlethwaite.
‘I'm new to it.’
‘I was new to it when I came out here.
Now I like it quite a lot.’
Back among the journalists Zeinab caught Owen's eye and pulled a face.
‘Is your friend Sesostris here?’
‘Sesostris isn't here,’ said Ramses, ‘and he's not my friend.’
‘Where does he stand in the War of the Succession?’
‘Out on a limb in my view.
He's completely opposed to any Coptic participation in the Government.’
‘Even at the personal level?’
‘You mean Patros?
Yes.
Especially.’
‘Is that going to happen soon?’
‘Is it going to happen?
A lot of people are keen to stop it.
Including Sesostris.’
‘The Khedive will have to make up his mind soon.’
‘Or have his mind made up for him.’
‘Is that likely to happen?’
Ramses smiled and turned away.
They resumed their seats and Owen slipped away into a tide of music and colour.
When the opera ended Zeinab sat on, emotionally drained.
Owen waited as usual for her to recover, talking quietly meanwhile with Jane Postlethwaite, who stole a glance at her from time to time, sympathetic and concerned but also slightly at a loss.
Zeinab caught one of her glances.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said, smiling.
She was beginning to recover.
‘It's always like this.’
‘Are you all right?’
‘Oh yes.
It's just the music.’
‘You feel it very deeply.’
‘Yes.
Don't you?’
Jane Postlethwaite considered.
‘No,’ she said.
‘I love the music, of course, the arias especially.
But I don't feel — I don't get bowled over by it, in the way you do.’
‘The terribleness of it,’ said Zeinab, astonished and slightly losing her English, ‘you don't feel?’
Jane Postlethwaite looked uncomfortable.
‘No,’ she said.
‘Very English of me, I'm afraid.’
Zeinab laughed.
‘And very Arab of me, too, I expect,’ she said.
‘Not just Arab,’ said Jane Postlethwaite.
‘Italians are like it too.
Especially about opera.’
‘You have been to Italy?
And seen the opera?’
‘I have been to Italy.
I went last year with my uncle.
But I'm afraid I did not go to the opera.’
‘No?’
Zeinab was astounded.
‘Perhaps I should have gone.
But really I was there to look at the pictures.’
‘There are no pictures in Cairo,’ said Zeinab.
‘But there are beautiful buildings.
Some of the mosques are so lovely.’
‘I have never been to Italy,’ said Zeinab.
‘It's not unlike here in some ways.
There was a beautiful avenue of mimosas I saw at the Gezira when we were walking round.
It reminded me so much of Italy, as I told Captain Owen.’
‘Ah.’
Zeinab had not heard about this.
‘I took Miss Postlethwaite to see the polo,’ he explained.
‘Indeed?’ said Zeinab distantly.
She removed her hand from Owen's arm, where she had placed it.
‘Against the deep blue of the sky just when it was getting dark,’ said Jane Postlethwaite enthusiastically.
‘So like Italy.
And so romantic.’
‘Romantic,’ said Zeinab, as if she was taking the word down to be used in evidence.
‘The desert makes a difference of course,’ said Owen.
‘For better or worse?’ inquired Zeinab.
‘It's the contrast,’ said Jane Postlethwaite.
‘It shows up the differences.’
‘You think so?’
Zeinab was inclined to take this personally.
Jane Postlethwaite caught the tone and stopped, startled.
Zeinab rose to her feet and swept out of the box.
At the hotel Jane Postlethwaite made it worse by inviting them to tea on the following afternoon.
‘I know you're busy in the morning,’ she said to Owen.
‘Her or me,’ said Zeinab.
‘What?’
‘Either her or me.
Not both.’
‘Don't be silly.’
‘I don't care if you have an affair with her but —’
‘I'm not having an affair with her.’
‘Then how does she know you're busy in the morning?’
‘Everyone knows I'm busy in the morning.
I work.’
‘You took her to the polo.’
‘I had to take her to the polo.
Paul made me.’
‘You shouldn't have taken her like that.’
‘Like what?
Christ, there's no other way of taking her.’
‘Without telling me.’
‘Look.
I don't tell you everything I do.’
‘No,’ said Zeinab, ‘you don't.’
‘I tell you the things I think will interest you.’
‘If you go out with another woman that interests me.’
‘I'm not going out with another woman.
Not like that.’
‘Not like what?’
‘Not like you're supposing.’
‘What am I supposing?’
‘For Christ's sake!’
Zeinab started on another tack.
‘She is cunning, that girl.’
‘Nonsense.’
‘Why is she here?
Tell me that.’
‘She is here to accompany her uncle.
And besides, Egypt is an interesting place to visit.’
‘She is here to get a husband.
Like the others.’
Zeinab had no high opinion of the scores of English girls who flocked over to Egypt during the Cairo season and flirted with the deprived and well-connected young army officers.
‘She is not like them,’ said Owen.
‘Oh?
And how is she is not?’
‘You can tell it straight away.’
‘Well, tell it then.’
Owen found this unexpectedly difficult.
‘She is more modest,’ he said lamely, ‘more shy and retiring.’
‘More cunning,’ said Zeinab.
‘She is a Nonconformist.’
Zeinab was stopped in her tracks.
‘What is this?
This ‘Nonconformist’?’
Under the strain of the occasion Zeinab's accent was becoming more and more French.
‘She is Socialiste?
Nationaliste?
Her?
I do not believe you.’
‘It is religious.’
It suddenly struck him that this was not  perhaps the best time to go into the history of the Established Church in England.
‘A sort of sect.’
‘Ah.
Like the Copts.’
‘No,’ said Owen, ‘not like the Copts.’
‘If I were you,’ said Zeinab.
‘I would have nothing to do with Copts.
Or Nonconformists.’
Things were indeed hotting up again; and they seemed to Owen to be hotting up chiefly on the Moslem side.
Osman had recovered from his put-down and seemed bent on recovering the ground he had lost.
There were incidents everywhere, in the bazaars, in the street markets, outside the churches, in the squares.
The incidents were beginning to involve more people, too.
That took organization; and that took money.
‘He's got more money than I have,’ complained Owen after four largeish simultaneous demonstrations had stretched his resources to the utmost.
‘Where the hell does he get it from?’
‘He must have powerful friends,’ said Georgiades, who had just limped in off the streets; not injured but footsore.
He wiped the sweat off his face with his sleeve and looked around hopefully.
Nikos took pity on him and went out into the corridor and called for Yussuf.
After a very long time Yussuf appeared.
Since the debacle of the wedding/divorce he had become very morose, hardly responding to outside stimuli at all, sunk in his pain and brooding on his wrongs.
‘Coffee at once!’ said Nikos sharply.
He was not one to make allowances.
Yussuf shuffled off and Georgiades waved a grateful hand.
‘I thought you had powerful friends too,’ he said to Owen.
‘Where are they?’
‘They've got problems,’ said Owen, ‘and I'm beginning to wonder whether their problems and our problems are connected.’
He told Nikos and Georgiades as much as he could about the current political log-jam, leaving out the Patros bit.
‘You think there's someone on the Moslem side who's got  an interest in keeping things on the boil?’ asked Georgiades.
Owen nodded.
‘There's a lot of money washing around,’ said Nikos.
‘Do you think it could be the Porte?’
Egypt was still in principle a province of the Ottoman Empire; and while the Khedive's allegiance to the Sultan of the Sublime Porte was in practice nominal, the Turks took a keen interest in Egyptian affairs.
‘No real sign of that so far.
I think it's internal.’
‘Well, one thing's for sure,’ said Georgiades.
‘It's not the Khedive.
He hasn't any money.’
‘Not many of them have, at least not on the Moslem side.
That's why I think it could be a group of them acting together.
Ministers, perhaps, who don't like the way things are going.’
‘Any evidence of that?’
‘Well,’ said Owen, ‘I don't know if this is evidence, but…’
He told them about Mahmoud being put back on the case.
‘It must be someone high up,’ said Nikos.
‘The case has been formally closed.’
‘The Minister?’
‘Could be.
He's new and ambitious.’
‘Any money of his own?’
‘Not of his own.
He might be able to lay his hands on some.’
‘Especially if he was doing it with a few friends.’
‘It's a bit out of our range, isn't it?’ asked Georgiades.
‘I mean, if it's a Minister?’
‘The Consul-General's in this particular political game too,’ said Owen, ‘and I think he would be interested.’
‘How do we find out?’
‘The only line we've got is through Mordecai,’ said Nikos.
‘The Jew?’
Nikos nodded.
‘In any case it would be interesting to find out where the money's coming from,’ said Owen.
‘Find out,’ said Georgiades, ‘and stop it.
Because if you don't, there could be big trouble.
A few more demonstrations like those last night and the whole place could get going.’
‘I think,’ said Owen, ‘it's time I had a word with Mordecai.’
The workers in gold spilled out of the Goldsmiths' Bazaar and into the surrounding streets and alleyways.
As you approached the bazaar you passed their showcases, full of the flimsy and barbaric workmanship which the native Egyptians admired.
There were bracelets and anklets of great weight and solidity made of the purest gold.
These were investments and the form in which less educated Egyptians stored their savings.
There were, too, rings and earrings and charms, charms especially, which the Egyptians loved.
Mordecai's stall was on the very edge of the bazaar.
You stepped down into it out of the street.
It was lit by candles, and in the soft light the gold in the showcases round the walls shone three-dimensionally, given depth by the shadows.
Mordecai himself was so much part of the shadows that at first when you stepped into the shop you did not see him.
Then a little move, a little cough, made you aware of his presence.
He led Owen into a recess behind a recess.
There was hardly room for the two of them, let alone for Georgiades, who followed them in but had to remain stuck in the doorway.
In the confined space Owen was powerfully aware of the heavy smell of body oil which, like many Egyptians, Mordecai used in abundance.
As the moments went by he became aware of another smell, that of sweat.
For Mordecai was sweating profusely.
He was scared.
‘You know who I am?’
Mordecai moistened his lips.
‘Yes, effendi.
The Mamur Zapt.’
‘Very well, then.
You know what I can do.
You need not fear, however.
You are only a little player in a game in which there are big players.
I am not interested in little  players.
When you have told me what you know you can go.
Provided that you tell me truly.’
‘Effendi…’
Mordecai hesitated.
‘Yes?’
‘What of the big players?
What will they do to me?’
‘I am here.
They are not.’
The beads of perspiration streamed down Mordecai's face.
‘They will kill me.’
Owen said nothing.
Just waited.
The smell of sweat was overwhelming.
‘I will tell you.
But…’
‘Afterwards?’
Mordecai nodded.
‘Do you have friends in another town?
Say, Alexandria?’
‘Yes, effendi.’
‘I will have you taken to them.’
Mordecai looked relieved.
‘Afterwards.
Provided I am satisfied.’
‘Yes, effendi.’
‘Very well, then.
Now tell me: there is a sheikh who comes to you and you give him money?’
‘Yes, effendi.’
‘The Dervish sheikh?’
‘Yes, effendi.’
‘How much money have you given him in the last three weeks?’
‘One hundred and thirty pounds.
Egyptian.’
Owen could sense Georgiades's astonishment.
One hundred and thirty pounds was a lot of money in a country where an average wage was three pounds a month.
‘That is a lot of money.
It is not yours.’
‘No, effendi.’
‘Whose is it, then?’
‘Effendi, I — I do not know.’
‘Come, it is not not here one moment and suddenly here the next.
Where does it come from?’
‘One brings it.’
‘That is better.
And who is that one?’
‘Effendi, I do not know him.
I do not know the name, or from where he comes, or from whom he comes.
All I know is that every Friday at a set hour he comes and puts the money into my hands.
He never speaks.
He merely takes the receipt, then goes.’
‘Does he give you no instructions?’
‘Never.’
‘Then how do you know you are to give it to the Sheikh Osman?’
‘It was told me before.’
‘When was this?’
‘A month ago.
A man came and said to me, one will come with money and you will do thus and thus.’
‘Who was the man?’
‘He was but a bearer.’
‘But not the same as the bearer who brings the money?’
‘Not the same, effendi.
The first one was but a servant.
The one who brings the money, well —’ Mordecai hesitated —‘I do not know what he is but he is not a servant.’
‘The one who brings the money: can you tell me something else about him?’
‘Only,’ said Mordecai, ‘that he is a Copt.’
‘A Copt?’
‘Yes, effendi.’
‘You are not speaking the truth,’ said Owen.
‘How can he be a Copt and bring money to be given to a Moslem for the Moslem to use against the Copts?’
‘I do not know what use he makes of it, effendi,’ said Mordecai humbly.
‘Are you sure the bringer is a Copt?’
‘Yes, effendi.’
Mordecai spoke with certainty; and indeed, it was something which no Cairene would have been uncertain on.
‘The other bearer,’ said Georgiades, ‘the first one, the one who was but a servant, was he also a Copt?’
‘An Armenian, effendi.’
No help there, and in fact there was little more help to  be had from Mordecai at all.
They told him to keep his mouth shut and left, not by the way they had come but through another door which led out through the bazaar.
‘A Copt?’ said Owen.
‘I can't understand it.’
‘Maybe someone's just being clever,’ said Georgiades.
‘I've found something new at any rate,’ said Mahmoud.
They were sitting at an outside table in one of the corner cafés of the Ataba el Khadra, out of reach of the traffic but strategically placed so that they could watch not only all the interesting things that went on in the square but also the more sophisticated exchanges which went on between tourist and native in Musky Street.
It had been a long, hard day and Owen would have quite liked a whisky.
However, in deference to his friend's Moslem susceptibilities he had stayed with coffee, and certainly Turkish coffee taken mazbout, sweetened, was perfectly to his taste.
‘Anything useful?’
‘It might be.
Someone's turned up who claims that Zoser had a visitor the night before he killed the Zikr.’
‘Why the hell didn't he turn up before?’
‘Because he's been away.
He travels with camels and has just got back.
When he got back his sister told him.
He stays with her between trips.
She lives in the house next to the Zosers.
That's where he was that night.
They remembered it because it was so unusual for the Zosers to have a visitor, and because he came so late.
They had already put the beds down and had to move them.’
‘Why didn't she say anything?’
‘Thought it wasn't for a woman, etc.
She had no man to go for her — her husband was away travelling, too — so she waited for her brother to get back.’
‘Does she corroborate?’
‘Yes, they both remember.’
‘Any details?’
‘Not many.
Nothing to identify by.
It was dark and it was late, so late that the lamps had already been put out, they hardly saw him, you know, all that sort of thing.’
‘Real, or are they saying that just to keep out of trouble?’
‘If they wanted to keep out of trouble they wouldn't have bothered to have come to the police station.’
‘True.
So you've nothing to go by?’
‘Except that he was a Copt.’
‘Even in the dark they would know that.’
‘I take it, from the fact that they remarked on it, that they're not Copt themselves?’
‘You take it correctly.
They're Moslem.’
‘How did they get on with the Zosers?
Friends?
Enemies?’
‘So-so.
Nothing much.
Hardly saw each other.
The Zosers kept pretty much to themselves.
Didn't have much to do with anybody.
That's why they remembered that night.’
‘Hear anything?’
‘Nothing they could repeat.
Except that he was clearly not a stranger.’
Owen sipped his coffee.
‘Pity there's nothing more,’ he said.
‘It could be significant.’
‘Of course there's someone else who could tell.’
‘There is?’
‘You're forgetting Zoser's wife.
She was there.’
‘The one with the handpainting?
Yes I'd forgotten about her.’
‘She would know.
The only thing is, she's moved.
In fact, that's what I wanted to ask you.
I don't suppose you've any idea where I could find her?’
‘As a matter of fact,’ said Owen, remembering Georgiades's visit to the funeral, ‘I think I have.’
They almost missed the man when at last he came.
Mordecai had said that he usually approached the shop through the bazaar, and that was the side they had been watching.
There were several little alleyways that he might have used and they had a man watching each one; but then in the end he approached from the other side, not through the bazaar at all but along through the streets, the way they themselves  had come on that previous visit.
Georgiades had a man on that route, too, but there was only one of him and when he saw the man coming he did not risk leaving his post to run and tell them but watched the man until he was safely inside the shop.
They had wondered about concealing themselves in the shop itself, in the recess possibly, but had decided not to risk it.
The aim, after all, was not to arrest the man but to follow him and see if by that means they could uncover the line which ran back from Mordecai's shop to the ultimate suppliers of Osman's money.
Instead, they had taken up position in one of the shops opposite where they were concealed by heavy wooden boarding and from where they could see directly into Mordecai's shop.
They saw the man come in from the street and stand for a moment adjusting to the darkness.
They caught a glimpse of his robe in the candlelight, but only a glimpse because then he moved into the shadows and it was only by Mordecai's gestures that they could tell where he was.
Somebody slid into the shop beside them.
It was their agent.
‘It is him, effendi.
I saw him clearly, but I dared not move.
It is the one we were told to expect.’
‘He had a bag with him?’
‘Yes, effendi.
As the Jew said.’
‘Good.
Go back now in case he leaves by the way he came.
If he does, follow him until the tracker takes over.’
Owen had borrowed for the day some skilled police trackers, men who could follow a trail, or a man, even through the crowded streets of Cairo.
He did not want anything to go wrong.
The agent slipped away unobtrusively.
In the shop opposite, Mordecai appeared to be bowing farewell.
He straightened up, came to the front of the shop and stood for a moment looking out impassively.
Then he moved aside, and a man came out of the darkness of the  shop, hesitated for a fraction of a second and then turned away into the bazaar.
Owen stood for a moment in stunned shock.
The man was Andrus.
11
‘I don't understand it,’ said Owen flatly.
‘Me neither,’ said Georgiades.
‘I thought he was the man behind the organization on the Coptic side.’
‘Well,’ said Nikos, ‘he is.
I don't think there is any doubt about it.’
‘Then why the hell is he the man behind the Moslem organization too?’
‘He's not exactly that, surely,’ Nikos objected.
‘He supplies the money, doesn't he?
And without that the Moslems wouldn't be half as effective.’
‘They're not paying him interest, are they?
I mean, he's not doing it for money?’
‘Osman?
Pay interest?
To a Copt?’
‘Funnier things have happened.
Like a Copt lending money to Osman.’
‘Osman personally doesn't have money enough even to pay the interest,’ said Nikos.
‘Friends?’
‘We're back to them again.
And the only friend that's appeared so far is Andrus.’
‘Maybe he is a friend.
In secret, I mean.’
‘Of the Moslems?
Of Osman?
I don't mind us looking at some funny ideas,’ said Georgiades, ‘but let's not go crazy.’
‘That can't be it,’ said Nikos.
‘No.
Well, I'm not really suggesting that it is.
I'm just reviewing all the possibilities.’
‘While you're doing that,’ said Nikos, ‘think about this one: Andrus doesn't know what the money is being used for.’
‘That it's going straight to Osman?
He set it up, didn't he?’
‘Well, did he?
It was set up that way, certainly, but was it set up by him?’
‘He's involved.’
‘Oh yes, he's involved.
But does he know?’
‘Someone else set it up and he's just being used?’
‘It's a possibility.’
‘OK.
I'll acknowledge it as a possibility.’
‘I've got another question,’ said Georgiades.
‘If he's a secret friend of the Moslems, why doesn't he just give them the money directly.
Why does he have to go through Mordecai?’
‘I can answer that one,’ said Owen.
‘He's had to go through Mordecai precisely because he is a Copt.
The Moslems wouldn't accept it if it came straight from him.’
‘They think it comes from other Moslems?’
‘Possibly.
I can't see Osman accepting it otherwise.’
‘Well, I find it confusing,’ said Georgiades.
‘I thought it was all straightforward, with Moslems cutting Copts’ throats, as they have always done, and Copts cutting Moslems' throats, as usual.
Now it's got more complicated.’
‘Let's go back to basics,’ said Owen.
‘First, are we wrong about Andrus being behind it all on the Copt side?’
‘No!’ said Nikos.
He went to his desk and produced a sheaf of agents' reports.
‘If you look at my map,’ he said with a tinge of pride, ‘you will see that all the incidents are still within half a mile of the Bab es Zuweyla.
Not only that, they're not spontaneous, they're organized.
After each incident the men go back and report.
I've had them followed.
They always go to the same place.
It's a house just behind the Mar Girgis.
It belongs to the church and is used by its laymen for committees and administering charity.
The church has a large charity programme.
Anyway, that's where they all go to report.
Not only that; that's where they get their instructions, because sometimes some of them go out again  for a second time to take part in another incident.
I've had my people watching the house for some time now.
That's where they report before they start and that's where they report after they're finished.’
‘Why don't we smash it up?’
‘Because then they'd report somewhere else.
Anyway, I thought you wanted to be sure about who was organizing it.’
‘I do.
Who is?’
‘It's got to be Andrus.
There are other people in the house from time to time, but he's the only one who has been there throughout.’
‘You haven't been able to get anyone inside?’
‘No, but I probably could.
Do you want me to?’
‘Yes.
Let's have some certainty about one thing, at any rate.’
‘Why don't we pick a few of them up,’ said Georgiades, ‘as they're going to and fro?
Then we could ask them.’
‘We could do that too.
I've thought about it,’ said Nikos, ‘but I was keeping to surveillance until I was told otherwise.’
Nikos was a stickler for the rules.
Owen never ceased to marvel at the way in which he combined incredible ingenuity within the rules with total lack of curiosity as to what went on beyond them.
‘You mean you've known all along where they were going?’ asked Georgiades.
‘Not till they got there.
I've known they were going, that's all.’
‘And you've done nothing about it?’
‘Of course I've done something about it.
I've had them followed from the time they left the house.
The moment it was clear where they were going I've had a message back.
And then,’ said Nikos with pride, ‘I've had our people there within minutes.
That's organization.’
‘Yes, but it's all unnecessary.
You could have hit them the moment they left the house.’
‘Can't do that.’
‘Why not?’
‘Because we're still on surveillance.’
‘Christ!’
‘Other reasons too,’ Owen intervened.
‘There's no point in picking up small fry.
Not when there are so many of them.
It's big fry we're after.’
‘If you'd been out on the street —’ Georgiades looked at Nikos —‘instead of sitting on your ass in a cool office —’
‘What I do,’ said Nikos, ‘takes ability.’
‘How did you get on to it in the first place?’
Owen asked curiously.
‘I had them followed back.
After the first few incidents I began to suspect there was a pattern, so I tried to find it.
You don't get anything on this scale without communication lines, so I started looking for them.’
‘Have you got it all worked out for the Moslems too?’ asked Georgiades.
‘It's not that I mind wasting my time, it's just that I like to know that I'm wasting my time.’
‘You're not wasting your time,’ said Owen pacifically.
‘It's not as clear-cut on the Moslem side,’ said Nikos, ‘not as well organized.
There's no reporting back, for instance, so they don't know how well they've done or what mistakes they make.
But instructions have to be given, so again there are lines of communication.’
‘Which you're shadowing?’
Nikos nodded.
‘They don't always work.
Some of the incidents are spontaneous.
The other thing is that they have a general idea of what Osman wants so they don't bother about instructions, they just go out and do it.’
‘I think I may be a secret Moslem,’ Georgiades said to Owen.
‘You didn't know that, did you?’
‘It all comes from Osman, does it?’ asked Owen.
‘Yes, Osman and Andrus.
They're the two.’
‘They're the one if it all comes back to Andrus.’
Georgiades went to the door and called for Yussuf.
One of the other bearers shouted back encouragingly.
In Yussuf's present numb state they had taken to covering for him.
Owen sat there thinking.
He couldn't make any sense of it.
The premise that everything started from was Andrus's hostility to anything Moslem.
It had been there right from the beginning, right from the night of the dog.
It ran through everything.
It had never wavered.
He could not believe that it was wavering now.
But how else to explain his actions?
The money was definitely being brought to Mordecai; and Mordecai was definitely passing it on to Osman.
Not only that; Mordecai was equally definite that he was merely doing as he had been instructed.
And Owen believed him.
Andrus was part of it.
About that there could be no doubt.
But how extensive a part?
Might Nikos be right and Andrus merely an unwitting accomplice, ignorant of for whom the money was intended?
But then, Nikos was himself a Copt and, yes, under an obligation to Andrus; might not he be biased in Andrus's favour?
And then again, for all his brilliance at organization, Nikos sometimes overdid the speculation.
‘Try another idea,’ said Nikos.
‘Why don't you apply the analysis you made of the Moslems to the Copts?’
‘What analysis?’
‘The political connection.
You know, that there was a group of people at the top, Ministers, perhaps, who had an interest in keeping relations between Copts and Moslems on the boil.
You thought that might lie behind Mahmoud being brought back into the Zoser case.
Keep the wound open.
Copts against Moslems.
I liked that analysis.
It avoided the mistake that is so often made.
People assume, the British especially, who appear to have a unique talent for combining sentimentality and intellectual evasion, that conflict, even massacre, is in no one 's interest.
But they're wrong.
Sometimes it is in someone's interest.
And then if you want to find out the reason for the tension or how to stop it, what you have to do is look at the interests of those concerned.
Perhaps the mistake we have been making is in applying that thinking to the Moslems but not to the Copts.’
Owen reached out his hand for the coffee a bearer had just brought in.
A different bearer.
Not Yussuf.
‘Applying it, then, to the Copts,’ said Owen, ‘what do we get?’
‘Someone on the Coptic side wants to keep things on the boil, wants to stop agreement from being reached.
To do that, they're even prepared to give money to Moslems.’
‘To be used against Copts?’
‘All the more effective,’ said Nikos, ‘if you wanted to keep things on the boil.’
Georgiades put his mug back on the tray.
‘Someone's a clever bastard,’ he said.
‘Of course, it may just be you.’
‘It fits,’ said Owen.
‘It explains the money.’
‘Not only that.’
‘Yes,’ said Owen.
‘It explains Andrus too.’
One of the bearers rushed into the office.
‘Effendi!
Come quickly.
Yussuf has taken a knife!’
Owen ran down the corridor and into the bearers' room.
There were shocked faces everywhere but no Yussuf.
‘Where is he?’
‘He ran out, effendi.
He said he would kill them.’
‘Who?’
‘Suleiman, effendi.
And Fatima.’
One of the bearers plucked at his arm.
‘He took my knife, effendi.
He took my knife.’
‘Where is Suleiman's house?’
It was in the bazaar area.
‘Take me there.’
The man ran out with Owen on his heels.
Two of the other bearers followed.
From the Bab el Khalk to the Bab es Zuweyla was about half a mile.
A man would go faster than an arabeah, certainly if you took into account the time needed to explain it to the arabeah driver.
The bearer set off along the wide, dusty street.
He was one of the younger bearers and ran fast.
Owen found it hard to keep up with him.
Within a minute the sweat was pouring off him and his jacket sticking to his back.
The bearer slowed to let him come up with him.
‘Run on!’ said Owen.
‘Fast.’
This was how they could save time, catch up.
Once they were through the Gate they wouldn't be able to run at all.
The streets would be too crowded.
The bearer drew away again.
He was running barefoot and had the advantage over Owen in his heavy shoes.
By the time they had reached the Gate he was a dozen or more yards ahead.
Owen dashed up almost blinded with sweat.
‘On!
Get on!’ he managed to gasp.
The bearer plunged at once into the warren of tiny streets, alleyways and passages between stalls that made up the area loosely known as the Bazaars.
Every road, every lane, even the narrowest of alleys was taken up with stalls.
And wherever there was a stall, inevitably the passage was blocked by the wares which spread out from it, covering the ground on all sides, stretching right across the thoroughfare so that there was indeed no thoroughfare but you had to pick your way among pots and pans, saddles, boots, baskets, melons, bales of cloth, onions, and canvases appliqúed with texts from the Koran and crude copies of the tomb-paintings of the Pharaohs.
And wherever there was a suggestion of a space there would be a craftsman bent over his work: a weaver over his loom, a metal-worker crouched over a dish of grey ash fanning a lump of live charcoal in its midst with a blowpipe, a basket-worker holding what he was making with his toes so as to leave his hands free, a turner doing his turning with a little bow which might have been used to shoot arrows, the man making pegs for the ornate wooden windows.
Owen was in despair.
Not only could he find no space to put even one foot, but whenever he hesitated, hands reached up at him beckoning him to buy.
He slowed almost to a halt.
The bearer kept looking back at him.
Owen would have told the man to run on but without him he would have been lost at once.
What had happened to the two other bearers who had started out with them he did not know.
The bearer pulled him into a passage so thin that even  the narrowest of stalls could not wedge itself in.
There was barely space for a person to pass.
Half way along they met a woman.
She pushed herself back against the wall to avoid touching a man but as Owen pressed past her he was as conscious of her roundnesses and softnesses as if he had been in bed beside her.
They came out into a slightly wider passage where there were no stalls but children were playing and black-gowned women standing in doorways talking.
They looked up at him in surprise and pulled their veils back across their faces.
One or two snatched up their children and held them close, making signs to warn off the evil eye.
This was mediaeval Cairo, mediaeval still.
They went up another narrow passageway, not so much a passage as a mere slit between houses, and came out suddenly into open space.
After the darkness and coolness the light and heat struck him like a blow.
The bearer looked round.
Everywhere was rubble.
There wasn't a single building standing for hundreds of yards.
The ground was covered with crumbling mud bricks, heaps of cracked white stone.
A dog barked and was answered by another.
Out in the rubble he saw others skulking.
Then he realized where they were: the Coptic Place of the Dead.
The bearer turned left along a line of houses they had just come out of.
The big ones they had passed through gave way to smaller, two-storey ones built of mud brick which the rains were gradually dissolving.
Everything was crumbling, falling down.
Here and there were gaps in the line where houses had collapsed completely.
There was a piercing whistle and a little boy ran across the rubble towards them.
‘Effendi!
Effendi!’
It was the boy he had met when Georgiades had taken him back to the Place of the Dead; Ali, Yussuf's nephew.
‘This way!’
He raced off across the rubble.
Owen stumbled behind him, his feet sliding and tripping on the loose stones.
They came to a blank white stuccoed wall.
Owen stopped abruptly.
The boy had completely disappeared.
‘Effendi!
Here!’
To his left an urgent face, an arm beckoning.
He ran across.
‘Under here!’
There was a gap in the lower part of the wall big enough for a boy, hardly big enough for a man to squeeze through.
He forced his way through it.
They were in what had been a walled garden and was now just a mass of rubble.
Ali turned immediately to his right and climbed over a broken-down wall.
They were in another disused, rubble-filled space which might once have been a yard or garden.
Ali ran to the next wall.
‘Effendi!
Quickly!’
‘Is he there?’
‘Yes, but they have barred the door.’
Owen found a hole in the wall, used it as a stepping place and swung his leg over the top.
Then he stopped.
Below him was another space which had once been a courtyard.
It was filled now with heaps of brick and stone.
These had perhaps once been outhouses which had long ago fallen down.
Piles of rubble lay against the side of the house.
There had once been an outside staircase leading up to the flat roof but that, too, had collapsed.
There was a mud brick wall round the roof of the house, over which looked two agitated faces, those of a man and a woman.
The wall was crumbling and there were great gaps in it.
It offered no defence; and defence was needed, for on the opposite side of the yard a wall ran right up to the house and although it was lower than the roof an agile man might easily scramble from it up on to the roof itself.
And along the wall a man was climbing.
Yussuf.
‘Yussuf!’
Yussuf stopped, startled.
He looked round, saw Owen and hesitated.
‘Yussuf!
Come down at once.’
Yussuf almost started to obey.
Then he shook his head  and began to climb determinedly on.
In between his teeth he was holding a huge knife.
The wall was narrow and missing many of its bricks.
It was not easy to climb along it and he had to go slowly.
He needed both hands as well as his toes.
Owen called again but Yussuf ignored him.
The faces on the roof disappeared and then appeared again.
A woman began screaming.
Owen threw himself over the wall and dropped down.
He had hoped to find a door.
There was one but it was blocked up.
There was no other way in which he could get up to the roof.
‘Have you a gun, effendi?’
He shook his head.
He never carried one unless there was a special reason why he might have to use it.
He would never have thought of bringing it out against Yussuf.
He looked round for a stick or prop which he could use to dislodge Yussuf.
There wasn't one.
Wood was as scarce as silver in the poorer parts of Cairo.
He seized a brick desperately and threw it at Yussuf.
It hit the wall four feet below him.
Ali threw, more accurately.
The brick hit Yussuf and jolted him but he shrugged it aside.
The top of the wall was in better repair closer to the house and he scurried along it.
He had almost reached the house when another brick hit him.
It would have struck him in the face if at the last moment, sensing it coming, he had not ducked his head.
The movement threw him off balance.
A brick beneath him crumbled and suddenly the whole wall began to sag.
Yussuf tried to recover his balance, tried to jump, but the wall collapsed too fast.
It subsided in a great cloud of dust.
Yussuf was pitched off on to the other side.
They heard the heavy thud as he fell.
Owen ran across.
The dust was so thick that for a moment he could not see.
Then, below him on the rubble, he made out Yussuf's motionless body.
And beyond him, for some strange reason, on the other  side of the neighbouring courtyard, was a totally amazed and bemused Mahmoud.
Owen slid down into the courtyard in a small shower of mud and masonry.
There was a woman standing beside Mahmoud.
She had thrown her hands up over her face in shock.
He could see the hands very clearly; well enough to notice the handpainting.
‘What the hell is this?’ said Mahmoud.
He rarely swore.
‘My bearer,’ said Owen briefly.
He knelt beside Yussuf.
There was an ugly wound on his head.
If he breathed it was imperceptible.
Ali came across and touched Yussuf with his foot.
‘He is not dead,’ he said.
Ali was an expert on such matters.
The woman brought water from the house, knelt down beside Yussuf and began to mop his wound.
Ali went and sat in the shade.
Owen went across to Mahmoud.
‘What's she doing here?’
He motioned to the woman kneeling beside Yussuf.
‘Don't you remember?
You told me.’
‘Christ, is this where she lives?’
‘Where she lives now.
She's moved, if you remember.’
‘Have you talked to her?’
‘I was talking to her.’
‘Did you find out anything?’
‘Not much.
A man certainly came that night but it was to see her, not her husband.’
‘That late?’
‘She wouldn't see him before.
It wouldn't have been proper to have seen him alone.
Her husband was out.’
‘So the man waited till he got back?’
‘He knew he would be late.
Zoser was at the church.’
‘Zoser says.
She says.
It would be worth checking.’
‘It's easily checked.
Zoser occasionally stayed late to help with the charity dispensation.
She was involved with that, too.
That was what the man came to see her about.
There were some women he wanted her to take relief to.
She often  did that, she says.
Of course, the men couldn't go to the women themselves.’
‘Did the man talk to her husband?’
‘She doesn't think so.’
The woman went into the house to get some water.
Yussuf was beginning to stir.
Mahmoud went across and picked the knife up out of the rubble.
Ali had been listening to the discussion.
‘I know that woman,’ he said.
‘How do you know her?’
‘She was at the house that night.
The night of the dog.’
‘The House of Andrus?’
‘Yes.’
‘She is a relative of Andrus?’
‘No, no.’
Ali was shocked that anyone could make a mistake so gross.
‘She was there to cry.’
Owen thought he understood.
She must be a professional mourner.
When a significant person died, women were sometimes hired to weep during the funeral ceremonies.
‘Andrus paid her?’
‘No,’ said the woman, returning with the water.
‘No one paid me.
Much.
I do it out of friendship.’
‘For Andrus?’
‘Not for him especially.
I do it for all of the community.
Other families were in the Place of the Dead that night.
I was with Sesostris.
He sent me to Andrus in the early part of the night because he knew Andrus lacked women.’
‘In the early part of the night?
Did you go past the Tomb of Andrus?’
‘Yes.’
‘Did you see anything untoward?’
‘Only the shadows,’ said the woman.
‘I saw the shadows and was frightened.
It is the night that the spirits return.’
‘And did you see them about the tomb?’
‘Yes, and I was frightened and hurried on.
When I reached the House of Andrus I spoke of it to the other women and we said a prayer.
And when I left, I looked  again, and there were no shadows, so I knew our prayer had been heard.’
‘That was in the morning?
Before the dawn?’
‘No.
It was in the middle of the night.
I had to mourn for Sesostris so I went back to his house.’
‘You only spent part of the night with Andrus?’
‘The early part.
Then I went to Sesostris.
And then at dawn I went to Zakatellos.
I had promised him I would be there for the Visit.’
She bent over Yussuf and splashed water on his face.
He opened his eyes, saw her and struggled to sit up.
‘Away, woman!’ he said.
‘I have no need of Copts.’
‘You have a need of someone,’ she said, ‘whoever it be.’
‘Was your husband with you?’ asked Owen.
‘No.
He was keeping vigil at the church.’
‘And you were at the Houses.
Were you with Andrus when he went to the Tomb?’
‘No.’
‘So you did not know about the dog?’
‘Not till later.
I was with Sesostris when one ran and told us.’
And you told your husband?’
‘When I got home.’
‘And did he speak with Andrus?’
‘Not then.
Later.
When Andrus came to visit me.’
‘Thank you,’ said Owen.
‘I've done the checking you wanted,’ said Georgiades, ‘and it's not been easy, I can tell you.
I went first to his business premises.
It's not a bad little business.
He does all right.
Nothing huge, small to medium.
Nowhere near big enough for him to finance the war on his own, especially as he gives such a lot to charity.
And he does give it to charity.
There's no doubt about that.
I've talked to his personal clerk.
Steady sums, increasing over the years as he's become more pious.
The clerk is secretary to the charity programme of the church and knows the recipients.’
‘Zoser?’
‘I don't think so.
Not in money.
In kind, perhaps.
Favours, maybe.
He does people quite a lot of those.’
‘And they do him some.
Go back to the money.
Does he finance the charitable programme himself?’
‘The church's?
No, they all chip in.
Andrus put in a fair amount but bigger boys give more.’
‘OK.
So after living expenses and charity there's not a lot left over.
Not enough to finance all the agitation on the Coptic side, let alone the Moslems as well.’
‘Nowhere near enough.’
‘So the money he gives to Osman must come from somewhere else.
Does he have a bank for his business or does he just use cash?’
‘He's got to have a bank.
His business is international, remember.
He sometimes needs quite sophisticated credit arrangements.’
‘Do you know which one?’
‘Yes.
He is a small businessman and he likes to deal with small bankers.
They've got to be Coptic, of course, and preferably someone he's met through the church.
He goes to Sesostris.’
‘So he could be getting the money there?’
‘Don't rush me.
Next, I checked on his movements on Fridays.
That's the day, remember, when he takes the money to Mordecai.
It's the Moslem Sabbath, of course, so a good day for Copts to do business on.
Well, it's hard to check the whole day, as you can imagine.
But that is the day, it appears, when he regularly goes to his own bank.
He's been doing it for years.
So far as I can tell, and that's not as far as I'd like, on the last few Fridays he's not been going to any other bank or finance house.
Nor is there any single person whom he's been visiting regularly.’
‘Anyone come to see him?’
‘Not at the business.
Nor at home, as far as I can tell from his servants.
Possibly at the church house, where, as you know, he's been spending a lot of time recently.’
‘So it could very well be the bank?’
‘That's what I thought, too.
So then I went to the bank  and asked politely in the name of the Mamur Zapt if I could check Andrus's account.
Sesostris said no.’
‘He can't say no.
Not if it's the Mamur Zapt.’
‘Well, I said it was the Mamur Zapt and he said no.
He wants proper legal notification.’
‘I'll bloody notify him.
Deliver it personally.
In the cell.’
‘He's an awkward bugger.
Andrus and he are two of a kind.
Difficult sods, both.
However, mere refusal does not stop me.
I talked to the tellers.
They said yes, Andrus did come on Fridays and had been doing so for years.
Any especially big drawings lately?
Well, they said, they wouldn't know, since he always went straight in to Sesostris.
Again, his pattern for years.
No change here.
Also it's the way the bank works.
Sesostris does it all personally.
The Copts like that.
It's always man-to-man stuff with them.
Funny, considering how they also like to put it all down on paper.’
‘Are you saying Sesostris hands over the cash personally?’
‘No.
The Cashier does that.
Andrus just pops in to see Sesostris and they have a bit of a chat, not a long one, they don't even have a cup of coffee, mean bastards, both of them, and then Andrus goes on to the Cashier presumably with Sesostris's authorization and the Cashier takes the money out of the safe and gives it to him.
I tried to have a word with the Cashier but he wasn't talking.
More than his job's worth, I suppose, though these Copts are always tight-mouthed as well as tight-fisted.
Well, not all of them.
I got something out of the tellers.
One of them said that Andrus normally took his money away in a small bag, one he could conceal under his gown, it's safer that way.
But for the last week or two he's had to use a bigger bag.
The Charity programme's been growing.
Actually it has, though whether by enough to require a bigger bag I haven't been able to make out.’
‘It would be interesting to see the account.’
‘That wouldn't tell you much.
It will either show he's overdrawn or that money has been credited.
If it's been  credited, then the only person who will be able to tell you where it comes from is Sesostris.’
‘Is he involved, do you think?
Personally, I mean?’
‘They're all involved.
You see, the way the Copts work is that if they decide on something, like a campaign of trouble-making and agitation, the first thing they do is set up an organization.
Then they set up resourcing arrangements, just as they would do for any other business operation they undertook.
They would arrange drawing facilities, appoint a local agent, etc.
Sesostris may be just another mechanism, like Mordecai.’
‘Like Andrus?’
‘Could be.
The local agent.
On the other hand, if you were Andrus and for some reason you decided to start a campaign of your own, and you were, like him, a Copt, the first thing you would do would be to go to a bank and make proper financial arrangements.
And when I say proper, I mean proper.
You wouldn't go to anyone else, because banks are where you go for finance, and you wouldn't go to a shady one, because that's not sound business practice.’
‘You think he might be doing it on his own?’
Georgiades hesitated.
‘Well, it could be.
He's strong enough, he's got a grudge, he's doing something about it.
He's the one who's actually masterminding the campaign.’
‘I agree with all that,’ said Owen.
‘But.’
‘But what?’
‘Remember what Nikos said: apply the analysis not to the Moslems but to the Copts.
Not Osman, but Osman plus money.
Not Andrus, but Andrus plus money.
Where does it come from?’
‘Sympathizers.
There are a lot of Copts who agree with him.
They're subscribing.’
‘Using the bank as a collecting point?
Well, you might be right.
But I'm sticking with the analysis.’
‘Test it out,’ Georgiades invited.
‘Talk to him.’
‘Andrus?
I might just do that.’
‘After all,’ said Georgiades, ‘you've got an excuse.’
‘What?’
‘Zoser.
He talked to Zoser the night before the killing.
Remember?’
Mahmoud leaned forward in his chair.
Since it was ostensibly in connection with the Zoser case, it was his business, and they met in his office.
‘So on that night,’ he said, ‘the night before the Zikr was killed, you talked only about the money she was to give out?’
‘Why do you ask me these questions?’ asked Andrus.
‘What have I to do with the Zikr?’
‘You talked only about the money she was to give out?’
‘Yes.
As I said.’
‘Did you have any money with you?’
‘No.
It is best not to carry money in Cairo at night.
She was to collect it from the church house in the morning.’
‘Where you would give it her?’
‘Yes.’
‘Did you give it her?’
‘Of course.’
‘Personally?’
‘Yes.
I was there when she came.’
‘You are there a lot,’ said Owen, ‘these days.’
It was the first time he had spoken.
Andrus gave him a hostile look.
‘Yes.
I am.
The church has a considerable charity programme which I administer.
There is nothing wrong with that, surely?’
‘Not with that, no.’
‘You talked that night about the people she was to give the money to,’ said Mahmoud.
‘Their names?’
‘Their names?’
‘Yes.
Could you tell me the names, please.’
‘Why should I tell you their names?
What business is it of yours?’
‘I need to know them.’
‘I forget them.’
Mahmoud sighed and made a note with his pencil.
He would check the names with the woman.
If there were any names.
‘You talked with the woman,’ he said.
‘Did you also talk with her husband?’
‘With Zoser?’
‘Yes, Zoser.’
‘Whom you killed,’ said Andrus, looking at Owen.
‘He killed himself.
And someone else.’
Andrus looked as if he was going to say something, then changed his mind.
‘Answer my question!’ said Mahmoud.
Andrus looked at him with undisguised fury.
Owen suddenly remembered that Mahmoud was a Moslem.
‘Of course I talked to him,’ said Andrus.
‘What about?’
‘How can I remember?’
‘Did you talk to him about what happened at your father's tomb?’
‘I may have done.
I do not know.’
‘And what was his response?’
Andrus did not reply.
He seemed to be looking into space.
Perhaps it was the reference to his father's tomb.
Owen suddenly felt unexpectedly sorry for him.
It came home to him for the first time that what had seemed to him a trivial event, a stupid joke, was something genuinely much bigger to Andrus.
It had touched him on a raw spot.
That harsh, unaccommodating man had clearly loved his father, perhaps had loved him alone.
Owen felt a twinge of pity.
‘And what was his response?’
Mahmoud prompted softly.
Andrus came back from space and looked at him bitterly.
‘I do not know why I should tell you,’ he said.
‘However, I will tell you.
He was shocked and horrified.
He felt for me as would anyone of a right mind.
And then he was angry.
That this should happen to one he knew and an elder of the church.
At first he could not comprehend it.
But then he realized.
This blow was not aimed at me but at the Church.
It was struck not at the weak man who suffered it but at the strong God who was the man's master.
And he said to himself: That man is weak indeed who lets his master suffer such an insult.
We looked for redress from the Mamur Zapt and received none.
But that was right.
We were wrong to look for redress from others when we should be taking the wrong done to our master upon ourselves.
That was Zoser's response.’
‘That was what you told him,’ said Owen.
‘That was what he said,’ said Andrus.
And almost certainly believed it.
When he had finished he sat glaring at them in defiance and pride.
Owen could believe that he had poured out all the wound and hurt that was in his heart when he spoke to Zoser.
And he could believe that although Zoser might not have said these things he had actually felt them.
And if he had felt them, might have done something about them.
Had Andrus intended that Zoser should do something about them?
‘You told him these things,’ said Owen, ‘in order to inflame him.’
‘I did not.’
‘You killed Zoser,’ said Owen.
‘Not I.’
For the barest second Andrus seemed to flinch.
Then the moment passed and the certainty returned.
‘God is great,’ said Andrus, ‘and will not desert his servant.’
‘There is a law of man, too,’ said Mahmoud, ‘and that, too, must be obeyed.’
He probed on, and Owen was glad, for it gave him time to think.
He needed to think, because although he was sure that Andrus had been speaking the truth, and that he had not deliberately incited Zoser to kill, he still felt puzzled.
If everything he had projected on to Zoser was true, or a true picture of his own feelings, why had he not taken the action upon himself?
As Mahmoud continued with his patient questions, and Andrus continued with his impatient replies, an answer  began to come to him.
Andrus, for all his faults, was, politics aside (and no Egyptian would accept that politics had anything to do with morality), a moral man.
He would not kill.
On the other hand, his wound went so deep and he was such a vengeful man that he had wanted his wounder dead.
When he had spoken to Zoser something of this had come across, perhaps not consciously but perhaps not completely unconsciously either.
He had said it speaking what he believed to be truth and justice, said it and left it.
If Zoser picked it up, then that was God's will.
If Zoser did not pick it up, then that was God's will.
There had been an act but he, Andrus, had not acted.
He had done nothing inconsistent with his morality.
Listening to Andrus now, Owen felt again his immense moral rigidity.
He had to have absolute certainty.
There was no room for doubt, least of all self-doubt.
Mahmoud's barbs, and there were plenty of them now, for Mahmoud was getting irritated, bounced off his massive self-assurance like wooden arrows off a rock of granite.
If they were going to get anywhere with Andrus, not on the Zoser business, Owen was satisfied about that, but on the other, then that granite surface must be undermined.
Somehow or other they had to get beneath the certainty and feed the seeds of doubt.
‘Tell me, Andrus,’ said Owen, ‘why do you spend all day and every day at the church house?’
‘I am doing God's work,’ said Andrus, caught rather off guard.
‘Are you sure that God would own it?’
There was a little silence.
‘Why should he not own it?’
Owen did not reply, merely waited.
‘God loves charity,’ said Andrus, with slightly less than his usual self-assurance.
‘No doubt; but what is that to do with what you are doing?’
‘What are you accusing me of?
Why don't you speak out?’
Andrus began to grow angry.
‘Do you think I am frightened of you?’
Owen took no notice.
‘You are spending a lot of time there,’ he said almost conversationally.
‘Have you given up your business?’
‘My business is no concern of yours.’
‘I thought you might have given it up.
You spend so much time at the church house.’
‘Have you been spying on me?’
‘I would have thought you needed the money.’
‘My business is doing well,’ said Andrus, ‘and I have no need of money.’
‘For what you are doing at the church house, I mean,’ Owen explained.
‘I give to charity what I can afford.’
‘Yes, but the other things.’
‘What other things?’
‘The other things you do at the church house.’
‘I do not know what you mean,’ said Andrus.
‘I do God's work.’
‘Oh no.
God is a god of peace.’
Andrus was brought up short.
After a moment he said to Owen:
‘You are mistaken.
He is a god of war.
Ask him.’
He pointed to Mahmoud.
‘He is a Moslem and will tell you.’
Mahmoud looked uncomfortable.
‘God is a god of neither peace nor war,’ he said.
‘It is man who makes war and man who makes peace.’
Andrus stood up.
‘Are you going to take me?’ he said to Owen.
‘Perhaps.’
‘I am not frightened of you.’
‘Why should you be,’ asked Owen, ‘when all you will get is justice?’
‘Your justice.’
‘Egyptian justice.’
‘Does a Copt ever get justice,’ asked Andrus, ‘in Egypt?’
He turned impatiently towards the door.
‘Come!
Take me!’
‘Sit down!’
If he took Andrus now it would be no good.
The Copts would merely regroup without him.
And Andrus would be untouched, impregnable behind his rigid simplicities.
His world was still certain.
‘Why do the British hate the Copts?’ asked Andrus.
‘We do not hate the Copts.
We are neutral between Copts and Moslems.’
‘How can a Christian be a Christian and be neutral?’
‘We are all servants of the Khedive,’ said Owen, correct in form if not in substance, ‘British as well as Copt, Copt as well as Moslem.’
‘I do not understand,’ said Andrus, ‘how a Christian can voluntarily choose to serve a Moslem.’
‘Many do,’ Owen pointed out, ‘including many Copts.’
For some reason this seemed to irritate Andrus particularly.
‘They are traitors!’ he said passionately.
‘They are traitors to the Coptic cause.’
‘To try to provide good government to the people of Egypt is hardly to be a traitor.’
‘The people of Egypt!
Who are the people of Egypt?
We are.
The Copts.
And for two thousand years we have had a government not our own.
And why is that?
Because we Copts have let others govern us.
We have even helped them to govern.
We have worked with the Government when we should have been working against it.
For two thousand years we have done that.
And for two thousand years every Government has been that of an invader.’
Where had he heard that before?
‘You are a Moslem,’ Andrus said to Mahmoud, ‘and you are an invader.
You are invaders too,’ he said to Owen, ‘but you are Christian.
When the British came we thought that they would lift the Moslem yoke from off our backs.
But Christian turned against Christian.
They supported the Moslems instead of sweeping them away.’
The moment of doubt, if there had been one, had gone.
Andrus was back in his old self-confident stride.
He would go to prison, if he had to go to prison, convinced of his rightness, proud of his martyrdom.
It was time to move in.
‘Andrus,’ said Owen, ‘you surprise me.
You hate the Moslems.
Why then do you support them?’
Andrus stopped.
‘Support them?’
‘Yes.
Against your own people too.’
‘I don't know what you mean,’ Andrus declared flatly.
‘Sheikh Osman.
You give him money.’
‘Nonsense!’
‘All the money that Sheikh Osman has used in the past few weeks in his war against the Copts is money that you have given him.’
‘Nonsense!’ said Andrus.
‘I have given him no money.
How would I give him money?
You invent these things to trick me.’
‘Every week,’ said Owen, ‘every Friday, you take money to Mordecai.’
‘Well,’ said Andrus, ‘what of it?’
‘Which he gives to Osman.’
‘That is just a lie,’ said Andrus.
‘Why do you bother with such tricks?’
‘I will bring Mordecai to you if you wish, and he will confirm what I say.’
‘You have told him what to say.’
‘I will show you the evidence that Osman goes to him every Friday and comes away with the money you have given him.’
‘But — but this cannot be.’
‘All the money that has been used against the Copts has been supplied by you.
And you talk of traitors!’
‘Mordecai is the traitor.
How dare he do this thing?’
‘He does only what he has been told.’
‘The money was brought for another purpose.’
‘What purpose, Andrus?’
Andrus was silent.
‘You brought the money, Andrus, and gave it to Mordecai to be used against the Copts.
Against your own people.
Why did you do that, Andrus?’
‘I did not bring it for that purpose,’ said Andrus hoarsely.
‘Mordecai has tricked me.’
‘Not Mordecai.
It is not Mordecai who has tricked you.
Mordecai has only carried out instructions.
Whose instructions were they, Andrus?
If they were not yours, whose were they?’
Andrus would not reply.
12
The Mamur Zapt sat in his office, thinking.
Nikos started to come into the room, stopped and withdrew unobserved.
No one after that was allowed past the office.
The bearers sensed the situation and stayed quietly in their office at the other end of the corridor.
They were in any case somewhat subdued by Yussuf's misfortunes.
A sympathetic peace descended on the corridor.
In fact, Owen was thinking mostly about Zeinab.
Since their visit to the opera relations between them had been distinctly cool; and Owen was feeling the effects of being deprived.
He had decided that it was time to think things through and settle them once and for all, but whenever he started thinking about Zeinab thoughts became memories of touch and smell and look and emotion and he became most unsettled.
He had to admit, too, that a certain drama had gone out of his life.
He considered himself on the whole a pretty steady person, but the trouble with steadiness was that it could very easily become the humdrum.
Zeinab, whatever else she might be, was definitely not humdrum.
She had all an Arab's volatility, added to which was an emphatic unpredictability which was all her own.
Too strong-willed and forceful to remain easily in any slot into which a male-oriented Moslem society might force her, regarding marriage, certainly to a Moslem, as the ultimate form of prison, conducting life as a ceaseless battle for Home Rule and Independence, she sometimes found things too much for her and plunged into pits of despair, from which she would spring out again almost immediately with a soar and a vehemence which left Owen dazzled.
He loved her both when she was cast down and when she was leaping up, and also in between when she was normal, although as far as Zeinab was concerned normality was a flexible concept.
However, ‘love’ was, for Owen, a strong word and one which needed thinking about.
Particularly in view of Paul's remarks and what he had said about Jane Postlethwaite.
Paul's remarks first.
There was no need for him to get married yet.
Paul's views notwithstanding, he was not old.
On the other hand, Owen was uncomfortably aware, a lot of men were married.
Especially senior men.
You could safely disregard Paul's opinion that marriage was a prerequisite of life at the top, because Owen could think of notable exceptions, Kitchener included.
Yet there was no doubt that it helped.
You fitted more snugly into society, especially, the tight little society around the Consul-General, if you were married and could take your wife along to dinner-parties with you, instead of forever having to be fixed up with a stray aunt or somebody.
Owen did not think of himself as ambitious.
He had left India for Egypt because he wanted to get out, not up.
He loved his work as Mamur Zapt.
It was still new to him and he wanted to go on doing it.
But there might come a time, there was no denying it, when he might have had enough, and then if he wanted to move it would have to be up.
But what to?
That opened up whole chains of other thoughts which he put resolutely away.
He had enough to think about as it was.
But the thought of possible other careers brought him to Jane Postlethwaite.
There was no doubt that she would be an asset.
Certainly her uncle would.
An influential politician would command patronage, although one didn't like to think of it like that.
Jane's husband would find ways  smoothed for him, things open to him.
Paul was acute on such matters.
Marrying Jane Postlethwaite would be good for his career.
But what about Jane herself?
She had a mind of her own and what she wanted would in the end decide what was done.
She might well reject him out of hand.
It would be a very sensible thing to do and Jane Postlethwaite was a sensible girl.
On the other hand, now he thought about it — that was one of the advantages of taking time out to think things through — there had been occasions when she had looked at him in a special way which made him think that she might not reject him.
However, evade and evade as he might, in the end he had to come to it: did he love Jane Postlethwaite?
Enough to marry her?
No, not enough to marry her, that was not it.
Love her, full stop.
Well, ‘love’ was a strong word, etc., etc.
Christ, he was going round in circles.
He needed some coffee.
That was another problem.
He had to do something about Yussuf.
Yussuf had been put in the cells to cool off and Owen had not long before been down to see him.
Yussuf had been quite inconsolable.
‘I have shamed the Mamur Zapt,’ he said.
‘Release me from your service!
I am not worthy.’
As Owen had not appointed Yussuf to his service in the first place but Yussuf had appointed himself, this seemed beside the point.
However, he seemed suitably penitent, so Owen left him there while he tried to work out what to do with him.
On his way back from the cells one of the bearers had intercepted him.
Yussuf's ex-wife had come to the police station and would not go away.
When Owen went out to see her she was squatting in the dust of the yard, her head covered, rocking to and fro in grief.
‘My man is in prison, Aiee-e,’ she wailed.
‘Be quiet, woman!’ said one of the bearers.
‘You have caused enough trouble.’
‘Aiee-e,’ wailed the woman.
‘My husband has wronged  the Mamur Zapt.
He was bearer to the Mamur Zapt and forgot his place because of his foolish wife.’
Well, that's something, at any rate, thought Owen.
If Fatima was prepared to admit her foolishness something might yet be saved from the wreckage.
‘Have mercy, effendi!’ cried the woman, rocking to and fro.
‘Have mercy and free this foolish man because of his foolish wife.’
The bearers looked embarrassed and tried to get her to go.
The woman shrugged off their hands and remained sitting where she was.
‘Have mercy, effendi.’
‘I might have mercy,’ said Owen, ‘if I thought there was any point in it.’
The woman stopped wailing.
‘Why should there be no point in it, effendi?’ she asked quietly, in a perfectly normal voice.
‘Because his heart would still be troubled.’
‘He loves me,’ said the woman, slightly with surprise, slightly with satisfaction.
‘He loves you and wants you back.
Will you not return to him?’
The woman dropped the fold from her face and looked up at him seriously.
‘I would, effendi,’ she said, troubled.
‘Suleiman is a pig.
All he wants is harem business.
He keeps on all the time.
A little, I don't mind.
It's good for a woman.
But this pig thinks of nothing else.’
‘Yussuf is a good man,’ said Owen.
‘He has his faults, but he is a good man.’
‘A woman could do worse,’ Fatima conceded, ‘as I have found, unfortunately.’
‘Besides,’ said Owen, ‘he might have learnt his lesson.’
The woman looked up at him.
There was a glint in her eye.
‘I think he might, effendi,’ she said.
‘Then what is to be done?’
‘Suleiman will not agree to a divorce,’ Fatima said, ‘unless  you give him money.
A lot of money.
He thinks that because you are a good master you will want Yussuf to be happy and so will pay a lot.’
‘She isn't worth it,’ said one of the bearers firmly.
‘Do not let yourself be beguiled, effendi,’ said another of the bearers.
‘Yussuf will be better off without her.’
‘Suleiman will tire of her,’ said another, ‘when he has had his fill.’
‘The Mamur Zapt has more wisdom than you,’ the woman retorted with spirit.
‘I will think about this,’ Owen had said.
And thinking was what he was doing, without success.
The trouble at the bottom was money.
That was another thing he had to think about.
The Curbash Compensation Fund was completely exhausted.
He couldn't pay for Yussuf.
He couldn't pay his agents.
And he certainly couldn't manage any of the substantial bribes on which the Mamur Zapt's day-to-day management of the city depended.
What was he to do?
Even if he survived the present crisis with its unusually heavy demands on resources, there were still a few weeks to go before he received his allocation for the next year.
He would have to cut back just when spending might be most needed.
There was, after all, the Moulid coming up.
He would have to pay for the policing of that out of this year's money.
With what?
If only John Postlethwaite would go away things could return to normal and he might be able to get some money as a special case in view of the emergency and the delicate state of politics.
But what with Postlethwaite and the political situation there was absolutely no hope.
But if John Postlethwaite went he would take Jane Postlethwaite with him.
Would that be a good thing or a bad thing?
He was going to be leaving soon anyway so Owen would have to make up his mind about Jane.
Oh Christ, there he was going round in a circle again.
Lastly, he thought about Andrus.
He thought he understood now about Zoser.
There had been no plot.
Andrus had gone to Zoser and poured out his heart.
Zoser, as rigid  as Andrus and far less intelligent, had taken it upon himself to put right the wrong which had been done to his friend and his church.
He could have learned who had perpetrated the deed either from Andrus or through the ordinary gossip of the bazaars.
And once he had learned, for the uncomplicated Zoser there would have been no gap between decision and action.
Zoser, poor man, had seen to his own punishment.
Andrus's was still to come.
Over the killing of the Zikr, Andrus, though not blameless, was probably not very guilty.
On the other matter, however, inciting unrest in the city which had already led to trouble between Moslem and Copt and might still lead to massacre, Andrus was, if not the prime mover, then definitely a prime mover, and for that he must be made to pay.
But that was not what Owen was thinking about.
Nor was he thinking about who really was the prime mover, for he thought he knew that already.
All he was waiting for was confirmation.
No, the problem which really preoccupied him, which he kept returning to from one direction after another, and one in which he never seemed to make headway, was how to use the information he had to bring the conflict between Copt and Moslem to an end.
It had to be soon, it had to be quick, and so far he had seen no way of achieving it.
Not that he had made much progress on anything else.
Even Yussuf, the simplest of the problems.
He wished he could speak to Zeinab about it.
Zeinab was quite good at that sort of thing.
Zeinab — oh God, there he went again.
Yussuf.
Well, at least he had learned his lesson.
He would never do that again.
He was absolutely ashamed of himself.
And as Owen reflected on Yussuf, and on the effects of shame, the glimmerings of an idea began to come to him.
He became aware of someone in the room.
It was Nikos.
‘He has come back,’ he said.
‘Did he see where Andrus went?’
‘Yes.’
After the interview Andrus, much to his surprise, had been released; but when he left Mahmoud's office one of Owen's agents had followed on behind him.
‘Who did he go to?’
‘Sesostris,’ said Nikos.
‘As you expected.’
‘What do you want?’ said Andrus.
‘I want you to withdraw all your people from the streets, to send them home and to tell them to stay at home, until at least after the Moulid.
You are to instruct them not to respond to Moslem provocation.
There won't be any after tomorrow, but if there is they are not to respond to it.
They are to take special pains not to offend Moslem susceptibilities.
Above all, they are not to use any violence.
If they do, I expect you to tell me their names and I will deal with them.’
Andrus laughed incredulously.
‘Is that all you want?’ he demanded.
‘You must be mad.’
‘It's not quite all,’ said Owen, ‘but it will do for a start.’
‘If you think I'm going to do any of these things,’ said Andrus, ‘let alone all of them, you must be crazy.’
‘I think not.’
‘Well, I'm not going to do them.
Not any of them.’
‘Oh, but you are.’
‘If you think you can frighten me,’ said Andrus, ‘you are mistaken.’
‘I don't.’
‘Then what makes you think I am going to do them?’
‘Because if you don't,’ said Owen, ‘I shall let it be generally known that Andrus has been giving money to the Moslems for them to use against Copts.’
‘No one would believe you,’ said Andrus, but his face went pale.
‘Won't they?
Even when they hear the evidence?’
‘They will believe it to be a trick.’
‘Even when they hear the evidence?
Mordecai?’
‘Mordecai would never dare.’
‘Mordecai has already agreed.’
‘But — but it wasn't like that.’
‘Will anyone believe you?
Anyone?’
Andrus licked his lips.
‘I cannot,’ he whispered.
‘I cannot.’
‘You can,’ said Owen, ‘and will.’
‘Take me to prison.’
‘No.’
‘Please.’
‘If I take you to prison,’ said Owen, ‘people will say: There goes Andrus, the enemy of the Moslems.
But you are not their enemy.
You are their friend.
You give money to them to use against Copts.
Therefore go free.’
Andrus looked at him, stunned.
He sat like that for a long time.
Then he buried his face in his hands.
‘Very well,’ he said in a choked voice.
‘Very well.
I will do it.’
He stood up and almost tottered.
He had suddenly aged.
‘That is not all,’ said Owen.
‘Not all?’
Andrus seemed totally bewildered.
His hands trembled.
‘Sit down.’
It was as if Andrus's legs had given way under him.
‘What more do  you want?’ he whispered.
‘You are to send a message to Sesostris.
You are to tell him that you have to see him urgently.
You will tell him that it must be in secret and that it is very, very important.
And then you will tell him to come to a place that I will tell you of and at a time that I will tell you.
And there you will meet him and say what I tell you.’
As realization dawned, Andrus blanched.
‘I cannot,’ he said.
‘You ask too much.’
‘Think of this,’ said Owen, ‘as payment.
Payment for the two men who died because of you and the many who might have died.’
‘I cannot.
I would be ashamed.’
‘If you do not, the shame will be not just on you but on your father's house.
‘There is Andrus,’ they will say, ‘the  man who gave money to the Moslems to use against the Copts.’’
Andrus buried his face in his hands again.
‘Either way there is shame,’ said Owen, ‘but one way the shame is yours and yours alone.
The other way the shame is on your father too.’
Andrus sat for a long time.
Owen let him sit.
When at last Andrus looked up, his face was haggard.
‘I will do what you wish,’ he said.
‘What do you want?’ said Osman suspiciously.
‘I want you to withdraw all your people from the streets, to send them home and to tell them to stay at home.
That is, at least until after the Moulid.
They are not to let themselves be provoked by the Copts.
After today the Copts will be very anxious not to provoke you, but should some foolish man do so then you are to instruct your people not to respond.’
‘What?’ said Osman, unbelieving.
‘You are to confine yourself to a mosque until after the Moulid.
You will not go out in the streets and you will not say anything in public.
There are to be no speeches and no sermons.
Not until after the Moulid.’
‘I shall say what I like and go where I like,’ said Osman.
‘As for the Copts, I will cut their throats and dance in their blood.’
‘You will not,’ said Owen, who took an equable view of Arab rhetoric.
‘No?’ said Osman belligerently.
‘Why won't I?’
‘Because if you do,’ said Owen, ‘I will tell everyone that you are the man who receives money from Copts.’
‘I?’ said Osman.
‘I?
I receive no money from Copts.’
‘You go to Mordecai, don't you?’
‘He is not a Copt.
He is a Jew.’
‘And where do you think he gets the money from?’
‘Not from Copts?’ said Osman, with a sinking heart.
‘He is just the man in the middle.
The Copts bring the money and Osman takes it.
Every Friday.
On the Sabbath.’
Osman reeled.
‘Do you swear this?’ he said thickly.
‘On the Book.’
Osman shook his heavy, turbanned head from side to side as if bemused.
‘I did not know it came from them!’ he muttered.
‘How was I to know?
A man came to me and said there were friends with money.
They wished to keep themselves secret and therefore I was to go to Mordecai.
But how can they be Copts?
Copts would not give money for use against Copts.
Unless —’
He smashed his great fists on the table.
‘They have tricked me.
It was a trap.
And I fell into it.
Fool that I am!’
He buried his head in his arms and rolled about the table in his agony.
‘Fool!
Fool!’
‘Osman takes money from Copts.
So it will be known.’
‘Fool!
Fool!’ groaned Osman.
‘Oh, the cunning devils!
They have beaten me.
How shall I show my face?
Osman takes Copt money!
Oh, the shame of it!’
‘If you do as I say,’ said Owen, ‘you will be able to show your face.
No one will know about it.’
‘The Copts will tell,’ groaned Osman.
‘They won't,’ said Owen.
Something in his voice made Osman look at him.
‘How do you know?’
‘I have talked with them.’
‘Do not believe them.
They are cunning devils.’
‘On this occasion,’ said Owen, ‘I think they may be believed.’
‘You do not know them like I do,’ said Osman.
‘They have no choice,’ said Owen.
‘They are in a trap as deep as yours.’
‘A trap?’
Osman began to sound hopeful.
‘Of your devising?’
‘Yes.’
Osman pounded the desk joyfully.
‘They are in a trap.
The Mamur Zapt has tricked them.
They have tricked me but have themselves been tricked.’
‘That's about it.’
‘You swear it?
On the Book?’
‘On the Book.’
‘Then I will go happily to prison.’
‘You are not going to prison.
You are going to take your people off the streets.
Remember?’
‘I can't do that,’ said Osman in consternation.
‘You must do it.
Or I will see to it that everyone in Cairo knows who is the sheikh who takes money from Copts.’
There was a short silence.
‘If I do what you ask,’ said Osman, ‘can I be sure that the Copts will do the same?’
‘You can be sure.’
‘I do not like it.’
‘Nor do they.’
‘No,’ said Osman, beginning to smile.
‘Of that one can be confident.’
He struck his fist on the table.
‘I will do it!’ he said.
‘At once.
Tonight,’ said Owen.
Osman nodded.
‘At once,’ he agreed.
‘So it shall be.’
He left looking quite pleased.
Owen was not sure that whatever lesson Osman had learned had been quite the right one.
Later in the morning Owen paid one of his infrequent visits to the Ministry of Finance.
As he was walking along one of the long, green-painted corridors he ran into John Postlethwaite.
‘Hello, lad,’ said John Postlethwaite.
‘What are you doing here?
Come for a bit of pocket money?’
‘In a manner of speaking,’ said Owen.
‘Not personally, but for the office.’
‘You'll be lucky.
What have you been up to?’
‘Not been up to anything.
It's all this trouble between Copts and Moslems.
It costs money.’
‘Too true.
That's only too true,’ John Postlethwaite  agreed enthusiastically.
‘That's what I'm always saying.
However you look at it, it costs money.
These colonies are millstones around our necks, as a noble lord of my acquaintance once said.
Mind you, he's a millstone round our necks too, him and all the other lords.’
Owen thought that Paul might not like the turn the conversation was taking so hastily shifted tack.
‘The real problem is the levy,’ he said.
‘Levy?’ said John Postlethwaite sharply.
‘I've not heard about that.’
Owen explained.
‘A levy is a mistake,’ said John Postlethwaite.
‘It's bad accounting principle.
It's a one-off business, you see.
You do it once and then that's an end to it.
What you want is a charge on something that regularly recurs.
You can go on forever then.’
‘The Khedive's insisting on it.
He needs the money.’
‘What does he need it for?’
Owen thought he hadn't better mention Monte Carlo.
‘Oh, a special function he has in mind, I think,’ he said vaguely.
‘If it's an unusual item, then maybe the best thing is a straightforward loan,’ said John Postlethwaite.
‘I don't normally approve of loans, unless I'm lending, of course, but sometimes they're the answer.’
At the other end of the corridor Owen saw Ramses come out of a door.
He began to edge away.
‘Come and see us some time,’ said John Postlethwaite.
‘I know Jane would like to see you.
She gets a bit cooped up in that hotel sometimes.’
‘Hello,’ said Ramses.
‘What are you after?
Still in trouble with the Compensation Fund?
I might be able to do something for you next year but there's not much chance this year, I'm afraid.
We're still stuck in our log-jam.’
‘Postlethwaite thinks the levy's a bad idea.’
‘Same here.
Unfortunately —’
‘He thinks a loan might be better.’
‘So it might,’ said Ramses, ‘if anyone could be found stupid enough to lend to the Khedive.’
‘I was wondering,’ said Owen, ‘if, in return for the levy being abandoned —’
‘A loan?
You wouldn't get your money back.’
‘Suppose,’ said Owen, ‘somebody made a loan, and the idea of the levy was withdrawn, and Patros became Prime Minister, couldn't he raise taxes?’
‘He certainly could and almost certainly will.’
‘Then the loan could be repaid out of the increase in taxes.’
‘Why,’ said Ramses admiringly, ‘you're beginning to think just like an accountant!
Yes, in principle it could be done.
I could get a few Copt bankers to club together to find a sufficient sum.
It would have to be a loan to the Government, mind, not to the Khedive personally.
A special loan so that, say, all the statues in Cairo can be cleaned on time for the Khedive's birthday.
They wouldn't be cleaned, of course, but no one would know.
A public loan like that would have the added advantage of showing the Khedive what loyal subjects we Copts are and how greatly we admire him.’
‘You think you could stitch that up?’
‘Yes.
On condition that the levy were withdrawn.
Patros would have to become Prime Minister, too, so that we could be sure that the money would be repaid.
Incidentally, I see problems there.’
‘The Consul-General will agree.’
‘Yes, but some of our side won't be very happy.
As you probably know, there's a strong party among the Copts who are utterly opposed to any Coptic participation in the Government, even on a personal basis.’
‘As a matter of fact,’ said Owen, ‘I think you may find that in future that party is not quite as strong as it has been.’
Before leaving the Ministry Owen rang Paul at the Consul-General's Residency.
‘Oh yes,’ said Paul.
‘I think that can be managed.
I'll have a word with the Old Man.
But do you think the Copts will really deliver?’
‘I think they will if you can get the Old Man to twist the Khedive's arm enough to persuade him to withdraw the levy.’
‘OK,’ said Paul.
‘I'll see he gets twisting.’
Instead of going to the Club as he usually did for lunch, Owen went to Zeinab's apartment.
She was surprised and pleased to see him.
Afterwards, as she lay drowsily in his arms, she said:
‘How is your little Nonconformiste?’
‘All right, I think.
I haven't seen her since the opera.’
‘I'm not jealous,’ Zeinab assured him.
‘If you want her, you can have her.’
‘She may have her own views about that.’
‘Are you taking her to the Moulid?’
‘Paul wants me to.’
Zeinab was quiet for a moment or two.
‘Have you ever been to the Moulid?’ she asked.
‘Not this one.’
‘Ah.
Then you must take her.
Yes, you must certainly take her.’
‘Perhaps I will,’ said Owen innocently.
Later, as Zeinab sat brushing her hair, she said:
‘How is Yussuf?’
‘In the cells.’
‘Poor man.
It is time you let him out.’
‘I would if I was sure he wouldn't go straight back and do it again.’
‘He ought to remarry Fatima.’
‘That's what I'm trying to achieve.’
‘Have you talked to the man, the one who married her?’
‘Suleiman?
No.
I've talked to Fatima, though.
She says that Suleiman will want money.’
‘Of course.’
‘Yes, but I haven't any.
The Compensation Fund is exhausted.
Anyway, it's a bad accounting principle.’
‘Accounting principle?’ said Zeinab, surprised.
‘Yes.
Give him some and they'll all be doing it.’
‘That is accounting principle?’
‘More or less.
Financial control, anyway.’
Zeinab shrugged her shoulders.
One of them emerged from her gown and Owen went across and kissed it.
‘I have been thinking,’ said Zeinab, laying down her brush.
‘Has Fatima any family?’
‘I don't know.
I expect so.
Why?’
‘It is one thing taking a woman into your house,’ said Zeinab.
‘It is another thing taking her family.’
‘So?’
‘If she has a large family and some of them are unprovided for, say, for instance, she has unmarried sisters and aunts and nieces, then it is only right, since her husband has married into the family, that he should provide for them, too.’
‘Yes, but will he see it like that?’
‘It is a duty to provide for your wife's family as for your own.
Why don't you suggest it to Fatima?
She sounds the sort of woman who wouldn't like to let things slip.’
‘I might do that.’
‘Yes.
If you did,’ said Zeinab, ‘you might even find Suleiman ready to think again.’
Owen had taken a house in the old part of the city not far from the Mar Girgis.
Through the heavy fretwork of its top windows he could see the towering minarets of the Bab es Zuweyla, and from the box window of the storey below, where he was standing when Sesostris approached, he had a good view along the street in both directions.
It was dark and the lamps were lit and they might not have seen Sesostris if he had not had to step aside to avoid a porter with a heavy bundle on his back and stand for a moment in the light from a shop front.
They watched him come to the door.
Owen had had the house cleared and the servant who let Sesostris in was one of his own men.
They heard the door close and the footsteps begin to climb the stairs.
In the room Andrus twisted his hands nervously.
He was a shell of the man he had been previously.
Owen gave him a warning glance.
He did not want things to go wrong at this stage.
He glanced round the room to make sure all was in order.
It was a modest but comfortably furnished room with a divan, low tables and large leather cushions on the floor.
The walls were covered with fine red carpets.
Georgiades held one of these aside and stood waiting.
Behind the carpet was a shallow recess in which the bedding was normally stored.
When Georgiades and he were standing inside it and the carpet replaced the wall looked like any other wall.
Sesostris came into the room.
‘Well, Andrus?’ they heard him say.
‘Greetings, Sesostris,’ Andrus said with difficulty.
‘Why have you brought me here?’
‘Because it is safest,’ said Andrus, as they had agreed.
‘They are watching our houses.
My house — and yours.’
‘Mine?’
‘They have found out.
The Mamur Zapt knows.’
‘What does he know?
And how do you know that he knows?’
‘I have a man in his office.
Nikos.’
Owen winced.
He thought that an unnecessary touch of Georgiades's.
‘He has told me.’
‘How much does the Mamur Zapt know?’
‘He knows about the money.
And to whom it goes.’
‘If he knows, why has he not moved?’
‘To know is one thing.
To be able to prove is another.
That is why he is having the houses watched.’
‘So he is not confident yet.
Well, that is useful to know.’
Sesostris did not speak for some time.
They heard him moving.
He seemed to be walking up and down.
‘It gives me a chance,’ they heard him mutter, as much to himself as to Andrus.
‘The question is whether to stop now or go on.’
‘I think we should stop, Sesostris,’ Andrus squeaked uneasily.
This part had not been in the script.
‘It would be a pity to stop now, just when we are nearly there.
A few more days, a week perhaps, would be sufficient.
Two weeks at the outside.’
‘The Mamur Zapt knows.’
‘But cannot prove.
Let us make sure that for the next two weeks he still cannot prove.’
‘How can we do that?’
‘We will not meet.
I will get the money to you in some other way.’
‘That is all right for you,’ said Andrus with an unexpected flash of his old spirit, ‘but what about me?
He knows I am the organization.’
‘The church house is watched too?’
Sesostris was silent for a moment.
‘Then you must move somewhere else,’ he said with decision.
‘They will find out.’
‘But not at once.
A week is all we need.’
‘Is it so close?’
‘The Khedive has to decide this week.
While there is trouble between Copt and Moslem he cannot offer it to a Copt nor a Copt take it.’
‘So he will have to offer it to someone  other than Patros?’
‘Yes.’
‘That will be a Moslem,’ said Andrus doubtfully.
‘That suits us,’ said Sesostris with extra definiteness.
‘He will impose the levy.’
‘And that suits us too.
It is the only thing that will stir out sleeping brethren, the only thing that will make them fight and not cooperate.
It is time,’ said Sesostris, ‘to make a stand.’
‘Yes,’ said Andrus, with less than his usual certainty.
There was a little silence.
Then Sesostris said:
‘You are tired, old friend.
It has been a hard battle and you have borne the brunt of it.
Keep going for just a little longer and then I will have someone else take over.’
‘I wish you had not given the money to the Moslems.’
‘It was necessary.
They would not have responded on such a scale otherwise.
It had to be big, Andrus, for the Khedive to notice and be influenced.’
‘But for them to use it against our own people!’
‘It is hard, I know.
But it was necessary.
How else are we to break through the effects of centuries of compliance and make the Copts erect and independent once again?’
Again there was a silence.
This time it was Andrus who broke it.
‘Will there ever be an end to the trouble between Copts and Moslems?’ he asked wearily.
‘Yes.
But on our terms.’
‘I hope you are right.
You play a dangerous game, Sesostris.’
The two men talked for a little longer.
Andrus was the first to leave.
Owen waited, as he had agreed, until the door closed behind him.
Then he stepped out from behind the hangings.