

BOOK TWO
The King Over The Water
PROLOGUE
May 10, 1941
The Chief, thought Karlheinz Pintsch, was suffering from nerves.
Dragging him away from the house at Harlaching had been like drawing teeth, and on the drive to the airfield he had stopped the car to pick wild flowers, in the name of God!
Now he was bitching about all matters technical.
A possible fault on one of the aero-engines, the camera playing up.
To Pintsch it seemed unfortunate.
God help us all, he thought, there's pain and suffering enough ahead: let's not worry about the details.
The problem with the port engine was soon sorted.
The aircraft had been flown already that day, before refuelling for Herr Hess's trip, and the motor was still warm.
D-type 110s were fitted with 601A units, which did not like warm starts, the Chief had been told that often enough, he was behaving like a Madchen.
Within minutes, both were throbbing comfortably, almost purring.
A deafening purr, quite ear-splitting!
As Hess approached the plane, Karlheinz trained the movie camera on him and turned the little switch.
Thank God for that, it worked.
He raised a hand, thumb upward, smiling.
The Chief twitched his famous eyebrows, that stuck out of the flying helmet like two ledges, showed his famous teeth.
Nervousness disappearing, Pintsch could see.
The sound of aero-engines.
The thought of action.
Like all the big bosses of the regime, he would have it on film, this great historic moment.
Not for posterity, however: for his own collection, assuming he returned.
For the Gestapo, thought Karlheinz, if anything went wrong.
He switched off almost sadly as Hess disappeared into the cockpit clumsily, too big in the leg for such acrobatics.
There were checks to be done, now that Hess had replaced the mechanic, so Karlheinz backed off a few paces with the camera.
It was not a professional affair, only a home-movie job, but it worked  well enough when it was working.
Pintsch had become an addict of the hobby early in the thirties, as had most of his friends.
Most of the other bosses had official cameramen, who photographed their every step, practically their every cough and spit, but he was glad Hess was not like that.
For a boss, in fact, he was a very human man, who had hardly tried to hide the tears behind his eyes as he had stepped into the Mercedes earlier.
Frau Hess had not come to say goodbye — ill in bed — and little Buz had been in the nursery.
On the pot, in fact, the Chief had said.
What a way to remember your only son.
The Chief had been quiet for a kilometre or two.
Wondering, beyond a doubt, if he would ever see the little boy again.
In any case.
Karlheinz Pintsch jerked his mind back to the present.
The ground crew were making ready.
The engines were being revved, full, throaty, reliable.
In any case, the first leg wasn't very far.
Only to Aalborg, up in Denmark, for refuelling.
Maybe something would happen, then.
Maybe the flight would be aborted, as it had been back in January.
Although the weather today looked ideal, the forecasts perfect all the way to Scotland.
Ah well, something else might happen.
He clicked the lever, and the clockwork motor whirred.
Pictures.
Out of the cockpit, Rudolf Hess waved, his face obscured now by mask and goggles.
It was his own mask, although the flying suit was Kaden's, borrowed because his own had disappeared, peculiarly, from its hook.
Karlheinz caught the wave, then turned the camera on the group of figures standing by.
Messerschmitt himself was there, the Prof, which was a surprise.
Surely he did not know precisely what was going on?
Kaden, too, and a couple of other senior staff at Haunstetten.
The engine noise rose, the chocks were pulled.
Smoothly, Karlheinz Pintsch panned round as the aircraft passed him, sweeping down the runway.
The sky was dull, and the last few seconds were almost certainly wasted film, but he did not switch the camera off until the fighter had disappeared.
He returned to the Mercedes then, his heart becoming heavier as he walked.
The time scale had been altered slightly, there was much to do.
The letter for Herr Hitler, most importantly, to be delivered personally.
His train was booked, hin und zuruck.
He doubted, to be perfectly frank, if he would ever get to use the return half.
But other things.
He checked his wristwatch.
Vital calls to make.
The timing had to be exact.
In the cockpit of the Bf11O, Rudolf Hess, Deputy Fuhrer of the  German Reich, stabilized the motors and concentrated.
Udet had listed the permitted zones and heights for the day, and his path was relatively simple.
He was heading for the North Sea coast, which he would cross near Terschelling then follow for a while before turning in for the approach to Aalborg.
The fluttering in his stomach had ceased, and he worked to clear his mind of images and worries.
Little Buz sitting on his potty was the hardest, the lovely, curly-headed boy.
But now he was the pilot.
The flier.
He had started on the mission…
Reinhard Heydrich — the President, as he liked to call himself — drove alone to Gatow that afternoon.
His car was instantly recognizable, as was his profile, so by the time he drew to a halt there were three men waiting to do his bidding.
He gave one the keys to the SSK, and told the other two to have an aircraft ready in twelve minutes.
Heydrich did not need to file a flight plan — had no intention of so doing-but he strolled to the control tower to tell them he was going for a spin.
It was normal.
Heydrich, a man of many talents, considered fighter flying one of the most useful and relaxing of them all.
He had come to it relatively late in his short life, having dulled the joys of promiscuity, music and organization early on, and like everything else he took an interest in, he did it with terrifying brilliance.
Having mastered aerobatics in his little Deaky before the war, he had gained Hitler's permission to go on bombing runs, although — boringly — only as a gunner.
While others had sweated and trained, whored and drunk like madmen to control their fear, he had practised for his fighter pilot examination — in time stolen from all his other jobs — passing, inevitably, summa cum laude.
He flew Willi Messerschmitt's masterpiece, the 109, in the Norwegian campaign, and over France, Belgium and Holland, while fitting in some high-level photo reconnaissance over England in a modified 110.
Both Himmler and Hitler disapproved of all this dangerous activity — they needed him — and Heydrich often had to sneak back to Berlin on late-night transport planes to cover the fact that he had been battling with the RAF instead of with the enemies of the State at RHSA headquarters.
If Heydrich had a regret about life on earth — and he had never been heard to express one — it was that a day held merely twenty-four hours.
Lächerlich!
The Bf110, he thought, as he flew sedately north towards Denmark, was not half the plane the 109 was.
It was a pity, one of the small mysteries of flight and aerodynamics.
It had twice the power of its single-engined sister, but far less of practically everything else.
Its top speed was lower, and at anything near that speed, its range was laughable.
It was a pig to fly, a dog to fight with, an animal.
Hess planned to get to Scotland in one, and rather him than me.
Heydrich was grinning to himself.
Hess would never get to Scotland in a 110.
Oh no, no, no!
He gazed around him at the late afternoon sky.
It was leaden, but clear.
No other aircraft, Germany laid out around him like a pale map, yellow and green.
He sang aloud, in what he amused himself by imagining was a passable accent, ‘Oh you tak the high road and I'll tak the low.
‘And I'll be in Aalborg afore ye!’
Poor old Hess.
The man they called The Fat One — Reichsmarschall Hermann Goering — was enjoying himself when Karlheinz Pintsch rang him with the news.
He was in Carinhall, his country home near Berlin, and he was naked.
He had, in fact, just stepped from his bath and, on a whim, had called upon the services of a maid called Ella.
He was in front of a mirror, and the sight had brought forth gusts of laughter.
Emmy was away, in case the Royal Air Force came with bombs again, and Der Dicke was feeling frisky.
Plotting was afoot, deep plotting.
‘Ah,’ he said, when Ella appeared at the bedroom door.
‘Come in, my sweet.
Don't be shy.
I need a second opinion, that's all.’
The girl, who was new but a Berliner, was even so a little shocked.
Her eyes rounded at the sight of so much flesh, although she stepped quite boldly into the room.
She was dressed-nicely, he considered — in a black uniform in the French style, trimmed in white English lace.
Doubtless the other girls had told her what she might expect.
Hermann loved Emmy, no one doubted it.
But he was a playful man, and generous.
‘Two whelks,’ he said, smiling at her.
He opened his arms as she joined him at the mirror.
Their eyes met in the glass.
‘A whale, two whelks, and a winkle!’
‘Very nice,’ said Ella, and she meant it.
Goering had noted many times before that the fatter and more powerful he got, the more attractive women found him.
What a pity he was so old!
He read her expression — enquiring — and touched her on both shoulders.
As she sank to her knees, the Reichsmarschall felt the winkle underneath the whale begin to rise.
From above, he saw only his belly, though, and Ella's fine brown hair.
Changing his mind, and watching in the mirror, he slipped his hands underneath her jaw and pulled her gently up again.
‘On your back, I think,’ he said, propelling her towards the bed.
‘I'm going to pull your skirt up, Ella, and if you've got no knickers on you will get a bonus, you saucy little minx.
I'm going to envelope you in flesh, I'm going to cover you like an Austrian feather quilt, like an enormous dumpling, you'll like that, won't you?
And when you've lain there, and thought of Adolf or whatever good girls do these days, you can watch me dress in my fine underwear, all pristine silk and nicely sticky balls.
You won't have read your Henry James, of course?’
So Hermann Goering was a little on the miffy side when Karlheinz Pintsch rang up before he'd finished.
His man had been warned that Pintsch was not to be put off, whatever the occasion, so The Fat One — without irony — shouted ‘Come’ when the bedroom door was knocked.
If the NCO saw Ella's limbs protruding from beneath the supine lard he did not comment.
‘Telephone, sir.
Karlheinz Pintsch.’
‘Ja, damn it.’
Withdrawn from silent Ella, still naked in an office off the bedroom, Goering shouted down the receiver: ‘You're early, damn you!
What's going on?’
Karlheinz Pintsch replied: ‘The bird has flown, Herr Reichsmarschall.
He left a little early.
I have the letter for the Fuhrer.
Everything except the time is normal.’
Goering scratched his balls, felt his drooping penis.
That bloody Hess, that Piesl.
He always cocked things up.
‘Right,’ he said.
‘You've done well, Pintsch.
Get your train, as planned.
Get to Berchtesgaden.
Are you scared?’
‘Naturally, sir.’
‘Don't worry too much.
You've got protection.
Herr Hess showed you the letter he's written Himmler, didn't he?
When the Chickenfarmer reads it, you'll be in the clear.
Exonerated.’
Like hell, he thought.
Pintsch did, too.
But both of them were prepared to live with it, for slightly different reasons.
‘Train,’ he said.
‘Move.
I've got calls to make.
And Pintsch?’
‘Sir?’
‘Good man.’
Before he made his next call, Der Dicke put on his underwear.
Ella he had dismissed, as pleasure could be recalled at any time, while the business in hand was urgent.
Somehow, he had never thought that Hess had had this in him, he'd never thought the flight would ever — to coin a phrase — get off the ground.
Grudgingly, he was impressed.
The old windbag still had some spunk left, despite all the shit his dear old Fuhrer made him eat.
He had set off early, too.
A crafty touch, a crafty touch indeed.
Still, Adolf Galland would not be thrown by minor details such as that.
Still like a whale, now a silken one, he returned to the small office and put the call through to Galland's unit in the Netherlands.
It took four minutes to connect.
‘Dolfo?
Hermann.
Look, I'm furious, I can barely contain my rage, every gram of flesh I have is quivering with anger.
Do I make myself clear?’
He could imagine Galland, a small man who looked as if he had permanent indigestion.
Galland would not be smiling at this jollity.
‘I have to tell you,’ he went on, ‘that the Deputy Fuhrer has gone insane.
He has obtained a fighter, Bf 1 10, and he's flying it to Britain.
Augsburg to Aalborg, then to Scotland, all right?
Naturally, he must not succeed.’
‘I'll get an intercept worked out immediately,’ said Galland.
‘I'll scramble shortly.’
‘Oh Dolfo.
This is unprecedented, you understand, totally unprecedented.
I have every confidence in you.
Let's have some wizardry, all right?’
‘The orders will be given as soon as possible, Reichsmarschall.’
Which means, thought Goering, get off the line.
He dismissed Galland.
The humourless little shit.
A good man, though, a genius in the air, and Stahl was also in on it.
Nothing would go wrong.
Hermann Goering put the receiver in its cradle slightly downcast.
He glanced at the carriage clock on the polished rosewood desk.
It had come from a chateau outside Paris, as had some of the other beauties.
And the desk!
He was taking care of everything for the owners.
Oh, what a good man!
He cheered up a little.
A few minutes, a few checks, some calculations and Galland would be airborne.
That would be all right, then.
Fine.
Perhaps he should phone the Fuhrer, perhaps a little later.
He thought of the evening's scheduled raid on London.
They'd be fuelled up by now, bombs loaded.
Six hundred of them.
The biggest one he'd ever mounted.
It was going to be some sort of a night for Mr Churchill and his friends, he mused.
He hoped — just hoped — it might prove to be conclusive.
Heydrich, who was never late for anything, was too late to stop the flight to Scotland.
As he taxied to a halt at Aalborg, he saw a small contingent of SD approach, keen and hungry, and his lips curved.
I'll feed you soon, my dogs, he thought.
As he pulled back the perspex canopy he permitted himself a small smile at Stallen, whom he knew.
The engines grumbled into silence.
‘Good evening.’
He pulled himself athletically from the cockpit.
‘Where is he?’
Stallen looked slightly perplexed.
Heydrich jumped down from the wing, face set.
Something!
‘Speak.’
His voice had quietened, his nostrils flared.
The SD men were watchful.
Stallen said stiffly: ‘We arrived on time, of course.
The Deputy Fuhrer had made other arrangements, it seems.
Another plane, in fact.
I could have arrested the manager of the field, but I thought it might be better to wait to see which way the cat jumped.
News of arrests might…
’ He left the thought to hang.
They were standing by the aircraft.
It was whistling slightly, as some part hidden in the cowlings cooled down.
A rhythmic ticking from the starboard engine.
Reinhard Heydrich swore, richly and obscenely.
Nobody responded.
The wind blew, ruffling Stallen's hair.
‘What plane?
Did they provide it here?’
‘Naturally.
It was ordered.
It was a new one, Mark E2 or some such jargon.
Half-painted, only, guns still packed with grease.’
‘I'll kill the bastards.’
‘The Deputy Fuhrer.
They could hardly have said no.’
Reinhard Heydrich wiped the portion of his face that had been  covered by his mask.
It was sweaty.
He was beginning to overheat in his flying suit.
He spat onto the concrete.
‘You're quite right, Burli.
A telephone.
I have some words to say.’
Goering laughed at him, like a drainpipe full of shit.
‘I know already, Reinhard!
I've scrambled Dolfo Galland to shoot him down.
Imagine!
Old Rudolf being smart enough to pull a trick like that!
Imagine!
To outwit Reinhard Heydrich!’
I'll get you one day, you fat sow, Heydrich told himself.
I'll boil you down for soap.
He said, mildly: ‘You also were outsmarted, Hermann.
Or are you in on this aspect as well?’
‘Oh no, no plotting, no I'm clean, my dear.
No, it's you he doesn't trust, Reinhard.
Does anybody?’
‘Does the Fuhrer know yet?
Has anybody bothered to pass the news on?’
Goering's gurglings were even richer.
‘Well you can't, can you?
If you knew there was a plot afoot, shouldn't you have mentioned it before, you know how paranoid our glorious leader gets!
It's terribly suspicious, Reinhard, you being up in Denmark when the old fox flies away.
Even if you do claim you went up there to do him in!
I'd keep your head down, nein?’
For the moment, there was very little that the President could say.
The navigation for the second leg should have been extremely easy.
From Aalborg it was largely a matter of following the setting sun, which had broken from its cloud cover even before the flier had reached his chosen height.
The earlier start had complicated matters slightly, but that had been remedied by flying a simple box pattern, by compass and clock, to lose time in the middle of the North Sea, as far as possible from either British or Luftwaffe fighters.
As he approached the coast the Bf110 was in a shallow dive, the new, high-power DB601N motors driving her very fast.
Course and landmarks were clear in his mind's eye, Holy Island in clear reality below him.
At Dungavel House, where the Duke of Hamilton had his residence, there was a private landing strip.
If his luck held, nothing could prevent him using it.
Almost as the thought formed, two aircraft appeared in front of him.
The shock was terrific, he gasped into his oxygen mask, his hands clenching involuntarily.
They were Spitfires, dead ahead and  so close it was impossible, coming directly at him.
Then they were gone, and he craned back to see behind him, to see if they were following.
But he saw nothing, nothing but dark sky: The oxygen mask was filled with sweat.
I am Rudolf Hess he told himself, again and again.
I am Rudolf Hess, and I have come to see the Duke of Hamilton.
He commands 602 Fighter Squadron and he is on duty tonight, at RAF Turnhouse, near Edinburgh.
He controls all hunters, so they will not hunt me down.
I am Rudolf Hess, and I come in peace, for peace, to end the war.
The repeated incantation calmed him, as it had throughout the flight from Aalborg.
The news from Gatow that Heydrich had flown north had been the great shock, the confirmation of all their fears, but Heydrich for once had missed the boat.
Here, in twilight's faded blue, was Rudolf Hess, flying over Scotland, still.
Fast and low and nervous.
There ahead, a flash of silver.
The sea.
He looked down in a sudden panic.
That should not be!
He had gone astray!
He checked his flight map, controlled his racing thoughts.
He had gone too far, but all was not yet lost.
He concentrated.
At nine minutes past eleven, confused but still not hopeless, he baled out.
He had flown over the sea for a short time — the western sea, the wrong sea — then swung back on a reciprocal.
He had other information in his mind and on his lap, information that would guide him to Dungavel House.
But it was late, the light had almost gone, he was unsure.
He was certain only of one thing.
Ich bin Rudolf Hess.
Ich bin Rudolf Hess.
He hurt his back and ankle baling out.
It was an operation he had never done before, and it was schrecklich difficult.
He hurt his back as the tailplane hit him glancingly, and his ankle when he hit the ground.
He was in a field, and after the awful smashing of the grounding 110, it was very, very quiet.
He forced himself from the parachute, offered thanks to God for his deliverance, and hobbled off to find someone.
The Duke of Hamilton.
Too much to hope for, but he was expecting him.
Ich bin Rudolf Hess…
He was confronted, in fact, by a farm labourer, who helped him into his small cottage and offered him a cup of tea.
The flier, smiling reassuringly at an old lady, roused by the excitement from her bed, said he would prefer a glass of water.
When asked, he told the labourer: ‘I am Hauptmann Alfred Horn.’
A couple of hours earlier, on a hunch, Hermann Goering rang down to his main office in Carinhall and gave them a Stockholm number to obtain.
He had a fair idea of what Heydrich had been up to in Aalborg, and he hoped he might get confirmation this way.
The man was a serpent, and — who knew — he might have been more successful than he claimed, in the matter of Rudolf Hess.
While he waited, another call came through, from Adolf Galland.
Everything, he said, had gone perfectly.
Dolfo was very circumspect about trusting telephone lines, even lines to Hermann Goering, whose Forschungsamt controlled which ones were tapped.
That was all he said, and he was not asked to embellish.
Two minutes later, the set jangled once more.
Goering's secretary.
‘The call to Stockholm, sir.
Impossible, I'm afraid.’
‘Why?’
‘The lines are down.
Some time ago.
We've no idea when they'll be restored.’
Reichsmarschall Goering — fully clad now in an opulent lounging suit of pearl grey with wide lapels and double vent ‘to give my arse some room to breathe’— thought long and hard about this information.
Surely not coincidence?
ONE
Edward Carrington was not always a historian.
In fact, he was recruited to the discipline by what some insisted was the arsy-versy way.
Instead of starting off in Oxbridge and becoming a spy, he started as a spy and ended up in Oxbridge.
It happened by accident, or at least with no intent at all on his pan.
It was haphazard, and surprising, and even rather funny, it was the nature of the times.
A week or so afterwards, the Second World War began.
The approach came after a reception in a large private house in Belgravia.
Edward's father had worked in the diplomatic service in India and had amassed a fortune also, by irregular and secret membership of a Burmese rubber syndicate.
His only son — well provided in those days with cash — had come back to Europe in the early ‘thirties with little in his mind except escape.
Like many other boys with India in his blood he had been forced into rootlessness by education.
At the age of seven he had been put on a ship to Britain, kissed by his mother and sisters, shaken hands with by his Pop, and banished from their sight for the next eleven years, save two brief holidays.
When he had left, he had loved them desperately, and had hidden in the stifling furnace of his cabin for days, weeping himself dry.
By the time he was reunited with them — for good, if he so chose — he viewed his parents with an indifference that probably masked hatred.
They were proud of him, they said, so pale, so educated, so English, and paraded him in the clubs and messes for a while.
For Edward, India had lost the only element he had liked in it — the easy affection of the Indians that he had taken for granted as a child — and gained nothing in compensation.
There were three rows with his father, behind closed doors, then they reached agreement.
Edward left.
His father, fortunately, had certain eccentricities.
Although it struck him as being perfectly right and natural to tear a seven-year-old boy away from his parents and send him ‘home’ to be educated, it also struck him that the English public school system was iniquitous, a hotbed of beatings and buggery.
So Edward, almost alone  among his fellow unfortunates who sailed that particular August, did not go to one of the great English educational establishments, but to a small academy near Dumfries.
Beating was on the agenda, certainly, but buggery very definitely was not.
In fact, about the only contact Edward ever had with other people's flesh was when the school maids, and then their friends from round about, began to share their sexual favours with him.
It started when he was only fourteen, and he was more or less alone among the boys in being smiled upon.
Even when he could not do it properly he loved it, and very soon he pleased as much as he was pleased.
He never told, either, a lesson he learned very young, which made him everlastingly popular with the girls.
Formal education he hardly bothered with.
He had a flair for languages that was extraordinary, and that was quite enough.
When asked by the masters where it came from, he put it down to being ‘good with my tongue’, and they nodded sagely, wondering why he smiled.
When he left, he had added German, Danish, Swedish and Norwegian to his Hindi and Urdu.
All, it was pointed out acidly by the headmaster, fairly useless languages (except perhaps the German), but that was his lookout.
Edward, who was depressed already, homesick for the bodies he was being forced to leave, agreed without agreeing and shook hands listlessly.
He had been offered university, naturally, but went ‘home’, this time to India.
That lasted four months.
Despite the violence of the schism with his father, the eccentric streak prevailed to the extent that he was offered funds until he found his feet back West.
In northern England there were branches of the family with interests in ships and trading, and eventually Edward ended up with them, on a roving brief.
The next few years he spent in travel and (dread words) in commerce, drinking in the wonderful perplexities that Europe, after India and Scotland, threw at him.
As early as 1933, when he was nineteen, he watched in joy and fascination as Germany burst into a new era, and Russia fed her revolution on the flesh of her own children.
Everywhere he went he smelled fresh blood, and was exhilarated.
Not in England, though.
As the decade rushed on, as he saw or read about slaughter in Abyssinia, beatings and murder in Hungary, Romania, Albania, racial violence in the Memel, Carpatho-Ukraine, Slovakia, fascist killing in Italy, Germany and Spain, communist in the east, Edward Carrington grew more and more amazed, then  horrified, by the country that he supposed his own.
To him and to most of his European friends, it was as clear as daylight in the sky that a war was coming.
Central Europe, and some of its fringes, was not an unexploded bomb, it was in a state of constant, barely controlled explosion.
It was burning, fraying at the edges, riddled with violent cancers of nationalism, spite and greed that could not go on without a climax for much longer.
The First World War had destroyed an empire and left a vacuum at the heart of Europe.
Hitler — a blind man could see — was going to fill it.
So was his country blind?
Certainly his father said so, in letters.
According to him — and Edward, separated by thousands of miles and great relief, was now prepared to listen — the Empire was retreating into cowardice and insanity.
They were all, save Winston Spencer Churchill, trying to give India to the fuzzy-wuzzies, and the cuts in arms spending would leave us quite defenceless.
The National Government was a disaster under Macdonald, worse under Stanley Baldwin, and unspeakable under Chamberlain.
On his returns to England, Edward more and more frequently mixed with people of like opinion, many of them friends or associates of politicians.
He was at the garden party on Guy Fawkes Night in 1938 when the honourable member for Stockton, Harold Macmillan, burnt Chamberlain in effigy, and he earned the thanks of Bob Boothby later the same evening when he happened upon him making love to Macmillan's wife against a turkey-oak tree — and went deaf and blind.
He drank with Brendan Bracken, the red-haired Irishman who many thought was Churchill's bastard, and slept more than once on a settee in the great man's flat in Morpeth Mansions when they had all drunk too much whisky — although never while Churchill was in town.
Edward had met him only twice, but what he saw he liked.
The man was not a grey-suit, not a whey-face, not a pusillanimous, coughing politician.
He was a buccaneer, and Edward admired that.
By god, it was what his country needed.
Not everybody agreed, inevitably.
To many Churchill was not so much a buccaneer as a straightforward pirate, a political outcast who skated on thin ice deliberately to keep himself in the public eye, a man who polished brilliant and wounding phrases that tacitly suggested himself as the alternative should his jeremiads turn out true.
Edward, in bed one day with a clever country girl rebelling deliciously against the perceived repressions of her class, learned  between kisses that Sir Joseph Ball — a former MI5 man who now led the Conservative Party's organizational machine — had used his old position to tap Churchill's phone for Chamberlain and monitor his associates.
Edward had passed it on and — although it had already been known about — was confirmed in the eyes of Winston's men as somebody to trust.
He particularly enjoyed the fact that his vaguely cosmopolitan, vaguely raffish air not only made him attractive to certain high-born English gels, but led to such useful pillow-talk.
Their menfolk — educated, constipated, correct — tended to despise or (perhaps) fear him for his manners.
It was on the cards that he should be drawn into the circle of dissent.
The suggestion that he might do something positive, however, came completely from the blue.
It was August 17, 1939, and Carrington had spent most of the reception swallowing champagne.
He did not recognize the man approaching him in a quiet corner of the drawing room, but feared he might be a drunken bore.
He had a large gin in his hand, and at least a few inside him.
He introduced himself as Major Desmond Morton.
Edward, who was hopeful that he had made a conquest some minutes earlier, found it hard to gather his concentration.
The reception had been a glittering affair, and an odd one.
After months of fits and starts, scares and rumours, the outbreak of a war in Europe was unavoidable.
Since Munich, the mood of the British people had changed almost tangibly, with only Chamberlain's grey men in Parliament, backed by their poodles at the Daily Mail and the Express, not positively, atavistically, desiring the first shot.
Poland was on the brink, it was only a matter of time before the heel of the jackboot smashed down.
In Berlin and in London, in Paris, Warsaw, Rome, only the diplomats and power-brokers were hanging on, making desperate efforts, in the open and in secret, to avoid the blow-up.
The people, it appeared, had clean forgotten what war meant.
Some of the grey men, apparently, had not.
At this reception in the heart of London, the atmosphere was schizophrenic.
There were civil servants there, diplomats from Germany and Russia, with their ladies old and young.
On one level the social niceties ground on, the minutiae of dress and behaviour observed and chattered over.
A string quintet played in the largest of the reception rooms, and guests spilled out into the garden in between light showers.
But beneath it all, beneath the strange rituals that passed in this milieu for normality, there was an undercurrent of  fear, of latent panic.
And for some of the young, a dizzyingly exciting feeling, deep in stomach-pit, that something terrible was about to come about, something wonderful and dreadful.
There was a young woman there, an attractive girl he guessed at twenty-two, who had been introduced to him as Suzanne Simonis.
She was imprisoned in a long silk gown, her face pale and rather beautiful, with dark circles around deep, exhausted eyes.
She seemed on the verge of tears, somehow, which Edward found both strange and quite exciting.
‘Simonis,’ he said.
‘May I say what an unusual name?
You are German, I presume?’
She was a German.
She was the cousin, she said, of Herr Theo Kordt, the Counsellor at the German Embassy in London.
She had travelled overnight from Germany, by boat and train, and had had little sleep.
‘How strange,’ said Edward, slipping into German.
‘You must have had a reason.
A very important one?
As I hear it, you may not have many days in which to get back home!’
It was couched in the form of a joke, or at least of banter, but it had the directness that he knew many women responded to.
Edward was dressed impeccably, but he retained his raffish air.
He could see himself in the garden with Fraulein Simonis, investigating those dark eyes at closer quarters.
But she did not respond.
The eyes slid sideways, looked over his shoulder.
A small smile lit her lips.
Turning his head, Edward saw another young woman.
She was shorter than Suzanne, with dark hair and eyes, a sultry, sulky mouth.
She said, in Swedish: ‘Are you all right, Suzanne?
You look like death.
Shall I tread on his toes for you?’
‘No,’ Suzanne replied.
‘But take him over, will you?
He's asking awkward questions, he's probably a spy.
I might burst into tears.’
‘Poor thing.
Do you want to lie down?
Shall we go and find a place for you?’
Suzanne Simonis smiled wanly.
‘I'll go and get coffee.
Find Theo.
I must sleep soon.’
To Edward, in German, she said: ‘I'm sorry for that rudeness.
This is my friend, Hannele Malling.
Would you like to talk to her?
She speaks German, of course, and English.
I'm rather tired, I'm going to find my cousin.
Excuse me.’
When she had gone, Edward said: ‘Hannele.
Short for Johanne?
Is that German or Swedish?’
He spoke in Swedish, looking directly into her eyes.
They did not flinch.
‘So you speak Swedish, also.
Very good.
Yes, I am half-half.
Suzanne is German, but she is my friend.
You are an unusual Englishman, to speak languages.
MI6, I suppose?’
The eyes were deep, fearless and unreadable.
Edward Carrington much preferred his new companion, taken though he had been with Suzanne's tired, tired eyes.
This one was like a dynamo.
He said: ‘I've never heard of MI6.
No, I am just a simple man of business.
Hence the languages.
I almost live in Europe.
Have done so, I should say.
I'm afraid it won't be so easy, very soon.
Would you like a drink?’
A waiter was approaching, with champagne on a tray.
Edward took two glasses, handing one to Hannele.
They moved slowly towards the garden.
‘I have a choice,’ she said.
‘It is not easy.
I have not made up my mind yet.
To live in Sweden or in Germany.
What do you think?
When the war comes?’
‘Self-evident.
Sweden is a beautiful country that will probably stay neutral.
Germany is full of misery and danger, bestiality, violence.
She will fight bravely for a while, then be bombed and strafed and ruined.
There will be blood in the sewers, pestilence and death.
She will probably be destroyed completely.’
‘Germany, then,’ said Hannele.
‘Yes, I think you're right.
Sweden is so very, very boring.’
Later in the evening, standing beside a huge rhododendron that dominated one whole corner of the garden, Edward asked Hannele if she would sleep with him.
She had short, bobbed hair, and she swept a lock from out of her eyes before she answered.
‘No,’ she said.
‘Tonight I must go with my friend.
She is here on business, you understand?
She is a courier from von Weizsacker.
You know?
Ernst von Weizsacker, State Secretary.
He still thinks there can be peace, he is determined.
Many people think Herr Hitler mad, you know.
Suzanne has brought a message to her cousin, to tell him the date the war will start.
August 25, or within three days after that.’
‘Good God.
Are you sure?’
‘Of course.
That is Hitler's plan.
By revealing it von Weizsacker hopes to shake the dunderheaded British out of their lethargy.
To make you be decisive, tell Hitler that you will march immediately, crush him.
Suzanne worries over it, she would not approve that I have told you.
She slept not at all, throughout our journey.
Do you think that it will work?’
Edward Carrington almost said something indiscreet, about Chamberlain and his Cabinet of sheep.
In his opinion, they would make peace on almost any terms, they were shot through with cowardice, they lived in a perpetual funk.
But who knew, perhaps this extraordinary girl was in fact the spy, not he, was trying to provoke an opinion that the Germans might find useful, was probing him.
‘I'm a businessman,’ he said.
‘I really can't imagine how they will respond.
I notice, however, that your reasons for not sleeping with me are purely practical.
That surprises me.’
She cocked her head, cheekily, tilting backwards to look into his eyes.
‘As an Englishman?
Or as a businessman?
Or as a spy?’
‘Let's say — as an Englishman.’
‘There is a war coming.
I am twenty years old.
Who knows, in six months I may be dead.
Most Englishmen I know, no one would sleep with, they presumably sleep with each other.
You do not look like that to me.
I would like to have a try.’
‘Tomorrow, then?
That's a very pessimistic view.
About the war.’
‘Is it?
I have lived in Germany for a year now, all the time.
I am at university in Dresden.
You are slim, and rather beautiful.
Ring me at the Embassy tomorrow, ask for Suzanne.
If it is possible, we will sleep together.
Ja?’
She had smiled and dipped her head, and slipped away from him, amusement visible in every curve and angle of her body.
Edward Carrington had wondered if he was drunk, or if she was just a dreadful tease, mocking the Englishman of European myth.
He longed for the opportunity to destroy it.
Back inside the house, he found himself confronted by the gin-filled man.
‘I saw your encounter earlier,’ he was saying.
His face was slightly blotchy.
‘With Miss Simonis.
Then the pretty little one, bright-looking filly, in the garden.
Did they tell you anything?
Interesting?’
‘I beg your pardon?
Major…
Morton, did you say?
Should I know you?’
‘You might have noticed me around.
Smart young man like  yourself.
I'm with the IIC.
Industrial Intelligence Committee.
Mean anything to you?’
‘I'm sorry.
Not a thing.’
‘No harm done.
I'm eyes and ears.
Intelligence.
The committee's just the cover, I only work for one man.
I think he'd be interested if you heard anything tonight.
I think he'd be interested in you working on his behalf.
I've checked you up, if you don't mind me saying so.
Done my homework.’
Edward Carrington stared.
As he raised his glass, Major Morton raised his also, as if to make a toast.
‘You know the man I'm talking of, don't you?
Friend of Bracken, Boothby, scourge of Halifax and the dreaded Hun.’
He touched his glass to Edward's, inclining his head.
‘Happy days,’ he said.
‘To Winston Churchill.
Our Man of Destiny.’
TWO
After she had gone to bed with him, Hannele Malling began to call Edward Carrington ‘Carruthers’.
When he had rung the German Embassy, after a thoroughly unsatisfactory morning, neither Suzanne Simonis nor Hannele had recognized the name, although both had known immediately who it was.
Hannele was calm and collected when she took the telephone.
She spoke in Swedish.
‘So.
Edward Carrington.
Some gentleman you turned out to be!
You did not give a name.’
Edward, tired of the rules, encouraged by something in her voice, replied: ‘If I were a gentleman, I should not be telephoning.
Do we have a date?’
‘I leave for Germany on the evening train, I'm afraid.
It all depends on what you have in mind, and how long it would take.
I have little experience in these matters.
Nor, incidentally, a premises.
I'm afraid you could not come here.’
A noise of stifled laughter charmed him.
Two finishing-school hussies!
They were outrageous!
‘Of course not, Froken Malling.
I have a flat.
Could you walk out from the Embassy?
In twenty minutes, say?
Turn left from the entrance and wait on the first corner.
I won't leave you standing.’
‘How will I know you?
Will you wear a red carnation!
It was very dark!’
The phone went down in laughter, and Edward replaced his receiver with a pleasantly hollow stomach.
It was ten minutes brisk walk to the Embassy, and he was waiting on the corner as Hannele approached.
She was wearing a thin silk dress, sheer stockings, a small fur jacket.
He found her entirely ravishing.
They took a taxi to the flat, which was in a quiet, imposing block overlooking Bedford Square.
Edward rented it from a woman who lived abroad, a woman he had never met, and it suited him perfectly.
It was far too big for one, but it was regularly cleaned by the leaseholders of the building, who maintained all services and looked  out for security.
The lifts, however, were unmanned, a feature he had also found convenient.
Not that Hannele would have minded being seen.
The boldness of her eyes when she had greeted him had spoken of no social fear.
It was Carrington who was at the disadvantage and the realisation came to him as yet another pleasant shock.
As he opened the front door to his rooms, his shirt collar was slightly damp.
There were no preliminaries.
Hannele glanced around the large, light, high-ceilinged rooms approvingly, then chose a room with a double bed.
It was not the one that Edward used, but that was no concern of hers.
She plonked herself firmly down on it, flicked off her shoes, and hitched her dress up delicately, first across one thigh, then the other, as she unpopped her stockings, rolled them swiftly down, and plucked them from her feet.
‘Silk,’ she said.
‘And there's a war about to start.
Forgive me for not inviting you to remove them with your teeth!’
Her face was blazing with amusement, she was making fun of him.
Edward did not mind at all.
The soft whiteness of her inner thigh was blinding him.
‘Well?
You either undress yourself, or you help me.
Don't just stand there like a dummy.
I don't like that.’
‘I thought you said you weren't experienced in these matters.
You have strong preferences.’
‘I said I was not experienced with Englishmen.
I'm wary of you, as a breed.
We hear terrible things of your schooling system in my country, and I've met a lot of you.
If it was dark, I would make you turn the light out!’
While she spoke, Hannele undressed herself, unhurriedly.
Edward undid his tie, but for the life of him he could not take his eyes off her.
She stood to slip the dress down over her hips, and pouted at him in her petticoat.
Her underwear was white, all of it, and she was surprisingly pale herself when she stood naked in his view.
Her vaginal hair was a tiny bush, high on her pubic bone, sparse at the sides, pointing downwards like an untidy arrow.
Her nipples were a surprising red, as if they had been rouged, which they had not.
Across, they measured probably an inch, and the nipple in the centre was also small.
‘Now you.
You bother me, standing like that.
Don't move.’
She came towards him softly, like a cat, and stood on tiptoe to ease off his tie.
Her eyes were on a level with his nose and they  were brown and full of life.
Edward had never been treated like this before, and he felt dazed, swoonlike.
He was probably wrong, he acknowledged, but he felt like a woman must feel, when an attentive man undressed her.
Hannele's fingers, as they ran down his shin buttons, were like electric probes, even through his cotton vest.
She had unbuttoned him to his waist, and pulled his shirt and vest out of his trousers, before she spoke.
‘Come on,’ she said.
‘You must help with the boring bits.
Take your jacket off, at least!’
He was surprised to discover it still on.
He shrugged his shoulders and it fell down his arms.
Hannele pushed it to the floor.
As she leaned  furred her breasts hung, brushed his vest.
Convulsively, Edward jerked the garments over his head and discarded them.
He put his arms around her and pressed her naked breasts to him.
His chest was hairy, especially towards the stomach, and she sighed.
She moved her body slightly, brushing her nipples with the hair.
‘More like an ape,’ she said.
‘Than an Englishman.’
Edward moved forward, moved her back towards the bed, but Hannele sidestepped, turning him around instead.
‘No.
Me.’
Edward, in the modern style, wore no braces.
Hannele unbuckled his belt, then reached her slender fingers into the tight, well-tailored fly to the waist-hook.
He thought he would have to help, but she was strong and sure.
The sensations that he had were extraordinary.
His penis was pressing hard against the inside of the fly, bent, desperate to escape and straighten.
Hannele, sensing this, whipped down the buttons very quickly and, before pulling down his trousers, put her fingers into the flap of his white cotton underdrawers and freed it.
As she touched his skin a noise escaped from Edward, an exact match for what he felt.
It was incoherent, inchoate, indescribably excited.
‘No,’ he said.
‘Don't touch.
Not for a moment.’
Hannele pulled back, and both of them looked downwards.
His penis was standing through the cotton slit, throbbing.
If it was touched again it would explode, they knew.
They watched it, silently, until the crisis passed its peak.
Then Hannele eased his trousers down his legs to his ankles.
She lifted the underdrawers carefully, sliding his penis through the slit without touching it, sliding the drawers down to meet the trousers.
‘You still have shoes and socks on, silly man.’
Her voice was thick and husky.
She sat him on the bed, and knelt to untie his laces, slip off the shoes.
Then she unbuttoned his suspenders and pulled his socks off.
Her hair was too short to fall far across her face, so Edward could see her expression, tender and deliberate.
Her small shoulders were frail, her back bent over him, her little breasts made fuller by their angle.
Edward dosed his eyes.
‘Back.’
He opened them to find her pressing him, by the shoulders.
‘Shift onto the bed.
There.’
And she squirmed quickly on beside him, turning so that her breasts touched him.
Her hand ran up inside his thigh and touched.
He closed his eyes again.
‘Oh God,’ he said.
‘You're making love to me.’
‘Of course.
That's why ferried here.
Now keep your eyes closed.
I am really ready.’
He did, and Hannele's weight left the bed for a moment.
He did not peek, but was strangely reassured when he felt her knees press the mattress down again.
Then a sensation on the end of his penis, and fingers down its sides.
Hannele said ‘Ah’ softly, as she unrolled the contraceptive to his root among the hair.
‘In me now,’ she said.
‘Oh Carruthers, I want it in me now.’
He opened his eyes and rolled — still almost blindly — onto the girl.
His blind penis found its home immediately and he slipped gently inwards, slowly, trying desperately not to come.
Hannele's mouth was open and her arms were flung outwards, bent, her palms half-closed.
Almost instantly, Edward began to come, in slow, tearing waves.
He came for ages, so it seemed.
They breathed in unison as he moved.
They felt as one.
‘You didn't…reach orgasm,’ said Edward.
They were fully on the mattress now, a tangle of hair and arms and legs.
He was delighted, delighted and regretful, both at once.
‘Oh Carruthers.
I did not farad to.
That was what I wanted.
Next time is for me, perhaps.
That was what I wanted.’
He moved sideways, to bring her fully into view.
She lay contented, sprawled, one heel on the bed-edge, one knee up.
‘Carrington,’ he said.
‘Not Carruthers.
But Edward's my name, Hannele.’
‘No.
Carruthers.
Surely you have read the book?
In Germany, in my set, everyone is reading it.
We are looking for the key to your character.
And for hints about the way you spy.
You don't know what I'm talking of?’
‘Not an idea.
I'm not a very bookish chap, you know.
Vive la commerce!’
‘And vive la différence.
Carruthers is the spy in Riddle of the Sands.
He becomes involved in a wicked German plot to invade England across the North Sea, from the Frisian Islands.
He is not very much like you.’
‘Not?’
‘Not.’
She scratched the inside of her thigh.
She moved closer in, and put her cheek on his shoulder.
‘But then, I am not like Clara.
She was a prim and proper little Fraulein, although her father was the villain, and Carruthers loved her, but dared not speak to her without a chaperone.
Were people ever really like that?
I'm sure they weren't.
But that is how we see you British, still.
Poor Carruthers.
He probably went to his death without once seeing Clara in this state!’
‘If she had behaved like you, he would have run a mile.
Ferried certainly not used to it.’
‘Oh thank you.
Now I am a tart?’
‘No!
No, I didn't mean that.
It's just…in our society.
No, really, I was criticizing us, not you.’
‘Your morals are too tight and ours too loose?
Well, never mind, Carruthers.
I expect you will not see me again, eh?
And although you are very beautiful, there are always other men.
You are a spy, aren't you?’
He eased his shoulder, as an excuse to break her gaze.
He had met Desmond Morton that morning and, briefly, Sir Robert Vansittart, the chief diplomatic adviser to the Cabinet.
Morton, in the cold gleam of sober day, had tended to make light of Edward's ‘chatter with the fillies’, and appeared to have nothing concrete to offer although exhorting him to ‘keep his eyes and ears open’, and harping on his private means.
Van was the man to cultivate, said Morton — he had a finger in every secret service pie — and Van indeed had offered him a certain irascible encouragement.
But so far Edward, very definitely, was not a spy.
It seemed terribly important to him that Hannele should not find out.
‘Why do you find me beautiful?’ he said.
‘You are beautiful.
I'm a man.’
‘Hah!
Carruthers!
You have such a lovely slim build.
Your body is long, and your legs are shorter, like a monkey's.
Your belly is very furry and quite sweet.
You have lots of hair, here, and here, and here.
Your penis is quite excellent.’
She had it in her hand, and it began to stir.
She let it grow to about half, then left it and took his testicles in her cupped hand.
‘And you are a spy.
I like that.
You are not like Carruthers, you are not one of these truly awful Englishmen.
You do not even disapprove, very much, of the way I came to bed with you.
I bet I know your rationale.
I bet you're thinking what odd times ferried living through, how behaviour can be different for a while, how I'm a little brash, and very ill-advised, but possibly forgivable.’
Edward stayed silent.
She had been very accurate.
On the other hand, she had not taken into account the effect her presence had on him.
Brief encounters he had had before, not just with Swedish/ German girls.
But Hannele Malling, body and brain, had filled his spirit.
‘Are you a spy?’ he said.
‘You are, in a certain way.
You've brought messages that the German High Command would shoot you for.
If I'm a spy, can we work together?
Could you get messages to me from Germany?
Have you come to work for us?’
Her hand was unmoving on his balls.
His penis had gone small.
Hannele breathed evenly, slowly.
‘No.
I am not a spy.
For me to spy would be a betrayal of my friends.
We brought messages to save the peace, not to be traitoresses.
That is why we have all been doing it, von Weizsacker, Theo Kordt in London, his brother Erich in Berlin, Canaris, Carl Burckhardt, Dahlerus, Wenner-Gren.
You do not think the war is worth averting, do you?
But you will be on the winning side.’
Edward said, rather piously: ‘There is no winning side in war.’
For a moment, something like contempt glowed in her eyes.
‘If only you believed that.
You English.
You know nothing of war, it has never touched you.
You are an island, you have not known the wolves.
Europe is a cockpit, a chessboard stained with blood.
I am Swedish.
Have you heard of the Thirty Years War?
You are an island.
Suffering, for you, is just a story, an old man's tale.’
Sunlight was streaming through the high window.
Amid the rumble of the traffic, birds were singing in the trees of Bedford Square.
Two people lying naked on a double bed.
Edward did not want that spell to end.
For a long while he said nothing.
‘So you are Swedish, Johanne Malling?
Or German?
Yesterday, you were half and half.
And Sweden was so very, very boring, you wanted blood.
This is me speaking as Carruthers, by the way.
The dedicated agent.’
‘I am Swedish, but my family are a mixture.
We have interests in Germany, technology, metallurgy, industry.
I am studying at Dresden, and I probably will stay.
The blood and boredom…well, perhaps I was a little drunk.
I can't see even Hitler causing trouble for the Swedish, he needs our iron ore too much.
I can always leave.’
‘Hitler is a mad dog.
If anything — if I agree with you at all— that is surely why a war is necessary?
Many of us in Britain see it as our duty, now.
Killing Hitler.
As much as anything, it's a matter of honour, and some of us are afraid that that's in danger of slipping away from us.
The Munich Disease.
I'm a Churchill man myself.
He thinks Chamberlain has wrecked this country.
I'm awfully afraid he's right.
He must come to power, soon.’
Hannele wriggled.
She moved from off his shoulder, swung her legs round, then crossed them under her.
She faced him, earnestly, sitting like that, her hands inside her thighs, her vagina exposed to him amid soft hair, smooth skin.
Edward Carrington had never talked to a woman like this before.
It shocked him, thrilled him, filled him with a kind of ache, a hunger.
This woman of twenty spoke to him like a mentor, like a sage.
But he could not shift his gaze from off her sex.
‘Churchill has read history,’ she said.
‘Churchill should know better.
Mr Chamberlain has tried everything, and he has lost.
But he knows what will happen if war comes.
He remembers carnage, the blood and misery.
Mr Churchill caused Gallipoli, and would do it all again.
He is a playboy, a gangster with a rich uncle.
Between them he and Hitler would lay everything to waste, and the uncle would have to save your side again.
America.’
Still Edward felt no irritation.
He concentrated on her breasts, small and soft, tipped so brightly in their red, moving in her agitation.
He put a hand out, touching her knee, tenderly.
Her head was haloed in the sunlight pouring through the casement.
He wanted her at peace.
‘Many of your countrymen — no, many of the Germans we have talked about — think Hitler would have stepped back if Churchill had been in power.
He would have been afraid.
But let me be Carruthers, Hannele.
History means nothing to the English.
At school I was no great shakes at it, or anything.
I'm ignorant.’
It was a lifeline he was offering, a last throw to save the mood, enjoy the bed and sunlight.
Hannele, making a small face, decided to accept it.
There was on her lips the slightly sulky look he had first noticed in her the night before, but she was fighting.
A smile broke through.
‘Ignorant and arrogant.
You are right, Carruthers.
How did you gain your empire, I wonder.
Were those your weapons?
What did you learn at school?’
Laughing, Edward moved sideways, sweeping her with him, untangling her legs, straightening her until they were facing each other, side by side.
Joyfully, they made love again, this time at his pace, not hers, even with a contraceptive he produced, both of them delighted by their mutual daring.
Still, she did not come, which almost dampened Edward's happiness.
It was nothing, she protested, it was something she could not control today, it did not mean she thought the less of him, or their sex together.
‘But we may never meet again!
Hannele, I couldn't bear that!’
She tapped his nose with her index finger end.
‘You're being quite ridiculous.
Should I ask Hitler to postpone the war because of your dreadful vanity?
You were excellent.
I am a woman, not a machine.
Everything was excellent.’
As she spoke she stood.
The sun was lowering, painting her pale skin gold.
She began to dress.
‘Don't go, Hannele.
Another hour.’
‘Third time lucky.
But I have a train to catch.
No!
Don't stand.
Stay there, naked.
I'd like to take that image.
A photograph inside my head.’
They kissed lightly when it was time to say goodbye.
Edward Carrington had a heavy certainty that the lightness was more genuine on her part than on his.
How ridiculous that the world would guarantee to keep them apart.
How ridiculous that he should care.
Hannele did not, she did not care to even hide it.
‘Don't look so sad, Carruthers.
Have no regrets.’
‘I doubt if we'll…
You have no plans to return to England?’
‘Oh no.
But Edward, you can come to Germany.
On a parachute!
I promise I'll be waiting, if you tell me in advance!’
She laughed, deliciously, and he laughed with her.
He watched her from the window, half hidden, naked, behind the curtain.
She walked across the corner of the square, and did not look back.
He  resigned himself to the single thought, that he would not see her again.
But two days later, Hannele Malling returned to London, and sought him out.
She brought amazing news.
THREE
That Friday evening, after Hannele had gone, began the drabbest weekend of Edward's life.
Outside in London, if he cared to leave the flat, he would have found an atmosphere, an edge, that any man of twenty-five with money in his pocket and an afternoon like that behind him should have delighted in.
In the last few weeks, in the last few days especially, a suppressed excitement had been growing.
Chamberlain may have shrunk visibly as the clouds across the face of Europe had grown darker, but the British people had taken a different path.
Sandbags in the streets, gas-masks issued, ration books and evacuation procedures explained — all had induced a kind of mild hysteria, a desire to ‘get up and at-'im’.
Like Hannele, nobody who was nobody had any doubts that Britain and her Empire would be victorious: only the grey men in their boiled shirts and wing collars, who strode the streets of Westminster in rain or shine with black hat and rolled umbrella, were afraid.
And lately, they had disappeared, gone to Scotland, Yorkshire, Cumberland to fish for trout and salmon, or shoot grouse.
What did they know of real life?
After Hannele had gone from view, Edward turned from the window and surveyed the bed.
It was rumpled, with the impression of their bodies clear on one side and across the middle.
His clothes were in a heap, sadly formal clothes compared with hers, one sock suspender hanging from a chair-rail, a jacket sleeve turned inside out.
Amid the jumble was a contraceptive, leaking onto the mat.
He should have tied it.
One of his mentor-girls in Scotland had told him once, in all seriousness, that it was against the law to use a rubber johnny then throw it away without knotting in the dangerous  efflusions .
It probably was, in Scotland…
Perturbed by the keenness of his loss, afraid that it made him, in truth, a stuffed-shirt Englishman as Hannele had assumed, Edward Carrington went to the bathroom and began to fill the mighty iron tub.
While the taps were thundering, he poured himself a large whisky and soda, and gulped it.
He tested the water with his hand, adjusted it, and climbed in.
His penis floated, moved in the swirling surface water when he lay down, and he fingered it, remembering.
He let it come erect, then looked at it, with Hannele in his mind's eye simultaneously.
He stroked it with the side of the whisky glass, smiled, drank.
Ah Christ, he thought.
What a thing to happen.
Dressed once more, in lighter, more informal clothes, he went to the telephone table in the lobby.
He fished out the number Major Morton had given him and dialled.
A girl's voice answered.
A secretary's voice.
No, Major Morton was not in, she had no idea.
There was more implied than said: it was Friday afternoon, it was getting on, the watering holes were filling up.
He wondered if he dared ring Brendan Bracken, perhaps drift round to Morpeth Mansions, who knew, Winston might be up, himself.
But damn them.
He felt like a hanger-on, a toady.
Damn everything, being born in a far colony, being cursed to cruise round Europe, to be on the edge of everything.
He would not chase, that was demeaning.
They could come to him.
He thought, briefly, of going to a night-club later, picking up a girl.
The febrile atmosphere of pre-disaster London had already wrought a gear-change in the night scene, the numbers of men away at training barracks having produced a seemingly equal and opposite number of women on the spree.
Edward had no uniform, which was the biggest draw, but he had cash, and what the girls called style.
He also had a picture behind his eyes, of Johanne Malling, naked.
He did not want another woman, not even as emetic.
So.
Get drunk in London, or get out?
Edward dialled the operator and put in a call to Portsmouth.
He had two friends there, two male friends, who had a little boat they could take fishing.
They were always asking him to come and join them, although he did not like the sea and did not fish.
They were homosexuals, although their little house at Cosham was very respectable, with separate bedrooms visible to anybody who cared to look.
John and Simon always left the doors open upstairs, as if casually, so that anyone who suspected, but did not know, would think they'd been wrong.
Edward knew.
He had met them on business once, in Denmark, and found them quite congenial — save for the sea-obsession.
When the operator put him through they were pleased to invite him.
If he motored fast, he would be in time for dinner.
They would hold it.
Seventy miles to Portsmouth, but the A3 was congested.
There were motor lorries in their dozens, most of them in Royal Navy blue, and convoys of staff cars and vans.
South of Guildford he got stuck behind a road-train of three steam traction engines hauling a low bogey.
The load was covered in tarpaulins, but was recognizable as a gigantic naval gun.
The lead engine had a canvas dodger along its canopy, that was stencilled in crude letters: Look Out, Fritz!
As Edward motored down Portsdown Hill, from the George, the harbour stretched out before him in the dying light.
Extensive though its waters were, it was jammed with warships.
John and Simon, although they had sounded cheerful on the telephone, were fractious, upset, and ultimately a crashing bore.
At first, after the normal welcomes and politenesses, the pre-dinner drink, their bitch had been about their little boat.
They were unsure as to whether they would be allowed to use her any more.
Although they had not seen the Harbour Master's orders themselves, there seemed a distinct possibility that all ‘normal’ use of the water was about to end.
‘Why?’ demanded Simon, a stocky, angry man.
‘Ferried not at war yet.
It's an infringement of our liberty.’
Behind the bluster, there was a deeper fear.
John had received preliminary notice that his services would be required by the Navy, as he had extensive knowledge of commercial diving technology.
Simon was expected to be called up by the Army, and sent off God knew where.
Edward, disaffected, could only try to hide his lack of sympathy, or interest.
Why, he wondered.
did they expect to be treated differently from anybody else?
Even any other married couple…
Pleading tiredness, he went to bed early, and masturbated.
Saturday was worse.
They drove to the little creek where they kept their fishing boat, and moaned extensively to other men with blue-knit jumpers and glowing pipes.
There were assessments of Herr Hitler's chances (poor), Chamberlain's ability (poorer), and the courage of the Italian fighting soldier (poorest, by a long shot).
On balance, Chamberlain would win although he did not deserve to, because Hitler had the Eyeties on his side, and the Eyeties had sent six hundred thousand men to crush Albania and almost been repulsed.
Hitler was fit only for the loony bin, his generals would kill him within five minutes if he ever declared war, and he only had one ball.
Ivan was the real threat, and if only Adolf had the  sense he'd do a deal with Churchill, they'd kick Neville into touch, and the pair of them would whip the Reds from here to Kingdom Come, or from arsehole to breakfast-time, whichever was the shorter route.
Carrington said little.
He stayed till Sunday morning, but the tensions only grew.
Simon and John hinted that he was preoccupied, but in fan he was downright bloody rude, and everybody knew it.
When they set off for church he set off for London, driving fast.
He had never believed that anything like this could happen to him — this being, he supposed, love at first sight — but he acknowledged that it had.
With the proviso that it was probably only lust, because he was already feeling slightly better.
He stopped for an early beer at a roadside pub in Surrey, then dropped the car off in its lock-up garage and strolled to a cafe for lunch.
There were still visions of Hannele, intermittently, but they were growing less.
Distance and impossibility were a help.
He had no address, no way of contacting her.
She lived in Dresden, possibly.
Or in Sweden…
At ten past eight that evening, when he ran downstairs to answer his outer doorbell and found her on the doorstep, it was as if he had been kicked in the stomach.
Hannele was all in.
Her hair was greasy, her face white, her eyes smudgy.
She wore a light travelling raincoat, and was carrying only a small leather bag.
Edward was dressed to go out, immaculate.
They stared at each other, however, in equal disarray.
‘Hannele.
Good God alive.’
‘Edward.
I'm sorry.
Can I come in?’
‘But you're in Germany’ What happened?
Didn't you go back?’
He touched her sleeve, guiding her through the doorway.
He took her bag, then put his free arm around her, involuntarily, hugged her.
Hannele, when they got there, pressed the button for the lift.
‘I've been there and come back,’ she said.
‘I have some information that your government needs to know.
Suzanne Simonis could not return, she has problems in Berlin.
It is not official information, it is better that it goes directly to a department that can deal with it.
It is about Hermann Goering.’
The lift arrived as she said the name, and the two people inside looked at her curiously through the metal lattice.
Edward jerked  open the door, interposing himself so that they should not stare.
He put a finger to his lips.
Inside the flat, he was at a loss.
He closed the door, and faced her in the lobby.
He opened his arms, then his palms, desperate to hug her again, to hold her.
Hannele's arms stayed at her sides, although she tried to smile.
Edward turned away.
‘I'll put the kettle on.
Take off your coat and come into the drawing room.
Hannele, you must be exhausted.
It's only two days since you left!
London to Germany and back again!
Hannele!’
Unbuttoning her raincoat, she followed him, watched him light the gas.
‘I could not get a flight to Croydon.
That would have been easier.
Edward, you do have contacts, don't you?
This information is of the first importance.
Goering wants to fly here.
To avert the war.
He wants to come and talk to your Cabinet.’
‘Goering?’
Edward's brow was furrowed.
He was holding the lighted match.
He blew it out.
‘Hannele, Goering is a painted fairy.
He is an evil, preening thing.
He baits Jews, he founded the Gestapo.
He is a Nancy-boy.’
Hannele's eyes, black holes in the pale, smudged face, held his.
‘I hoped we had buried Carruthers,’ she said quietly.
‘Are all your countrymen as prejudiced as you?’
‘I'm sorry,’ Edward snapped.
‘Some of my closest friends are homosexuals.
But Hermann Goering is revolting.
He is a beast.’
The kettle had begun to sing.
Hannele rubbed a hand across her forehead.
‘He is a strange man,’ she said.
‘He is eccentric, should that not appeal to your race?
Much of what he says and does is just to shock.
The clothes, the make-up sometimes, the jokes.
He is not a homosexual, he is married to a Swedish woman, the sister of a count, and his first wife was also devoted to him, she died.
He is prepared to risk everything to avoid this war.’
‘Jokes,’ said Carrington, with disgust.
‘A Jewish friend of mine, in Germany, said that after Kristallnacht, last November, Goering suggested that the Jews should be charged for all the damage that was done.
The shop windows, the synagogues, the cleaning of the streets.
Was that a joke?’
‘Probably.
You would not understand.
Men like Goering have to live with Hitler.
Under Hitler.
Some compromise is necessary, some  protective stances.
Even Hitler cannot control the Sturmabteilung, the Brownshirt animals.
Self-preservation, Edward.’
He did not reply.
He rattled in a cupboard, fetching cups and saucers.
He banged a teapot onto the table, pulled the lid from off the caddy.
Is this the fight we almost had on Friday?’ asked Hannele.
‘I will not have it, Edward, because I think you are being stupid, or obtuse.
You know nothing of Herr Goering, only what you are fed by propaganda.
You know nothing of me, only that we went to bed together for a while.
You must stop treating me like a naughty girlfriend, for I am neither the one nor the other.
Goering has been negotiating secretly for months.
One of his deputies, Helmut Wohltat, has been working on behalf of your Sir Robert Vansittart for years, even, feeding information.
Three weeks ago Goering met some Englishmen on Sylt, you know it?
One of the German islands.
They also failed to take him seriously, and made him angry, but he has carried on the struggle.
There is a Swede called Birger Dahlerus who has been aiding him.
Now things are very black.
So Goering is going to fly to England.
Place himself in your trust.
If you will not listen, Edward, take me to somebody who will!’
The kettle was boiling.
Edward lifted it and splashed a little water into the teapot, swirling it around.
He made the tea, conscious that Hannele was close to him, unmoving, unanswered.
‘You take a European view,’ he said, finally.
‘You think we want this war, we welcome it.
That's not true.
But Hermann Goering…
Forgive me, Hannele.
Of all the German leaders…
Look — have some tea.
Go and sit in the drawing room, I'll bring it through.
I'll ring some people.
Of course.
I did not know he was married.
Not that that matters, naturally.’
‘Naturally,’ she said, bitterly.
‘Nor that his wife is Swedish, either.
No.
Only Germans are prejudiced, naturally.
That sounds like a Goering joke, in fact.
She left the kitchen, and Edward watched the teapot for a minute, a small trail of vapour escaping from its spout.
In the drawing room, Hannele had removed her raincoat and was sitting on the edge of a hard armchair.
She had a white blouse on, and a severe grey skirt that reached halfway down her calves.
Her fist was bunched under her chin, she was staring into space.
Edward poured the tea.
‘Sugar?’
‘Thank you.
Sorry, I mean no.
I'm in England, aren't I, a different language.
I'm very hungry, Edward.
Is there any food?’
‘We'll go out.
Hannele, you're whacked.
Would you like to take a bath?
Drink your tea and take a bath?
I'll make some phone calls, then we'll go out.’
She nodded.
‘I would like that, but I expect they'll want to see me.
Make your phone calls.
We will see.’
Ten minutes later, as he rang number after number, Edward Carrington was aware of her behind him.
He turned, to find her chewing on a loaf of bread, watching him.
Then he heard her prowling, then the rush of water.
Five minutes after that, he had exhausted all the numbers that he knew, and drawn a blank.
He felt a fool, an utter fool.
He tried to get back to the drawing room unheard, but she was waiting.
As he tiptoed past the open bathroom door she called.
‘Edward?
What is happening?’
‘Nothing much.
I'll tell you in a minute.
You have a soak.’
‘Carruthers!
Come here!
I won't eat you!’
He did not want to go.
If he saw her naked, he knew he would be lost.
He would fall into a pit, he would descend to hell.
She was lying in the bath, all underwater save her face, chewing the last crust of the loaf.
The water was clear, unblurred by soap, and she was visible, naked and distorted, lovely.
Her hair was wet, in dripping ringlets beside her ears, and steam rose to the lightbulb.
Her face was no longer white, but pink, although her eyes were sunk deep still, deep and dark.
She moved when he came in, her shoulders sliding up the curved enamel, her breasts breaking the surface.
‘Well?’
He was wretched.
‘It's Sunday.
Most of the government are still on holiday.’
‘What?
With a war about to start!
Even spies!’
‘I'm very junior, Hannele.
I may have deceived you.
I'm hardly in the game at all.’
She was on the last mouthful.
She grinned at him.
‘If I tell Goering this, he might change his mind.
He might decide Hitler's is the winning side after all.
Is there nobody we can raise?
What if we went there?’
‘To the House? 10 Downing Street?
It's not like that, in England.
Could one go and knock on Hitler's door, in Germany?
Perhaps you should go to your Embassy.
See Theo Kordt.’
‘No.
It would not do, this time.
Will you be able to get them in the morning?’
‘Oh yes.’
He hoped he was speaking the truth.
Good God, he was!
To tell them Goering was coming — well Halifax, or Cadogan, or Vansittart, anyone would want to hear that news.
‘Edward?’
She raised herself, amid a slosh of water.
Her breasts came clear, the nipples flattened with the heat, but still that lovely red.
Edward answered in his throat.
‘I have eaten all your bread.
I am very tired, and I am all wet.
Can we forget the restaurant?
Can we go to bed?
It's not too early for you?’
To be honest, Edward told himself, I do not know.
It was painful to be looking at her, her face open, a tired and unfrightened girl.
He was frightened, and there was no component of desire in his response.
He was beyond desire.
But he capitulated without a fight.
Without a semblance of a fight.
‘Third time lucky?’ he said.
His voice was not his own.
‘I'm probably too tired.
For anything like that.
Shall we just wait and see?’
Ten minutes later, still damp and pink, she was asleep, her black hair dripping into his pillow.
Edward lay beside her, fully clothed, with one arm crooked across her back.
He lay like that for ages, until cramp forced him to change position.
Hannele slept on.
FOUR
Admiral Sir Hugh Sinclair — Quex — looked like a dying man to Edward Carrington.
His skin was pale and crepe-like, his eyes too bright inside loose, unpleasant-coloured lids.
His office was heated, despite the warmth outside, it was overheated.
When Sinclair spoke, his teeth — presumably dentures — clicked.
At first he said very little, only listened.
Carrington, still naive though learning, had thought it logical that Hannele should tell her story to the proper authority in person.
They had woken at eight, and he had made tea and toast for both of them.
She had been like a lazy cat, refusing to wake up properly, a phenomenon that he had known in young girls before.
Twenty, she had said, and in some ways she seemed younger.
Edward, at twenty-five, felt staid and mature, and also privileged.
Also urgent, as he served her tea and she sat up in the bed, exposing her small breasts without a thought.
She caught the look.
‘You're terrible, Carruthers, you think of nothing else.
I'm here on urgent business, I've come to save the world from self-destruction.
Let me eat some toast first.
Where did you get the bread?’
‘They leave it outside my door, with the milk.
The porter fetches it every morning.’
‘How very civilized.’
Afterwards, they made love, but Hannele had very little interest in it as a process.
She did not actually check her watch, but the effect was there, and Edward felt it keenly.
As soon as he had come she pushed at him to move, all efficiency.
‘That was very nice.
Now, let's get up, shall we?
Edward!
Are you sulking?’
He was.
Sulking and hurt.
She tutted.
‘Please.
Don't be a foolish boy.
I'm here to do things.
I'm refreshed, I've had a lovely sleep.
Um Gottes willen, Edward!
There are better times for this!
There are other times!’
She jumped from the bed and harried him, like a terrier, towards  the door.
The look of fierce determination on her face soon made him laugh.
He was nude except for a drooping condom.
She seized it, flicked it off his penis, waved it round her head.
‘Go!’ she cried.
‘Let us save the world!’
It was not easy, though.
Morton, even at ten past nine, was nowhere to be found.
The Whitehall switchboard was a model of inefficiency as usual, and it took twelve minutes to try the various rooms and people who might know.
Hannele, perched on a chair in the lobby like a greyhound, grew more and more impatient.
‘It's Monday morning!
Hitler is due to march on Poland this weekend!
Is this some English joke!’
It wasn't.
From what he knew of government, it was normal.
He considered going to the House, or Whitehall, looking for Morton or someone else he-knew.
But he did not have an appointment.
Nobody would see him.
‘Are you sure we can't do it through Kordt?
The Embassy?
There are official channels.
It's very, very difficult.’
‘Absolutely not.
Under no circumstances at all must the Germans know about it.
Edward — act!’
He rang Vansittart.
He felt that he was making a mistake, but that was that.
Please God he would remember him.
‘Who was that man?’ he asked Hannele, after asking for his offices.
‘The Goering man you said worked with Vansittart?’
‘Wohltat.
Doctor Helmut Wohltat.
Say you're him.’
That wasn't necessary.
Edward gave his own name, mentioned the meeting with Morton, mentioned Wohltat.
Within thirty seconds Van came on the line.
‘Yes?
Don't waste my time, young man.’
‘I won't, sir.
Those girls we talked about, the couriers.
I think I'd better see you face to face.
One of them has come back.
May we come and talk to you?’
‘I have a meeting.
Can't Morton deal with it?
I've got to see the PM.’
‘I'd rather not say on the telephone.’
‘Poppycock!
Well damn you, then.’
‘Sir!
It's about…it's about Doctor Wohltat's superior.
It really is important.’
There was a pause.
Edward lifted a hand, the fingers crossed.
‘Quex Sinclair's on this number.
Take it down, memorize it, destroy it.
Ring him now and tell him it's from me.
If you waste his  time he'll roast you, if you don't you might just get that job.
Don't take the woman.’
‘Sir?’
‘Are you stupid, boy?
Do you know who Quex is?
Do you know who she is, more to the point?
By the end of the week we'll probably lock her up.
Don't let her know a thing.’
Quex Sinclair — also known as ‘C’— was head of M16, one of the great non-secret secrets of the intelligence machine.
He did not tell Hannele that, but he told her he had to go alone, and she took it calmly.
She had expected no other outcome, even if he had.
She stayed in the flat, while he took a taxi.
She was prepared to meet an intermediary, anybody, any time.
But she suspected it would not be necessary.
There are other channels, she told him gravely.
Edward, again, felt foolish.
Sinclair made him tell the story twice.
He drew doodles on the pad in front of him, occasionally dabbing at his loose, wet lips with a handkerchief.
Carrington was uncomfortably hot, but did not like to use his own in case it was insulting.
‘That's all, is it?
Goering means to come, and he wants us to give him clearance.
Does he think we'd shoot him down?
Going a bit far, eh?’
Hannele had given Edward a sheet of paper with names and numbers on it, which now lay on the desk.
He indicated it.
‘My contact says —’
‘Yes, yes.
And who is she?
Johanne Malling, Swedish national, resident in Germany.
Hhm.
Do you know what the German girl brought?
Last week.
Simonis?’
‘As I understand, some dates.
When Hitler intends to invade Poland.’
‘Good.
Not good enough to bring Chamberlain back from his holiday until today, but good.
Something else.
A message from Count Ciano.
Mussolini won't necessarily support them.
What d'you make of that?’
‘Oh.
Well.’
‘Nothing?
Very wise.
Can't trust any of them.
This latest nonsense.
Goering flying from Germany to keep the peace.
Damn man's too fat to fly a plane, I'd say.
To damn fat by far.
Which university did you say?’
‘I beg pardon, sir?
Oh, oh I see.
Neither.
I'm a colonial, actually.
Father helps run India.
I got my schooling on the hoof.’
‘Good, damned good!
I don't like Oxbridge men, don't trust ‘em, they don't always play the game these days.
Cambridge in particular.
Nest of perverts, so they tell me, I won't have 'em in my service if I can help it.
Clubs?’
‘None, I'm afraid.
I'm not in England much you know, sir.
I've quartered Europe in the last few years.
Had to make a living, actually.’
‘Good again.
Novel.
If you make a living, you're not an intellectual.
Not bad rule of thumb, that.
Not, are you?’
Edward gave a deprecating smile.
‘I don't believe so, sir.’
Want to join the service?
Of course you do!
If I don't snap you up someone else will, won't they?
We'll fix you up with something, avoid conscription, eh?
Cover, or a regiment, no need to decide just yet.
Welcome to the team.’
The old man stood with difficulty.
As his face came close to Edward's, his breath hit him in a shocking wave.
His hand was gnarled and bony.
Edward Carrington was on his feet as well.
They regarded each other.
‘Sir?
Major Morton —’
‘Hah.
He's been at you, has he?
He won't mind, he can't pay you, anyway.
I'll sort him out.
‘And…and the Goering information?’
‘Leave it with me.
Give your details to the girl outside, we'll fix everything.
That German girl?’
‘Swedish.
Yes?’
‘Get rid of her.
Quick.
Whatever the wops say about not dying for Danzig, those dates that came were genuine.
The engine driver says so too.
Send her home.’
The engine driver?
He did not ask.
‘If you want someone to talk to her —’
‘I don't.
Be nice to her, mind you.
Thank her prettily, see if we can keep in touch somehow.
The Swedish connection could be very useful when the war comes.
Very useful.’
Outside in the corridor, his mind still easing itself in to the thought that he was now an agent, an M16 man, Carrington met Desmond Morton.
The major's puffy face took on a look of deep suspicion.
‘So Quex has got you, has he?
Damned nuisance, all this poaching.
What did she want, the girl?
Nothing new, I suppose?
Just confirmation, or denial?
Of the dates?’
‘That's it.
Confirmation, actually.
But Sir Hugh —’
‘Quex.’
‘Quex knew already.’
Desmond Morton was pleased.
‘Of course he did.
At least you're on the payroll, though, remember who put you up for that, eh?
Listen, just because you work for Quex, you understand, doesn't mean we can't liaise.
It's very much a team affair, intelligence.
Don't put this round, but when Ramsay Macdonald was PM, Quex used to keep a lot of stuff back from him, thought he was unsound.
He passed it on to Winston.
So bear that in mind, won't you?
You are on the payroll?’
Edward, reluctantly, nodded confirmation.
‘I knew it.
So bear it in mind, there's a good chap.
Won't you?’
‘I will,’ said Edward, truthfully.
But the major struck him as an odd fish, rather.
Strangely inferior, somehow, for Churchill to have placed so much trust in.
He mused about it, as he hurried to the flat.
The Goering flight did not happen, but even as an agent, Edward Carrington was never able to find out why.
Over the next days, he was taken round the various offices used by the SIS in London, and introduced to many men, and a few women, with whom he was to work.
Most of the women were secretaries, models of deferential, under-educated Englishwomen who filed and typed and processed the enormous piles of bumph that came from many quarters.
Some of them worked in the field, he understood, but these were the younger, smarter ones who had been trained as cipher clerks and radio operators, usually to serve a male agent.
He quickly learned that he was to be used in Scandinavia, because of his languages, but at present— with no expertise of any sort in clandestine communication — he had to train.
His parting with Hannele had been low-key, and saddening.
He had told her, as frankly as he could, that the person he had spoken to —‘a person high in British Intelligence’— had wanted her to return to Germany (or at least, to leave England) and would not allow her to meet anybody else.
He passed on the thanks, and the remarks about the possibility of keeping in touch in the event of war.
Hannele eyed him coldly.
‘I suppose you've not reconsidered, have you?’ he said, trying to  ignore her expression.
‘We don't want you to spy, exactly, but…
’ He made a face, exonerating himself from such indelicacy.
‘You frighten me,’ said Hannele.
‘You are such amateurs, you English, such awful amateurs.
It seems to me that I am exactly the sort of person that you need, that you should cultivate me, prime me, pay me, even.
You could interrogate me, at least, and if you thought I was a double agent you could put a bullet in my head.
But you pat me on the bottom and send me home, and hope I'll ‘keep in touch’!
Pfui!’
‘Rather more than that, I think,’ Edward replied.
But he was uncomfortably aware that she was precisely accurate.
‘In any case, you did say you wouldn't do it.’
He had hoped for better things than this.
He had had visions, striding back to Bedford Square, of proper love-making, of tenderness, perhaps some tears.
Then, obscurely, he had thought they'd work it through, he would recruit her, sort out a way in which they could communicate, even meet.
His very own private source in Germany.
Instead, contempt.
They were in the kitchen, where Hannele had been drinking milk when he returned.
She drained her glass and stood.
‘No,’ she said.
‘I haven't changed my mind, if that's what you're angling for.
And if your Intelligence wants me out, I'd better go.
I've checked the aeroplanes from Croydon, I used your telephone, this time I shall fly.
I shall take a taxi to the aerodrome.’
‘But I'll drive you!
Hannele…’
He had a lot he wanted to say, but her face forbade it.
She refused to let him drive, and she had no time — no inclination?— for making love with him.
She moved round the flat like a whirlwind, and in minutes she was in her light raincoat.
He said miserably: ‘Let me at least come with you and hail a cab.’
‘And kiss me goodbye in the street?
No, here.’
She moved towards him, smiling.
Edward, utterly wretched, put his arms about her and she raised her mouth to his.
Hers was open, but his lips stayed closed.
She held him, stroked his back, laid her head, after a few seconds, on his chest.
‘Carruthers,’ she murmured.
‘Sometimes Edward, you really are Carruthers.
Don't grieve.
I am immensely fond of you.
Don't grieve.’
Edward Carrington was grieving.
Goering did not fly, and Hitler's first attempt at starting World War 11 was a failure.
The orders were indeed issued, and the attack should have begun at 4.30 a.m. on August 26.
Concentration camp prisoners dressed in German uniforms had been collected near the Polish border and were waiting, drugged, to be shot by their fellow German soldiers, real ones.
and used as evidence of provocative atrocities that would justify invading Poland.
Reinhard Heydrich had dreamed up this idea, and also the name for the unlucky decoys — Konserven, or, let's say, tinned meat.
When the plan fell through, he put them back into the larder till the next time.
Case White, as the invasion was codenamed, was aborted by a signal issued at about 7.30 p.m. on August 25, because Mussolini and Ciano, when it came to it, summoned up the courage to tell Hitler the truth at last.
Pact of Steel or not, they could not support him physically without large injections of armaments and raw materials: if he went into Poland, and France and Britain sprang to her defence, Italy would collapse.
Forced by Mussolini's courage to be unusually clear-sighted in his turn, Joachim von Ribbentrop, the champagne salesman, advised his Fuhrer to call it off, an undertaking that would take about eight hours.
A few units, inevitably, were not warned in time, the radio messages and despatch riders did not get through, but nothing serious happened, a few more border incidents at dawn, adding to a list already long, was all.
Later that day — the 26th — Hitler was still in command of his mental state sufficiently to send a telegram to Mussolini demanding a precise list of what he needed, but after that he almost snapped.
The German people, too.
On August 27 they awoke to find that food had gone on ration, as had petrol and many other necessities.
In several towns rioting broke out, rioting for peace, and Nazis found themselves the victims of the kind of abuse and maltreatment they normally handed out to others.
Party flags and posters were destroyed.
Carrington, on initial training in London, gleaned snippets from his colleagues, and from Desmond Morton; who remained clubbable and generous as long as there was gin in evidence.
It emerged that Ribbentrop had accused Birger Dahlerus the Swede of being a British agent — which in a way he was — but that the Fuhrer luckily had ignored it.
There was hope of an Army rebellion to unseat Hitler, but firmer news that he had ringed himself with his most loyal SS units, doubling his personal security.
There was an even stronger rumour that Herr Hitler had finally become unhinged, had gone  bleating, weeping mad and would end his days — soon — dribbling and counting posies.
Sadly.
this turned out to be the standard stuff of innumerable intelligence reports, as Carrington got to know them better.
A little fact, a lot of wishful thinking.
However, the scramble to keep the peace went on.
The Swedish connection, working mainly through Hermann Goering still, set up meeting after meeting, held session after session, made proposals by the score.
Diplomats like Sir Nevile Henderson in Berlin — already dying of cancer — wore themselves grey and corpselike in the struggle, while in London every avenue was open.
The news of the Nazi-Soviet Pact, which broke mid-week, confused the issue, but the conviction that the war would never come appeared to grow in Whitehall, whatever evidence emerged to the contrary.
Goering, via Dahlerus. insisted that Hitler was dead set on it, and even transmitted a new invasion date, the night of August 30/31.
The Reichsmarschall also showed his Swedish intermediary maps of the whole German battleline, disposed to enter Poland.
But when no war came on August 31.
Vansittart — not noted for his pacifism told Carrington over lunch with Desmond Morton that Herr Hitler had undoubtedly lost his nerve.
At an adjacent table in the Carlton Club, the skeletal Lord Halifax, a hunting man, was telling his own entourage loudly that he ‘smelled a beaten fox’.
Optimistic or not, though, the government had taken their precautions.
Outside the club, the busy streets of London would next day be awash with evacuees and their parents, and third class carriages on special trains awash with tears and urine.
Similar scenes were scheduled to take place in other major cities.
while country areas were bracing themselves for the influx of tragic refugees or louse-infested slave labour, depending on the children's luck.
Complete mobilization of the forces was scheduled for the same day — one of those strokes of government that real people marvel at.
Quietly, too, Morton confided to Edward, the stiff and priggish Chamberlain had been pulling chestnuts from the fire.
He had been in touch with Winston to sound him out.
At any moment, an announcement of a job would surely be made — a Cabinet position.
It was Saturday before the balloon really went up.
despite the fact that the invasion came at last on Friday morning.
The news was first disseminated by DNB — the Deutsche Nachtrichten Buro — at 5.40 a.m. when the Fuhrer's proclamation revealed to an incredulous world that the action had been forced on Germany by the  insane campaign of terror waged against her by Poland.
Reuters flashed the news to London shortly afterwards, and Sir Howard Kennard, the British Ambassador in Warsaw, sent a coded phone call at 8.30 reporting the attack.
It emerged much later that the first casualties had been on Thursday night — Konserven, one at Gleiwitz, six at Hohnlinden — who had been dressed as Polish soldiers and shot.
They had, these dastardly ‘Poles’, been caught committing terror acts and killed by brave SS units in the ensuing battle.
Their faces had been beaten off to make sure nobody could later link them to a concentration camp, or even their homes, in Germany.
Tinned meat had been served, and served its purpose.
In London, though, life went on that Friday almost as if the invasion had not happened.
True, evacuees milled and wept and choked the stations, mobilization added to the confusion, the Cabinet dithered — but all that was preordained.
Food-rationing details were announced, surprising nobody, and radio censorship made no difference that anyone could discern.
Sandbags appeared in Whitehall and the blackout officially started, and at six o'clock Parliament assembled to hear Mr Chamberlain speak.
Balloons did go up, literally, as the first of the silver monsters climbed slowly into the sky to cripple or destroy the bombers, if they came.
But when the country went to bed that night, precisely nothing different, or exciting, or decisive had been said or done.
Edward Carrington, weary of the chattering and intrigue at Westminster, was home in bed by midnight.
His thoughts were not of Britain's fate, nor Poland's, but of Hannele's.
He ached for her.
On Saturday.
the edges frayed.
Carrington spent most of the day in the House, in the company of Churchill's men and, briefly, Churchill himself.
They followed the saga of France's panic and Mussolini's attempts to backslide from dribs and snippets, and hung around the bars and tea-rooms as Chamberlain's new statement was announced and postponed twice.
By 7.45, as he crammed himself into the visitors' gallery.
Edward could see that not only Desmond Morton had been drinking.
In fact, the only men in the Chamber who seemed entirely sober were the Prime Minister and Halifax, his Foreign Secretary.
They looked as if they needed alcohol, or perhaps a blood transfusion: they were cadaverous.
Chamberlain's speech was worse than his appearance.
The House, prepared to sympathize, listened in growing anger as he doddered on.
It was as if — or so it seemed, to that excited, tired throng — it  was as if no one had invaded anyone, no one had been bombed or slaughtered, no treaty obligations were being fudged.
He talked of an Italian plan to stop the war and have a conference instead, he said he was in touch with France to agree a time limit for Germany to withdraw and be forgiven, it came across as craven.
Morton, crushed in next to Edward, spluttered: ‘Winston must speak!
Winston!
Winston!’
It was Arthur Greenwood who did speak, however, the Labour leader.
When Chamberlain subsided, Greenwood rose.
‘Speaking for the Labour Party —’
Speak for England!’ someone roared, and the House erupted.
Later that evening, as the Churchill faction talked and drank and lived it out again, Bob Boothby claimed the honour, although Edward thought he had seen Leo Amery mouth the words.
No matter, it was said.
And when the noise died down, Greenwood continued.
‘I am greatly disturbed.’
His features were working, he clearly showed it.
‘An act of aggression took place thirty-eight hours ago.
The moment that act of aggression took place, one of the most important treaties of modern times automatically came into operation.’
The roars and shouts grew louder.
‘I wonder how long we are prepared to vacillate at a time when Britain, and all that Britain stands for, and human civilization, are in peril?’
Poor Chamberlain tried to save himself, but his reply was yet more pathetic than his first attempt.
The Tory Chief Whip, David Margesson, ended his agony by moving the adjournment, and the corridors were filled with yelling, scurrying, frantic men, taking up their cliques and groupings, pooling their opinions, consolidating.
Edward allowed himself to be swept by his particular tide, and spent the next few hours in a blur of short motor trips, a meal, many drinks, shouted insults, conversations.
Half the Cabinet or more, the rumour went, had rebelled and demanded Chamberlain give an ultimatum to the Germans, whether or not the French joined in.
The seriousness of the revolt was evidenced by the fact that Soapy Simon, an arch-appeaser who wanted above everything to be liked, had become their spokesman and had let them cram into his room and sit it out (with a break for dinner at the Savoy, of course) until the PM gave his answer.
All evening, great men came and went at Downing Street and at the Palace of Westminster.
Phone lines buzzed between Rome and  Paris, Paris and Warsaw, Berlin and London, London and Rome.
The Poles reported Warsaw under bomb attack and wanted help, immediately, from whoever would honour their commitments.
The French Cabinet, split and demoralized, wriggled and trimmed, while their Embassy in London was besieged by people and by telephone.
The assembled friends were told by Brendan Bracken in tones of wonderment that Churchill — that great Francophile — had rung to bellow that he would watch them die without a qualm if they ‘ratted on Poland as they had ratted on Czechoslovakia,’ while Bob Boothby told them repeatedly how he had exhorted Winston to ‘break Chamberlain and take his place’.
Churchill, while being ‘too much a man’ to kick the PM on the ground, had agreed to send a letter to Downing Street demanding to know by midday on Sunday the exact position he could expect to hold in the government.
There was an emergency Cabinet meeting shortly after 11 p.m., and as it progressed the storm clouds that had been gathering all Saturday evening came to a head.
Like characters in a Thomas Hardy novel, the Cabinet left Number Ten to wild lightning and torrential rain — nor were they unaware of the almost vulgar symbolism.
An ultimatum had at last been agreed, which gave Hitler until eleven o'clock next morning to withdraw from Poland lock, stock and barrel.
No one believed for a moment that he would, but it was backed unanimously.
The largest thunderclap of the storm had followed the Prime Minister's words ‘Right, gentlemen, this means war’, and the subsequent flash of lightning, it was remembered later, had lit up the entire room, despite the blackout curtains.
Edward believed it when he heard the tale.
By midnight, he and everybody else would have believed almost anything.
Without a miracle happening, Hitler had achieved his war, and Chamberlain had lost his peace.
There was no miracle, although across Western Europe Sunday morning saw the last throws of ‘the diplomats and the last prayers of the people who believed.
When the moment of the ultimatum came and went, Neville Chamberlain sat before a microphone at 10 Downing Street and read the speech that was to become his monument.
Before the National Anthem had finished playing, the first air-raid siren of World War 11 had sounded, a false alarm that sent the British nervously into the shelters, some — like Winston Churchill — defiantly clutching bottles of strong drink.
That after  noon a U-boat sank SS Athenia. carrying eleven hundred passengers and three hundred crew from Liverpool to America.
Of the three hundred Americans on board, anxious to get back across the Atlantic to safety, twenty-eight were among more than a hundred people drowned.
A Swedish yacht helped pick up the survivors.
Edward Carrington returned to his flat in Bedford Square at just after seven o'clock that evening.
It had been a melancholic day, although Winston Churchill had at last been called into the War Cabinet, gracing its inaugural meeting as First Lord of the Admiralty.
Not only his men were cockahoop, either.
Even the worst dummies, according to Bracken and Bob Boothby, were quietly confident that Britain would win a brief, efficient war.
Carrington, however, was drained, and worried, and prematurely hung over.
Then his own small miracle took place.
The phone rang, and the operator connected him to Stockholm.
It was Hannele.
The call was brief, the line appalling.
She said Suzanne had telephoned her from Germany.
Berlin was stunned, the population cowed, rebellious, sullen.
Dahlerus had spent the morning in one last effort to save the situation, and Goering had, in fact, ordered a plane to be prepared and standing by to fly him to London if the British would accept.
They had turned him down.
Goering's second flight had also not come off.
Carrington said: ‘But Hannele —’
‘No.
I'll talk.
Carruthers, I don't know what will happen now, but I have changed my mind.
I do not know why, or whether it will work.
If this war goes on, there will be networks.
People will organize, and I will be among them.
Tell your people who I am, that I will be in touch, I will be waiting.
Carruthers?’
‘Yes?’
‘Carruthers, fourth time lucky!’
She put the phone down.
Through his window, Carrington could see a silver barrage balloon, rising slowly on its cable into the clear blue sky.
It was very beautiful.
The beauty of that late summer came to seem, finally, quite bizarre.
Although most people were relieved that the waiting game was over, the first days and nights were nerve-racking.
All the preparations, all the propaganda, had led them to expect Herr Hitler to start it with a bang, an airborne cataclysm, probably with fire and with deadly gas.
Although few people still retained the Great War view that German soldiers wore dead babies on their helmet spikes and lived on human flesh, there was little doubt in many minds that the Fuhrer was related to the devil.
It was a schizophrenic view, as he was depicted by cartoonists as a buffoon, a cringing halfwit with cap constantly in hand, but the balloons, the sandbags, the innumerable air-raid shelters attested to the underlying fear.
And nothing came.
The war in Poland raged tragically, but even the French had pulled themselves together sufficiently to coin triumphalist slogans about their might and will.
It continued warm and pleasant, no bombers terrified or destroyed, and euphoria returned and grew.
Not until October 14, when a U-boat penetrated the defences of Britain's ‘safest harbour’ at Scapa Flow and killed the Royal Oak and more than eight hundred of her sailors, did the chill of autumn begin to bite.
Churchill, the First Sea Lord and England's hero, could only describe it in the House on October 17 as ‘a remarkable exploit of skill and daring’.
There were many more to follow.
For Edward Carrington, the early weeks brought little but frustration and disappointment.
He had learned from Desmond Morton that there was a plan afoot involving iron ore and the Swedish port of Oxelosund, which — had he not ‘joined the wrong eleven’— he might have had a hand in.
Edward knew Oxelosund, and guessed that the idea might be to cripple it, to cut down ore shipments to -German industry, although Morton would not confirm his hunch.
The major, grander now but no less approachable, had been promoted to a joint directorship of the Ministry of Economic Warfare.
‘Try for a transfer, my lad,’ he said.
‘It might sound damned stuffy but it's not.
Winston calls it the Ministry of Ungentlemanly Warfare, you know — although we have no riffraff, naturally.
We get up to all sorts, I can tell you, and ferried not fully in our stride yet.
God knows what'll happen now that poor old Quex is going home.
Perhaps I'll put in a word for you sometime.’
Quex was dying.
fast, of cancer.
By October his days in the saddle were over, and his deputy.
Lieutenant Colonel Stewart Menzies, was preparing to clear his desk for one last time and transfer to Sir Hugh's enormous office overlooking Whitehall, an office so secret that it had a private door and staircase that could not be overlooked.
There were some who hoped and half expected that he would never get there, and indeed, fought viciously to prevent it.
Not because of his background — among Menzies' credentials was the widely held belief that he was the illegitimate offspring of Edward VII — but because, as Carrington was to slowly learn, the secret services, like most other scions of government and the Establishment, were run by envy, fear and favouritism.
One of the most heinous of Menzies' sins was the fact that he was not a Navy man in the tradition of the one-legged Smith-Cumming — who had coined the title ‘C’ for holders of the post — or Admiral Sinclair.
He also spent too much time a'hunting (which endeared him to Lord Halifax) and too much time drinking fine brandy at White's (which had the same effect with Churchill).
Many members of the Admiralty were furious with their First Lord when the temporary appointment was ratified on November 28, but Churchill did not give a fig.
He knew, as they did not, of Enigma and of Ultra.
Stewart Menzies was master of the key that might one day win the war.
Long before Quex died, however, Edward Carrington had discovered better reasons than inter-service rivalry and backstabbing to make him doubt the quality of the organization he had been so proud to join.
He was interviewed by Menzies — still as the deputy — in the second week of September, and taken out of a class in pistol shooting for the occasion.
He found the lieutenant colonel, although only touching fifty, almost impossibly grand.
He had been educated during Eton's greatest days, been President of Pop, then had straightway graced the Grenadiers, transferring later to the Life Guards.
The only human thing that anybody whispered of him was that his wife, the daughter of the Eighth Earl de la Warr, had had to be divorced for granting bedroom favours to another.
Given his carriage, his square face with downturned mouth, his iron self-regard, Carrington could see her point.
The interview was short, and devastating.
Edward, invited to give an account of himself and be frank about it, did so.
He emphasized his knowledge of parts of Europe, in particular the North, and his grasp of Nordic languages.
He could pass for a native of Sweden certainly, and probably of Norway and of Denmark.
He already had a contact in a Swedish woman who had expressed a desire to work with the British, who was studying at Dresden.
His greatest use, he felt, would be in forging this connection, with the help of the agents he imagined were already in place in these countries, and developing it.
Froken Malling, his contact, had very high and useful connections of her own.
He named Suzanne Simonis, her cousins the Kordt brothers, Erich von Weizsacker, Birger Dahlerus.
And added, tentatively, that members of the German High Command might be linked.
Colonel Menzies listened with apparent interest.
He raised his eyebrows at the list of names.
He consulted a dun-coloured file in front of him.
He cleared his throat.
‘Well.’
His voice was deep, cultured, sonorous.
‘Self-confidence is of the greatest importance in an agent.
Self-knowledge comes with time.
We have assessed your capabilities, and we find your potential interesting.
There is a proposal to send you — when you have completed basic training, naturally — to the Netherlands.
We have great need of people like you there.
You'll fit in perfectly.’
Edward Carrington gasped.
‘I don't speak Dutch.’
It was all he could get out.
The face across the table hardened.
‘Then learn.
You will be groomed as a Dutch businessman, based in Rotterdam, who has returned from the East Indies.
You are in rubber, which the Germans desperately lack.
We note your father is a Burma expert, that is good.
You will be able to cross into Germany, with a view to doing deals.
It is a most important posting.
Any questions?’
Plenty sprang to Edward's mind, but he prevented any of them from passing his lips, which he momentarily pursed.
He thanked the colonel for the interview and returned doggedly to his pistol lessons in the basement range two doors away.
After that he went back to the offices to receive details of his next step.
He neither complained nor commented to anyone.
At the flat that evening, lying thinking in the bath, he was aroused by the telephone.
In case it should be Hannele, he had to answer it.
It was not.
It was a woman's voice, though, one he did not recognize.
It had an American tinge, and it was light and pleasant.
‘Hallo.
This is Erica Lucas.
I'm just nearby.
Can I come up?’
His mind was blank.
‘Erica Lucas?’
‘Your landlady.
I own your apartment.
I have a key, of course, but…’
‘Good God.
I'm in the bath.’
‘Ten minutes, then?
Is that OK?
I've just got into England from the States.’
Fifteen minutes afterwards, the doorbell rang.
Edward Carrington took quiet pride in his modernity.
The British, he felt, for all their supposed superiority, were marked by insularity, and were by European terms quite backward, culturally.
Their class system was hidebound, their rulers unjustifiably smug, their attitude to rising talent blinkered.
He recognized these things and hoped he was above them.
But Erica Lucas took his breath away.
The view he had of her through his spyhole was distorted.
She looked undefined, the sides of her face slipping to infinity, her body woolly, soft.
Feeling foolish, he jerked the door open to the reality.
It was completely different.
Erica Lucas was five feet six, with a thin, strong, intelligent face.
Her hair was black, but streaked dramatically with silver grey.
It was not her age — she told Edward within minutes that she was twenty-seven — and it was not the effect of cares or worry, the lines around her eyes were laughter lines.
It was nature that had turned her grey, she said, and she did not give a damn.
Her clothes proclaimed the message.
Her skirt was short, above slim, silk-stockinged legs, and her peach-coloured rayon blouse was open almost indecently low upon her well-formed bosom.
She was carrying a lightweight jacket and a travelling bag of solid leather.
She behaved as if she owned the place.
‘Come in,’ said Edward.
‘I hope it's not too much of a pigsty.
It lacks a woman's touch, you know.
I'm sorry.’
‘Bullshit,’ said Erica, and Edward jumped as if he had been stung.
‘Why should a woman keep it any different?
Anyway, it's your$, it's no business of mine at all, I shouldn't really be here.
You don't  have to let me in, you know, Mr Carrington.
May I call you Edward?
Or is it Ted?
Call me Erica.’
She had walked in as she talked, so he assumed the offer to be turned away was her form of politeness.
She dropped the heavy bag, the jacket on top of it, and looked around.
She opened doors, walked up and down, inspected rooms.
Edward's dirty clothes were in a pile beside his bed but his embarrassment did not interest her.
He was sweating slightly, overheated from the bath, his shirt open at the neck.
Very nice,’ was Erica's verdict.
‘No complaints here about the way you've kept it.
It's an enormous place for one, however, I always thought so.
Would you consider a sub-let?’
She moved past him to the kitchen, where she put the kettle on the gas.
She rooted through the cupboards, turned her nose up at the dishes in the sink, selected tea cups and located the caddy.
Edward took up a position at the door-post.
A defensive one.
It's against the rules of the lease.
The agents have always been most strict with me.
More to the point, it suits me.’
‘I'd be a model lodger.
I'm quiet, I have few dirty habits that would trouble you.
Economically, it makes perfect sense.’
‘Oh.
You.’
‘Of course me.
Naturally.
I wasn't expecting to come back to England, not for years, maybe never.
But since I've had to, and since the old place is so empty, how about it?
You weren't thinking of anybody else?
I see only one bed is used.’
‘But…well, if it doesn't sound ridiculous — what would the neighbours think?’
Erica Lucas laughed expressively.
‘Screw the neighbours.
I used to live here in the old days, before my mother left, then my father died.
They know me well enough.
They never said a thing, they never dared.’
She moved to the stove, poured water in to warm the pot.
‘It's not that sort of place, Teddy.
They're not that sort of neighbours.
Do you talk to them?
There, then.
Besides.
Times have changed.’
The pot was ready.
She put it on a tray with the cups and saucers, sugar, milk.
Edward still watched from the doorway.
‘Still, if you're adamant.
There's the gutter if I can't find a cheap hotel.
Why should you care?
You heartless bastard!’
Over tea in the front sitting room, overlooking Bedford Square, she filled him in on her background.
She had lived in America for more than two years this time, and had grown up there, basically.
Her father had been an economist, who had come back to Europe with Woodrow Wilson to try to hammer something workable out of the ruins of the Great War, and after that the family had divided themselves between the USA and Britain.
She had been born in this apartment — in the bedroom that he slept in, maybe the very bed, she grinned — and she loved the place.
Not as much, perhaps, as New York or Washington.
‘Why did you come back?
It seems a strange time to choose.
Most people are rushing off the other way.
There's been a mass exodus of Americans in the last few weeks.’
‘Am I American?’
She sighed.
‘Oh, I don't know.
I'm here for the reasons that they've gone back there, I guess.
It's a pull.
Not rational.
I worked out for myself that there's going to be a blow-up.
London's going to be bombed, invaded, over-run, who knows?
So I booked my passage.
Also…well, there's an awful fascination.
I worked with journalists in New York, I worked in radio.
They're pouring over here, the last contingents, to see the fun.
War as a spectator sport, you know?
There were eighteen of them on the boat with me.
I guess I got infected.’
They drank tea.
Erica lit a cigarette, and Edward refused one.
He had been trying a pipe recently, but was not making much progress.
Smoking, he had found, gave him a headache.
‘Are you a journalist?’
‘Hell, no.
I studied politics, economics, like my Pop.
But I thought I might be able to earn a crust by it, you know?
Offer my services to some of the magazines, a ‘gal's eye view’ of Little England's struggle.
That's the angle over there, believe me.
The gallant fight against the last barbarians.
They're pushing it like crazy.
I guess I'll find a better job.
Something I can believe in.’
She blew smoke in a pale blue stream through rounded lips.
She smiled easily.
She was not attempting to be provocative.
Edward, provoked, said: ‘Don't you think Hitler's a barbarian?’
She was surprised.
‘They're all barbarians.
Good God, Teddy, the US arms industry has been praying for this war for years.
The British too, surely to God?
Woodrow Wilson nearly tore his liver out trying to get a reasonable settlement at Versailles, a settlement that would last, and look what Europe did to him.
A blind man with his head tied  in a sack could see this one coming, couldn't he?
The Germans aren't insane.
They were screwed.
Twenty million of them dispossessed, twenty million told they now lived in a foreign country and they could never be Germans again, for ever more.
You would have fought, if you'd been them.
If somebody had told you Wales was part of Poland.
Come on, Teddy!’
He was beginning to feel uncomfortable.
This was heresy, or at least beyond his comprehension Erica could see the effect her words were having.
But it only made her smile.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said.
‘Have I become too much?
We see things differently over there, you understand.
There's a pretty powerful body of opinion that thinks Germany and Britain will link up one day soon and turn on the States.
You don't believe that?
I'm telling you, it's true.
You heard of William Bullitt?
Sumner Welles?
Nah, you're English.
You have heard of America, I suppose?
Have you heard of Nancy Astor?
Cliveden?
Of course you have.
Well, Stateside lots of people think they lead a group of aristos and bankers and industrial giants who see Mr Hitler as the future.
You know Joe Kennedy?
US Ambassador here in London?
A Boston-Irish gangster.
He swills champagne with Lord and Lady Astor, so they say.
He's one of the set.’
‘They can't believe it's true, though?
You don't believe it?
It's insane.’
‘Why insane?
A different perspective.
Europe is Nemesis for America.
The devouring myth.
Americans sprang from her and she always calls them back.
Europe's always dying and Americans can't leave her alone to die.
They go back, they interfere, they try to save her from herself.
And they get slaughtered in the process.
Without thanks or understanding.’
Edward had a sudden, uncomfortable memory of Hannele.
‘Your Rich Uncle,’ she had called the States.
This woman apparently saw Americans as wandering children, unable to break with a bloodstained, hopeless parent.
‘You won't need to help this time,’ he said, lamely.
‘Against France and Britain, Hitler hasn't got a chance.
Poland might fight him to a standstill on her own.
The Poles beat Russia in the 1920s.’
She crushed her cigarette out in an ashtray.
The butt still smouldered.
‘I wouldn't bet on it,’ she answered.
‘But I hope you're right.
There's a lot of Americans this time round who'd rather die than  die for Europe.
Like I said, it's a spectator sport.
The good ol' boys'll sell you tanks and planes aplenty.
But if you hit the canvas, Uncle Sam won't pick you up and dust you off.
Roosevelt might want to.
Rumour has it Roosevelt's already making secret moves, although he's too damn fly to let anybody in on it.
It's against the US law, Teddy.
The Neutrality Act has got a lot of watchdogs.
There's a man called Borah.
There's senators whose families came from Germany and Italy and Ireland.
And there's cash.
Industry invests in Germany as much as it invests in England, maybe more.
If they fought for one side or the other, Standard Oil would be fighting Standard Oil.
And the loser?
Standard Oil.
Forget it!’
Carrington was silenced.
Erica took another cigarette and lighted it.
The ignition of the match made a significant roar in the quiet room.
She inhaled deeply.
‘Am I too much of an American for you, or can I stay?’ she said.
‘And if I can, here's another question.
What do we do about sex?’
Smoke was rising from her nostrils as from a pantomimic devil's mask.
Her smile was growing.
She moved her head from side to side.
‘Teddy,’ she said.
‘You are just priceless.’
SIX
Edward Carrington, with heavy heart but great determination, threw himself into his training as an agent.
Like any bureaucracy given a green light, the Secret Intelligence Service grew like mushrooms in a wet field overnight.
It was riddled, in his opinion, with old and stupid men, most of whom had been recruited by word of mouth or by membership of a certain club or school society, but to give Menzies his due, he did bring in new blood of a different order.
Carrington learned Dutch under a young lecturer from Manchester who was brilliant, and his radio and cipher training was handled by men whose accents were extremely low, while their skill levels were precisely the opposite.
He was taught unarmed combat by a former plumber, and was later told that the famous novelist Gerald Kersh gave lessons in how to kill a man in total silence using only a handkerchief or a bunch of keys.
In other classes learned men told him about the economic infrastructure of the Low Countries and Germany, and the Burmese rubber nexus.
He often found his thoughts, unfortunately, turning to Hannele's face and body, and to the economies and peoples of Scandinavia, both of which he knew quite intimately.
The other intelligence services also proliferated, and there were dark tales in the clubs and messes of rivalry and hatred.
Many M16 officers made no pretence at co-operation as a desirable aim, instilling in some of the newer men a conviction that M15 saw its main purpose to encroach on M16 domains, and suggesting that all such moves should be pre-empted.
Vernon Kell, Carrington was told, was not only an incompetent head of M15, but possibly a traitor and almost certainly a homosexual.
He recruited from the ancient universities, and many of his agents were believed to be Russian sympathizers.
Carrington knew only one of them by name, Lord Victor Rothschild, with whom he had played cards occasionally.
His views were certainly of the left, but one of his houses, in Bentinck Street, was always full of pretty girls, which redressed the balance.
Kell, his back exposed to many knives, was bizarrely blamed by  Churchill for the ‘skill and daring’ of the submarine that destroyed the Royal Oak, and after a couple more botched jobs was summarily dismissed.
But in M16 itself the rivalries flared and smouldered.
Colonels Valentine Vivian and Claude Dansey, theoretically the right and left hand men of C, fought each other bitterly, and their colleague Felix Cowgill, head of Section Five, with even greater vigour.
There was MI(R) in the question, first one then two ‘D’ departments added to SIS, plus military intelligences attached to each armed service, PWE and the EH group.
The Ministry of Economic Warfare hung on the periphery and stirred the witches' brew.
Carrington, a colonial, possibly in love, detached, watched all this with a definite slight unease and hoped the battle in the field was conducted with more competence and panache, not to say goodwill.
His target, when he should be considered fit and ready, was the European centre of SIS operations, a house in The Hague disguised as the ‘Continental Trading Corporation’, where he was to join the staff of agents run by Major H. R. Stevens and his deputy, Captain S. Payne Best.
Prom there he was to work up his cover as a rubber man and make the contacts that would get him into Germany.
In theory it sounded plausible enough.
In practice, luckily for him, it never happened.
On November 9, Britain's two top agents were lured to the border town of Venlo by some Germans and simply kidnapped.
A Dutch intelligence officer, Lieutenant Daniel Klop, tried to save them but was shot and later died.
Stevens and Payne Best spent the war in prison and in camps, and almost every SIS man in place in Germany, the Low Countries and France had to return to England.
Carrington's adventure in Holland was over before it had begun, by two short days.
Unlike Sir Vernon Kell, Menzies had a talisman.
He carried on.
That night, Edward took Erica to dinner at the Savoy Grill in the Strand and explained that he would not be leaving after all.
The dinner had been arranged as a farewell, but never mind.
The food was still good, he could afford it, the table was booked.
Erica, who had been dressed to kill when he got to the flat, had agreed.
She would relish it the more, she said, knowing that, it was not a wake, and who knew how much longer such restaurants would still be open, such food and drink available?
‘Except for the rich, of course.’
She ironically raised a glass of whisky and water, her aperitif.
‘To the Black Market.’
When they were shown to their table, Erica asked the sixty-four dollar question.
Why?
Carrington was prepared.
‘The project's been delayed.
As far as I know, the boffin in control has had second thoughts about some calculation.
I doubt if I'll be off the hook for long.
But it'll be an excuse for another farewell binge.’
To Erica, Edward was a metallurgist, a researcher into alloys at the leading edge of science.
It had occurred to him that simply to refuse to discuss his movements would have led Erica inevitably to his real job.
And science, she had revealed the day after they had met, was a total mystery to her.
‘Good,’ she said.
‘I'm glad you'll be around.
But I may be working soon myself.
Pve come out of the woodwork.
I've declared myself.
I'm going for a job.’
‘Well congratulations!
You've saved me the embarrassment of having to turn you in!
What are you hoping for?’
Erica, in all the chaos of her arrival back in Britain, appeared to be on no one 's files.
She had turned up, been noted as arriving, then forgotten.
Had she been a foreign agent, she could not have done it better.
‘Ministry of Information.
I know a man there, so I thought I'd see if they could use my services writing leaflets, or propaganda or something, I don't know.
I used to do scripts in the States.
I know radio.
They're seeing me tomorrow.’
He tried to hide it, but Carrington was surprised.
She caught the rogue expression, and grinned.
‘I'm not a fifth columnist, you know!
Just because we disagree on everything!
I thought you'd be amused, me telling lies to bolster up morale.
I'll be very good at it, as good as Churchill.
You can tell me what to think!’
He made a rueful face.
Their views on everything, from what to have for breakfast to the course and conduct of the war, had remained diametrically opposed.
Churchill had been the latest bone of contention, as he had begun to make public speeches which Chamberlain clearly found embarrassing.
They were violently anti-Nazi, patriotic, jingoistic some would say.
Erica, for instance.
She called him rabble-rouser, windbag, fraud.
Everything he said or wrote was calculated for posterity, in her view, he sounded like a sheaf of notes looking for a history book.
‘Well, the very best of luck,’ he said.
‘But for God's sake don't tell  them what you really think, will you?
About anything.
Otherwise you'll end up in the Tower, not writing leaflets.’
When the meal was over, they went for a late drink, then for a dance.
Although they were not lovers they stayed together, sought no other partners.
When they reached home, happy and a little tipsy, they drank cocoa in the kitchen, then went to separate rooms.
The ‘sex arrangement’ she had joked about had been about other people, and their attitude to strange bodies cluttering up the place.
They had agreed that each of them should have carte blanche, no questions asked nor opinions given, unsolicited.
But Edward had lost interest in easy conquests for the present, and Erica hinted at the ending of an affair when she had left the States.
They liked each other, they rubbed along quite well.
It was enough for both of them.
It was several months before anything significant happened in Edward's life — by which time he was so sick of the stagnant war that he would have been prepared to be parachuted into the heart of Germany wearing a kilt.
His training had benefited from the extra time, he was assured by any superior who could spare the energy to talk to him, and indeed he was an expert radio operator and cipherist, who could also — in theory — kill, survive, and use a parachute.
He knew the details of ident laws and rationing for every country in Europe, he had mastered Dutch and French, and he still could not get a pipe to burn for more than three minutes at a stretch.
There were things in the air, he knew, everybody knew.
The centre of activity, of the universe, was Bletchley Park, north of London, where signals intelligence had something big.
But Carrington did not get to go there, and secrecy was high, with many rumours but few facts.
For him, after the Venlo fiasco, being a British agent meant reading newspapers in Swedish, Danish and Norwegian, studying reports, poring over decodes, analysing situations.
In February he was told that Britain would probably be invading Norway soon, but his pleas to be in place beforehand fell on deaf ears.
His spot was London, his usefulness all of the intellect.
As spring progressed he wrote briefing documents on the life, the people and terrain of Scandinavia, and gave assessments of how a British ‘intervention’(the word invasion was never used) would be received.
He knew beforehand that on April 8 the Royal Navy were  to mine the fjords off Narvik, in neutral Norway's territorial waters, and he was one of the first to learn of Germany's devastating response, a full-scale invasion the next day.
He monitored the course of the campaign to retake the country, exchanging messages with an M16 man called Frank Foley, who organized the evacuation in an Irish Sea ferryboat of the Royal Family and much of the government.
After both Norway and Denmark had fallen, Neville Chamberlain also fell, on May 10.
It was the day Hitler tore into Belgium and the Netherlands, and the day that Winston Churchill became Prime Minister.
Edward Carrington was in the flat with Erica when Chamberlain broadcast his farewell.
Any tendency he might have had to crow, or scoff at his achievements, was modified by the dreadful news from the continent.
The Twilight War, as Chamberlain had dubbed it, was over with a vengeance.
The Norway disaster had been just an appetizer, it would seem.
‘Well, your man's won,’ said Erica, when the broadcast was over.
‘Al Capone has got his finger on the trigger at long last.’
‘What can you possibly mean?’ flared Edward.
‘What possible alternative is there?
At least we'll fight now.
At least there'll be a fight.’
‘Yes,’ said Erica.
‘To the death, and probably beyond.
Churchill didn't do too well at Norway, though.
Why should he do better now he's ousted Chamberlain?
How was Norway Chamberlain's fault and not the First Sea Lord's?
I only ask.’
The telephone rang in the lobby, and Carrington went, gladly, to answer it.
It was Desmond Morton.
‘My boy,’ he said.
‘I might have need of you.
Terrific news about dear Winston, ferried all delirious.
But there are moves afoot.
Treachery.
Menzies can spare you, I've spoken to him.
See me tomorrow morning, at my office.’
‘It would be an honour, sir.
Ten thirty?’
‘Fine.
Carrington, you'll not believe this, but I'll tell you.
Utterly shocking.
After Chamberlain had quit, there was a meeting in his chambers.
Him not present, but others, utterly disgraceful.
This must not get out, of course.’
Of course, said Edward.
Morton, he realized, spoke with the confidence of the man who tapped the phones.
His breath wheezed faintly, down the line.
‘They drank a toast.
To the man who gave us Munich, the guilty  man.
‘The King Over The Water.’
In champagne.
Rank treachery.’
It did not sound that serious to Edward, given the circumstances of Neville Chamberlain's fall from grace.
It sounded more like a courtesy than a threat, a valediction.
Morton had been celebrating, hard.
Then Morton said: ‘There is a king, you know.
Over the water.
I don't mean Chamberlain.
He lives in Portugal.
he deals with Nazis.
Married to that dreadful Yankee woman, Wallis Simpson.
Our information is that Hitler's offered him the throne.
Our throne.
Edward becomes king again, d'you understand?’
‘But how can he?
How can Hitler offer anything?
He'd have to win the war!’
‘Or end it.
There are people in this country who would do anything to end it.
Powerful people, people in the highest echelons, people in the deepest sympathy with Hitler.
And they would have a king again in sympathy with them.
Edward the Eighth.’
‘But Churchill.
He is PM now.
He would never…’
‘Precisely.
That's the devil of it, isn't it?
The import of the toast.
The King Over The Water will forever remain so, while Winston lives.’
His voice had grown thick, with anger or emotion.
Edward waited.
‘So Winston Churchill,’ said Desmond Morton.
‘Would have to die.’
SEVEN
Drunk, or mad, or stupid?
Or maybe utterly sane, perhaps it was he who could not come to grips with the topsy-turvy world they all now lived in, Edward thought.
When he had come off the phone the night before and Erica had asked who it had been, he had replied, with a certain confidence and an audible distaste, ‘Someone talking nonsense’.
But after meeting Morton, the verities had slipped once more.
The major — still puffy-eyed from the night of celebration — had backtracked rapidly from wild tales involving Winston Churchill's death, but had offered calmer possibilities to replace them.
More powerfully, he had offered Edward action, linked with Scandinavia.
At first, Carrington had listened with unease as Morton had blandly slid around his assassination claims.
There were dark schemes afoot, he said — some with their roots going back for years — and if Hitler could achieve it, the replacement of King George by his brother could only occur at the cost of Winston's life.
But Morton's job was to prevent such things, which was why he wanted Edward's help.
He had, after all, been originally his protege, and ‘C’ had confirmed his excellence in all things Nordic.
Edward had smiled modestly and, of course, agreed to do his best, if it were so ordained.
While wondering, with well-concealed impatience, at the details.
But with details Major Morton was less forthcoming, and Edward's unease turned into something deeper when he named the ‘traitors’ who had drunk the shameful toast.
They were the young Lord Dunglass, who had gone to Munich with Chamberlain as his parliamentary private secretary in 1938, Chips Channon, an amiable but half-witted American who was Rab Butler's PPS, Butler himself — a friend and admirer of Chamberlain who worked in the Foreign Office under Halifax — and a fourth as yet unnamed.
Morton caught Edward's involuntary eye-movements, but instead of pouncing, instead of switching on the bluster, he changed gear.
He pondered for some seconds before speaking.
Then he said: ‘I can see you're dubious.
But don't dismiss it out of hand, that would be foolish.
It is not as unlikely as it appears, you know.
You are young, and you are a colonial.
You perhaps do not realize how long and desperately people have fought to keep Winston Spencer Churchill in the wilderness, and how furiously angry many of them are that he is back where he belongs.
Between these walls, Carrington, I will pledge to you that there are plotters in high places, and as an indicator of just how high, I will add that Lord Halifax himself is possibly among them.
Halifax, note.
A friend and confidant of R. A. Butler.
Halifax was called in privately to Chamberlain's room at the same time as Winston, and he assumed he would get the PM's job.
There were just the three of them, with Chamberlain holding one man's future or the other's in the palm of his hand.
Churchill did not speak, but he won by force of personality.
He told me that he projected, by sheer will, the scenes in Parliament after Norway into the atmosphere of the room, and Halifax finally quailed.
The job went to Winston, but Halifax will not forget it, or forgive.
Believe me.’
Carrington felt strained.
Lord Halifax was a cold fish, a man of steely rectitude, a religious man.
But a traitor?
‘Lord Halifax is the Foreign Secretary,’ he said.
‘He hates Hitler.
He has worked with Chamberlain against him tirelessly.’
‘Yes.
To what end?
Appease, appease, appease.
They lost their fight to prevent the war, but never their desire for peace.
You have seen the way the war has been conducted.
Now it's getting more violent by the minute.
If Chamberlain had not fallen, he would have caved in.
Halifax as well.’
There was something in that, and there was something plausible in Morton's attitude.
Despite the paleness of the eyes, the aura of post-alcoholic suffering, his exposition now was grave and measured.
The misplaced bonhomie, the unchecked schoolboy enthusiasm that Edward distrusted in him, was tightly reined.
Wild phone calls were of the night: this, perhaps, was serious.
He tapped a light tattoo on his desk-top with his fingernails, and sighed.
‘No one 's suggesting, do you see, a full-scale plot to undermine Winston on the spot.
Not at the moment, anyway.
But there's an undercurrent you may not be aware of.
This war is costing money.
It is costing Britain millions every month.
It is costing our industrialists dear, and our exporters.
War is a moral luxury to some of these people.
However just our cause is, they see only their cash balances  dwindling.
Germany's in the same boat.
War is financed by industry, and the power in any land, behind any throne, behind Hitler or behind our own democracy, is a body of immensely wealthy men whose allegiance is ultimately to their wealth, and perhaps to each other.
They talk to each other, they commune with each other , and there is a pressure for peace among them.
It's international, my boy, and that's the danger.
It's international in that they see themselves above nationhood, beyond patriotism, and they want the war to end.
It's only a short step from desiring peace to seeking it, of course.
It's only a short step from thinking Neville Chamberlain hard done by to blaming Churchill for his ills.
Winston's going to win this war for us, as I'm sure you understand.
Only Winston can win this war for us.
But believe me, Hitler is not the only enemy.’
For the moment, they were on the same wavelength.
Morton, eyes narrowed, hands clasped before him on the desk, seemed decisive, intelligent.
Edward Carrington, relaxed but keen, had excitement in his guts.
‘And my part, sir?
The English aristocracy, I'm afraid, is a bit of a closed book to me.
But on the German side…
’ An idea fell into his mind, so obvious.
‘The Scandinavians.
War industry.
That's how they'd communicate.
Am I to go there?’
Desmond Morton was chuckling.
‘Hold up, hold up!
Not yet awhile!
I admire your perspicacity, and yes, that's the ultimate goal.
But softly-softly.
You're not the only Nordic expert in the service, you know.
We have a man, a man called Foley.
Your first job will be to work with him.
In fact, your job will be to work on him, to watch him, to check him over for me.
He's good, he's brilliant, and he's probably as sound as a bell.
But there are certain indicators, little worries, and we need to know.
What do you say to that?’
For many moments, Edward said nothing.
He had heard of Foley, had worked with him — tangentially, and through the medium of crackling morse — during the Norway campaign.
In as far as anyone could hope to be in the bitterly envious soil of the SIS, Foley was unblemished.
Morton, watching carefully, was nodding.
‘You've heard of him.
So be it.
You think I'm raving.
But it's not what it seems.
Nobody's suggesting he is a traitor, he's one of our very best men.
He was an agent in the Great War, he's done wonderful work, wonderful.
But there are indications, hints, which we must check out.
He's close to some of the Germans, he married  one, for heaven's sake.
What's more, he spent ten years and more living in Berlin, speaks the lingo literally like a native, and after Berlin — he came out when the show blew up — he went to Oslo.
Now, as you've already guessed, if there is a link-up between our high-born plotters and their equivalents in Germany, that's the way it's going to come.
So is it coincidence, or is it not?
Wherever you look, there's Francis Foley and there are Scandinavians.
Birger Dahlerus, Wenner-Gren, you know the names.
Quite frankly, young man, we would be insane not to be vigilant.
We want him watching, and you're the man to do it.’
They both paused for thought.
It was a fine morning.
Perhaps the summer would be as marvellous as had the last.
The traffic noise in Whitehall was muted by the heavy curtains, despite the open window.
‘It would be inappropriate in me to say it felt un-British,’ Carrington said, at last.
‘It's just —’
‘Foolish, too,’ Morton interrupted.
‘We all have sacrifices that must be made.
And for the moment you are not watching on a colleague, because you are not working for M16 but directly for Winston.
And the good of Britain.
You are a very lucky young man.
We want you in France in three days time.
Try to get to Paris before the blessed Boche.’
‘France?’
‘That's where Foley is.
There's some gunk called heavy water that the Frogs want to off-load onto us.
Our man in Paris is Lord Suffolk — a rum'un and no mistake.
Working with a chap called Allier, French but very sound.
They're expecting you.
You've not done this before, have you?
Active service?’
‘No, sir.’
Desmond Morton grinned like the Cheshire cat.
‘Enjoy yourself, then.
But remember — Foley is your target.
Be vigilant, and don't be taken in.
He's come straight from the heart of it.
Norway.’
They shook hands.
Inevitably, perhaps, Frank Foley was not in Paris.
But Edward, delighted to be carrying a gun at last, hardly cared.
When he met Lord Suffolk — officially the science attache at the British Embassy — the delight increased.
Suffolk loved the war as he had loved  nothing else in life, and had turned his part in it into romantic fiction.
As France slipped into chaos he let his dress and demeanour slip to match.
He greeted Edward half drunk, at eleven in the morning, and offered him champagne.
He was in stained black trousers and an open shirt, and his chin was rapidly disappearing beneath a growth of soft, curly hair.
Their job, he explained, was to quarter Paris and the surrounding towns collecting scientific and industrial hardware from factories and labs, arranging their dismantling and packaging, then sending them to Bordeaux to be transhipped to Britain.
To this end he had selected two Embassy secretaries as helpers, with brains to equal beauty, who matched him drink for drink late into the night, then killed their hangovers in work.
It was something of a relief to mind and liver when Edward was assigned to help Jacques Allier, a less flamboyant man than Suffolk, who did not like champagne.
He had tracked the heavy water to a hiding place in an Auvergne jail, he said, and needed muscle and another gun.
Edward, feeling neither strong nor very brave, shook hands with Suffolk and kissed both girls goodbye.
The plan was that they would meet again in Bordeaux, where Suffolk was soon to go to commandeer a freighter for his scientific booty and machine tools.
Jacques Allier was a sombre man, although prepared to talk.
Before the Germans overran Norway, Edward learned, he had mounted an operation to smuggle out all the heavy water stocked at the Norsk Hydro, which was the only producer in the world.
The twenty-six canisters had reached Paris via a flight to Edinburgh organized by one Frank Foley — a train journey down the length of Britain, and a ship across the Channel.
Now, after a month of nervously transferring it from place to place as the situation worsened, the French government were giving it to the British.
When they reached the prison, at Riom, and an official tried to argue that they had no authority to remove the canisters, Jacques Allier took out a pistol and levelled it wordlessly at the bureaucratic face.
If the man had held out for five seconds he would have been dead.
He collapsed in three.
The roads to Bordeaux were heavily congested.
As the British had retreated to the beaches of Dunkirk, the government of France had run for the southern port in case the worst should happen.
Allier's Simca, freighted with nearly four hundredweight of heavy water, groaned and squeaked its way through the lorries, cars and  refugees on foot.
Petrol could have been a problem, but once more Allier's ruthlessness paid off.
He explained, tersely, to Edward Carrington what their cargo was and what it would mean if German scientists got hold of it.
Quite simply, that was worth dying to prevent.
For Edward, the stainless steel containers, and the job, took on a deeper significance.
It was in Bordeaux, when they crawled through the traffic to the docks, that he at last met Foley.
They saw Suffolk first, on the cluttered deck of a filthy coalship called the Broompark, looking more piratical than ever.
His shirt — once white — was open to the waist, and his beard was long and straggly.
One of his girls was next to him, incongruous in a floral summer dress, and with them was another girl, more soberly turned out, and a small man in a brown suit.
Allier, at the steering wheel of the overheated Simca, gave a grunt.
‘Ah.
Bon.
Foley.’
Carrington was fascinated.
Foley looked like anything in the world except a secret agent.
A shipping agent, more likely, standing on the Broompark's deck checking bills of lading.
His face was round and turnip-like, a soft felt hat crammed on it, and his boots were brown and polished.
The collar-points of his white shirt had rolled up in the heat.
Edward approached cautiously, following Allier.
There were handshakes all round, and congratulations.
Suffolk placed a dirty paw on Edward's shoulder and pushed him forward.
‘Frank.
A new young man.
He's done sterling work.’
‘Let me guess.’
Foley's voice was soft and mild, but not particularly friendly.
‘Edward Carrington.
I have been warned.’
Over the next few days, as the rush to load the Broompark became more frantic, there was little time for anything except work.
Lord Suffolk served his purpose as a liaison between the French scientists and government officials who were going to Britain to carry on the war, and he was good at smoothing difficulties with pantechnicons of furniture and the occasional arrival of a weeping mistress, or in one case two.
In some way he appeared to hearten the French, many of whom were disoriented and depressed by the appalling events, by his insouciance.
He took to drinking almost constantly from a champagne bottle in his hand, while his two girls — one fair, one dark — gave the proceedings a weirdly festive air.
Foley, on the other hand, laboured with officialdom, consigning space to microscopes and industrial diamonds, helped tirelessly by his cipher  clerk, Margaret Reid.
Edward was delegated to meeting new arrivals, screening them for importance to prevent the Broompark sinking under her weight of refugees, and commandeering essential supplies.
At 11 p.m. on the night of June 18, when Edward was sitting bog-eyed with weariness in the small metal box that served him as a cabin, Foley sought him out.
His round face was grey with tiredness.
‘I know why you're here,’ he said.
‘You probably imagine that I don't.
You young men are all the same, at heart.
Gullible.
Take my advice, Edward.
Don't trust anybody too far.
Do what you're told, but think about it.
They're usually using you.’
Edward had no reply.
The possibilities were endless.
He was being pumped, or he was being warned.
Those were just two of them.
Foley said: ‘Well done.
Don't trust me, either.
Don't be drawn.
You're interested in the Swedish angle, aren't you?
The Scandinavian connection.
Good.
I think you could be useful.
We'll talk about it later.’
Still Carrington could think of nothing sensible to say.
He was aware of the clattering of shipboard work, the chatter and clang of steam cranes.
They had been working night and day since his arrival in Bordeaux.
‘The Broompark sails tomorrow morning,’ said Frank Foley.
‘France will go under in the next few days.
I'd ask you to stay with me but we might not survive together.
I'll talk to you in London.’
Carrington was shaken.
‘You're not coming?
Why?’
‘It's what I'm paid for.
Curiosity.
To see what's what.
There's no one left in France, you know.
Not at present.
We'll have to build from scratch.
A network.’
Carrington picked his words.
‘And is there one in Scandinavia?
Is there actually a Swedish connection?’
Foley said nothing for a good few seconds.
Then, suddenly, he yawned.
He covered his mouth with his hand, and seemed to swell with the oxygen he drew in.
When he had finished, he said: ‘Edward, does the name Carruthers mean anything to you?
I have another one: Hannele.’
Edward flinched, then reddened.
Even after eight months the  nerve was there.
Foley turned, and dragged the white steel door open.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘We have something growing there.
We'll talk again in London.
Edward?’
‘Yes, sir?’
‘We have hope.’
EIGHT
From Desmond Morton's point of view, Edward struck gold the first time he had a proper conversation with Frank Foley.
It happened a month after the Broompark had rolled and wheezed her way out of Bordeaux to face the U-boats and the bombers, and it happened in a Soho pub.
Edward's trouble was that the tell-tales he was looking for, the subtle marks of treachery, were the main — and open — subject of the conversation.
If Foley were a traitor, he did not care who knew it, it would seem.
He also had a rank contempt for Desmond Morton.
Edward turned up late for their rendezvous, and found Foley standing at the bar with a much younger man who had a long, intelligent face and a quiet manner, whom he introduced as Harold Philby, known as Kim.
‘He's with the opposition,’ he said, jocularly.
‘Section D. I'm afraid ‘C’ wouldn't touch him with a bargepole.
Cambridge.
He's just off, though.’
Indeed, Philby was at the bottom of a pint of mild.
He shook hands with Edward, tapped his pipe out at the bar, nodded, and left.
When the door had closed behind him, Foley said: ‘Funny lad.
He doesn't speak a lot because he stutters.
Useful.
You can understand ‘C’ 's point in a way.
There's a group of them, all intellectuals, all educated to infinity and beyond in poetry and stuff.
Look at Harold.
Kim, I ask you, because he always wanted to be a spy!
It's a dream.
I doubt if any of them's ever seen real blood, except maybe in the Carlton Club.
What will you take?’
‘Pale ale, please.
They certainly look a different breed, the ones I've met.
I can't imagine him being taken for anything other than an Englishman abroad.
Why the Carlton Club?
Blood?
Is that some sort of joke?’
Foley's eyes darkened, momentarily.
‘No.
There's a cellar there, I'm afraid.
Some of these young men ask questions.
They don't actually get abroad a lot, in theory, although they don't always stick too closely to their brief.
Which of us does?’
‘Questions?
Do you mean —’
Foley interrupted him.
‘I mean they have a job.
Results to get, like everybody else.
I'm involved in some of their work, now.
Hence the meeting.
They've pitched me into Section Five.’
‘Am I allowed to ask?
Or should I congratulate?’
‘Margaret thinks it's demotion.
You remember Margaret?
Of course you do.
She thinks we should be abroad, where the real work is.
Katherine's delighted.
Wife.’
He paused, drank beer, sighed.
‘On balance, I agree with Margaret, although Section Five's important.
Ferried looking for the foreign boys wherever they turn up.
Counter-espionage.
My feeling is the job should be strengthened in the field, especially Norway and Sweden, which is why I want to talk to you.
If there is anything in this Duke of Windsor nonsense, the peace at any price brigade, that's where it'll come from, you can count on it.’
Edward almost coughed into his beer.
It sounded like an echo of words he had heard before.
Foley had a light of humour in his eyes.
‘I thought I'd strike a chord,’ he said.
‘Just what do you know about all this?’
Edward thought fast, achieving little.
He swallowed a mouthful of pale ale.
‘Nothing, I suppose.
Not really.
They never let the right hand know what the left one's doing, do they?
I was asked to keep an eye on some people, is all.
People they suspect of being…over-zealous in the search for peace.’
‘Including me,’ said Foley.
‘Which means, in one guess, Desmond Morton.
The trouble with this service in a nutshell.
Anyone can stick an oar in.
It's a mare's nest.
Anyway, the man's a fool.’
Despite the calmness of his voice, Carrington realized he was angry.
The avuncular face was set.
So bang went any chance he might have had of hearing things he did not know.
In that, though, he was wrong.
‘What infuriates me.’ said Foley, ‘is the cynicism of these people.
The assumptions that they make.
I'm certain there are people in Germany who want peace.
Powerful people.
I'm certain that there are people here who feel the same.
The question is, is it treachery, or is it sense?
The nub of the matter, the heart of it, is what the  terms are.
Good God, Edward, if you had the power to end this war, wouldn't you seize it with both hands?
Wouldn't you?’
Impossible question.
He did not know.
But it did not take him long to sort out what was wrong with it.
It was not a question for the likes of him, or even Foley.
It was a question for the top, for the Cabinet, for Winston Churchill.
Realizing that Foley was studying his face, he flushed.
He sipped more beer.
‘I'm sorry, son,’ said Foley.
‘I must sound soft.
I'm not.
When Hitler offered peace after Norway I agreed with Churchill, it was meaningless.
But Hitler is a hated man in Germany, I know that first-hand.
There are movements afoot at every hour of every day, there are men and women risking their lives.
Every time something stirs, every time someone makes a contact, we should cherish it, examine it, and hope.
Not crush it underfoot and talk of treachery.
I'm sorry, I've put you in an invidious position.
If you're being run by Morton, he'll want to hear all this.
It won't do any harm, but I'd rather not give him food for thought, because I consider him an idiot and I don't think he's capable of interpreting it correctly.
The service is in ferment at the moment, the knives are out.
I'd rather carry on in my own sweet way, and I'd rather be in Stockholm.
Failing that, I'd like to see you there.’
The directness of the man, the quiet honesty of his face and manner, confused Edward more by the moment.
He thought the unthinkable, it seemed, and spoke the unspeakable.
‘But why?
What have I done that…
No, first, aren't you worried by what Morton might do?
That I might report all this to him?’
‘No.
There are still wiser men.
And more powerful, thank God.
Morton's an irritant, he has many of his master's vices without the virtues, but I can deal with that.
I have friends, too.
I was tipped off about you when you came to France, remember?
I'll fare all right.
As to the other, I heard about you from the other side as well, didn't I?
Carruthers, a name to conjure with!
I heard enough to make me think it worth my while to talk it over.
There is an organization, the Norwegians laid the bones of it even before Oslo fell.
It's well-advanced now, based in Stockholm, working into Germany.
Hannele, the other name, one of the brave.
I'd like to see you there.’
There was a long silence between them.
The pub was noisy, but neither of them noticed.
Edward said: ‘I'd better not mention it to Morton, then, had I ?
I'd like to get to Stockholm.
But will they let me?’
Foley was lighting a new pipe.
He indicated the tobacco pouch on the table with a finger.
Edward shook his head.
The short man blew the match out.
‘I think they will,’ he said.
‘I think you ought to tell Morton I've taken you into my confidence.
Tell him I've hinted that there are high Germans trying to make contact, and we need a conduit.
If he wants anybody to lead him to the so-called English plotters, it's the very best possible way to go about it.
In the meantime, I'll talk to ‘C’ and set you up from my end.
I won't mention Morton because he hates his guts, of course.
They all hate each other 's guts.
It's a peculiar way to carry on a war, isn't it?
If I didn't know the Germans were exactly as bad, I'd say it was a very British thing.
Ferried remarkably similar to the Germans in some ways.’
‘And have you taken me into your confidence?
Are there high Germans trying to get through?
Am I working for you, or am I working for Desmond Morton?
Will you trust me when I tell you anything?’
Foley's turnip head was wreathed in smoke and smiles.
‘I like you, son,’ he said.
‘But don't get silly, will you?
I'll trust everything you tell me on the evidence and on my instinct.
You'll have to do the same with me.
You can trust me in this, though.
I'm not a traitor, whatever any fool might tell you.
We are fighting a barbarian, and we must beat him.
Personally, I will refuse to be barbaric in the process.’
The smile had faded.
‘Otherwise, I really can't see the point, can you?’
Having rolled up Western Europe like a carpet, Hitler sued for peace.
To everyone's surprise his requirements were not punitive, not even the return of territories Germany had lost after Versailles.
As Erica remarked to Edward, he seemed, underneath the rhetoric, to ‘want to be friends’.
The rhetoric, however, was inevitably warlike.
The hour of Britain's total defeat was at hand, and Winston Churchill would soon abandon England to preside over the ruins from the safety of his Canadian dominion.
Although gossip was that Churchill had been tempted, given the mighty scale of Germany's achievements in so short a time, the iron returned to his soul and he steamrollered furiously through his doubting Cabinet.
It had been left to Halifax — surely not by accident — to broadcast a rejection on  the radio.
Hitler had talked of an offer ‘in the name of reason’, and Halifax threw it back at him as a ‘summons to capitulate to his will’.
Erica and Edward had their usual disagreement, and Edward announced that he was leaving next day on more unspecified scientific business.
To his surprise, Erica offered to sleep with him, to prove that they could argue without falling out.
To her surprise, he declined — and they laughed about it.
He had Hannele in mind and, he hoped, almost in his grasp.
The ‘scientific business’ was his flight to Sweden.
Getting there, despite his expectations, was extraordinarily easy, and by leaving Britain, Carrington missed the Day of the Long Knives.
One of Churchill's reactions to the fall of France was to put into effect his long-brewed plan to vent his anger and frustration on his secret services.
The day Halifax spurned Hitler, the War Cabinet approved a memorandum setting up the Special Operations Executive.
Large chunks of M16 fell to it, and the infighting between departments grew distinctly worse.
The idea was classically Churchillian, to ‘set Europe ablaze’, to send saboteurs and subversives to create a reign of terror and make the lives of the occupiers ‘an intense torment’.
The torment, to begin with, was all at home.
Somebody had to run the show, and everybody wanted to.
The War Office and the Foreign Office lost, and the Ministry of Economic Warfare — run by Dr Hugh Dalton, a non-military man and a socialist — triumphed.
Carrington was well out of it.
He flew from Leuchars on a fast, unarmed courier flight, and he flew as a Swedish businessman called Lansen.
The sensation of sharing airspace with a murderous enemy — although in fact he saw no other aircraft — was disconcerting, as was the coming to terms with the idea that not all the world was locked in war, but only parts of it.
In Stockholm he was met by two men, and driven to a quiet house in the suburbs.
His companions took extreme precautions against being followed: the place, they said, was alive with Abwehr and Gestapo men.
To get four miles they covered twenty, and they took nearly two hours.
Edward was sweating lightly when they walked into the house.
Perhaps he had hoped that Hannele would be there, miraculously.
She was not.
For the first five days she was not mentioned, and Edward was treated with polite caution.
First, they wanted to see if he could pass himself off as Swedish, or if there was anybody working for the enemy who might have an inkling of his presence  or identity.
When they were sure of him they eased up, and the introductions became more frequent and less formal.
One man he had assumed was Swedish revealed himself as Jim Taylor, despite his name a Welshman, and he was taken to meet the SIS chief of station Cyril Cheshire at the passport offices in Birger Jarlsgatan.
His most important contact was Brynulf Ottar, the head of the Norwegian secret operation in Stockholm, whose HQ was at Skeppargatan.
Although Stockholm was the base for spies of every warring nation, the Scandinavian connection that Foley had talked about was run by Norway, whose government-in-exile had set up in the neutral city.
Brynulf Ottar told him the organization, known as XU, involved a secret network based in Oslo, a courier line to Stockholm, and Swedes, Germans and Norwegians in Germany to provide the information from source.
Johanne Malling was a student at the Technische Hochschule in Dresden, near where her family had engineering interests.
The Norwegian military attache, Alfred Roscher Lund, had graduated there in ‘37, and considered it the perfect cover and a fine recruiting ground.
Froken Malling worked with a new entrant, a Norwegian who had taken advantage of the Germans’ relatively relaxed attitude to the Scandinavian students there.
He was only twenty, although, Ottar said drily, he was a Nordic giant, more than six feet tall, blonde and handsome.
His bent was technical, while Malling concentrated on the politics.
Edward Carrington, hating himself for it, acknowledged the expected stab of pain.
There was no doubt in his mind what collaboration would mean to Hannele.
He acknowledged, too, that it was crazy.
It had been eleven months since they had parted.
There had, of course, been no letters.
He pulled his attention back to Brynulf Ottar, who was explaining the way information was telephoned from Dresden, via Berlin, to Stockholm through newspaper and business intermediaries.
It was done in code, naturally, and sometimes people had to meet, for handovers or to relay difficult intelligence.
Johanne Malling would be coming soon, he said, with something enormous, dangerous, and vital.
Would he, Edward Carrington, be prepared to meet her?
The bland Norwegian dropped it in so casually that Carrington made something of an idiot of himself.
He jumped, then had to cough to cover the noise that rasped unbidden from his throat.
Ottar waited patiently, enjoying the reaction he had caused.
‘If you agree,’ he said, ‘the meeting will take place in Stettin, on a ship.
I know Frank Foley wished you to help us extend our network here, but this is a task I think potentially more important.
You will not need to go into Germany, it is largely a question of detailed talk with Froken Malling.
She has information which must go back to England urgently, to be considered in depth.
There is a question of a leader having second thoughts about the war.
A very important man indeed.
The Deputy Fuhrer, in fact.
Rudolf Hess.
Well?’
‘What can I say?
Beyond good God?
This is extraordinary.’
‘I meant,’ smiled Brynulf Ottar, ‘do you agree?
To go?’
‘Of course!
Of course!
I'm sorry.’
‘Good.
On Tuesday, then.
In two days time.
Good.’
‘I'd like a drink,’ said Edward Carrington.
NINE
The freighter was Swedish, and the Baltic Sea, to all intents and purposes, was Germany's.
Carrington had been advised to keep himself as private as was possible, as one never knew who might be paid by the Abwehr, and neutrality as a concept was very fraught.
He was a Swede, in iron ore, and he kept himself firmly to himself.
The captain, who had done this sort of thing before, did not discuss it and discouraged any of his officers and men from doing so.
Carrington watched the sea for the first two hours, enchanted by the Scandinavian night, then went to sleep.
When he awoke, he would be in a German harbour.
When they did arrive in Stettin, they were immediately boarded by port officials, carrying guns and deep suspicions of supernumeraries.
Lansen's papers were in order, however, and his story watertight.
Neutrality again.
Germany needed high-grade iron ore to feed the Ruhr, and Lansen was an important link in the chain providing it.
He was left alone to think and wait.
Hannele arrived two hours later.
Carrington was lying on his bunk, fully clothed, and he told himself afterwards that he had known she was outside his cabin before she touched the handle.
Certainly he heard the knob turn, which considering the battering of cranes and donkey-engines as the ship was emptied of her cargo was phenomenon enough.
As the door opened he swung his feet from off the bunk and stood.
Hannele closed the door behind her and pressed her back against it.
Her eyes were large and bright, her breath uneven.
‘Edward.
I am so pleased to see you.’
They moved forward slowly, as if both terrified.
Edward was hollow with love and fear, shaking at how fierce and fresh all the sensations were.
Before they even touched he knew it had been wrong to come, he knew he had reopened a wound that would never heal and could never be soothed by consummation, unless the war should end soon and they should both survive.
Hopeless  even then.
He watched her eyes fire with the old, familiar irony, and it hurt him like a blade.
‘Carruthers.
Won't you hold me?
I've thought of you so often.’
Silently they hugged each other, with Edward trembling for both of them.
Hannele was thin beneath her sober business dress, thinner than he remembered her.
He looked into her eyes and they were different now.
The mockery was gone, and the skin around them was lined.
Her face had lost its flesh, she had aged.
Her hair was scraped back in a bun.
‘Don't mind,’ she said.
‘I will recover, when the war ends.
This is not a happy country, Edward.
I prefer to look like a hungry governess, it keeps me safe from questioners.
Today I am a shipping secretary, a clerk.
Tomorrow I will be a student again, but no better fed.
How's the food in England holding out?
How is England?’
‘Pretty much the same.
Ferried fighting in the air but we don't see it in the cities.
They bomb the airfields and we shoot down their bombers, lots of young men die but we expect to win.
You know England.
No one 's too hungry and we think ferried charmed, the holocaust won't come.’
‘England is charmed,’ said Hannele, ‘but the holocaust will come.
Germany is dying, but she will take the rest of the world with her when she goes.’
‘Dying?
What, starving?’
She shook her head.
‘Not starving, yet.
Although the food is deteriorating, and only the powerful eat well.
No, dying morally, dying inside.
The land is just as beautiful, and their heroes strut across the world, but only the stupid still feel proud.
Too many people know what is happening to the Polish and the Slavs and to the Jews and the dissenters.
It is only that I live in Dresden and that I fight like this that keeps me sane.
I have an apartment that overlooks the Elbe.
It is a lovely city, the war seems very far away, as if it can never reach me there.’
They had unwound their arms from round each other, and they sat on either side of the small table, held by brackets to the bulkhead.
Each thought of home.
Edward said: ‘My flat's still just as peaceful.
It's hard to imagine war coming there, either.
Still no gas, still no bombs, we were so panic-stricken in those early days.
Oh, there is one thing less peaceful.
I have a sharer now.
In fact, my landlady, she owns the  place.
She's loud, like an American.
I think she sees herself as American, actually.
She acts like one.’
‘And do you sleep with her?’
There was a faint light of amusement in her eyes, but faint, as if she already regretted asking him.
‘I'm stupid,’ she said, quickly.
‘We should not talk of things like that.
We both have to do things that are necessary.
I would like to sleep with you, Edward.
I am a changed woman, I'm afraid.
I'm very staid.
I would like to sleep with you, however.
Also, to make love.’
He moved his lips.
‘Fourth time lucky.
It will be sad if we never make it.
Why not here?
Now?’
‘No.
Perhaps one day in Sweden, students have holidays, you know!
Perhaps I'll break, go back for good.
No.
I will not break.
Edward, enough of us, we are being irresponsible.
I must get to the station, go south again.
I must tell you about Hess.
There is a chance that he will dare to leave.
To break with Hitler, defect.
It would be the greatest thing.’
‘But why?’ said Edward Carrington.
He was aware that it was trite, but the alternative was to express the scepticism that had grown inside him in the intervening days.
‘Hannele, I must be frank.
It sounds incredible.’
For the first time, her eyes sparkled.
She nodded vigorously.
‘Yes, doesn't it?
The unlikeliest of men!
He's been with Hitler since the street-fighting days, he was in the famous putsch in twenty-three.
But we believe him, Edward.
We believe the worm has turned.’
She sobered.
‘We believe there are others with him, too, shadows.
but we don't know who they are.
If he does it, Edward, it could mean collapse.
It seemed beyond belief to start with, we approached it as a trick, a lure, but now ferried confident.
It would be an appalling blow to Hitler, a crippling blow.’
‘OK,’ said Edward.
It was a stand-off, he was picking up the Yankee jargon.
‘Hannele, I don't know much about these men, I must admit.
What I do know's probably distorted, as you told me once in London.
But there are people at my end who will take a great deal of persuading, you understand that?
Rudolf Hess, to me and most of us, is a strutting Nazi, the one with the eyebrows.
Wasn't he behind the crackdown on the Jews?’
She nodded.
‘In a way.
He helped to frame the Nuremberg Laws.
But in Germany, everything is complicated.
His mentor, the man who taught him at university, is married to a woman who is half-Jewish, and their son has worked for Hess for years as his adviser.
Hess has protected them, although in theory they are people he should not even know.
In fact the father, Karl Haushofer, is godfather to his little boy.
The other godfather is Hitler.
Everything is complicated.’
Hannele reached across the table and touched his hand.
‘They are funny men these people, listen.
Hess did not have a normal christening for Wolf Rudiger, the Fuhrer does not think them good enough for Nazis.
Instead the leaders of every Gau in Germany sent a sample of the soil from their district to go underneath the cradle at the naming ceremony.
Joseph Goebbels is Gauleiter of Berlin.
He sent a piece of dogshit.
A touching gesture, don't you think?
He said it was the soil of his city.
The Nazi sense of humour.’
‘Did anybody laugh?’
‘It is not on record, but I doubt it.
Joseph Goebbels is the most hated man they have, other than their most beloved leader.
But they all hate each other, this is not understood in England.
Goering and Ribbentrop keep bodyguards to protect them from each other.
Goering almost destroyed Goebbels in a scandal over his mistress, who was a film star.
Himmler is a nonentity who thinks he should be Fuhrer in Hitler's place and Himmler's deputy is Reinhard Heydrich who is brilliant and daring and handsome and will kill Himmler first and then the Fuhrer, if they don't pre-empt him.
Compared with most of them, Hess is a decent man, a sane man.
We have seen documents, secret orders under his signature trying to protect the Jews from Stormtroop lunatics.
After Kristallnacht he forbade further attacks on Jews and tried to have the worst ringleaders punished by the courts.
Since then, of course, things have got much worse.
As I said, we think that even some of the less sane of the lunatics would like to leave the madhouse if they could.
Or at least have the superintendent put into a straitjacket.’
She sighed.
Her face was sad.
‘You look dubious.
You are right to be so.
It would not be easy, nothing any more is easy.
But it is worth a try, believe me.
We do truly believe that Hess wants to go to Britain.
If he could get there, surely there would be a hope?’
A shaft of sunlight blazed through the cabin scuttle, then as quickly faded.
Edward said: ‘Is there a plan, or do we have to work one up?
Assuming that our government agrees, how would Hess hope to get to us?
How big is your group?
Dresden is a long way from Stettin.
You were not chosen for this trip just to see an old flame, were you?’
‘No.
I was chosen because it was safest for me.
I'm a neutral student and I'm allowed to travel without too much explanation.
Also, my uncle owns this ship!
You know some of the network, the names have not changed.
My contact in Berlin is Suzanne, and her family connections cross with mine in Sweden.
There is a plan, the start of one, but of course we need co-operation, guidance.
That is also why I was chosen.
You know and trust me.
The core of it, in Germany, is Rudolf Hess's adviser, Albrecht Haushofer.
He has friends in Britain, important people, aristocrats.’
There were alarm bells ringing in Edward's skull.
Aristocrats.
He had been conditioned.
‘Who?
Which aristocrats?’
‘Well, one in particular.
A young man, an aviator, called the Duke of Hamilton.
Hess met him in 1936, at the Olympics in Berlin, but he was called Lord Clydesdale then, your system is confusing.
Albrecht Haushofer became a friend, a very close friend, they corresponded up until the war, Haushofer visited him in Scotland.’
‘So what is the hope?
To renew the connection?’
Precisely, Hannele agreed.
Haushofer wished to contact Hamilton and have him prepare the ground among the company he kept.
Hess would probably fly as well— there seemed no other way so well-known a figure could leave the country, and he was a skilled aviator — and Albrecht Haushofer understood that the Duke was now a high-ranking officer in the RAF, which would surely aid the details of the flight and landing?
When she had finished, they sat in silence.
Outside the cranes clattered on.
‘There is a fear,’ Edward said, ‘that some so-called noble people wish to sell Britain's interests out.
There is a fear of treachery.
Why this duke?
Why not approach us through the proper services, through an agent, me for instance?
Would Hess not fly under our aegis?
I only ask, it is a confusion.
Why this duke?’
‘In the first instance, Haushofer and Hess raised the idea.
Logical, surely?
Now I am approaching you, Edward.
It will not be done  behind anybody's back, if you should veto it it falls, quite clearly I mean your masters, naturally.
But we have fear, also.
There is a fear here that some of your people don't want peace, at any price.
And how do we know whom the secret channels would enlist?
Herr Hess might be arrested out of hand and shot.
Or blown out of the sky.
We have our fears to match yours.’
Carrington did not believe that such a thing could happen, or would.
But Hannele lived in Germany.
He did not contradict.
‘In any case,’ she said, ‘this Hamilton is no traitor.
He is a friend of Winston Churchill, that is another reason.
He is a friend of Winston Churchill and also of your royal family.’
‘The Duke of Windsor?’ asked Edward, sharply.
‘No, the King.’
Hannele was surprised.
‘What is wrong, Edward?
Surely the King is not a traitor?
Nor Mr Churchill?’
Slowly, something was igniting in Edward.
Excitement.
He stared at Hannele's pale, drawn, serious face and he knew that she was genuine and convinced.
She was offering him the deputy to Hitler, through an intermediary who was a friend of George Vl and Winston Churchill.
Slowly, a grin spread across his face.
She responded, her facial muscles relaxing, the furrows in her brow fading visibly.
‘Oh, Carruthers!
Do you understand at last?
Do you understand what we might have here?
This could mean peace.’
They kissed each other then, leaning across the cold steel table, but only gently.
They were very chaste, their lives felt very fragile at the moment.
Not long afterwards she left the cabin, and Edward returned to his bunk to wait for the ship to sail, to take him back to Sweden.
After that, London, as quickly as was possible.
Hitler's deputy was willing to defea…
TEN
If Edward Carrington had assumed the process would be quick or easy, he was quickly disabused.
He returned to London to find the chaos in the secret services growing, with talk among the younger and more foolish elements of resignation, betrayal, even suicide.
His instinct was to take the news to Foley, but Foley, for the moment, had disappeared.
As Menzies, Vivian and Dansey were locked in bitter combat with one another and the SOE, he inevitably fell prey to the predatory curiosity of Desmond Morton.
But even Morton, installed now in luxury at the Ministry of Economic Warfare, refused to show much interest.
Great things were afoot, he hinted, and the secret services had bigger fish to fry than propaganda nonsenses dreamed up by Joseph Goebbels.
In view of the weight he had given to the idea of an aristocratic plot, Edward found his flat reaction to the name of Hamilton quite puzzling.
A week later, of his own volition, he provided him with proof that Albrecht Haushofer had written to Douglas, Duke of Hamilton, before the war— and that Hamilton had shown the letter to Winston Churchill at his Morpeth Mansions flat.
Morton had become immediately more thoughtful, and had ordered him to keep the matter firmly underneath his hat.
Fearing that he might end up excluded, whatever steps were taken next, Edward managed next morning to get a memo through to ‘C''s personal assistant, with a promise that it would end up on his desk.
It was a long game, and despite his dogged determination not to be shuffled to the sidelines Edward, naturally, was not privy to all the machinations.
There were months of planning, false trails were laid, tests and traps set up and sprung.
Albrecht Haushofer was contacted, certainly, and communication lines were established in Portugal and Switzerland.
In November, Edward was given sight of a letter from Haushofer — he signed it ‘A’— written to the duke.
‘My dear Douglo,’ it began, and referred, significantly in Morton's view, to ‘your friends in high places’.
Hamilton, presumably to fool the Abwehr if they had wind of it, was told not to reply to the suggestion  of a meeting outside England until the day after Hess had flown.
The endgame started suddenly, with final confirmation of the flight coming from a source that Carrington, at least, found totally unexpected.
The Minister of Labour, Ernest Bevin, received a message which he had decoded for him in a Leeds hotel by Albert Heal, a trade union leader who had run a pre-war escape route for German socialists that still had watertight communications.
Bevin rang London from the hotel room, and Edward was rung at home half an hour later.
It was late on Friday evening — Friday, May 9, 1941 — and he was ordered to present himself at the office at ten past seven in the morning.
An hour after that, provided with rail tickets and a reservation, money, petrol coupons and instructions, he was at Euston.
When he arrived at Glasgow, there would be a car to pick him up, with a driver who knew the Scottish lowlands ‘like the inside of his sporran’.
The train pulled out to the minute.
During the interminable journey Edward turned what he knew of the affair over and over in his mind, and wondered if it could possibly, really, happen.
Throughout the months since he had brought the word from Hannele, he had sometimes had the impression that the British viewed the escapade with distaste, embarrassment, that sat ill with its potential.
On the very narrowest level, it seemed to him, Rudolf Hess must be a gold mine of strategic information, although the experts at SIS had said his position in the Nazi hierarchy was not perhaps all it had been or appeared to be.
He was Number Two in name, they said, but Number Three in power, and possibly fading.
Hermann Goering was the man behind the throne, and Hess had become increasingly of the margins.
On the other hand, the selfsame experts named Hess as one of Hitler's very few close friends, a loyal sidekick from the early days.
That struck Edward as suspect, as if they wanted to have their cake and eat it too.
If they got their hands on Hess he was important — if they failed, he was a nobody.
It was the attitude to peace which nagged him most, however.
The last few weeks, indeed the last year, had been appalling for Britain, and as Churchill said — ad nauseam, in Erica's view — Britain stood alone.
West Europe had gone, North Africa and the Balkans.
London and other cities were slowly dying underneath the Blitz, and intelligence on U-boat building (top secret) was terrifying to those who knew.
But despite the Hess initiative, despite feelers via  Switzerland and Spain as well as Scandinavia, even to talk of seeking peace was treated in secret service circles as defeatism, almost treachery.
M15 had reported the possibility of peace demonstrations in several major cities — and censored any hint of them by press and broadcasting — and almost all the Cabinet's home and office numbers were being tapped on Churchill's orders.
Erica, although knowing none of this, had grown more scathing, with her outsider's eye.
not less.
She had been appalled by Churchill's decision to shoot down German aircraft — marked with the red cross — picking up ditched fliers in the Channel, and she argued passionately that the saturation bombing of Britain's cities — bombing that Hitler had promised would never happen — had been forced on him by Churchill's repeated refusal to stop the air-raids on Berlin that had set the whole thing off.
‘But they were small,’ yelled Edward.
‘Germany's too far away, we've got to fly across the occupied territories.
Hitler killed fourteen thousand Londoners in fifty-seven days!’
‘Precisely!
Are you stupid?
Churchill knows he'll never win this war, but he can't give it up!
Resistance makes him great!
He's a V-sign and a fat cigar!
I truly don't believe if Hitler offered peace on any terms he would accept, he couldn't!
So he needs America, doesn't he?
He's had their arms, he's got their sympathy, but he needs more.
One day, God and FDR willing, America will join in with him.
And the more poor little Britain takes a battering, the more bombs that are called down on the wreck of London, the sooner it will be.
Truth!’
They had had many rows like this, and it was a measure of how far their relationship had come that Edward, while sometimes scorched by the depth of Erica's cynicism, fought his corner without descending into rage and came back for more.
They were lovers now, and he preferred today to dwell on that than on the knottier problems.
Even in peacetime the London-Scotland journey had been a long one, but in wartime it was dreadful.
This train, like every other one, was packed to the doors, and when it was left in sidings periodically to allow trains of troops, and ammunition and essential war materials to plod by, the hum of conversation hung about the carriages almost tangibly.
There was no chance to stretch one's legs, as even the first-class corridors were packed, while getting to the reeking lavatories was an assault course and using them much worse.
As often as he could, Edward dozed in and out of sleep  and thought of sex.
It was not perfect with Erica but they were honest with each other— as honest as two lovers can be — and Erica was forgiving.
Sometimes they made love brilliantly, and for the rest they acknowledged a pleasure in each other, and a deep need for the comfort that each brought, in bed or out of it.
And they argued.
It was late afternoon when the train pulled into Glasgow, and Carrington was grubby and exhausted.
The station concourse was a seething mass of people, civilian and uniformed, with a fair spattering of the drunks that had always been part of the city's landscape when he had ridden up from Galloway on weekends free from school.
Mussolini, he reflected, was reputed to have made the trains run on time if nothing else, and he wondered if it might not be a good idea to offer him a job controlling Britain's network.
He was just over three hours late to meet his guide, locating him at last on the edge of a ruck of Army drivers, forlorn in Air Force blue.
When Carrington spoke he jumped, and a powerful aura of beer hung round him.
But he was not drunk, he insisted, no sir!
He had stayed away from the whisky.
As long as he could drive, Edward did not really care about his condition, and the man, Corporal Miller from Dundee, was perfectly capable behind the wheel of the Austin Ten.
He did not try to talk, indeed he was a morose type even half-cut, and he manoeuvred out of Glasgow's traffic and onto the Edinburgh road with only the occasional muttered swearword.
The first stop was RAF Turnhouse, where Carrington would dine with Hamilton, he hoped, or at least have a good wash and sandwiches before their briefing session and the antics of the night began.
Miller dropped him at the main administration then drove on to the vehicle pool and, he said, some food and shut-eye.
He opened pale, hurt eyes when Carrington told him not to take more drink excepting tea, and swore it had not entered his head.
Hamilton was a tall man, who treated Edward briskly, and clearly as a social inferior.
Luckily he was engaged on operational matters when his ‘guest’ arrived, and turned him over temporarily to his intelligence officer, a flight lieutenant called Benson, who recognized the symptoms instantly and prescribed a double whisky.
When Edward suggested ablutions first he grinned engagingly and led him to the bar.
‘A whisky'll take thirty seconds, man.
Then come to my quarters  and leap into a bath.
Then more whisky, then we'll eat.’
It sounded, put like that, like a damned fine plan.
Later-several whiskies later — Hamilton did emerge, and they went into a private office to talk.
He still treated Edward coolly, stating with conviction that he had his orders direct from London and saw no need to go over them in detail, and no possibility that he would modify them on the say-so of a junior officer he did not know.
He was expecting the ‘target’ to enter his ‘field of jurisdiction’sometime late that evening, and his instructions had gone out.
The plane would certainly not be shot down, and as he had not alerted the Observer Corps, there was a good chance that it would get close to its destination — Dungavel, his family home — before being spotted.
After that, assuming Hess survived whatever form his landing took, he would no doubt be apprehended on the ground in the normal manner of crashed enemy aircrew: there were plenty of Army units in the area.
Feeling slightly at a loss, Edward said: ‘But how do you see your part after that?’
And noting the widening of the haughty eyes, amended: ‘I mean of course, sir, what are your orders?’
Benson was smirking slightly.
Edward felt like a colonial or a schoolboy, and it irked.
Wing Commander the Duke of Hamilton replied: ‘My instructions are to let it run its course as if I know nothing at all about it.
That is rather obvious, I should have thought.
Either Hess will name me — which God forbid he should be stupid enough to do — or I will be contacted in the normal run of things.
I do, after all, control this sector.
Either way, he will be locked up and guarded, and in the fullness of time I will be conveyed to speak to him.
Your instructions, as I understand them, are to sweep up all the pieces, tie the loose ends, make sure nobody goes dancing about the countryside shouting that Rudolf Hess has landed.
Correct me if I'm wrong.’
In the officers' mess afterwards, Benson laughed at what he said had been Edward's expression in the last moments of the interview —‘pained, old boy, quite pained.
It's clear that you've never been in the services.’
‘Or gone to a public school,’ Edward rejoined.
‘God, Benson, how do you put up with it?’
‘Oh, he's a good man underneath it,’ said Benson.
‘In fact I think it–s you that's got on top of him.
Or this Hess lark in general.
He's being ruled from London, and he's not used to that.
He moves with  Royalty, you know, his ma-in-law's chief lady of the chamber or what-have-you to the Queen.
To be quite frank, this cloak and dagger stuff is beneath him, and he feels it keenly.
You're just the whipping boy.
Listen, don't mind the Wingco anyway, have another drink.
I'll watch your back at this end, you can count on me.’
It was getting towards ten o'clock, and they had switched to beer some time ago, to keep their brains clear.
According to Benson it would be getting dark soon after ten, so Hess would have to show up soon.
He had keyed up all the radar stations and they would be alerted the moment anything significant was plotted.
Then they could follow Hess by phone, and Carrington could head off immediately to the spot where he'd ‘kissed the deck’ to make sure some Home Guard maniac didn't put a bullet in him.
Carrington remembered Miller.
‘Talking of maniacs, my driver,’ he said.
‘He was tiddly when he picked me up.
I'd better check him.’
‘I'll send a man.
You're worrying too much.
I chose Miller for you, he could drink a distillery dry and chase it with a brewhouse.
This is Scotland.
Have another drink.
It's Saturday night.’
The first news came shortly after ten o'clock, and it was followed up, annoyingly, by a report from a Royal Observer Corps post on the coast near Berwick.
Carrington and Benson had joined the Wingco in the control room when they'd received the radar tip-off, and heard him cursing under his breath.
The ROC had identified the interloper as an ME 110, which was more or less unheard of this far north because of its range.
Indeed, Hamilton suggested crisply that they had got it wrong and left it at that.
When he came off the line he smiled his first genuine smile in Edward's presence.
‘If anybody dares to wonder why I'm not scrambling, there's my answer,’ he said.
‘Carrington, I must admit I never much believed in any of this malarkey, but it looks as if I've been proved wrong.
We've got a bloody German in our air space and ferried meant to welcome him.
I think the show's about to start.’
For Edward Carrington, over the next hour, ‘the show’ degenerated rapidly into farce.
The next reported sighting was from RAF Ayr, then the ME 110 was tracked intermittently until overshooting Scotland altogether and flying out to sea.
It returned, ‘wove about  like a drunken hoorie’ in Benson's words, and disappeared from radar south of Glasgow.
A couple of judicious phone calls, and they had a more or less exact location: Eaglesham.
At twelve miles from Dungavel, the pilot had not done too well.
Edward was kitted up and ready to go, and Benson went with him to the car, which was ticking over outside the control tower.
Miller jerked himself into some sort of alert state as they approached, smiling glassily.
‘Miller,’ said Benson, warningly.
‘If you're pissed, man, I'll have your balls for breakfast.’
‘Never in this world, sir,’ slurred Miller.
‘Just tell me where the gennleman wants to go.’
The reek off him was now of whisky.
The night, when Edward relaxed into it, was really quite amusing.
Miller had two uncanny knacks — one of missing other vehicles, or walls, or signposts, by inches, and the second of missing their destinations and the action by a mile.
By the time they reached the Mearns Road near Eaglesham and trudged to the wreckage of the Messerschmitt, it had acquired a small crowd of sightseers, who were bantering with the Home Guards trying to keep it safe from looting.
Carrington was directed to a nearby farmhouse where ‘a tall, dark German airman had been arrested at the sharp end of a pitchfork’ to find only another crowd of excited neighbours and a labourer called Davie Maclean who was getting fed up with the whole affair.
Carrington managed to get him to one side long enough to ask him what the airman had said.
‘Not a lot,’ replied the Scot.
‘He'd hurt his back a bit, and couldnae walk so well.
He took a glass of water till the Home Guard barged in and waved a muckle pistol in his face.
He said he was called Horn and he'd popped across to see the Duke of Hamilton or somesuch.
His English wasnae good, I'm thinking, he didnae seem to understand a word I said.’
As Edward could hardly understand a word the man said either, that did not surprise him.
Nor did the false name Hess had given.
With Home Guard revolvers in the question, it would be a foolish man indeed who claimed to be a Nazi warlord.
‘Look,’ he said.
‘Well done with the pitchfork, but don't talk to the neighbours too much about this, will you?
And especially not  the newspapers if they start nosing.
From what I've seen of it, this is a perfectly normal thing, the pilot probably got lost.’
‘I didnae use a pitchfork, that's just nonsense.
And he mentioned the Duke of Hamilton, he said he was a friend of his.’
The crush of people in the kitchen were beginning to take notice.
It was amazing, Edward thought.
Did they not have beds to go to?
He looked at his watch.
Well gone midnight.
And the plane had crashed at 11.10, or thereabouts.
Ah, what the hell?
The gabblings of a Scots farm labourer would hardly matter.
‘Unlikely, isn't it?’ he said.
‘He must have read his name in the German papers, unless he's crackers.
Well, I must go, no rest for the wicked.
And remember-not too much talking.’
‘Walls have ears,’ piped up a white-haired old lady.
‘Careless talk costs lives!’
Fuck off, thought Carrington, sourly.
He stumbled into the blackness and made his way to the wreckage, where Miller was meant to have found out the location of the Home Guard HQ.
He found him chatting with two soldiers, and sharing their bottle of whisky.
For a moment, he was furious.
‘Miller!
You're on duty!
For God's sake, man!’
The two soldiers looked at him, uncrushed.
As one of them turned away Carrington heard him mutter something, undoubtedly obscene.
Miller winked.
‘Ach, sir,’ he said.
‘Unwind, why don't you?
Have a dram.’
He offered the bottle, and Carrington took it.
He was in a foreign country, and he was lost.
Miller looked surprised, the other two astonished.
‘Hey!’ said one.
‘You wouldnae drop it?’
Carrington raised the bottle, swallowed, and sneezed hard as the fumes went up his nose.
He drank again.
‘I bloody wouldnae,’ he said, in a perfect Dumfries accent.
‘Thanks.
Now — where the hell's the next stop?’
The next stop was a scout hut in a Glasgow suburb called Giffnock.
By now Miller had dropped all pretence at knowing where he was, and the night was exceedingly dark.
The headlights, in their blackout cowls, threw about as much light as a candle, and finally they went off the road.
They missed the ditch-lip by a foot, but Miller, required to reverse with delicacy and skill, got a fit of giggling.
So it was that Edward Carrington became the driver, and so it was they turned up at Florence Drive to learn that Major Barrie of the Home Guard  had gone with a lieutenant and two soldiers of the Eleventh Cameronians to escort the prisoner to Maryhill Barracks, on the other side of the city.
‘Have we identified him formally?’ asked Carrington, of the senior NCO left in charge.
The man looked strangely shifty.
He fiddled with some notes.
‘Well, sir, he says he's Hauptmann Alfred Horn.
But there's some here have their doubts.’
‘Ah,’ said Edward, casually.
‘Hauptmann Horn.
No mystery there, surely?
Who's the doubter?’
It was an ROC officer, who had already left.
The rumour was that he thought Horn resembled Rudolf Hess, and had rung Turnhouse to tell the Duke of Hamilton so.
No one else was sure if they agreed, but they did know it had taken him nearly half an hour to get through, and the conversation had been brief.
The phone exchanges were manned by civilians, and they were being more recalcitrant in responding as the night wore on.
Edward, given a private room, discovered the problem first hand: it took twenty minutes before he raised the operator, and another ten before he was talking to Flight Lieutenant Benson.
They shared notes.
‘No trouble on the ident here,’ said Benson.
‘The ROC man was Graham Donald and the Wingco sorted him out, he'll keep his mouth shut.
The Army HQ have also been on, trying to get us excited, but our Duty Pilot turned them off pretty effectively.
He told them we knew all about it, and said we'd be over in the morning.
He had their duty wallah fair squeaking, about this mystery man being the Duke's best pal or some stuff, but he got nowhere.
Just check that no one 's taken anything away from him, will you?
Oh, and if anyone has made inventories of his possessions, the Wingco says to pick them up.
The less that gets out the better, whatever happens.’
Miller was fast asleep in the passenger seat when Carrington got to the car, but he did not try to wake him.
The Home Guard had drawn him a map of how to get to Maryhill, and he was quite happy now.
The whole thing had a total air of unreality, it was so different from anything he had expected.
There was a war on, the military were in control, and all was chaos and confusion.
Probably Germany was in a similar state.
It was a pity one could not invade without giving advance warnings and following the rules: it would be a pushover.
At Maryhill Barracks, he met his first instance of bad temper of  the night.
The Home Guard officer, Major Barrie, was beside himself with pompous fury at the way he and his prisoner had been treated.
The gates had been shut and unguarded, he said, and he had been forced to blow his horn to attract attention.
Carrington made the mistake of allowing a small smile to show.
‘You may not realize it, young man,’ said Barrie, witheringly, ‘but in so doing I was breaking the law.
It is not permitted to sound a car horn after a certain hour.
I could be prosecuted.’
Lieutenant Whitby of the Cameronians confirmed that laxness had been rife, although he was more worried at the lack of respect meted to the prisoner than the damage done to his self-esteem.
The night duty officer, he said bluntly, had been drunk, and so had most of the NCOs detailed to the job.
‘Lieutenant Fulton was in bed!’ said Barrie.
‘I was not saluted, I was not given my proper form of address.
He conducted the matter in his pyjamas, and wanted to shove Hauptmann Horn in the guardhouse for the night.
There will be complaints about the matter, and my language will be most stiff.’
Carrington asked Whitby: ‘Where is he now?
Who is in charge of his possessions?’
‘I've got them, sir, they're in a bag.
I also have an inventory.’
He pulled a piece of paper from his tunic, and Carrington took it.
He glanced through it.
A Leica, letters, photographs, headache pills.
He would take care of all that later, when he'd got the bag.
‘And Hauptmann Horn?’
‘He's been driven to the hospital.
Major Greenhill's given him a draught.
He's not badly injured, just a few aches and abrasions.’
Major Barrie put in acidly: ‘He was driven over there by a second lieutenant called Bailey, if you have any jurisdiction in this matter.
Another disgrace.
He was wearing tartan trews and a glengarry.
The German was appalled.’
‘Oh?’
‘Aye,’ said Whitby, rather sheepishly.
‘He did complain at one point, actual fact.
He said a British officer wouldn't be treated like that in Germany.
Bit rich from what I've heard, but unfortunate.
That was when we first got here.
They'd locked him in a dirty little hole with a bed you wouldn't put a dog under.
Would you need to speak to him, sir?
In the hospital?’
But Carrington did not.
Herr Hess was safe, and sedated.
He collected the bag of possessions from Major Barrie's car and returned  to his own.
Judging that Miller had been snoring long enough, he shook him till he woke, and made him drive to Turnhouse.
As Miller related it to his mates later, they were both asleep when they drove through the gates.
It was nearly 5 a.m.
While the Duke and Lieutenant Benson went to Maryhill later in the morning to talk to Hess, Carrington soned out a few more ends.
He spoke to intelligence officers at several airbases and made sure that certain records were amended.
If the censor ever allowed any of the story to appear in the newspapers, there would be tales of hot pursuit and near interception — the hot pursuit line giving the l.O.s particular pleasure as the fighters mentioned were Defiants, which everybody knew could not have caught a cold.
He discovered that two Spitfires from 602 Squadron had actually met the ME110 head on — quite fortuitously — but it had been going so fast they had lost it by the time they'd turned around.
This had been good fortune, as they had not been aware that it was a ‘protected’ aircraft, but Carrington arranged in any case for the record of their flight to be blotted from the squadron's sortie book.
One of the pilots had been the ace Al Deere.
It would not look too good if a 110 flown by a man well over forty had outpaced and outmanoeuvred two Spitfires piloted by ‘the cream’.
He also followed up a rumour that another ME I 10 had crash-landed north of Glasgow the same night, although he did not get to the bottom of it, and assumed it was more evidence of the Scottish Saturday Night.
A trip to Eaglesham followed, where he met the Duke and Benson.
The field was swarming with sightseers from Glasgow, and the sweating guards from RAF Abbotsinch were having little luck preventing the looting of souvenir items from the scattered wreckage.
Carrington had already arranged to have it carted away as soon as possible by a salvage unit, and dumped at the old railway sidings at Carluke.
Back at Turnhouse, after a light lunch, Carrington and Benson sipped beer.
Both were pale and tired, although Edward was conscious of an almost manic elation.
Benson was quieter.
He had been excluded from the interviews with Hess on the German's insistence, but said Hamilton had confirmed that the Horn nonsense had been immediately dropped.
There had been something in the Wingco's demeanour that Benson did not like much, however, a quietness, an air of brooding.
‘You're M16, aren't you?’ he challenged Edward.
‘Perhaps you could ask him?’
As it happened, Hamilton called Carrington into his office shortly after half past five that afternoon, again excluding Benson.
He had been on the telephone for more than half an hour, he said, and had got precious little sense out of them.
He had been trying to talk to Sir Alexander Cadogan, the Cabinet's linkman with the secret services, but had been told that he was busy.
Too busy, Hamilton added drily, to be informed the Deputy Fuhrer of Germany had just dropped in.
He'd had a blazing row with a ‘Foreign Office Johnnie’, and was on the point of bursting when a third voice had come onto the line.
It had identified itself as Churchill's private secretary, Jock Colville, and said they realized he had some news to tell them.
‘Which means,’ said Hamilton, looking hard at Carrington, ‘that the line was tapped.
The Foreign Office line.
Is that possible?’
Carrington made a neutral gesture.
Which also means, he thought, that Churchill was expecting something.
Who knew about all this, who knew?
‘It would surprise me,’ he said.
‘But…
And what did he suggest?’
‘Mr Churchill was not in London last night,’ said Hamilton.
‘There was an enormous raid, some thousands of people killed.
Mr Churchill was luckily in Ditchley Park, in Oxfordshire, and I am to fly there now.
I shall take a Hurricane.’
‘Well at least you got through at last,’ said Carrington.
‘Is there a problem?’
The Duke tapped his desktop nervously.
‘Everybody thinks I knew Hess well,’ he said.
‘I told them several times I had met him only briefly.
The problem is this, perhaps you can advise me?
I'm not absolutely certain, you see, as to whether I should say it.
Whether it is what they want to hear.
Your masters.’
There was a short silence.
‘I'm sorry,’ said Edward Carrington, ‘but I'm rather at a loss.’
Hamilton picked up a pencil, and deliberately snapped it in two.
‘I'm horribly afraid,’ he said, ‘that the man in Maryhill Barracks, the man who flew from Germany last night, is not Rudolf Hess.’
‘Good God!’
‘Yes,’ replied the Duke.
‘Well I'm sorry to burden you with it, I  thought you might know more than…
It was foolish of me.
I'll think about it as I fly.’
He stood.
‘In the meantime, you'd better keep your mouth shut, hadn't you?’
He left Carrington standing in the office, dumbfounded.
ELEVEN
The fact that Winston Churchill knew that Rudolf Hess was coming was finally confirmed beyond doubt for Edward Carrington when he heard how Hamilton had been received.
Until then he had suspected that the whole bizarre affair might have been kept under wraps by Morton and his cronies in the secret services, to see how it turned out.
But when the duke — still in his flying gear — was ushered into the presence at Ditchley Park, he found Churchill in a playful mood.
Hamilton showed him the photographs he had taken from the German flier, and told the Prime Minister that they were of Rudolf Hess, who had crashed a fighter plane into a field in Scotland the night before.
Churchill, who liked to watch a film at night whenever possible, merely chuckled.
‘Hess or no Hess,’ he said, ‘I'm going to see the Marx Brothers.’
It was Frank Foley who told him this, in his small office in Broadway.
Edward had arrived by the overnight train and felt like death.
Since Hamilton had flown south two days before he had been mainly involved in fighting pressmen, and briefing intelligence officers on how to counter the rumours and counter-rumours that were sweeping Scotland.
The news was general now, although the chief censor, Admiral Thomson, was keeping all comment and speculation very firmly out of the newspapers.
German radio had announced on Monday night that Hess had disappeared by plane, and had either ‘jumped out or met with an accident’.
There had been, the broadcast added unexpectedly, a history of mental instability.
Only then had the BBC followed up the statement, saying baldly that the Deputy Fuhrer had parachuted into Scotland.
‘But is it Hess?’ asked Edward.
‘And if it is, what do we do now?’
Foley regarded him through clouds of aromatic smoke.
‘If it isn't Hess,’ he said.
‘Where is he?
If we try to make something of it, will he pop up like a maggot from an apple?
Do you remember, about three weeks ago, German radio announced that Hess wasn't going to go to Spain, when no one in the world had said he was?
Could we have been hoodwinked all the way?
Whatever, there's  something awful fishy going on.
I'd say offhand, they've dropped a monstrous spanner in our works.’
Edward nodded.
He was smoking some of Foley's black tobacco and it tasted terrible.
He wanted bed, sleep.
‘But who are they?
And what exactly were our works?
What was the plan?
Do you know?’
I have a rough idea.
It was to do with propaganda, obviously.
Suggesting that life under Hitler was so bloody that even his deputy wanted to get out.
But there was more.
There was a hope that we could persuade him to go back, ‘turn’ him, if you like.
That was to be my job, I'm on the Double X, you know.
And when we'd turned him, if I managed it, we were going to send him back.’
‘What, as a spy?
That's ridiculous!’
‘No, not as a spy, you idiot.’
Foley laughed.
‘Look, why don't you put that out?
You're making me feel sick.
You'll never be a pipe smoker.
No, not as a spy, it was more complicated than that.
Imagine if, for instance, we could get him standing up in public , get him photographed, on newsreel, all around the world, saying that we were fighting a just war, that Hitler was insane, that we had to win.
Imagine him appealing to America to come in quickly, fight the good fight with us, shoulder to shoulder.
Imagine if he told the Russians that Hitler was going to turn against them, soon.
Imagine that.’
‘Christ,’ breathed Carrington.
‘Is it true?’
Foley gave him a certain look.
‘It could hardly harm us if it was, could it?
But imagine, if after we'd persuaded him to say all that, we announced that he'd decided to go back.
Into Germany, by parachute if necessary, of his own free will, to plead with Hitler to give in, or to rally the German Volk against him.
What could Hitler do?’
Carrington's pipe was out.
He laid it on the desk.
‘Shoot him?
What else could he do?’
‘What, the man who sued for peace?
The man who risked his life and flew to Britain?
The eyes of the world would be on him, wouldn't they?
Difficult.’
‘Jesus.’
You swear too much, son.
But you can see why Churchill was devastated, can't you?
It was very brave of Hamilton to show his doubts, collossally.
In Ancient Rome they'd have chucked him to the lions.
Blame the bearer of bad tidings.
You can also understand  why everybody identified the photos Hamilton brought down as being Hess.
It had to be Hess, or everything collapsed.’
‘But the photos were of Hess,’ said Carrington.
‘The man who landed brought them with him.
Didn't they look at the real man?’
‘Just the opposite.
Churchill banned all photographs.
None are to be taken of the flier, under any circumstances.
At first they lived in hope, I think, they were willing Hamilton to be wrong, they needed it to be their man.
Then Deutschlandsender made their announcement yesterday that Hess had flown the coop and I think that clinched it for them.
It was Hess, it had to be, but even if it wasn't, they were safe.
The Nazis had lost him, and we had someone who would do.
They sent Hamilton back to Scotland with Ivone Kirkpatrick, one of our men working for the BBC who'd met Hess a couple of times in Berlin, when he was with the FO.
Unless this chap's got two heads they'll confirm it's Hess, I'll put my shirt on it.
Otherwise it's months of planning up the wall, and Mr Churchill crying in his brandy.
Strange animal, the human being.’
‘But what if the Nazis haven't lost him?
What if it's a trick?
Haven't they considered that as being possible?’
Foley lit a supplementary match.
He drew in smoke.
‘Hard to know,’ he said.
‘That would be the devil, wouldn't it?
Maybe they just can't bear to contemplate it, or perhaps they'll just be forced to wait.
You see, if they wanted to know the truth beyond all doubt, they'd have sent me up to Scotland, wouldn't they?
I knew the man, I know the questions that we've got to ask.
It might come to it.
In the meantime, I've cabled for an X-ray report on the fellow's chest.
That'll sort it out.
Hess was shot in the Great War, through the lung.
That'll sort it out.’
There was a question.
Edward marshalled it, through the fog of tiredness.
‘Peace,’ he said.
‘You didn't mention peace.
As part of the plan.
If it is the wrong man, what about the peace proposals?’
Foley's eyes held his, for seconds.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘Or even if it is the right.
Very astute of you to notice that.
They didn't mention peace.’
Over the next five days, events behind the scenes moved at breakneck speed, although with Admiral Thomson keeping the lid screwed down tight on the newspapers, radio and newsreels, the  British public had little to feed on except rumours, and snippets not to be trusted but disturbingly suggestive — gleaned from German broadcasts.
Berlin's line was now that Hess had flown to England to suggest peace, an idea, they said, that the British government was terrified might catch on.
What neither German radio nor the public knew was that the Duke of Buccleuch was placed under house arrest on his estates in Scotland, several aristocrats were personally warned by Churchill that if they talked of peace they would be jailed, and Lord Londonderry was questioned inconclusively about a meeting that was alleged to have taken place on his Mountstewart estate in Northern Ireland with four German agents who had travelled up through the Free State.
In America the scare was possibly even greater.
Industry was geared up, under Lend Lease, to produce the armaments that would defeat Hitler, and also pull the country finally and forever out of the stagnation that had crippled it for a decade.
The thought that it might all come to nothing through a peace-outbreak had bankers, politicians and industrialists shaking in their shoes.
The OSS forerunner of the CIA — held joint meetings with M16 to hammer out a viable response, and Roosevelt was advised to cook up some scheme with his ‘Former Naval Person’ friend across the water suggesting that Hitler's real hope was to bring about a peace in Europe so that he could attack and destroy the US and her interests.
Even the expressions of support and sympathy that flooded in for Rudolf Hess from all around the world were ruthlessly destroyed by the British censors.
Kim Philby, who had got a job at last with SOE and was working to get into SIS, fed rumours to the Russians that Hitler was behind the flight, and wanted Churchill to join him on an eastward march, or at least stay neutral while he did the job himself.
No one ever knew who had fed this line to Kim.
Quickly and inexorably, however, the evidence built up that the man in military hospital at Buchanan Castle, Drymen, was not Rudolf Hess.
He failed to recognize Ivone Kirkpatrick, and he spoke only in the most general terms about why he had flown to Scotland.
While the reports that IAK sent for the official files expressed no doubt at all, by Thursday he was complaining that he could hardly get the prisoner to mention politics, let alone discuss them.
Later the same day Douglas, Duke of Hamilton — frustrated past belief turned up at the Foreign Office in London and informed them that he was seeking an urgent audience with the King.
This caused a  frisson of pure terror, but Hamilton was not to be denied.
The following day he lunched with George at Windsor, and that evening the prisoner was removed from Drymen and packed onto the LMS night sleeper from Glasgow.
As a measure of how leaky was the colander, even in the exercise of maximum security, a Movietone newsreel van and a Daily Express reporter had to be shooed away from Euston next morning before he could be transferred to the Tower of London.
Within hours of his arrival, Frank Foley was sent at last to interview him.
He had already seen the report on the X-ray done at Drymen, and had requested clarification of one point.
This had arrived by telegram from Lieutenant Colonel Dr J. Gibson Graham, RAMC.
There was no sign of a bullet wound, ancient or modern.
‘It is not Hess,’ Foley told Edward, after spending his first day with the man.
‘He is thinner than Hess, he is stupider than Hess, and he thinks like a peasant.
He mumbles when I go in for specific points, he puts an accent on, but I think he's trying to tell me Hess is dead.
He mentions Heydrich, and an airfield in Denmark, Aalborg, I know some people there.
I think it's where he flew from, and the implication is that Hess was there as well.
But Reinhard Heydrich got to him, and bumped him off.
The poor chap's in a state of terror in case we do the same to him.
He clings to his uniform like a second skin.
Geneva Convention, prisoner of war.’
Edward smiled faintly.
‘Distasteful lot, the Nazis, aren't they?
Have you told the top brass yet?
That it's not him?’
‘I told Cadogan after the first hour.
In a quiet way, he went off the handle.
He said they won't accept it, I've got it wrong.
He told me to go back and try again.’
‘Churchill?’
Foley pulled a pipe from the pocket of his baggy brown jacket.
He began to fill it.
‘I imagine from Cadogan's attitude that that's the problem.
I think it's a question of deep rage, subterranean.
I got the feeling that there could be murder done.
Cadogan reins him in, you know.
Part of his job.’
There was quiet while Foley lit a match and drew.
He looked a happy man, soft-voiced, content.
Carrington was no longer fooled by that.
Foley flicked the match out.
‘Edward,’ he said, ‘I want you to contact XU.
I know we've had  communication difficulties lately, but you've got to speak to them.
If you can't make contact, you'll have to go to Sweden.
We've got to know.’
‘I'll try.
What are the questions?’
‘Who is this man?
Why is he here?
Do they know where Hess is?
If he's dead, who killed him, where, and why?
Who knows about it, and who and what will they tell?
Did something go awry, or is this how it was planned?
If so, what happens next?’
That evening, Edward Carrington tried for six hours to make radio contact with XU.
He worked from his normal station, in the top storey of a house on Highgate Hill, and he worked with increasing depression.
They had had no indication that anything had gone wrong, but there had been no firm news from Stockholm since before the flight.
He tapped out the call sign in two-minute segments, waited for ten, called again.
If the Swedish connection had been blown, he could not imagine the severity of the consequences.
But they had had no indication.
At last, at twelve minutes past midnight, he received a signal.
It was unexpected, clear and fluent.
Reading you, it said, good strength, go ahead.
Edward, using the code and method agreed for that date — Monday, May 19 — asked his questions.
After forty minutes, without preamble, the answer started to come through.
The transmission was short, but he was sweating when it ceased.
For a few moments he sat at the receiver, listening to the hollow hum of vacant ether, recovering.
Then he acknowledged it and began to decode.
When he had the message, he read it several times.
Most of it was very clear.
RH alive and well awaits photo AH ditto stop use only Leica stop clear airfield 413 0300 day 20 month 5 stop safe conduct Dornier 217 two men plus documents stop no man move while uncertainty stop RH insists parole also AH safety stop letter in own hand and password stop lucky 4 HM query end
It took three phone calls to track down Foley, who was still at the Tower.
It was after two when Carrington arrived, but the governor's house was still bustling.
Foley, stony-faced, told him that the dirty tricks brigade, led by Charles Fraser-Smith, had turned up earlier to make a replica of the prisoner's uniform, correct in every detail.
He had been stripped and measured, and two tailors were now  working on the clothes.
Courtaulds had sent a man who had found an exact match for the material.
‘Stripped?
Didn't he object?’
Foley made the action of a hypodermic with his fingers.
There was a look of distaste on his lips.
‘It's the left hand not letting on what the right's up to again.
Why we need a duplicate uniform, don't ask me, God knows.
What luck?’
He took the sheet of paper and glanced at it.
Then he guided Edward into an office and sat him down.
He pored over the message for an age.
‘So he's still alive,’ he said.
‘They've got him.
Clearance for two men.
Does that mean he'll come?
No-parole insisted, and a letter from AH.
Alfred Horn, presumably.
In his own hand, and photographs with the Leica.
There was a roll of film in it by the way, did they tell you?
It was fogged, possibly by our own lab boys, we'll never know.
Well he's cautious, isn't he?
Presumably, if he's satisfied, he'll meet us.
He might agree to come.
Good God, son.
Good God.’
‘Do you think they plan to send a Dornier?
Is that what it means?
A German bomber on an English airfield?
Would that be possible?’
‘Been done before.’
Foley was preoccupied.
‘There's a worry here, though.
It all makes sense, except…
What in heaven's name does the last bit mean?
Do you know?’
Edward went slightly red.
‘It's personal,’ he said.
‘Unprofessional, one might say.
HM and myself are friends.’
Foley chuckled.
‘Thank the lord for that, I thought HM must be the King.
Or worse, the King Over The Water!
Edward, this is all marvellous.
God willing, we'll have an answer to our mystery.
We'll have our man, even if we have to row across and pick him up ourselves.
Are you au fait with everything?’
‘One query.
Airfield 413.
Should I know it?’
‘I do.
It's a code we've used before.
Lincoln.
I think we'll go together, don't you?’
‘Rather,’ said Edward.
At three o'clock in the morning of Tuesday 20 May, Frank Foley and Edward Carrington watched a Dornier 217 taxi to a halt between  the lines of flares that had been lit ten minutes previously at RAF Lincoln.
It struck Edward as a strange, exciting thing, with overtones he found quite horrible.
The aircraft was an enemy, and the two men who climbed down onto the concrete were enemies, also, two of the nameless killers who had tried to ‘break this island race’.
The plane had been expected and had come in unchallenged, and would fly away again in total safety.
The two men looked small and vulnerable in their leather helmets, harnesses and bulky coats.
One of them was carrying a package.
As they drew near, Foley and Carrington stepped out of the shadow of the control tower.
The Germans hesitated, then came on.
They were face to face.
‘Good morning, gentlemen,’ said Foley, in German.
‘I believe you have something for us?’
The airmen were young, but not unconfident.
‘Good morning,’ said one of them.
‘Major Foley.
How very pleasant.’
‘Heinrich.
Paul.’
Foley was unsurprised.
‘I won't name my young colleague, if you don't mind.
We can't be too indiscreet.’
‘Of course.
Good morning, sir.’
‘Hallo.
A pleasure,’ said Edward.
It was so grave, so mad.
He held out a small package.
‘These are the photographs requested.
They were taken with the Leica.’
‘Good.
We have our parcel for you.
It is all in order.
I hope everything proceeds all right from now on.’
The other man, whose voice was gentler, added: ‘I hope it can bring peace, Major Foley.
We can vouch for his intentions.’
The sentence seemed to hang in the cold morning air with the whisp of vapour it had left behind.
Frank Foley nodded.
‘I will do my best, friends,’ he replied.
‘I wish you the safest of safe journeys back.’
Formally, all four shook hands.
Then the Germans turned and walked across the empty concrete to the rumbling Dornier.
No Englishman had approached it.
The fliers clambered in.
‘Paul Rosenberger and Heinrich Schmitt,’ said Foley.
‘They fly from Aalborg.
Another part of the pattern, I would guess.’
Shortly, the grumble of the engines became a roar, then an ear-splitting crackle that preceded the take-off run.
It changed as the Dornier accelerated away from them, and took on a rhythmic throbbing as it left the ground.
Two minutes later, on the concrete of a Royal Air Force aerodrome, the engines of the German bomber were dying on the light west wind.
As shadowy men in overalls began to douse the flares, Carrington and Foley turned silently away.
The photographs in the Leica were the only pictures of the flier that were ever taken on British soil.
TWELVE
Carrington's second flight to Stockholm was the most difficult of his life.
The courier service from Leuchars had become increasingly dogged by attacks from ME109s, which appeared at times to have advance intelligence of when the planes would leave and land.
Carrington's flight was put off three times, and when he did go it was in the belly of a Mosquito, lying on a blanket and wrapped in a heavy coat.
The unarmed plane flew very fast and very high.
Carrington, when they landed, was tinged with blue at his extremities, and could not hear his own teeth chattering because of the engine-thunder that still rang inside his skull.
The XU man who met him was sympathetic, but could not help much.
The heater of the van they drove in was hardly worth the noise it made, and no coffee was available.
It was light when they reached their destination, a small house some miles outside Stockholm, but his condition was hardly any better.
He had to be helped into the house.
Inside the kitchen it was warm, and smiling Scandinavians gave him hot blankets and drinks to revive him.
The pain of returning circulation was violent, and for half an hour he bit his lips and clenched the muscles that still worked to keep himself from moaning.
After the first ministrations the Swedes discreetly left him to his agonies.
It was an hour later that he heard light footsteps and watched the handle turn.
It was Hannele.
At first, Edward Carrington could hardly take it in.
He made to stand, but yelped at the stabbing in his knees.
Hannele, who had not yet apparently decided on an expression, smiled.
She walked across the room and pressed his shoulder.
‘Sit,’ she said.
‘Oh Edward, how you do suffer for your country!
Sit awhile.’
She turned to the stove and checked the damper.
It was very warm now in the room.
She pulled a wooden chair across in front of him and sat sideways on it, leaning on the back, looking at him.
She had a long, loose dark brown skirt on and a cotton shirt and waistcoat.
‘You're different,’ she said.
‘Your eyes are different.
Your cheeks are hollow.
You're going grey.’
Her smile had gone, but she was kindly, almost motherly.
Edward realized that there would be no fourth time, whatever her message might have said.
‘How old are you?’ he asked.
‘Twenty-one?
Twenty-two?
You seem much older, much much older.
I don't mean you're not beautiful, you're more beautiful than ever.
Ah well.’
‘I'm twenty-two.
I feel a hundred.
Edward, why is your country so resistant, why are you so stubborn?
We expected a response.
We hoped for wonderful things.
Why is it taking so long?’
He was puzzled, honestly.
‘But the real Hess did not come.
It caused great embarrassment.
Problems.
Well, to be frank, fury.
Winston Churchill, like Queen Victoria, was not amused.
Why didn't he come?
It was a stupid trick.
He's lucky the other man wasn't put against a wall and shot.’
‘He was afraid,’ said Hannele.
‘He was afraid of Winston Churchill.
I've told you before, we see things differently over here.
It takes two sides to make war.
Also to make peace.
Herr Hess does not trust Churchill.’
‘You sound like a German.
You say ‘we’.
Surely Churchill is the only hope?’
Hannele Malling's eyes were downcast.
She was very calm.
‘Herr Hess was afraid of other people, too.
Goering could have shot him from the skies.
Heydrich could have shot him in the head.
The deception was meant to facilitate the end result.
We thought that that was understood.
We indicated that the night the flight was made would be the climax of the air-raids, that after that they'd stop.
That was to be Herr Hess's pledge of his intent.
His parole, as he calls it.
We had acknowledgement.’
Oh God, thought Carrington.
Could that be true?
He had heard nothing of this.
But the air-raids had been biggest on the night.
And afterwards they had ceased.
Churchill had been a hundred miles from London, weekending in the country.
Had it all been done by arrangement?
And acknowledged?
‘Goering,’ he said.
‘That means Goering must have been in on it?
And you mention Reinhard Heydrich.
Surely he…?’
‘You must ask Herr Hess.
I do not know the details.
Reichsmarschall Goering taps all the telephones, of course, so he knows  everything.
Heydrich just knows everything.
You must ask Herr Hess.’
‘Is that possible?
Where is Hess?
Can I see him?’
‘Yes, you can see him, Edward.
There have been many wild geese chased, that is not how we like to go on.
Herr Hess is in Sweden.
He is on a yacht, we can go there by a launch.
If he is satisfied with you, with your parole, he will go to England with you.
He is prepared to die to end this war.
Well, we all are, I suppose.
You too.’
He had not really looked at it like that before.
‘Let's hope it won't be necessary,’ he said.
Even before Carrington had left for Sweden, he'd known that the contents of the package from the Dornier had clinched the matter beyond doubt.
Churchill had been enraged yet further, and Foley had received the flak.
That mild man, a touch of his native Somerset showing through, had been quite knocked sideways, so he said, to learn that he was held responsible for ramifications to the matter that other men had deliberately kept from him.
The upshot was that Hauptmann Alfred Horn — if that was indeed his name — had been transferred next morning from the Tower to a miserable country house near Aldershot called Mytchett Place, where he was being held under extremely heavy guard.
‘He's been designated ‘'Z’,’ said Foley.
‘And Mytchett's called Camp Z from now on.
He's an unforgiving devil, Churchill, isn't he?’
Carrington did not understand.
‘Ah,’ said Foley.
‘Maybe you've never heard of Plan Z?
That's what Chamberlain called his famous flight to Munich, back in ‘thirty-eight.
Another airborne bid for peace that Churchill disapproved of, likewise doomed to failure.
A nasty sense of humour, as I said.’
Nastier still, from Foley's point of view, was that he had been told to go and live at Mytchett Place as well.
He and two other M16 men were to stay with ‘Z’, night and day, and secretly record everything that he said.
Distasteful, and a total waste of time.
The flier had been briefed to say a few things like a parrot, but had no deeper understanding of war, or peace, or politics than that bird.
‘So why?’ asked Edward.
‘What good will it do, you being there?’
‘Could it be a punishment?
For transgressions that I didn't know I'd made?
Because I believed that something fine might come of it?
Churchill said in the House that the whole thing baffled his imagination, which I don't believe.
But for my part, all right, I'm baffled.
Cadogan says ferried to question this man till he's dry, question him to death if necessary, but I've already spoken to him for hours.
There's nothing there, he's a husk.
They've got the spare uniform somewhere, although I've never seen it.
‘C’ talks of seeing what can be salvaged, seeing if this man could still be turned, to follow the original score.
I don't know, Edward.
I've had my orders.
I m going to the country for a while, to merry Mytchett Place.
To see what happens.’
‘And I'm off to Sweden.
To try to meet up with the real thing.
What if I bring him back?
What price your daft imposter then?
We'll have the real Hess.’
They were drinking filthy ersatz coffee in a Cornerhouse.
Inevitably, Foley was offering his pouch.
It was declined.
‘Well,’ he said.
We might have two to play with.’
His blunt fingers had rapidly stuffed the pipe.
The vesta scratched, and clouds of smoke billowed.
‘Then again,’ he added, ‘maybe we won't.’
His voice had become very quiet, the pipe-stem in his mouth.
I beg your pardon?’
Foley blew the match out.
‘Intelligence can be overvalued, can't it?
It can be a positive embarrassment.’
Edward did not think he understood.
But Foley's mind, he saw, was no longer with him.
He did not ask.
They went to the fjord in the same old van, driven by the same large XU driver.
In a small harbour below an empty summer house they were greeted by a seaman, who had been sitting warming his hands on the engine of a small black motorboat, incongruously called Shirley.
It was a sunny day, the light lovely on the sparkling green water, and the sea was calm.
In another time it would have been a delight, the twenty-minute trip along the craggy shore, the petrol motor almost purring.
But neither Hannele nor Edward felt like talking, and the seaman stared ahead, keeping close inshore, avoiding hidden rocks.
Finally they rounded a headland and saw a  steam yacht, white and magnificent, in the middle of a deep, high-sided gut.
Hannele touched his hand.
‘There.
Like Napoleon on St Helena.
He lives in splendid isolation and dreams great dreams.’
But there was no one visible, no brooding figure on the afterdeck.
Only some sailors in blue jerseys who appeared as the Shirley chugged alongside the boarding pontoon.
Hannele and Edward were handed off, and entered the opulent interior through a doorway cut in the yacht's side.
Hannele introduced him to two of ficers in some sort of private uniform and they were conducted to a stateroom.
A minute later a tall, stooped man came in and looked at them.
His eyes were deep-set and almost feverish, shining out from under craggy brows.
His face was pale, intensely strained, unhappy.
It was Rudolf Hess.
Hannele introduced them, and they shook hands.
Then she said: ‘I shall leave you now.’
‘Why?’ said Edward.
‘Herr Hess requires it.’
Herr Hess, it seemed to Edward, was not in a good state.
He offered him a chair and also sat, but after ten seconds was on his feet again.
There was a clock in the stateroom, and he had a watch.
He must have looked at both of them a dozen times in the first two minutes.
‘Forgive me,’ he said.
‘I have been away from Germany for almost two weeks.
I thought by now I should be at home, I thought by now I should have secured peace, or died honourably in the attempt.
How is my Hauptmann?
It was not my intention that he should die.
He has been very brave.
Four months ago, you know, he could not even fly an aeroplane.
I trained him myself.
Do you fly?
A twin-engined fighter is a beast, I told Messerschmitt he should go back to the drawing board.
A beast.’
‘He is safe still.
You had the letter.
But will you tell me why this happened, please?
I have come to take you back to England, if that is what you want.
But-it caused confusion.
We were considerably confused.’
Hess was a big man, but the way he shrugged his shoulders was expressive.
The emotion was distaste.
‘I do not believe that,’ he said simply.
‘But I cannot talk to you.
My business is with your greatest men.
We must bring peace before everything is lost.’
Edward, as instructed, said: ‘My job is to find out what you have to say.
My instruction is to find out if you mean to seek a peace sincerely, and if so, what are your terms.
Until you have indicated that, there is little I can do.’
Rudolf Hess sat down, and lowered his head wearily onto one hand.
He was dressed in jodhpurs of field grey, and polished boots.
His shirt was crisp and newly ironed.
But his frame spoke tiredness, mighty tiredness.
‘In that case,’ he said, ‘nothing will be done.
To ask a man who has risked his life and that of his loyal deputies, who has abandoned home and wife and a boy of three years old…to demand proof of sincerity…no.
Nothing will be done.
It is your word that is needed, not mine.
Your parole.
Your Mr Churchill's.
No, no more.
Either I go to England with your word, or I go back to Germany.
I would rather die like a dog than be forced to grovel like one in the name of peace.’
‘You had the package,’ said Edward.
‘If that was not sufficient…
’ He stopped.
He felt a fool, a charlatan.
‘Sir,’ he said, ‘what is your offer?
Could you not give me an outline?
The broadest framework?’
Rudolf Hess stood up.
His eyes were black, deep under the eyebrows.
‘You had better go,’ he said.
They jumped less than a week later, at Luton Hoo on 28 May 1941, under cover of a supposed air-raid jointly organized by XU and some elements of the Luftwaffe.
The RAF were expecting them, and a motorised ack-ack unit had been called in with their Scammells and their diesel generators and their giant mobile searchlights to blaze away with 3.7 inch AA guns at what they tentatively registered as about a dozen Heinkels flying very high, too high to be in danger.
On the German side a few bombs were dropped to keep up the pretence, but they were left strictly alone by fighter aircraft, of course.
In fact the ack-ack unit, who thought, or hoped, they might be protecting the princesses Elizabeth and Margaret, in residence at Windsor Castle, almost missed the fun entirely, having been told the raid would be at 2 a.m.
The intelligence officers, having failed to allow for Double Summertime, which had been introduced the night after the first ‘Hess’ flight, were on the point of standing down the op just as the bombers droned into hearing.
Two, maybe three, parachutists were dubiously reported to have been sighted, but they were never heard of again.
In fact, the intelligence of ficers were ordered afterwards to forget the thing had ever happened.
In the days since they had first met, Hess had unbent a little with Edward Carrington, but his decision not to discuss detail had remained unchanged.
Edward had made the necessary signals, and received the necessary instructions.
It was decided not to try to smuggle Hess out on the courier run, although the idea of making him do a parachute drop at his age seemed risky and wrong-headed to the Englishman, if not malicious.
Hess, however, took it with equanimity, and laughed at Edward's own unease.
It was all in the knees, he said, and he had liked to ski in better times.
On the day, they were brought ashore on the Shirley and driven to the house.
They were given a meal, and Hess took an hour's sleep.
Carrington and Hannele found themselves alone.
‘I'm tired of saying goodbye to you, my Edward,’ she said.
She moved close to him and touched his cheek.
‘It's a pity that this war has spoiled things.’
‘You don't call me Carruthers any more.
I knew I'd missed my chance when that happened.
I have a woman now, in London.’
‘The same one?
Yes, you were always such a faithful man.
You could never have stood me, Edward.
I've had to sleep with so many since this began.
It feels like whoring sometimes, only I don't do it for myself, except once or twice to save my life.’
Despite himself, he felt the knife.
It showed, she stroked his cheek.
‘Typical Englishman,’ she said.
‘I suffer and you complain.
You boys.’
She was like a big sister.
Smaller than him, pale and thin, younger.
She was like an older, bigger sister.
‘Typical woman,’ he said.
‘You don't mind about the orgasm, do you?
The one we never had together.’
‘Of course not.
I never minded.
But I still see you by the bed that time.
I still remember taking off your underclothes.
Maybe one day.’
They kissed for a long time, and indeed there was still longing there, in both of them, a kind of hopeless longing.
Soon after that, they parted.
In the Heinkel, despite the enormous noise, Hess and Edward  exchanged a few shouted words from time to time, their faces pressed close together.
‘As things got worse and worse for you, I knew I had to come,’ roared Hess.
‘I had to come before two great nations died.
We suffer similarly.
Two corrupt and mighty egos.’
That was what it sounded like, but he was not sure.
No point in asking for repeats.
Hess yelled: ‘Soon we turn to Russia.
We should do it arm-in-arm.
There are other men to lead.
No one is invincible.’
The engines battered onwards.
Soon they must be over England.
Hess moved his head in close again.
‘Churchill cannot stand the thought of peace, that's understood.
The loss of face!
But when he hears what I am offering!
This time he will change his mind!
This time…’
It was Edward's first parachute drop except in training, and it hurt.
He lay on the grass of Bedfordshire, shaken to his very bones.
Out of the darkness he saw men coming, stealthily.
A mile away the searchlights and the ack-ack tore the sky.
He wondered where Hess was.
Later, he saw Foley, pipe glowing, looking like a farmer back from market.
Edward was hobbling to a Humber and the little man detached himself from it and came to him.
‘Jesus,’ said Edward.
‘I'm glad to see you.
Where's Hess?’
‘He's gone to London in the other car.
He did a better jump than you, boy.
Well done, by the way.
You've played a great game.’
Carrington rubbed his aching elbows.
There was something about the way that Foley spoke.
‘Gone to London where?
Are we following?’
The tobacco glowed like burning thatch.
‘Not our show for the moment.
We'll hear about it.
He's gone to the Reform Club, I believe.’
‘The Reform Club?
Whatever for?’
‘We've got some rooms there.
Come on, climb aboard.
I'll take you home.’
Carrington pulled the door open with a heart like lead.
He remembered what Foley had told him once about the Carlton Club.
But the Carlton Club was bombed.
After they had driven for a while, Edward said: ‘Aren't we involved at all now?
Is that the end of Hess for us?’
‘I told you.
We'll get our orders in the morning.
I'm seeing ‘C’ at nine.
With a bit of luck I should get three hours sleep.
I'll ring you when I know.’
‘Frank,’ said Edward, later.
‘These rooms at the Reform Club.
Are they in the cellar?
What's going to happen to him?
What's intended?’
There was a long pause.
The Humber, old and driven hard, squeaked and rattled.
Foley's voice took on its quiet form.
Carrington had to strain to hear him.
‘I wish to God I knew,’ he said.