

CHAPTER 6
As I didn't know where Frank was and I couldn't give them Alec Reynolds's address, the Plod soon lost interest in me.
They did give me the name of the hospital Salome was in and the taller one told me that the accident had happened ‘just off the M20 near Wrotham’, but they had no more details, they were just running errands for the Kent police.
And no, I didn't know why Salome was driving around Kent at midnight on a Saturday.
As soon as they'd gone, I got on the phone to Directory Enquiries and asked for the number of the Maidstone  hospital.
I was dialling it when I heard the door of Flat 2 open and I glanced over my shoulder to see Fenella, who had added pyjama trousers to her stripey shirt, and Lisabeth, in an ankle-length woollen dressing-gown, creeping down the stairs like they were doing a commercial for a new edition of A. A. Milne books.
I covered the mouthpiece and said: ‘Salome's been involved in a car accident.
I'm ringing the hospital.’
Lisabeth's mouth dropped open and she swooned slightly against Fenella, who cunningly stepped forward out of the way so Lisabeth had to right herself.
‘Is she all right?’
Fenella whispered.
I shrugged my shoulders and then the hospital came on the line.
They told me Mrs Asmoyah was ‘critical’— hospitals are only generous with the truth when it's bad — and if I was her husband, father, mother or sole blood relative, I could visit her any time, but preferably after 7.0 a.m.
Ask for Ward 4 — Intensive.
Have a good night and try not to worry.
I passed this on to the assembled crowd — Lisabeth in her dressing-gown constituted a crowd by herself — and held up my hands to silence the chorus of ‘what'll-we-do-now?’
‘We go to the hospital and stay with her.
I've told the police the name of Frank's firm and they'll trace him.
Don't worry, the police are good at getting solicitors out of bed on Sundays.
But there's no way Frank can be back before tomorrow night, I reckon.’
Lisabeth nodded her agreement and said firmly: ‘Quite right.
I'll get dressed.’
‘Not now,’ I said patiently.
‘First thing in the morning.
We'll leave at nine.’
Fenella's eyebrows shot up.
‘Okay, eight,’ I conceded.
‘But one of you'll have to stay here in case Frank calls.’
‘Can I help?’ said a voice behind us, almost scaring me to death.
It was the reclusive Mr Goodson from the ground-floor flat, who was something in local government, though nobody knew quite what, and who was never, ever seen at the  weekend.
He was standing with his flat door open about four inches to preserve his hundred per cent record of letting no one, except presumably Mr Nassim, see inside.
From what I could see of him — mostly his spectacles and his left arm around the door jamb — he appeared to be wearing a red silk kimono.
I bet myself it had a dragon on the back.
‘Are you doing anything tomorrow?’
Lisabeth asked and for a moment I thought he was going to slam the door on us.
I explained quickly about Sal's hospitalization and how we wanted someone to keep an eye, or an ear, open for Frank.
He said of course he'd do it if I gave him the phone number of the hospital.
I said I'd leave it pinned to the noticeboard above the communal phone and he said that was probably best and good night.
We all said good night and Fenella added: ‘Oh, and thank you,’ and ignored Lisabeth's warning glare against fraternizing with the enemy.
I pointed up the stairs.
‘C'mon.
Up the little wooden hill to Bedfordshire.’
Fenella giggled.
Lisabeth kept up a barrage of whispered questions.
What was Sal doing in Kent?
How did the accident happen?
Was anyone else involved?
I parried most of them until we got to their door, then I put a finger to my lips and shushed them.
‘Tomorrow.
I need my beauty sleep even if you don't.
Eight o'clock, on the dot.’
Fenella put a hand on Lisabeth's arm.
‘I'll set the alarm for seven,’ she said sensibly.
‘I'll set mine for five-to.
Night-night.’
‘Don't let the bedbugs bite,’ whispered Fenella as she closed the door.
This was followed by a ‘What did you say?’ in what, for Lisabeth, passed as a whisper but probably registered on a seismograph somewhere in California.
Actually, I set my alarm for seven as well and by quarter past I was standing outside Frank and Sal's flat with my trusty nailfile doing the business on their Yale lock.
It's one  of the old-fashioned files with a curly bit on the end for doing your cuticles and I've always had better results from it than bending any amount of credit cards.
I wasn't too sure what I was looking for, so I wasn't disappointed at not finding anything obvious.
The bedroom showed all the signs of Salome throwing some things into a bag in a hurry.
The bed was covered in odd stockings, T-shirts and stuff not wanted on voyage, so to speak.
A wardrobe door was jammed open by the sleeve of a dress, as if Sal had kicked it shut on her way out.
I opened it out of curiosity more than anything and there, in between the high-heeled shoes, was Sal's executive briefcase.
It was a real leather one, the clasps held by two sets of combination tumblers each with three digits.
A real thief would have taken a screwdriver and levered off the clasps.
I didn't want to do anything so drastic, so I flipped the combination until it read Salome's birthdate.
(Rule of Life No. 8: Never disregard the obvious.)
Then I slid the catches sideways and — nothing happened.
(Rule of Life No. 9: No Rule of Life is inviolate.)
Most people would have keyed in their birthday as one of the few six-digit numbers — if you put a zero in front of single figures and for the months up to October and just the last two digits of the year — they can remember apart from their telephone number.
I'd ruled that out because London numbers are seven-digit and Sal and Frank's private radio phone had something like twenty-seven.
So if it wasn't Sal's birthdate, how about Frank's?
I knew the day and the month and made a stab at the year.
The catches snapped open and I was left feeling annoyed that Frank really was that much younger than I.
The case contained one office file and a brochure.
The file was a standard office file with a Prior, Keen, Baldwin label stuck in the top right corner.
Written on the label in felt tip was: CAWTHORNE — CONFIDENTIAL.
The brochure, a coloured affair of four A4 pages, looked at first like a holiday advertisement.
But I knew there was something unusual about it.
The cover photograph was of three guys in full army kit — camouflage dress, boots, black  berets, black make-up and all waving rifles — jumping off a wooden bridge which appeared to be under shellfire.
The brochure had a splash title: THE EXHILARATOR — TRY IT.
Club 18–30 it was not.
I stuffed it inside the file, closed the briefcase and put that back in the wardrobe.
There wasn't time to read anything then, so I nipped back to my flat and found a Virgin Records plastic bag to hide them in.
Then I told Springsteen not to invite any strangers in, or any of his friends for a party, put my flying jacket on and jogged downstairs to wind up Armstrong.
Fenella must have heard me, as she appeared at her door as I reached the first landing.
‘We'll be with you in one minute precisely,’ she said precisely.
‘My God, you mean the Kraken is awake?’
I don't know if Fenella knew what the Kraken was, but she knew who I meant.
‘Up and dressed.
She's just cutting some flowers from the window-box in the kitchen — to take to Salome.’
I had a sudden pang of conscience that I really ought to tell them that the funny-looking herb on the left of their kitchen garden was not really an obscure form of ivy and on no account must they attempt to smoke its leaves.
But that could wait.
Armstrong started up first go and I dialled around the local radio stations to try and catch if anyone was doing anything stupid on the roads.
There were no warnings of Fun Runs, protest marches, street carnivals or charity pram races, so it seemed safe to cut through the City and head for Kent direct, rather than heading east and using the Dartford Tunnel.
Lisabeth agreed with my navigating for once, but then she and Fenella were sat in the back like Royalty, ready to wave to the crowds, the deserted Houses of Parliament and so on .
But as it was Sunday morning, there were few admiring fans about.
I slipped an old Eurythmics tape into the cassette deck I have installed where Armstrong's meter used to be and  adjusted the speakers so the full effect came in the front rather than the back.
I spent most of the journey wondering why Annie Lennox could make ‘girl’ rhyme with ‘thrill’but nobody else could.
The last thing I wanted to do was debate the horrific possibilities of Salome's condition with Les Girls.
It was only as we came in to Maidstone and I started looking for Hospital signs that I began to suffer the nervous Whirling Pits way down in my stomach.
The hospital had a flower shop inside its main entrance and I subbed Fenella a tenner to get a decent bunch of flowers (I knew I should have told them about their pot plant) while I tried to chat up the nurse on reception.
Normally, I'm pretty good with nurses, although that's a terribly chauvinist thing to say.
It's not meant that way.
All I mean is you have to accept that they really have heard it all before — the jokes about taking samples, wearing black stockings, so forth, so fifth.
(Though I do have a friend — Bunny — who always insists on a female doctor or nurse if he has anything wrong of a private nature.
But then Bunny's idea of a subtle chat-up is a sock full of sand.)
In my experience, most female nurses' idea of an erotic evening is sitting in front of the TV with their shoes off and an endless supply of cups of tea.
So I try not to try it on, even though I could get mileage out of being an Angel myself.
‘Good morning, Sister,’ I said.
Well, it never hurts to promote people.
‘Staff Nurse,’ she said without looking up from the notes she was writing.
‘I'm so sorry.
We'd like to see Mrs Asmoyah if that's possible.’
She looked up and smiled.
She reached for a pair of glasses but I didn't think it was because she was dazzled by my teeth.
‘Are you her husband?’ she asked, consulting a clip-board.
‘No, just a friend,’ I said too quickly, before I realized that she had almost certainly not been on duty when Sal was brought in.
‘Then I'm afraid you can't see her.
She's in Intensive Care.’
Just then Lisabeth and Fenella appeared, looking suitably subdued and carrying a huge bouquet.
‘But these are her sisters,’ I said thinking on my feet.
Lisabeth and Fenella did a double take between themselves but fortunately kept quiet.
‘Well, I suppose you can wait in the IC reception area,’ she said doubtfully.
I jerked my head towards the stairs, having already clocked the sign saying Intensive Care 4th Floor, and Les Girls followed me without breaking step.
‘You'll have to check in with the policeman,’ the Staff Nurse yelled after us.
I held the staircase door open for Lisabeth and said: ‘You first.’
Lisabeth held back and then handed the bouquet to Fenella.
‘After you, Binky.’
Then, aside to me, she said: ‘She's got a way with policemen,’ as if confiding some dark secret.
We tramped up the stairs and enjoyed a mutual moan about why hospitals always put the sickest people in the most inaccessible places.
On the fourth floor we opened the fire doors and let Fenella go into the corridor first.
There were more double doors at the end and in front of them on a tubular chair sat a uniformed constable reading the Sunday Express.
Under the chair, between his legs, were his helmet and an empty cup and saucer.
He folded the paper away as we approached but he didn't stand up.
‘We'd like to see Salome, please,’ said Fenella with a smile.
‘Mrs Asmoyah,’ added Lisabeth politely, and she pointed to the flowers as if they explained everything.
‘Sorry, my love,’ said the PC in a soft Kentish drawl.
‘No visitors.’
‘Oh dear,’ said Fenella, ‘and we've come such a long way.’
‘Out of my hands, my dear.
Doctor's orders.’
Fenella pouted.
She does it rather well.
‘You can have a look, though, but you can't go in.
Okay?’
All three of us nodded in unison and we stood in line as he pushed open the double doors for us.
I felt as if I was back at school, not that even my school had pupils like F and L.
Another set of swing doors greeted us.
These had a big sign saying NO UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY and various instructions about hospital waste disposal, from which I averted my sensitive gaze.
The doors also had two round glass windows in them and our neighbourhood policeman stood aside to let us press our noses against them.
Lisabeth and Fenella took the left one (‘Fenella, you're steaming up the glass!’) and I took the right.
Salome was in a metal frame bed with about half a ton of bits and pieces surrounding it so it didn't escape.
There was some sort of monitor with dials which I couldn't make head nor tail of, two drip stands with tubes — one lot going up her nose, the other into her arm — and her right leg was coated in plaster and suspended in mid air by a pulley contraption on which the Spanish Inquisition probably held the patent.
I made a mental note to myself that if the doctor on her case set that beautiful leg anything other than back the way it should be, then he had better start looking for a good dentist.
Lisabeth and Fenella were coo-ing sympathetic noises and tut-tutting a lot and were riveted to the porthole window like two old men sharing a What the Butler Saw machine.
I took the opportunity to have a word with the Kentish Constabulary's finest.
‘I hear the passenger with her is a goner,’ I said knowledgeably.
‘Yeah.’
He nodded.
‘But she don't know that yet, of course.’
Of course she didn't, she's unconscious, you chucklehead.
But I didn't say it.
Still, at least he'd confirmed Salome was driving.
‘I can't believe she'd been drinking.
It's not like her at all,’ I said quietly.
‘Well, they've taken a blood sample, so I understand, on account of her not being able to give a breath specimen, but I've not heard one way or the other.
You a relative?’
I think I flinched at that.
Well, I mean you just can't trust policemen, can you?
One minute nice as pie and the next — asking questions.
‘Business colleague.
She's quite something in the City, you know.’
Then I felt I'd better add: ‘The Stock Exchange.’
I wondered if I should add ‘in London’ but I didn't want to appear too pushy.
‘Where did it happen?’
I asked casually.
‘'Bout eight or nine miles from here off the A227.
Place called Blackberry Hill.
Bloody dangerous piece of road, between you and me,’ he confided.
‘We get a lot of day trippers motoring around the Downs and they see the signs for Brands Hatch and they automatically put their foot down thinking they're bleedin' Formula One drivers.’
I filed that away and asked if it was all right for the girls to stay until the doctors had done their rounds.
He said he supposed it was and offered to show them into the Intensive Care room which had a hot drinks machine.
By this time Lisabeth was sniffing dramatically into a wad of Kleenex and Fenella had an arm round her (well, half way round — her arms aren't that long) for comfort.
I gave Fenella a handful of loose change for cups of tea and told her I was just popping out to ‘see to Armstrong’ and I'd be back in an hour.
She knew me well enough not to ask what I was up to in front of a policeman.
Back in Armstrong, I dug out a road atlas from under the driver's seat and turned to the page covering south-east London and north Kent.
I found the A227 which fed into the M20 motorway near Wrotham easily enough, but the scale of the map was too small to identify anything called Blackberry Hill.
From what the copper had said, though, it was somewhere between the North Downs Way country park and Brands Hatch.
It was worth a looksee anyway and there was bound to be somebody around to ask; a poacher or an itinerant hop-picker or whatever sort of person wandered the countryside these days.
I zipped back along the M20, letting Armstrong have his head as I thought it made a nice change for him not to plod through heavy traffic at ten miles an hour.
At the A227 turn-off I switched off the cassette-player so I could concentrate on the terrain.
The road wound gradually upwards towards the Downs — only the English could call uplands downs — until I was clear of the motorways which cut through Kent like the prongs of a carving fork stabbing at France.
The scenery was lush and the house values just as high as London.
I even passed a couple of oast houses where hops used to be dried after being picked by families of East Enders for a pittance and a daily beer ration.
Nowadays the graphic designers who'd converted the oast houses into very bijou residences all commuted to their dockland offices in the East End.
It's a funny world.
At a petrol station near Vigo, I got directions to Blackberry Hill, proving yet again that taxi-drivers are the only people who can get service at a garage without buying anything.
A few miles further on, I took a left on to a B road which curved up even higher.
It didn't say Blackberry Hill anywhere, there was just an old-fashioned road sign saying Broughton Street was four miles away.
The hill was a switchback and at the top of the first rise I stopped and got out to have a look around.
There was no traffic at that time in the morning; it was too late for the milkman and too early for the lunch-time pubbers.
So I climbed on to Armstrong's bonnet for a better view.
Blackberry Hill curled down then to my right and up again.
From my vantage-point I could see exactly where the accident had happened, about sixty yards from the summit, as the cops had left a portable barrier with yellow flashing lights on top to mark the spot.
I got back into Armstrong and wound him up again.
I couldn't see anything from road level because of the hedgerow but as I started up the second switch of the hill, I noticed an Escort estate car parked on the left opposite the  police barrier.
I parked behind it and prepared some sarky backchat if the owners turned out to be sightseers.
Then I saw that it had a light on the top and the crest of Kent Fire Brigade on the driver's door.
I couldn't see anyone around so I sauntered over to the barrier.
About a hundred and fifty feet down the side of the hill was Sal's VW Golf lying on its roof waving its wheels at the sky.
The body shell had been crushed in and anybody in there could only have come out through the windscreen.
I climbed the barrier and scuttered down towards the wreck, dislodging bits of chalk underfoot.
As I drew nearer, a man stepped out from behind the Golf.
He was wearing a peaked cap and pullover with epaulettes and elbow pads and carrying a clipboard.
‘There's very little worth nicking, son,’ he said straight off.
Some people are dead suspicious.
‘I'm here on behalf of the owner,’ I said, nodding at the Golf.
‘And who would that be?’ he asked, narrowing his eyes.
‘Mrs Salome Asmoyah,’ I said politely and offered to spell it.
He looked down at his clipboard.
‘That's okay, then.
We have to be careful, you know.
There are so many rubber-neckers and bloody souvenir-hunters you wouldn't believe.
‘Specially on Sundays.
They make a fucking day out of it if they hear of a prang as nasty as this.’
I tut-tutted sympathetically.
‘What do you reckon happened?’
I knew he couldn't resist being asked his professional opinion.
‘For my money she just came over the top of the hill from the Broughton side too fast.
Its straight up that side —’ he waved his clipboard at the hill — 'but it twists this side.
She didn't correct enough or she lost control or maybe she'd had a few bevvies.
Who knows?
Anyway, she hit the hedge which is only about an inch thick and found there was nothing this side.
I think maybe she jammed the anchors on, because the car didn't sail out into space or anything.’
He made a motion with his clipboard like an aircraft taking off.
‘It hit the hedge sideways and just kept rolling.
There are faint traces of tyre on the road, but no serious skidding.
Could have been just carelessness or inexperience or the booze.’
‘That's not like her,’ I said, putting on the concern.
‘But tearing about the countryside late at night with a man not her husband is par for the course, eh?’
He saw my expression change.
‘I know, I know.
That's none of my business.
That's for the cops now but they don't seem to be worried.
The poor cow'll have to live with it.’
‘Brakes okay?’
I pointed at the car.
‘Yeah, as far as I can tell.’
I walked around the wreck with him.
‘No fire?’
‘Nah.’
He dismissed the idea.
‘It's only in American movies where they catch fire.
The petrol tank split open as it rolled and most of the gas spilled out over the hill.’
We'd come full circle round the Golf, our feet crunching bits of windscreen.
‘She was a lucky lady, your friend,’ he said thoughtfully.
I agreed and we stood in silence for a minute, gazing at the pile of crumpled metal.
‘If you'd brought a brush and shovel with you, you could have taken it home,’ he said, slapping his clipboard against a thigh.
‘Yeah.
I reckon even the insurance company will accept this one as a write-off.
What'll happen to it?’
The Fire Officer shrugged his shoulders.
‘Probably stay here till it rots.
It ain't on the road and this isn't exactly prime farming land.’
‘Would there be any objection to me shifting it?’
I asked on a hunch.
‘It would be easier to get this back to London than to get an insurance assessor out here,’ I added on the spur of the moment.
‘Don't see why not.
I've finished with it, but you'll have to check with the boys in blue.
Here.’
He reached into a back pocket and produced an official-looking business card  which said his name was Davis.
‘Clear it with Inspector Ball in Maidstone first, but it should be all right.
The police photographers were down here first thing this morning.’
I thanked him.
Then I asked what time it had happened.
‘Just before midnight — well, before then maybe.
It was reported by a bloke down the hill coming back from the pub.
He heard a crunch or two and saw the headlights where he knew there wasn't a road.
Road Traffic were here within ten minutes and the ambulance almost straight after.
We brought a rescue team and an appliance —’ I realized he meant a fire engine —‘but we were able to get the girl out through the windscreen.
She was lucky not to be trapped, nine out of ten would be.
Of course, there was no rush with the bloke.’
‘You were here?’
‘Yes.’
He nodded.
‘I'm on three days’ leave but I wanted to get my report done.
It's best.
When there's a death.’
I bent down to try and look in the back of the Golf.
‘All the luggage has gone to the hospital,’ said Davis.
I straightened up.
‘She'll probably ask for her clothes as soon as she comes round,’ I said, just for the sake of something to say.
Davis and I climbed back up to the road together.
‘She wasn't showing much dress sense last night,’ he said over his shoulder to me.
‘What?’
‘Your lady friend, the black girl.’
‘I don't follow.’
I stopped but he didn't and I wheezed after him.
‘Dressed like a fucking commando she was, last night.
You know, battle fatigues — camouflage gear.
If it hadn't been for the long hair and the high heels, we'd have thought we had a squaddie on our hands.
In fact, one of the Road Traffic boys thought she was a Libyan terrorist at first.
God knows where she'd been last night.’
I was beginning to think I might have an idea about that.
But Salome had said say nothing, so nothing was what I said.
By the time I got back to the hospital, I'd missed the doctors' rounds.
The policeman on duty was a different one but he seemed to have already struck up a friendship with Fenella.
Lisabeth was sitting apart from them reading a newspaper and eating a bar of chocolate.
They vied with each other to fill me in on the gruesome details.
‘Salome's got a brain clod,’ said Lisabeth.
‘Clot, you idiot,’ said Fenella.
‘A blood clot on the brain.’
‘They're going to operate tonight.’
‘They've done the operation hundreds of times, though.’
‘And they won't have to shave all her hair…’
‘And it'll grow back anyway…’
‘And they don't know if it's affected her brain…her memory…’
‘Or her eyesight…’
‘Or sense of smell.
That happens too sometimes.’
‘Well, thanks, ladies, now I'm really depressed.
Still, who comes to a hospital to be cheered up, eh?’
I put an arm round them both.
‘Pregnant women,’ said Fenella.
‘Pardon?’
‘Pregnant women.
They come to hospital and are cheered up.’
‘Oh yes, I forgot.
Sorry.’
Sometimes you just couldn't open your mouth with those two.
‘Ignore her, Angel.
I think the smell of this place has gone to her head.
Or maybe it's that nice policeman,’ she hinted, emphasizing the last syllable.
Fenella blushed and I changed subjects quick.
‘Any word on Frank?’
‘Ooh yes,’ cooed Lisabeth.
‘Fenella's policeman told us.
They've found him in Edinburgh and he's on his way to Heathrow or Gatwick, I forget which.
But anyway, he's hiring a car.’
‘You'd have thought the police would have sent a car,’ said Fenella loudly.
‘Who for, miss?’ asked the policeman.
‘Salome's husband.
He must be worried sick.’
‘Sorry, miss.
You heard the doctors.
There's not likely to  be any change until they operate and that probably won't be until late this evening.
We just haven't got the manpower to play at taxis.’
He was gentle enough about it, but of course Lisabeth got the hump.
‘Well, what are you doing here?’ she snapped.
I moved between her and the constable.
That way he might live to make sergeant.
‘He's waiting to give her a breathalyser if she comes round,’ I said under my breath.
‘He's only doing his job and pretty soon he'll give up and go away.
It doesn't sound as if she is going to come round, so he won't have to do anything.’
Lisabeth fumed but I went on.
‘Now make up your minds where to go for lunch.
I've got something to do.
Oh, and remember, this is the countryside not the big city and it's Sunday, so your choice is limited.’
I approached the copper and held out Davis the Fire Chief's card.
‘Hi there.
I've seen the Fire guys and they told me to ask for an Inspector Ball.
It's about the car Sal — Mrs Asmoyah — was driving.
I wondered if I could arrange for the wreck to be taken back — er — back home.
Where can I find him?’
‘Down the Shop, I ‘spect.
You a relative of…
’ He jerked a thumb at the Intensive Care doors.
‘We all live together.’
Did I lie?
His eyebrows would have disappeared if he'd been wearing his helmet.
‘I could get him on the radio and ask for you if you like.’
He tapped his collar radio — his ‘talking brooch’.
‘That's decent of you,’ I said and I meant it.
He moved down the corridor nearer to the window to get better reception.
‘Fenella says there's a vegetarian cafe down the High Street which does Sunday lunches, or so her policeman friend tells her.’
‘Okay, we'll find it.’
Lisabeth's vegetarianism made it difficult to take her into pubs at lunch-time.
Her temper made it inadvisable at other times.
‘It's expensive, so Clive says,’ said Fenella.
Behind her Lisabeth mimicked ‘Clive says’ silently.
‘Don't worry, this is on expenses.’
I peeled off forty quid from the wad in my back pocket.
‘But keep the bill.’
Clive the Constable came back with as much of a smile on his face as uniformed coppers ever allow themselves.
‘I got through to Mr Ball.
He's quite happy if you want to move the car, we've finished with it.
In fact he reckons you'll save us and Kent County Council a few quid by doing so.’
‘That's magic.
Great.
It's…er…something to do instead of hanging round.’
‘Yer, I know what you mean.’
I was warming to young Clive.
‘Any idea what's going to go down over this?’
I asked, making sure we were not overheard by Les Girls.
‘Depends.
Could be drunken driving, manslaughter, who knows?
Did the chap who copped it have family?’
‘I don't know.
Would it make a difference?’
‘It might.
Mothers Against Drunk Driving, that sort of thing, though usually it's the mums of young daughters who beat the drum.
The present Chief Constable's very keen on causes like that.
I'd line up a Brief if I were you.’
‘Her husband's a solicitor,’ I said, which wasn't strictly true but he was in the legal profession, and they're all as thick as thieves as far as I'm concerned.
(Rule of life No. 24: If you ever find yourself needing a solicitor, it's too late.)
I looked at my watch.
There were fifteen minutes to opening time, which meant I might just be able to head Duncan the Drunken off at the pass.
‘Look,’ I said to Clive.
‘Er…thanks for everything but I've got to get these ladies some food.
See you later, eh?’
‘I'm off at two.
I don't think there's much point in hanging around.’
‘No, I'm sure you're right.’
He came closer and bent towards my ear.
‘Tell me something.
Are those two really her sisters?’
He nodded towards where Salome lay in traction.
Well, they were Sisters, if not sisters, but I didn't know if he'd get that.
So I said:
‘Oh yes.
And that one —’ I pointed discreetly at Fenella —‘is the black sheep of the family.’
CHAPTER 7
I rang Duncan from the phones on the wall in the hospital entrance as time was running out.
As it was I got Doreen because Duncan was half way down the garden path (all three feet of it) on his way to the pub.
I told her I had a job for Duncan and there was money in it and that was enough for her to yell ‘Duncan!’ so loud I felt I heard it without the need of the phone.
Duncan took some persuading — £250 and the scrap option on the VW to be exact — but agreed to meet me at Blackberry Hill with his wrecker truck (there isn't a vehicle known to man he can't get hold of) in two hours.
He told me I should be grateful as this was the first Sunday lunch-time down his local that he'd missed in five years.
I promised to buy shares in the brewery to make up for it.
I drove the girls around the suburbs until we found a newsagent big enough to sell maps and stuffed behind a wad of yellowing unfunny birthday cards, I found an Ordnance Survey map of the Blackberry Hill region.
I wedged it in the carrier bag with the papers I'd taken from Salome's briefcase and then we went in search of the veggie noshery recommended by Fenella's nice policeman.
We found it easily enough and it was open for business — at least it was when they went in.
I said I'd pick them up in an hour and then drove until I found a pub with a Bar Food sign and a quiet corner.
I bought myself a pint of shandy and something called a French Banger, which turned out to be a six-inch sausage served in a nine-inch piece of French bread.
In a crisis it could have doubled as a draught excluder or, if the pub got rough, as a cosh.
I had my bag of reading material with me and before the  pub got too crowded, I spread the map, the EXHILARATOR brochure and the file marked ‘Cawthorne’ over a metal-legged table and got down to it.
By the time the pub had filled enough so that the punters were giving me dirty looks for taking up so much room, I felt I had discovered enough to put two and two together and make five if not six.
The ‘Exhilarator’ bumph advertised the latest in executive pastimes — dressing up as soldiers and running round the countryside shooting each other with paint pellets from air guns — a sort of hide-and-seek directed by Sam Peckinpah.
The address on the brochure was: Pegasus Farm, Blackberry Hill, Broughton Street, Kent, but there was no name to it.
Yet Werewolf's new friend Sorrel had said ‘Cawthorne’ and ‘Assault Courses’virtually in the same delicately taken breath and surely there couldn't be two of them?
But then, how come Sorrel knew about things like that?
Cawthorne's file from Prior, Keen, Baldwin didn't actually mention the Exhilarator, it was mostly financial stuff about his holdings and interests in the City.
There was a lot of stuff in there I didn't understand, such as‘MM’ and ‘TT’and ‘JS’, mostly in the form of cryptic notes after a company name, though even I worked out that ‘BB’meant Big Bang, when the City had been deregulated two years before.
On the personal side, there was very little about Cawthorne except that he was the son of a Colonel in the Parachute Regiment now retired to darkest Wiltshire.
To my mind that clinched the connection with Pegasus Farm, the Winged Pegasus being the emblem of the Parachute Regiment which used to be called the Red Berets (when Richard Todd was making films) but nowadays (since American Football and Rambo) referred to themselves as the Maroon Machine.
I've always said that all those games of Trivial Pursuit wouldn't be wasted.
I sat back and treated myself to a cigarette, determined to make it the first and last of the day.
I dug out the packet of Sweet Afton I'd managed to make last most of the week and lit up.
On the back of the packet was the phone number of Prior, Keen, Baldwin's motorbike messenger service which I'd jotted down while snooping in their postroom on Friday afternoon.
I remembered Gerry saying she thought it must be a radio phone as it had so many digits.
It wasn't, it was a country STD code and it matched the number printed on the Exhilarator leaflet for Pegasus Farm.
I should have made the connection sooner, given that the company was called Airborne Plc, but nobody's perfect.
Lisabeth and Fenella were waiting on the pavement outside the Spring Onion when I arrived to pick them up.
The restaurant was still standing but I suspected some unpleasantness had taken place as neither of them said a word until we arrived at the hospital again.
I did ask if they'd had a nice meal, but Lisabeth just ‘harrumphed’ so I dropped the subject and told them instead that I was going to meet Duncan and collect Salome's car.
As they hopped out of Armstrong, Fenella leaned in through the meter window as if paying off a real cab.
She handed me a bill from the Spring Onion and mouthed ‘Sorry,’ before skipping off to catch up with Lisabeth.
Puzzled, I scanned the receipt to find, at the bottom after the VAT, an added amount of £7.50 just listed as ‘Breakages’.
I made a mental note to ask about that.
One day.
I got to Blackberry Hill before Duncan showed and cruised by the barrier which marked the scene of the accident.
A few yards up the hill, on my left, was a turning which at first I thought was just the entrance to a field.
I pulled in there as it seemed a good place to get Armstrong off the road and it was only then I saw that it was in fact an unmade road curving away round the back of the hill.
I snuffed Armstrong's engine and dug out the OS map I'd bought.
I opened it out knowing straight off that I'd never get it re-folded properly, and found Blackberry Hill.
The track I was parked on was a back way into the village of Broughton Street and, as the crow flew, a quicker way than coming around by Blackberry Hill.
Broughton Street was a collection of grey boxes on the map with nothing to  distinguish it from loads of other small Kentish villages.
Near the village end of the track a ‘Fisher's Farm’ was marked and behind it, a green rectangle with the legend ‘Fisher's Wood’.
There was nothing saying Pegasus or Exhilarator.
A motor horn sounded off behind me and scared me silly.
It was Duncan reversing a flat-back wrecking truck complete with winch and hook gear.
On the doors of the truck was stencilled ‘Ron's Recks of Romford’.
Obviously Duncan was calling in a few debts.
We wotchered each other as I led him across the road.
‘Wotcha, Angel.’
‘Wotcha, Dunc.
Thanks for turning out.’
‘No problem.
It's double time for Sundays.’
‘Never forget you're Yorkshire.
It's over here.’
We looked down over the police barrier at the upside-down Golf below us.
‘Got enough rope?’
‘Should have.
If the wheels turn and we can tip it rightside up between us — should be a doddle.’
He rattled the yellow and black barrier with both hands.
‘This'll shift easy enough.’
For the second time that day I scrambled down the slope of the hill towards the sad little car.
I hadn't done this amount of countryside rambling since I was drummed out of the Boy Scouts.
Duncan tested the wheels and then indicated the old heave-ho motion.
The slope of the hill helped us and the Golf flipped over after three or four big rocking pushes.
When it stopped bouncing on what were left of its shock absorbers, I tried to get the driver's door open but it, and the passenger door, were jammed shut.
As there was no windscreen left I stuck my head in but there was nothing to see, not even blood, thank goodness.
Duncan got behind the Golf and pushed it to prove it would move, then set off back up the slope to get the truck.
‘That's a tough little motor,’ said Duncan as we climbed.
‘There's not many would have stayed in one piece like that.
I'm impressed.
I think I'll get Doreen one.’
Back at the top I helped Duncan carry the police barrier across the road so that it blocked traffic coming up.
Duncan then marched over to the ‘Ron's Recks’ truck and opened the passenger side door.
He took out two large plastic orange cones — the sort you get on motorway hold-ups — and gave them to me, telling me to put them the other side of the bend to slow the traffic coming down.
The lad had come prepared.
He reversed the truck so that its winch poked over the edge of the drop.
Then he attached a rope to it and scuttered down to tie the other end on to the front axle of the Golf.
While he was getting ready, I wandered back to the turning where I'd left Armstrong and looked back across the road.
It wasn't exactly square on to the place where Sal's Golf had gone for a roll, but it wasn't far off.
I waited until Duncan had winched up the Golf to the road and exchanged the rope for the winch hook which lifted the front of the VW off the ground so it could be towed.
I bet myself he had professional ‘On Tow’ plates in the truck and he had, along with a seemingly authentic ‘Police Aware’sticker which he stuck on the rear windscreen.
Then I asked him if he had any thoughts on how it had happened.
‘Pissed?’ he tried for openers.
‘Doubtful.’
‘Bit of nookie that got out of hand?’
‘Not a chance.’
‘Speed job?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Either.
Pedal-to-the-metal or naughty substances.’
‘Wouldn't give you odds on either.’
‘Then I'm buggered if I know, but I'll check the mechanics for you.
I might have to unbend a few things, though.’
‘Don't unbend too much — not until the insurance people have seen it.’
We replaced the police barrier to prevent a repetition of Sal's sudden decision to travel sideways, although I hadn't seen another car on the hill either time I'd been there.
Which, of course, would just make it that much safer a place to do the business, if business had needed doing.
I asked Duncan to come over the road and look at the unmade road where I'd left Armstrong.
Some civic-minded soul had attempted to lay gravel at some point but the track was pretty soft and there were tyre marks, showing somebody had been down there pretty recently.
‘What do you make of them, Dunc?’
Duncan looked at the ground then at me.
‘I'm supposed to be fucking Tonto all of a sudden am I?’
‘Not if that makes me the Lone Ranger, son.’
And I meant it.
My idea of a truth-and-justice lone avenger never appears in less than platoon strength, preferably nuclear-armed.
‘Well, I nivver said I could read Indian signs, but them's some make of jeep thing.
You know, one of the flash four-wheel-drive jobs.’
‘You mean a Range-Rover?
Something like that?’
‘Nah, too small.
More like a Shogun or one of the other smaller Jap 4Ws, or maybe a South Korean.
I don't keep up with the names any more.’
‘Duncan, you're supposed to be a car mechanic.
You're supposed to know these things.’
‘All I know is the bastard things are good enough not to need much repair and there's no real second-hand market in them.
People with loadsamoney —’ he said it as one word just to prove he had learned something living in London —‘buy them to play with and throw them away when they're bored with ‘em.
Nobody wants second-hand toys.’
What he really meant was there wasn't a market in nicked ones.
Yet.
He'd work on that and probably end up getting a Queen's Award for Industry.
‘Just what're you getting at, young Angel?’ he asked, narrowing his eyes the same way he did when he had a cigarette going and he was looking in a petrol tank.
‘It was just a thought, Duncan,’ I said casually.
‘Lemme give you a f'rinstance.
What if you wanted to push that there VW Golf off this ‘ere road, through that there hedge…’
‘And down that there hill?’
He scratched his chin.
‘I'd probably wait here in my 4 by 4 with the lights off and then charge out so they have to swerve, only there ain't anywhere to swerve to.’
‘What about hitting them side on?’
‘Possible.
It would be difficult to prove anything from the VW — it got pretty crumpled going down the hill.
And you'd expect some broken headlights or something here on the road.
Look.
Nuffing.’
He was right.
There wasn't really any trace of another vehicle and neither the cops nor the Fire Officer had mentioned anything.
‘You're not happy about this, are you?’ said Duncan.
‘No.
I'm not.
Take the Golf back to Barking and stash it somewhere.
Don't do any work on it till you hear from me, okay?’
Duncan nodded.
‘And don't worry if you don't hear from me for a few days.
I think I'm going to be busy.’
Even then I knew roughly what I was going to try and do though I had no idea how to go about it.
But first things first, and while Duncan headed back to town with the VW riding piggyback on his truck, I turned back towards Maidstone and the hospital.
The corridor outside Intensive Care was about as organized as Euston Station on a Friday night when I got there.
Our friendly policeman had gone but there were nurses there for the first time that I'd seen, and even the odd doctor.
Maybe all that stuff about cuts in the health service wasn't true.
Lisabeth and Fenella were being moved out of the way and generally harried from pillar to post.
Fenella told me, breathily and all excited, that they were going to operate and we'd all have to leave, but it was all right really because Salome's mum (who was ever so nice) had turned up having been called by Frank and was in there talking to the surgeons.
Oh, and yes, Frank was on his way.
I told them there was nothing much more we could usefully do there and we'd better leave before we were ejected.
Truth was, I wasn't that keen on meeting Salome's  mother again.
Not because she doesn't approve of me (few mothers do), but she was bound to have a lot of questions I had no intention of answering.
Lisabeth reluctantly agreed after I put her in charge of phoning the hospital for twice-daily reports, which was exactly the sort of thing she liked to take charge of.
Fenella was easily bribed with the promise of an ice-cream on the way home and Lisabeth kept her company by devouring a couple of choc ices, which meant I had to wash down the upholstery of Armstrong's back seat that evening.
I thought about the real taxi-drivers in London who took parties of kids to the seaside on day trips each year and realized just what courage was.
The next morning I was up and on my way to work by eight o'clock.
Not bad for a Monday, I thought.
For me, that wasn't bad for any day with a ‘y’ in it.
Even so, the overbearing Purvis looked at his watch when he saw me and said ‘Good afternoon’.
‘I need to see Mr Patterson,’ I said as if I was letting him in on a big secret.
‘It's urgent.
I was told I could get him on 2001.’
I nodded to the phone on the reception desk.
‘No chance,’ Purvis said with a smile.
Saying no seemed to suit him.
‘He's in the Monday morning conference with the dealers and that'll go on till nine, then he's got a policeman waiting to see him.
You'll have to join the queue.’
‘Thanks, but no thanks.
I'll wait.
Catch him later.’
I sneaked into the main dealing room and found a heating vent near the skirting-board at one end which I could unscrew and look as if I was doing something professional.
Only two or three of the terminals were occupied, by guys who looked as if they'd been up all night and who were already on to their second pack of cigarettes.
Shortly before nine there was a general hubbub down the corridor and the Suits began to appear from their conferences, most of them holding styrofoam cups of coffee.
Patterson was one of the last out, but it seemed he'd got the message about his visitor as he hurried towards his office without a sideways glance.
I decided to join Anna and the girls in the postroom and  scrounge some coffee.
I think Anna was pleased to see me despite the knowing looks from the other two, and none of them seemed to have heard about Salome, so I stayed tight-lipped.
I did drop a bit of business into the pleasantries, like asking if there were likely to be any hand deliveries that morning.
When they said it was almost a certainty, I made an excuse and nipped out to see Purvis.
‘Mr P. wants you to do something for him, Sergeant,’ I whispered.
‘Oh yes?
Seen him, have you?’
‘Yes, as he came out of the conference,’ I said without a word of a lie.
‘What?’
‘If a motorbike messenger turns up today —’
‘You mean a Don/R?’
‘Yes, a Despatch Rider.
If it's an Airborne guy, ask him for some ID.’
He liked the idea of ‘ID’.
He would.
‘And see if you can get his name.
But be discreet.’
He looked offended but I guessed his idea of discretion was swapping his length of lead pipe for a rubber truncheon.
I was back in the dealing room looking vacantly into an empty conduit when Patterson emerged from the end office and escorted a guy to the lobby.
The visitor was wearing a suit, but you could tell he wasn't in the City as it was single-breasted.
On his way back to his office, Patterson caught my eye and without breaking his stride, he tapped his wristwatch (I put odds on a Rolex) and held up five fingers.
I nodded my White Sox cap in his direction and bent down to start screwing back the vent cover.
As on Friday, no one seemed to notice me and certainly no one challenged me as I walked through to Patterson's office whistling cheerfully (a Tommy Smith riff which I wished I could transfer from his tenor sax to my battered trumpet) and holding a plan of the air-conditioning system out in front of me.
It was only as I rapped on the open door of his office that I realized the plan was upside down.
Tel-boy was a worried man.
I could see that from the way his knuckles whitened around the telephone.
He wasn't  saying much; mostly ‘yessir’ and ‘certainly’and he ended with the words ‘Very well, Mr Prior’and hung up.
He looked at me as if I had trodden in something on the way in.
‘You've heard,’ he said.
‘Yeah, and I think we'd better talk.’
I closed the door and sat down in the one chair this side of his desk.
From his reaction, that was probably A First.
He narrowed his eyes.
‘What do you want?’
‘I want to know what Salome and Alec Reynolds were doing down in Kent on Saturday.’
‘How should I know?’
He avoided eye contact immediately.
‘Husband away, cats will play.
Alec and Salome were very close.’
‘Is that what you told the copper who just left?’
Patterson reached for a paperclip to fiddle with.
‘That's none of your business.’
‘Who was he?
Road Traffic?’
Patterson's eyes flickered as if I'd given him a straw to grasp, but I pressed on.
‘Or was he City Squad?’
Even I knew about the CS, which had been set up the year before in the wake of a couple of real humdinger scandals in the Square Mile.
They were a cross between the most intelligent members of CID and the hardest cases in the Fraud Squad.
They were computerized, all young enough to be looking for promotion and supposedly as mean as hell.
They had replaced private wheelclamp units as the Bogey Men of middle-class London.
‘That's certainly none of your business,’ he said, but his heart wasn't in it.
‘Come on, Tel.
Don't play hard to get, I'm on the payroll — remember?’
‘Not any more you're not.’
He reached into a drawer down to his left and produced a cheque-book, one of the big fat jobs that meant it was a company one, not a personal account.
‘I think a thousand should cover it.
After all, you haven't  been here anywhere near a week and you don't seem to be getting anywhere.’
‘That's where you're wrong,’ I said as he reached for a pen.
‘Leave the Payee line blank will you?’
‘Just what do you want?’ he asked, his pen poised above the signature space.
I sat back and crossed my legs.
‘I want to know what you told the copper, what he told you, why you sent Sal down to Cawthorne's place at the weekend, what you're going to do about her now, what you intend doing about Alec Reynolds now that he's dead and why you're trying to give me the bum's rush.
Though that's pretty obvious: you're trying to sweep shit under the carpet and that's never a good idea.’
Patterson blinked a couple of times.
It was to clear the sweat from his eyelids.
I noticed that he had pressed his elbows into the desk to stop his hands shaking.
‘You don't know anything,’ he snarled.
‘You were a mistake.’
‘I know how you're losing information.’
‘How?’
‘Your motorbike messenger service.
I'll lay you odds that every leak has come from something hand delivered.’
‘You think we haven't checked that?
You think we haven't timed the deliveries?
You think we haven't sent a bike off and asked the receivers to phone us on arrival?
Not one delivery —’ he held up one finger —‘was more than six minutes later than we estimated, taking account of the traffic, and we checked every delivery over a period of two weeks.’
Well, after all, he was supposed to be in charge of security.
‘All the same messenger service?’
I said confidently.
‘Yes, as it happens.’
‘Airborne?’
He thought for a second then said: ‘Yes, that's the name.
So?’
‘Oh, nothing.
If you've checked them out to your satisfaction, then fair enough.
I just thought that them being owned by Simon Cawthorne would…’
‘What?’
I think it was fair to say I had his attention, though the fountain pen he was strangling would never be the same again.
‘Didn't you know?
Didn't you even check that far?
Didn't you make the connection with Pegasus Farm?
Or am I way off-base thinking that's Cawthorne's little war-gaming place down in Kent?
Maybe Sal and Alec really were having a dirty weekend down there with the hedgehogs among the cow-pats?’
‘You're sure about this?’
‘Fairly.’
‘That's not good enough.’
‘Hey, hey, José, that's your department — finding out who owns who.
I'm just the hired help and if I'm still hired, I'll find out how they're doing it.’
His pen moved away from the cheque-book.
Bad sign.
He was getting his confidence back.
‘We've gone through that procedure.
There's no way it can be the bike riders.
How are you going to find out?’
‘Ever followed one?’
‘Christ, no.’
‘I can, without being spotted.
If we know where he's supposed to be heading, even easier.
Rig a delivery for this afternoon.
It doesn't have to be anything important.’
‘How did you rumble them?
It was more or less the first thing we checked.’
‘After Salome, that is.’
‘How did you know that?’
‘She's female and black.
I'm surprised you didn't have her shot out of hand.’
He looked down at the cheque-book.
‘You don't think much of us, do you?’
‘Not a lot.’
‘Except her.’
‘That's right and I want two things.
First, is Salome covered by BUPA or some company medical scheme?’
‘Naturally.’
‘Good.
Get her moved up to town a.s.a.p.
Private room, whatever it takes.’
He blanched at that, but it wasn't the insurance premiums he was worried about.
‘You think she's in danger?’
He wasn't as daft as he looked.
‘Let's just say she's too near to Cawthorne at the moment.
Which brings us, mystery lovers everywhere, to this week's guest on Desert Island Discs.
Tell me, Tel, which eight records and which book other than Shakespeare and the Bible, would Mr Cawthorne choose?’
‘What the hell are you talking about?’
‘The second thing.
I need to know all you know about Cawthorne.’
In a split second he made his mind up and decided to be decisive.
‘No.’
He began writing on the cheque again.
‘The moving of Salome, yes, we'll do that.
We're covered for it anyway.
But the rest — forget it.
Take this and we'll call it quits.’
He handed me the cheque and looked at his watch.
It was a Rolex.
‘Not bad for one and a half day's work,’ he said smugly.
I took the cheque, folded it and put it in the back pocket of my jeans.
‘Orders from Mr Prior, was it?’
I slipped into my Humphrey Bogart but it came out more like George C. Scott.
‘Get that fella Angel's ass off this case, Patterson.’
Something like that?’
‘How…?’
‘Oh, come on, you were on the phone to him when I came in.
Reporting on what the copper said.’
He tried to get angry.
‘I don't have to listen to you.
Get out or I'll have you ejected.’
I liked that.
In the City you get ejected, in a pub it's chucked out.
‘No you don't.’
I didn't stand up.
‘You talk to Mr Prior, I'll have a word with Mr Keen.
Is there a Mr Baldwin, by the way?
I wouldn't want him to feel left out.’
‘Why do you want to talk to Mr Keen?’ he snapped.
‘To tell him that his son Morris is the office pusher, and I don't mean the tea-trolley.’
Patterson's mouth fell open.
I thought I was getting to him.
‘Wha…wha…?’
‘Young Mr Morris Keen is your friendly coke machine.
Deliveries at least every Friday, probably mid-week too, I'd guess, direct to your door.
Well, your desk anyway.
I could even put a tag on a few customers.
They're all out there beavering away at their terminals right now.’
‘Co-caine?’ he said loudly.
‘Look me in the eye and tell me you never suspected.’
‘Just exactly what do you want to know?’ he said carefully.
‘That's more like it.’
I gave him my full smile.
I've got good teeth so why not show them?
And I always like doing business with a man who knows he's over a barrel.
I spent just over an hour with Patterson which, I found out later, turned out to be another first.
Time is money in the City and few people are worth an hour unless it's over lunch and only then if you're involved in a takeover bid.
It was also, I learned, one of the few occasions anyone at PKB could remember that Patterson had a meeting with his door shut and nobody got fired.
Even Purvis treated me with more respect as I sauntered out.
Well, at least he toned down his sneer a notch or two.
‘Have we used a Don/R at all?’
I asked, remembering to slip into the Purvis jargon.
‘Just the one.’
He slipped a sheet of paper out from under the blotting-pad on his desk, then put on a pair of spectacles to read from it.
‘Lewis Luther; that's Lewis with a ‘w’.
Lives at 23 Marlowe Road — that's Marlowe with an ‘e’—’
‘As in Philip.’
He looked blank.
‘Or Christopher?’
I tried.
Double blank.
‘London SW2,’ he completed.
‘Brixton.
Would Mr Luther by any chance be a coloured gentleman.’
‘Dark as pitch.
Not that I noticed, of course.’
Not bloody likely you didn't, I thought, but bit my tongue.
‘Good work, Sergeant.
How did you find out?’
‘Asked to see his driving licence.’
‘Did he clock you — did he notice you copying it out.’
Purvis bristled.
‘Of course not.
I've got a photographic memory for some things.
Wrote it out soon as he'd gone.’
‘Excellent.’
I took the sheet of paper from him.
‘Good initiative there, Mr Purvis.
I'll make sure it's mentioned in the right quarters.’
As I went down in the lift I thought it pretty clever of Purvis to get the bike rider's licence.
I was impressed.
But I was also glad he'd never asked to see any of mine.
I bus-hopped down to Covent Garden to start putting the feelers out for Werewolf.
The City is one of the few places left with the old London buses you can jump on and off.
With most punters having travel passes with those twee colour pictures on their identity cards, the conductors rarely bother to come upstairs to collect fares any more, so you can get a fair amount of free rides in if you're prepared to keep moving.
The new one-man buses which are everywhere these days are not only designed by maniacs who've never heard of the aged or disabled, but you can't get on one without flashing the cash.
Sometimes I think all the fun's going out of London.
Sorrel was on duty at her stall on the corner of the flea market, so that was my first port of call.
She was wearing biker leathers and cowboy boots which all looked as if they'd been applied with the aid of a shoehorn.
The jacket had ‘Those Whom the Gods Love’ picked out in brass studs across the back and the trousers had parallel lines of matching studs down the side seams.
The boots had fake spurs.
She was carrying more rivets than the average U-Boat and would probably have turned a compass away from Magnetic North.
The antiques business looked slack.
Sorrel couldn't have made more than a grand so far that morning.
‘Hi.
Remember me?’
I smiled at her.
‘Sure.
It's Gabriel, isn't it?’
‘Close, but no cigar.’
‘What?’
‘A Transatlantic expression meaning —’ I paused and looked in the air for inspiration.'
— meaning ‘almost’ I suppose.’
She studied me for about half a minute, then rearranged some of the knick-knacks on her stall.
‘The Wolfman was right,’ she said as if to herself.
‘You are a weird person.’
‘Werewolf said that?
About me?
About anybody?’
‘Yeah, I know what you mean.
Don't worry, I'm not convinced.
Not totally, anyway.
What can I do for you?’
‘Loyalty to Werewolf, and the fact that he's bigger than me, rule out answers 1 to 100, so I'll settle for knowing where the lad is.’
She picked up a book from her stall and browsed.
She browsed beautifully.
It was an 1875 edition of Villette by Charlotte Brontë.
I'd never read it but I knew how much I could have sold it for.
‘The lad, as you call him,’ she said, still reading, ‘or the Mad Irish Git as I prefer to call him, is in my flat nursing a Full Metal Hangover.
If there's any justice in the world, that is.’
‘Good night last night?’
She shook her blonde hair.
She shook her hair wonderfully.
I'd better stop looking at her, I decided.
‘You could say that,’ she said in a sing-song sort of way.
‘I never knew there were so many different types of stout.
I never knew there were so many Irish pubs in London.
And I've never been carol-singing in April before.
Yes, you could say it was a good night.’
‘Is he in a state to receive visitors?’
‘The Pope and maybe a Guinness salesman, but otherwise I'd have to say probably not.
But since it's you…
’ She looked at me suspiciously.
‘He seems to think a lot of you.’
‘There's no accounting for taste,’ I quipped, but she took it seriously.
‘No, I suppose not.
I'll give you the address if you want, but I'm heading back there with some lunch for him in an hour or so.’
‘That'll do.
Just ask him to ring me this evening, would you?
Tell you what, let's go out and eat tonight.
On me.’
‘Okay.
He knows where to get you?’
‘Yeah.
Tell him to ring about seven and we'll fix a place for eats.
Italian food okay with you?’
‘Sometimes I could kill for fresh pasta.’
‘Good.
But you'd better give me your number just in case.’
I like to think there aren't many tricks I miss, but I have to credit Sorrel in that she did write it down on a scrap of newspaper without saying ‘in case of what?’
I filed it away in my wallet.
‘Are you sure you want me along?’ she asked.
‘I mean, it's not boys’ night out or anything, is it?’
‘Oh no.
It's purely for the pleasure of your company.
The two of you, that is.’
She didn't believe a word of it.
‘Well, I do want to pick your brains, just slightly.’
‘What about?’
She turned half away from me as she had, rightly, detected a brace of customers approaching down the aisle of tables.
They were a couple in their mid-fifties, I'd say, but dressed like they thought they were twenty years younger.
The man carried a bulging leatherette wrist bag.
I put them down as Dutch and everybody knows the Dutch buy antiques by the lorry-load.
‘The other day,’ I said quickly, ‘you mentioned a guy called Cawthorne.
Simon Cawthorne.’
‘Uh-huh,’ she said, busying herself with miners' lamps, old spectacle cases and various china oddments which had ‘A souvenir of Cromer’stamped on the bottom.
The Dutch couple stopped and began to inspect the merchandise.
Out of the corner of her mouth — and she did it with great flair — Sorrel said:
‘Sure I'll come along.
You're going to need all the help you can get.’
CHAPTER 8
By 2.30 I was having lunch at the wheel of Armstrong, parked on the edge of the pavement in Gresham Street about sixty feet from the Prior, Keen, Baldwin entrance.
I had disguised myself with an old cardigan with faded leather elbow patches and a copy of the Daily Express.
Lunch was an avocado and prawn sandwich and a carton of mango juice, which I admit were a bit out of character but otherwise I looked for all the world like a real musher.
I must have done, as not only did the Old Bill and the Ritas (as in Meter Maid) ignore me, but a real cabbie parked nearby came over to pass the time of day.
He told me how he'd been conned three times that week by people who took ten-quid rides, then said they hadn't any cash but offered to leave a watch with him while they went inside (usually a block of flats) to get some dosh.
Of course they never came out and he was left with three digital watches which, in the cold light of day, turned out to be worth approximately 99p each retail, 30p wholesale.
I sympathized and threw in a few choice obscenities and ‘hanging's too good for ‘ems’ but made a note to pick up a few watches next time I was down the Brick Lane midnight market.
He wandered back to his cab eventually.
It was one of the newish two-litre Metrocabs and it was painted red.
How gross.
As a staunch supporter of the traditional FX4S design in any colour you like as long as it's black, I suppose I shouldn't have even talked to him, let alone been friendly.
At 2.40 a motorbike rider appeared on Gresham Street, parked outside the PKB building and the rider disappeared inside.
I couldn't tell much about him as he was covered from head to toe in red crash helmet with black visor, red riding leathers and red boots.
The bike, a medium sized Kawasaki, had rigid saddle-bags with AIRBORNE stencilled  on them, so even if it wasn't Lewis Luther, it was the right company.
I started Armstrong up as he emerged from the building with a large jiffy bag under his arm.
Like most of the City messengers these days, even the ones in the dinky shorts on BMX bikes, he was radio-controlled and, like a copper, he had his tacked on to his collar.
Before he got on the Kawasaki he spoke into it and then tilted his helmet to hear the response.
Then he was mounted and off.
It's almost impossible to tail a bike in London unless you're on a bike yourself, and that's a definite if it's rush-hour.
But the next best thing is a taxi, which can always bend the odd rule and rewrite bits of the Highway Code without attracting too much attention.
And of course it helps if you know where your target is going.
Patterson had arranged for the hand delivery to a firm of corporate solicitors who had an office in Bloomsbury round the back of the British Museum.
The contents of the jiffy bag weren't important but they were genuine, and the solicitors were well known for handling City problems.
Even I'd read about them.
The idea was that the package might be tempting enough to follow all the other leaks down whatever conduit somebody was using.
I'd picked the Bloomsbury address from a handful of alternatives Patterson had offered for the set-up as the easiest route and also the time, early afternoon, though in town these days the traffic was a matter of pot luck with the odds stacked on it being bad.
If it rained, I'd be in trouble.
Despite the number of golfing umbrellas you see around, advertising everything from Building Societies to aftershave, nobody ever uses them, they jump into cabs when it rains.
I'm convinced half of them don't actually open, they're just designed as offensive weapons for use by psychopaths fed up with not getting a seat on the tube.
The Kawasaki cut through to St Paul's as I'd expected and accelerated up towards Holborn.
So far, so good.
I didn't bother with keeping a car or two between us like they do in the movies.
If he looked behind him (he didn't have a mirror), all he'd see would be a black cab.
So what?
And  how many despatch riders ever look over their shoulders?
Having said that, the bugger nearly threw me at Holborn Circus.
He turned left down an alley without indicating and I had to carve up a Volvo with Swedish number plates in order to follow him.
I felt a wee bit sorry for the driver — reindeer probably don't drive like that — but this was London and if you can't stand the heat, leave the wheels at home.
The Kawasaki disappeared to the right up ahead of me and I followed slowly.
He seemed to be working his way round the back of the Daily Mirror building, though I couldn't think why.
There were loads of light vans in the Mirror livery parked on both sides of the street and the pubs down one side were doing a roaring end-of-shift trade — or maybe pre-shift.
It was difficult to tell, but since Fleet Street had more or less stopped producing newspapers, this area was now the journalism centre of town, which meant the pubs would be doing some sort of trade.
I slowed some more and it was just as well or I would have missed him.
He'd pulled up behind one of the newspaper vans, except it wasn't a newspaper van.
It was a red Transit, one of the new designs which look like they've been punched in the nose, but there were no markings on it and the rear windows had been painted out.
The rider parked the bike nose-in to the pavement and killed the engine.
I swung Armstrong to the right and mounted the pavement on my side, not more than twenty feet from him.
I took down the battered, broken-spined A-Z I keep taped to the driver's sun visor and pretended to be looking something up.
The Don/R spread his legs so he was holding the bike up, then he rapped on the back door of the Transit with a gauntleted hand.
The door opened and he handed in the jiffy bag.
I timed the operation on my Seastar.
Three minutes and ten seconds later, the door opened and the jiffy bag was handed out.
Mr Luther, if it was he, stuffed it into one of  his saddlebags and freewheeled the bike back on to the road, kick-started and was away.
Patterson had arranged for the solicitors in Bloomsbury to ring him immediately the jiffy bag arrived, so that end was covered and I was pretty sure that's where the Airborne messenger was heading without further interruptions.
I decided to stay where I was and watch the van.
I even took its number just to prove how professional I was, not that I had any idea how it could help.
I kept one eagle eye out for wardens and policemen with nothing better to do than harass taxi-drivers, but I didn't have to wait long.
After about five minutes, the rear doors of the Transit opened and a guy hopped down.
He scanned the street as he looked up, but true to form, he didn't pay Armstrong the compliment of a second glance.
He pulled on a pair of folding sunglasses (the sort you pay an extra load for to have ‘Porsche’ stamped across your field of vision) as he made for the driver's door, but even with them and the soft brown leather blouson jacket, which made him look a bit like an off-duty copper (they get them cheap down Brick Lane), I still recognized him.
He was the one who had asked Werewolf if he played in a band, and the one I'd seen being ticked off by Cawthorne.
Werewolf had called him Robin Redbreast because of the striped shirt and red tie.
I'd called him Chinless Wonder on the same basis that regular enlisted men in the Army call Sandhurst graduates ‘Ruperts’.
Maybe we'd both misjudged him.
Maybe he was the sort of guy who pushes VW Golfs off hills in the middle of the night.
Just for fun, of course.
I followed the van for an hour and dead boring it was too.
I was certain he didn't know I was following him, but he led me a pretty dance almost as if he was trying to lose me.
As the traffic thickened towards the rush hour it got easier, but more boring, to stay fairly close behind him.
Only once did he stop, having looped back towards the City, in Finsbury Circus.
He had to double park there — doesn't  everyone?— so he put the warning indicators on as he climbed in the back of the red Transit.
Sure enough, Lewis Luther, or whoever, turned up in full Airborne rig — I was pretty sure it was the same bike and I made a note of its number this time — and they did the business as they had at Holborn.
This time it was an ordinary letter by the looks of things and it took, again, just over three minutes.
This time, though, Chinless Wonder stuck his head out of the van and said something to the rider before he went.
The rider nodded and pushed off on the Kawasaki.
Chinless looked up again and got back to the driver's seat and headed east.
I followed him out of the City until I was convinced he was packing up for the day.
My guess was he would head for the Dartford Tunnel and then Kent.
There was no way I could hope to keep up with him through the tunnel (a route I highly recommend if you want to lose a tail) as there were just too many imponderable lane changes and toll booth stops, so I U-turned where I shouldn't and headed back.
Turning around brought a couple of angry hoots from the odd civilian driver — taxis and buses never blow their horns at taxis or buses — but I was now going away from the traffic flow and I was back outside PKB by five.
I even found a legal parking space.
Things were looking up.
Patterson listened to me in silence, then said, ‘I just don't believe it,’ a couple of times to himself.
‘My guess is they've got a photocopier in the back of the van, and a typewriter and a selection of envelopes.
They photocopy what you send out and then repackage it pronto.
Takes a coupla minutes and the people getting it at the other end don't notice anything wrong.
Still sealed up, addressed to them.
You ring up and say, ‘Did you get a jiffy bag five minutes ago?’ and they say, ‘Sure, one jiffy bag, containing one letter, just arrived.’
So maybe it took one minute more than it should as the crow flies.
We ain't talking crows.
We can allow for traffic, bike breakdown, rider can't find the right doorway, whatever.
All the things  you take for granted that are going to screw you up in London.
It's pretty ingenious.’
‘It's diabolical,’ said Patterson with feeling.
‘But we could put them out of business if we, say, used sealing wax, or special security envelopes…’
I shook my head slowly in disappointment with him.
‘I was thinking of something more permanent.’
‘Not in that,’ I said emphatically.
‘No way, not ever.
Not even in daylight.’
‘What's the matter with you now?’
Patterson yelled at me.
I don't think he meant to yell, it was just that his voice echoed a lot in the underground car park.
I hadn't known before that there was an underground car park to the building, but as the building was shared, only about eight spaces were reserved for Prior, Keen, Baldwin bigwigs.
Therefore, Patterson was a bigger wig than I'd had him down as.
I still thought he was a dickhead.
‘You are a right dickhead —’ I broke it to him gently —‘if you think we are driving down to Brixton in that.’
‘What in Christ's wrong with it?’
Patterson screamed.
I have to admit that on a good day I find little at all wrong with the prospect of a ride in a new BMW, and Patterson was obviously well-pleased with his material rewards of Yuppiedom.
‘Look, Tel, here in the City it's a very nice status symbol and a fine example of German craftsmanship, but in Brixton its a Bob and therefore a legitimate target for any kid big enough to keep a tyre wrench in his nappy.’
‘A Bob?
What are you talking about?’
‘Bob Marley and the Wailers.
BMW.’
I could see it sinking in.
‘Shall we take mine?’
He was somewhat mollified to find that Armstrong was a cab and he could ride in the back and scowl at me, but he knew I thought it was a lousy idea going down to Brixton to track down Lewis Luther.
‘Do you know where Marlowe Street is?’
‘I'll find it,’ I yelled back at him, then slipped an old  Simply Red tape into the cassette just to annoy him, although it had the added advantage that I couldn't hear him any more.
I'd told him in his office it would do no good, but he insisted.
So I used his phone to ring Sorrel's number and got an answerphone.
I told it to come to the Vecchio Reccione in Leicester Square at 9.30, then I rang the restaurant and made a booking, using my PKB Amex card to confirm it.
That also annoyed Patterson as he'd forgotten about the card.
Round about the Elephant and Castle I decided to call a truce and talk to him.
I told him I reckoned Marlowe Road to be one of the ‘poets’ run' of streets off Railton Road, all named after Shakespeare, Milton, Spenser with an ‘s’and so on.
‘What's the plan, then?
Go up to the front door and ask if Lewis is coming out to play?’
‘At least we could see if there's an Airborne motorbike parked outside.
That would be a start.’
‘You think he'll leave his bike outside round here?’
I was winding him up some because I thought he deserved it.
He'd probably never been to Brixton before — I could tell that from the way he was sinking down in the back of Armstrong the farther along Effra Road we got.
Mind you, I was a bit out of touch myself.
In fact, I hadn't lived south of the river for nearly five years and that had been further over in Southwark until a small matter of an exploding terrace house had persuaded me to go flat-hunting.
Not that that little affair had anything to do with the riots on Brixton's Front Line.
No, that was a purely personal  piece of business.
So I didn't know the area like I should.
But, as they say in the ads on the telly, I knew a man who did.
‘I've got an idea,’ I yelled over my shoulder.
‘I've a friend lives near here in Jonson Road.’
But he wasn't the sort to have actually read The Alchemist and probably thought his street was named after an American President.
‘What good does that do us?’
Patterson moved on to the jump seat just behind mine.
I think it made him feel more secure.
‘My man in Brixton knows everybody worth knowing and a sackful of those you wouldn't want your enemies to know.
I think we should check in with him.
It's just down here on the left.’
‘Well, okay,’ said Patterson nervously.
I knew Lloyd Allen was at home as soon as I turned into Jonson Road because nobody else would have a pink (yes, pink) 1964 Ford Zephyr — the nearest the British ever got to a car with fins — parked outside.
Well, in Brixton they might, but only Lloyd would have had a tenor saxophone painted in gold on its bonnet.
The year before he'd been into the whole Absolute Beginners scene and everything around him had to date from the late ‘fifties, early ‘sixties.
Now he was into jazz because he'd heard that the Yuppies had hijacked it after Clint Eastwood's film on Charlie Parker, and had moved back a decade to the late ‘forties.
It was only a matter of time before my more traditional sort of jazz became popular again and I'd have to think of a new image.
I parked Armstrong in front of the Zephyr, reversing until the bumpers almost touched.
A couple of black kids no more than about nine years old appeared from nowhere, hands in pockets, just sauntering by.
They would be the official car minders for the street.
They stopped and examined the half-inch gap between Armstrong and the pink Zephyr.
I think they were impressed.
‘Lloyd in?’
I asked, not expecting an answer.
I didn't get one.
They just shrugged their shoulders.
I opened the door for Patterson and then locked the cab up after he'd stepped gingerly on to the pavement.
Lloyd's house was a three-bedroom, semi-detached in a street which about sixty years ago would have been classed as a greenfield development.
The front door was open and at least two sorts of music were oozing out on to the street.
I recognized some pirated recordings of Sade in cabaret coming from the upper floor and, louder, some mid-period John Coltrane from the living-room.
I knocked on the open door and strode into the front  room trusting that Patterson was right behind me.
He was.
I could smell his after-shave.
The room had stripped pine flooring and white walls.
All the lights were white golfball shapes on stands about four feet off the floor.
The furniture was expensive wood and leather and probably Danish.
There were two cases of Red Stripe lager in the middle of the floor, roughly a couple of thousand record covers in various piles, and about six people in the room.
One of them stood up and took off his sunglasses.
‘Angel!
Hey, my main man.
Where've you been for the last six star signs?’
‘Hello, Lloyd, you cooking?’
‘I'm gettin' by, but you — you just disappeared off my screen, man.
What's going down?’
Lloyd was wearing the bottom half of a pale grey pinstripe suit with turn-ups which probably took on board water when it rained.
His braces were vivid blue and yellow zigzags and were button fasteners not clips, over a see-through white shirt which didn't have a collar.
He almost certainly had a pearl fedora to go with the image and brown and white two-tone shoes, if he'd been wearing any.
‘Low profile, Lloyd, that's me.’
We shook hands.
Both of us were too old to ‘slap skin'.
We left that to the teenyboppers with personal stereos and skateboards.
‘Man, I ain't heard you play since the days of the old Mimosa Club,’ said Lloyd with a thoughtful expression.
In the past I'd seen a fair bit of Lloyd.
I'd played at a club in Soho, even backed a few rock bands Lloyd had claimed to manage, and he'd run a string of female mud wrestlers, mainly in the clip joint next door.
‘And are you still into mud — or is the record business paying off?’
‘I get by, Angel baby, I get by.’
He grinned.
‘Meet the guys — and the next superstar I'm grooming.’
He put an arm around my shoulder and steered me to one of the leather sofas which had a girl where other sofas have cushions.
She was wearing a plain white T-shirt.
Oh yes, and sunglasses.
‘Hi, Mr Angel,’ she said, stretching her legs together just enough to produce static electricity.
‘Hello, Beeby,’ I smiled.
‘You know each other?’
‘Mr Angel sort of put me on to you, Lloyd,’ she purred.
‘And I've never looked back.’
The kid was going to make it.
‘Well that's just wicked, man, really wicked.
Mr A, I'm in your debt.’
Lloyd slapped my shoulder.
‘Good,’ I said.
‘I thought so,’ Lloyd said, grinning.
‘But first, meet the Dennison brothers.’
The three black guys didn't get up or anything — I was pretty sure two of them couldn't — they just nodded as Lloyd reeled off their names.
‘That's Derek, Selwyn and Melvin and I know what you're thinking.’
He prodded me playfully in the chest.
‘And you'd be right.
Del, Sel and Mel.
Would you credit it?
Your ma had a weird sense of humour, boys.’
The boys took this all in good heart, as they probably had all their lives.
‘'Nother coincidence,’ I said.
‘Meet my mate Tel.’
‘Hey!
Welcome!
Del, Sel, Mel and now Tel.
Beeby, get the Guinness Book of Records on the horn.
Pull up a beer, you guys, and utilize the accommodation.’
Lloyd picked up a beer can, lifted Beeby's legs up with one hand, sat down on the sofa and let her legs fall across his lap.
I sat down on the cases of beer and Patterson perched on the edge of an armchair.
‘Tel here works in the City,’ I opened.
‘He's got a problem.’
‘I can relate to that, Angel my man.
No decent food, no place to park and almost zero women.
Good street prices for Jaws though, gotta admit that.’
‘Jaws —’ I explained to Tel —‘otherwise known as The Great White Powder.
Very naughty substances.’
He made an O with his mouth.
I turned back to Lloyd and tried not to look at Beeby's legs.
‘Tel's problem's a wee bit more specific than that.
It involves a Brother, a local one.
Thought you might know him.’
‘He got a name or am I psychic suddenly?’
‘Lewis Luther.
Rides a Kawasaki 125.
Know him?’
‘Maybe.’
‘Lives round the corner in Marlowe Road.’
‘So does my tailor.’
Lloyd beamed and a couple of the Dennison brothers laughed dutifully at the in-joke which went over me.
‘If I were your tailor, so would I, but I wouldn't tell anyone.’
Beeby laughed at that until Lloyd lifted one of her legs and sank his teeth into her inner thigh until she squealed.
‘Know your place, woman!’ shouted Lloyd, and Beeby wriggled more into his lap, laughing like a drain.
Patterson coughed to cover his embarrassment.
‘So what's this Loo-is been a-doing then, Mr A?’
‘That's what we want to ask him, Lloyd.
It may be that Lewis doesn't know he's doing anything out of order, but some of the messages Lewis is delivering ain't getting through, or at least not in one piece.’
‘What sort of messages?’
Lloyd ran his fingers up Beeby's legs like a concert pianist warming up.
‘Mostly financial stuff.’
‘Any firm in particular?’
Lloyd was concentrating on miming what looked to me like Mozart's Turkish March.
‘Tel's company.’
‘Which is?’
‘Prior, Keen, Baldwin,’ Patterson said nervously.
Lloyd stopped tuning up Beeby's legs and looked up in genuine surprise and then disgust.
‘Shit!
Has that little jerker Lewis been messing with my brokers?
I'll kill him.’
If I was surprised to hear that Lloyd had a stockbroker, Patterson was dumbfounded.
But a client is a client and he  perked up no end as we walked round to Marlowe Road, Lloyd between us and one of the Dennison boys about ten feet ahead acting as an outrider.
I'd been right about Lloyd's two-tone shoes though I had expected him to put socks on, and I was wrong about the hat — it was a white Panama.
I was glad he chose to wear it, for otherwise, in his shirt-sleeves and braces walking between us, it could have been mistaken for an arrest or at least a ‘helping with inquiries’ and the last thing I wanted was a street riot.
By the time we were out of Jonson Road, Lloyd and Tel were getting on famously talking ‘fundamentals’, ‘half yearly growths’ and ‘sell options’.
The Dennison lad had pulled ahead of us and disappeared round a corner.
He emerged giving Lloyd the thumbs-up sign and Lloyd jerked his head without pausing in his conversation on the future of the British economy.
Dennison crossed the road and disappeared again.
He would be covering the back door of No. 24 if I know Lloyd.
The front door of No. 24 was a yard back from the pavement.
Lloyd didn't knock, in fact he didn't stop talking to Tel.
He pulled a key from his trouser pocket and slipped it into the lock.
‘You do know Lewis, then,’ I said, looking at the key.
Lloyd pushed the door open and showed me his teeth.
‘'Course I do.
He's one of my tenants.’
‘This is your house?’ asked Patterson, impressed.
‘One of ‘em,’ said Lloyd modestly.
I wondered if he had just the one broker.
‘This way, gentlemen.
Ground-floor ap-art-ment if my memory serves me well.
And we know he's home.’
I followed his gaze down the hallway to where a Kawasaki was parked on a spread-out copy of the Evening Standard.
The number plate told me it was the same one I'd followed earlier.
Lloyd rapped his fist on a badly-stripped fake pine door with a metal numeral 1 nailed to it.
Further down the corridor was a kitchen and across it I could see young Dennison loitering with intent outside the window.
‘Looo-ees,’ Lloyd cooed.
‘It's your friendly landlord.
Social call.’
The door opened an inch and a yellow and brown eye looked out.
‘Do I lie?’ said Lloyd, pushing the door.
Lewis Luther was about nineteen in age years but a lot older in street-time.
He backed across the room keeping pieces of furniture between himself and the three of us.
Not that there was much furniture in the room: a table, covered with copies of Motor Cycle News, two dining chairs, a bed with a duvet cover illustrating a big Honda bike and a chest of drawers with a Midi stereo cassette unit on it.
The whole place had an odour of long-gone take-away curries and engine oil.
‘What can I do for you, Mr Allen?’ said Lewis suspiciously, rubbing the palms of his hands down his red leathers.
He'd lost the leather jacket and the boots but maybe he slept in the trousers.
‘You happy in your work, Lewis?’
Lloyd put a foot up on one of the chairs and flicked imaginary dust from the toecap with his fingertips.
‘Sure, Mr Allen.
It's a good job.
Regular pay.’
‘Your mum keeping well?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Still giving her housekeeping?’
‘Every week.’
‘Good boy.’
Lloyd turned to me.
‘His ma's got six other Luthers and an Episcopalian church to support, but she's a good lady.
Would break her heart to hear of Lewis in trouble.’
‘What trouble?
I ain't done nuffink.’
But he was looking worried.
‘That's for these gentlemen to decide.’
Lloyd waved a hand, giving me the floor.
‘Who's they?’
‘We're financial advisers to Mr Allen,’ I said, and Patterson nodded enthusiastically.
‘What's that to me?’
Lewis spread his arms.
‘Your job with Airborne —’
‘Yeah, what about it?’
‘Do you always do pick-ups from Prior, Keen, Baldwin?’
‘What's that when it's at home?’
Patterson grabbed Lloyd's arm and said excitedly: ‘But he was there twice today and…’
‘Leave it out, Tel,’ I said without looking at him.
‘Gresham Street, in the City.’
‘Oh, them.’
Lewis looked relieved.
Like most delivery riders, he never looked at the name, just the address.
‘Yeah, I was covering them today and —’ he thought about it for a second —‘twice last week.’
‘How do you get your instructions?’
‘Radio.
The despatcher just tells us where to pick up and where to go.’
‘What about the Transit van?
Why did you take the Gresham Street stuff there first?’
Lewis didn't bat an eyelid.
‘Take everything to the van and check it with Mr Sorley.
The van's the office, man, that way they keep the overheads down.’
Lewis found himself looking at three puzzled faces.
He tried to explain.
‘Look, man, Airborne doesn't have a base in town.
The whole operation is run from the van.
There are six or seven riders and we split the shifts.
We rendezvous every morning near Blackfriars Bridge and get the first jobs over the radio.
We do a pick-up, then check in with the van.
Everything gets registered by Mr Sorley so he knows how much work we've done and how much to bill the clients.
Where's the harm in that?’
‘You doing this self-employed, Lewis?’ asked Lloyd.
He was either concerned for the lad or thinking up a scheme of his own.
‘Yeah.
So?’
‘Paying tax, are you?
National Insurance?’
‘I will, I will.’
‘How long have you worked for them?’
I asked.
‘Three months.’
‘Know any of the other riders?’
‘One dude, Lenny Emerson.’
He looked at Lloyd when he said this.
‘Lenny's only been out of the jug five, maybe six weeks,’ said Lloyd.
‘Ever seen any other Airborne riders?’
I tried.
‘No.’
‘Ever drawn a night shift?’
‘No, I'm lucky.’
‘Weekend work?’
‘Nah.
Like I said, I'm lucky.’
I looked at Patterson and Lloyd looked at me.
‘Conference?’
I said yes and Lloyd told Lewis to go and make a pot of tea and invite the Dennison kid in.
Lewis said he hadn't got five cups.
Lloyd looked at him, then at the ceiling, sighing as he did so, and Lewis got the message.
Lloyd shut the door after him and pulled up one of the chairs, straddling it.
‘Is the boy in trouble?’
I shook my head.
‘He's no idea what's going on,’ I said.
‘But he'll probably be needing a new job soon.’
Lloyd scratched the underside of his chin.
‘What have we got?’
Patterson asked me.
‘A very sensitive operation.
I think they're targeting one or two City firms and getting the inside track by reading their mail.
Airborne gets a reputation for quick service from the companies they're interested in because the bikes are cruising round outside just waiting for a call.
They probably have three riders on call in case one goes sick or gets delayed or is already on a job but I'll bet they never deal with more than two companies at a time.
It sure as hell ain't a full-time job for Mr Sorley, if that's his name.’
‘It is,’ said Patterson thoughtfully.
‘Go on,’ I prompted.
‘Jeremy Sorley-Smith to be exact.
Long-time gopher to Simon Cawthorne.
I think they were at school together.’
‘Cawthorne, eh?’
Lloyd let out a low whistle.
‘Bad news baby if ever there was.’
‘How come you know of Cawthorne?’
I was getting annoyed about everybody knowing more than me.
‘Just because you don't read the financial pages, Angel-face…’
‘Later,’ said Patterson looking at his Rolex.
I hoped he remembered to pull his cuff down over it when we got out on to the street.
‘What do we do now?’
‘Well, I'd like to get a look inside that van,’ I said.
‘So maybe tomorrow we arrange for me to do one of Lewis's runs.
Think he'll agree?’
‘It'll cost,’ said Lloyd, weighing up Tel's wallet with his X-ray vision.
‘Can he be bought?’ asked Tel.
Lloyd and I just looked at him (Rule of Life No. 28: Everybody can be bought.
The trick is to make them think you're buying them from Harrods, not Woolworth's at sale time.)
‘Okay.
Negotiate what you want,’ he said with a defeated air.
‘As Lewis's agent —’ began Lloyd, then he saw my face —‘recently appointed, I'll handle that.
Just give me a bell as to when and where you want him.
He'll be all yours.’
Tel and I didn't stay for tea.
Lloyd had the Dennison lad escort us back to Jonson Road while he had a word with young Lewis, who seemed remarkably nonplussed by the whole affair.
Armstrong was still there and in one piece, though I walked around him to check that all four wheels were in place before we got in.
Beeby came to the door of Lloyd's house and waved us goodbye.
She was fully dressed; she had her sunglasses on.
I still didn't know why she was called Beeby.
‘How did you know it was the motorbike service?’
Patterson asked over my shoulder as we left Brixton.
‘You were convinced that was where the leak was from the start.
Why?’
‘Because that's the way I would have done it, Tel-boy.’
I dropped Patterson back at the PKB office so he could pick up his BMW and, though he didn't say it, I think he was glad he'd left it behind.
At least he had something to drive home in.
I made it back to Stuart Street just before eight.
I needed a shower and a change of clothes and if I was meeting Werewolf and Sorrel in Vecchio Reccione's it was wisest to leave Armstrong behind.
Besides, there were my domestic duties to perform, such as getting updated on Salome's condition from Lisabeth at Mission Control, and feeding Springsteen.
Lisabeth was out of her flat before I'd closed the front door behind me.
‘Frank's been back but he's gone again,’ she said, quivering with importance.
‘Salome's had her operation but there's no change in her condition which is a good sign rather than a bad one…’
‘Stable!’
Fenella shouted from inside their flat.
‘Don't forget to tell him she's stable.’
‘Thank you, Binky,’ Lisabeth said in a voice that would have sliced vegetables.
(Fenella's surname was, unfortunately, Binkworthy.)
‘Don't have a dog and bark yourself, dearest.
Concentrate on your macramé.’
She said it the way judges passed sentence at Nuremberg.
‘Salome's condition is described as stable.
We'll know more tomorrow night.’
I was almost up the stairs level with her by this time.
‘How's Frank taking it?’
I asked.
‘Quietly,’ said Lisabeth.
‘Very restrained.
He's gone back to spend the night near the hospital.’
I have to admit I was relieved.
I dread having to go through the sympathetic ear act, even when it's merited.
I'm no good at it and I hate doing things I'm no good at.
‘Anything he wants doing?’
‘No, I don't think so.’
Lisabeth frowned for a second.
‘Oh — he did say to tell you he'd fed Springsteen.
In case you were late back.’
‘He didn't have to do that,’ I said, squeezing past her  and on to the next flight of stairs to my flat.
Then I did a double take.
‘How did he get into my place to get the cat food?’
‘He didn't.
He microwaved some steak out of the freezer.
The poor little beast…
’ And this from someone who firmly believed all cats had 666 tattooed on them somewhere under their fur!
‘Just like Salome does when you're out.’
I found Springsteen lying in the middle of my bed.
He didn't look up when I entered the bedroom, he just put a paw on the end of the sirloin steak he was chewing to make sure I didn't grab it.
I shook my head at him in disgust.
‘You're an animal,’ I said.
CHAPTER 9
‘You're an animal!’
Sorrel shrieked in delight.
Then she grabbed a handful of ice cubes from a nearby wine cooler and stuffed them down the front of her partner's trousers.
She stood back and acknowledged the applause of the crowd as the lights came on again and we were able to concentrate on our dessert.
I suppose I'd better explain.
If you want an Italian restaurant where the waiters bring you menus instead of shouting at you, where they leave the lights on instead of turning them off every twenty minutes, and where they make you get up and dance before they'll turn them on again, then don't try the Vecchio Reccione, however convenient it is for Stringfellows.
I only eat at the Vetch-Retch these days when someone else is paying, which is much the same as saying when England wins at cricket.
However, this was on PKB's Amex card, the pasta had been delicious, the Frascati had flowed, the zabaglione was on its way and all was right with the world.
Though I couldn't go so far as to say that service was included as all the waiters seemed interested in was getting the lights off so they could dance with Sorrel.
Little  Gino, whose ambition had always been to be taller than four foot ten, had got a little too interested when it was his turn and even in the candlelight we could all see that he'd deliberately got his charm bracelet tangled in one of Sorrel's suspenders.
The miniature St Christopher on it had a brief treat before Sorrel cooled him off in no uncertain terms.
The blue-rinsed grandmother from Iowa —‘just passing through Lunnun to catch a few shows’(like anglers collect trout)— I had drawn as a dancing partner clapped louder than anybody.
‘I've always wanted to do something like that,’ she confided to me.
Then to herself, she said: ‘Never got the excuse.’
I thanked her for the dance and Werewolf bowed deeply to her ‘girlfriend’(Oxnard, California), which made her day, as they say in those parts.
Back at our table with the promise of at least a half-hour's respite while Gino dried his trousers, I brought Sorrel and Werewolf up to date.
‘Why are you telling us all this?’ asked Sorrel.
She was direct, I'll give her that.
‘Because I thought it was more interesting than the weather, the rattle on Armstrong's exhaust pipe, the situation in the Lebanon, additives in food, the price of…’
‘What do you want us to do?’ asked Werewolf, scraping the last of the zabaglione out of his glass.
‘There you are,’ I said to Sorrel.
‘He understands every word I say.’
‘So what's the deal?’
She raised her spoon to her mouth then sent her tongue out to meet it.
I averted my eyes.
‘All you have to do, Sorrel dear, is fill me in on the gossip about Simon Cawthorne.
You, Rambo, come and play soldiers with me down on Jollity Farm.
Cawthorne calls it the Exhilarator.
It's in Kent, one of these paintball guns and combat trousers action games for bored executives.
They run over cross-country courses and pay through the nose for it.
In fact they pay for the sort of thing they used to skive out of when they were at school.’
‘I nivver did games at school,’ mused Werewolf.
‘Lack of coordination,’ Sorrel said to me.
‘Bad attitude?’
I asked.
‘Yeah, that's right,’ said Werewolf, genuinely surprised.
‘How did you know?
That's exactly what the priest put on my report.
Not just for games either, come to think of it.
Still, the pompous bugger wrote it in Latin so my Dad never understood.
Thank God.
So when do we go yomping over south-east England?’
‘Tomorrow if I can fix it, Wednesday if not.’
‘Today Kent, tomorrow the world!’
‘Somebody must have seen that before now,’ sighed Sorrel.
Then, seriously: ‘The Exhilarator can be rough, you know.
I've played it.’
Werewolf and I looked suitably impressed.
‘They don't like women there,’ she offered, playing with the froth on her coffee with a fingertip.
I found it disturbingly moving.
‘And they don't make concessions and it's not just airpistols firing paint blobules.
They have the whole works — thunderflashes, booby-traps, smoke grenades, the lot.
That's why he charges top whack and it's a nice little earner for him.’
‘If it's such a nice little earner, why does he go round prying into other people's mail?’ asked Werewolf.
‘Nice little earners are even nicer when they grow into big earners,’ said Sorrel philosophically.
‘Is he greedy?’
‘Greed is everything in the City.’
I'd heard that before.
‘What exactly is Cawthorne?
Somebody told me something like he was ‘of the City’ but not ‘in it’.
Does that make sense?’
‘That's very astute.’
She nodded.
‘Sums him up nicely.
He was a real bright boy in the pre-Big Bang ‘Golden Hello’ stakes.
Built himself a shit-hot reputation and moved firms three, maybe four times, before the Bang.
You've got to remember that at the time, deregulation was looked on as an open cash-register.
The firms with the best teams — analysts, jobbers, corporate lawyers, financial PR men, whatever — those were the firms who were going to set the going rate and get it.
And for a while — the Golden Time — they hired anybody, giving six-figure ‘Golden Hellos’ to anyone willing to break a contract.
At one point, I think Cawthorne was actually getting paid by three brokering houses.
‘Anyway, soon after Big Bang, things settle down and eventually start to tighten up.’
She flicked a finger at her empty glass and Werewolf added some more white wine.
‘The writing on the wall for the Yuppies, eh?’ he asked her.
‘You could say that, but few saw it.
The spray-painting on the wall came with the big double M in. ‘87 — Meltdown in the Market, which started on Wall Street — but some of the bigger houses and the banks were already letting people go.’
‘I love that,’ I said, ‘Letting people go.’
I have this vision of a Biblical stockbroker standing in the Red Sea shouting ‘Let my people go.’’
‘It was a bit like that,’ Sorrel said, smiling.
‘I know one jobber who spent his twentieth birthday in the slammer for throwing his VDU through a fifth-floor window on to the street.’
Werewolf whistled low and slow.
‘Did it hit anybody?’
‘Worse than that.
It bounced off the roof of another jobber's Porsche.
He got bound over to keep the peace for punching the guy who got fired.’
‘Was Cawthorne let go?’
I asked.
Sorrel shook her head and her hair stayed wondrously in place.
I realized that a haircut like that was no Saturday-morning trim and blow-dry.
Come to think of it, the little party frock number she was wearing (and I'm so glad hemlines are on the up) didn't come from Oxfam either.
‘No.
He jumped, but only just before he was pushed.
He was dealing himself in too much.
It becomes obvious, even to the Stock Exchange.
You could say he was an insider trader before it became fashionable.
Nothing was ever  proved, of course.
That was still before people went to chokey for dodgy dealings, but he soured his own patch.
The DTI — the Department of Trade and Industry — started to check up on one or two deals and at the first whiff of them he was away on his toes.
Couldn't get a job in the City scooping dog poop nowadays.’
‘So how does he earn his Daily?’
Werewolf leaned over and pinched a Sweet Afton from the packet on the table in front of me.
He rolled it between two fingers and tapped it on a thumbnail and generally fondled it as I knew he would for a good five minutes before lighting it.
Sorrel watched him for a few seconds, then snatched it out of his hands and stuck it in her mouth.
Two waiters clashed wrists getting a light to her.
She blew smoke out, coughed, and handed him the cigarette and he took it without a word.
She'd known him less than a week and was already on to his annoying habits.
‘He panders to people's whims,’ she said pointedly, still looking at Werewolf.
Then to me, as if she heard my brain going click-whirr.
‘No, not drugs.
I don't think he deals.
It's the other things, like the Exhilarator — a playground for young executives.
And he has a small ticket business, you know, last-minute box at the opera or hospitality suites at Wembley for a Springsteen concert, or Centre Court at Wimbledon, that sort of thing.
You pay, of course, but that's rarely a problem for his clientele.
And there's his latest venture — Le Tube.’
‘I have to ask…
’ I said.
‘It's what we — they — in the City call the Channel Tunnel and the opening up of the full Common Market in Europe in 1992 and ‘93.
Well, the market integration comes in ‘92 and the Tunnel is supposedly the following year.
The two together are referred to as Le Tube, though the papers sometimes call it the French Connection.’
‘It's the houses, isn't it,’ said Werewolf, nodding wisely.
‘What houses?’
I had to ask.
‘Property prices in rural France are a joke compared to this country.
Near where the Tunnel comes out on their side…’
‘Le coast,’ said Werewolf, interrupting her.
She ignored him.
‘…
You can pick up an old farmhouse with barns and stables, so forth, so fifth, for less than a terraced house in Bolton at the moment.’
‘Le snip,’ grinned Werewolf.
‘And there's sod-all planning permissions needed over there.
Ideal for doing up into dinky Yuppy holiday homes or even regular homes.
With the Tunnel, you can commute to the City from France faster than from, say, Wiltshire or Dorset — which are the in places to live at the moment.
Or you could live there, rig up your personal computer and play the Stock Exchange and the Bourse at the same time and then nip over to the West End for a show.’
‘Le life du vin et roses.’
‘Ignore him,’ I told Sorrel.
‘He tripped over a volume of Proust when he was a kid.
So Cawthorne is doing up houses in France?’
Sorrel shook her head.
‘No, buying up, not doing up.
Pure speculation.
It's been said he's got a bigger investment in bricks and mortar in the Pas de Calais than Hitler had.
Once the Tunnel opens — or maybe just before it does and before the French realize what's going on and think up a way to stop it — he'll sell them for maybe a thousand times what he's paying for them now.’
‘Is it le con?’ asked Werewolf.
Sorrel shrugged.
‘That seems a legit business, though knowing Cawthorne, a few corners will have been trimmed.
But the idea seems a decent punt — that means a bet to us city slickers, Wolfman —’ she smiled sarcastically —‘not a cockeyed Irish pound note.’
Werewolf narrowed his eyes and pursed his lips at her, making a face which would have worried an exorcist.
‘It's the way he's financing it that's dodgy,’ Sorrel went on.
‘He's into cash businesses.
Like the Exhilarator and he owns leases on half a dozen pubs in the new dockland, and he does a bit of importing — high value stuff like furs or cars.
They're all cash deals.
No extended lines of credit, no invoicing thirty days later and all designed to be quick  in-and-out operations before the tax man or the VAT man has twigged there's anything going on at all.
‘From what you've said about Airborne, he's also into some dodgy share dealings.
That's a dangerous business these days, so he's being clever — if he's being successful.’
‘What do you mean?’
I asked before Werewolf could say anything.
‘Look, insider dealing is regarded as the downside of legal nowadays.
A coupla years ago, it meant you had good contacts and you used them well.
Now it's naughty with a capital N. So you don't do it, or you don't do it in the normal way, which is relying on somebody inside a company to tell you things.
Cawthorne seems to have cut out the middleman.
He just reads their mail without them knowing it and the thing that would really appeal to him is that the companies he sets his sights on are actually paying him for delivering it!’
She smiled and shook her head some more.
‘Yes.
He'd like that,’ she said to herself.
I caught Werewolf's eye and knew it had to be me who had to ask.
‘How do you know all this, Sorrel, love?’
‘Simon used to work for my father a few years ago, but he…’
‘Had to let him go?’
‘You're catching on, Angel.
It's a small world in the City, though, so…’
‘Speaking of small worlds…
’ Werewolf nodded towards the restaurant's kitchens from where Gino had appeared zipping up the flies on a new pair of jeans.
‘Your father is…in the City?’
I asked innocently.
‘Oh yes,’ she admitted.
‘Well, he's a businessman but he has a lot of dealings in the City.’
‘Okay, blue-eyes,’ I drawled, even though they were green, ‘be difficult and make me twist the information from you until you scream for my kisses…’
‘Oooh, I love it when you talk dirty!’
‘Not you, you Fenian oik, her!’
I turned back to Sorrel and leaned forward so we eyeballed each other.
‘Now listen very carefully…’
‘I shall say this only once,’ she completed, moving closer so our noses almost touched.
She had good teeth too, I noticed.
‘What — and think carefully before you answer — is your surname?’
‘McInnes,’ she said, dead straight.
‘Big M, small C, big I.’
‘So your father is called —’ I paused dramatically —‘Mister McInnes.’
‘Correct!’ she squealed, leaned over a millimetre and kissed me quickly.
‘Go to the top of the class.’
‘You get any closer to him, my lass, and he'll have to stand in the corner till he cools down,’ said Werewolf, draining the last of his wine.
‘Oh, is that a salami in his pocket?’ she said all innocent, with eyes as wide as a Volvo's sidelights.
‘And I thought he was just pleased to see me.’
‘Now, now,’ I said soothingly.
‘It'll end in tears.
I want to get one thing straight before this conversation finally goes down the drain and before he orders liqueurs.’
Sorrel and Werewolf sat up straight in their seats like schoolkids at morning assembly.
Their faces were studies of faked interest.
‘So your father is…’
‘Innes McInnes,’ said Sorrel primly.
‘The Innes McInnes?’
I asked stupidly.
‘The rich Innes McInnes,’ said Werewolf.
‘As in company takeover McInnes, company chairman McInnes, seat-on-a-thousand-boards of directors McInnes and so on.’
‘Oh, that Innes McInnes.’
I nodded, hamming it up.
‘I thought you meant the Innes McInnes who runs the bookmakers on the Goldhawk Road.’
‘Nah,’ Werewolf joined in.
‘That McInnes is McInnes with two ‘M’ s and a silent ‘q’.
Any anyway, he's Jewish.’
‘I don't think you two,’ said Sorrel, sniffing loudly, ‘are in any position to take the Mick out of people's names.
I mean to say, Fitzroy Maclean Angel!
Would you believe it?’
‘No,’ I agreed, ‘but it happens to be true.’
From the corner of my eye I saw little Gino make his way over to the restaurant's background music system.
‘What sort of a name is it?’
‘My father was a great reader,’ I explained, as I have a million times.
‘And when I was born, he'd just finished reading Eastern Approaches by Fitzroy Maclean.
Hence the name.
Lucky, really.’
I noticed Gino reaching for the volume control on the amplifier with one hand and the restaurant light-switch with the other.
‘Why lucky?’ she asked, as I knew she would.
‘The following week he read Mein Kampf.’
The restaurant was plunged into darkness and the music boomed out as Gino dived across the table at her.
I got home, eventually, via a minicab and two large malt whiskies at Sorrel's flat in the Barbican — or the Barbarian, as Werewolf insisted on calling it.
It was a nice flat with a good view and as I let myself into Stuart Street, I wished I could remember how to find it again.
No. 9 had long since gone to bed, so I crept up the stairs as quietly as I could.
I did put the landing light on, though, as I'd been ambushed in the dark on those stairs before, barely escaping with my life.
But Springsteen wouldn't catch me napping again.
There was a note from Lisabeth Sellotaped to my door telling me that Frank had phoned and that Salome was ‘comfortable’ which was heaps better than ‘stable’, and he'd talked about her being moved to town.
Oh, and Frank wanted to see me about the car.
There was also a PS:
A Man rang this evening [Lisabeth always used Capital M for the enemy]and asked how Salome was.
Wouldn't say who he was, just said he was a friend.
Very posh voice.
Don't forget to tell Frank if you see him before I do.
L.
Underneath, in purple ink, had been added: ‘And love, Fenella’, with a capital X as a kiss.
I might have known Lisabeth wouldn't have walked up the stairs herself to leave  the note.
She was convinced Springsteen would come out of the catflap like a bullet and zip up her trouser-leg.
Though to be honest, there was hardly room for her leg in there.
With such idle thoughts, I repaired to my virginal couch to stack up some zeds in the sleep bank.
But even as I engaged in the ritual unarmed combat with Springsteen (well, I was unarmed) over possession of the duvet, I had a nasty feeling that I wasn't taking this whole thing seriously enough.
My brain went some way up through the gear-box next morning as I padded downstairs to collect my pint of gold top.
Frank usually left it outside my flat door on his way back from his morning jog.
I was missing him already.
Lisabeth appeared in her doorway as she heard me coming back up.
‘Did you get the message?’
‘Loud and clear and good morning to you too.’
‘Hrumph.’
‘You look worried.’
‘Well, I don't like Men phoning who won't give their name,’ she said as I drew level.
I shook my head to dislodge some of the dead grey cells which were clogging things up.
‘What are you on about?’
‘The posh voice last night who kept asking where he could send flowers to for Salome.’
‘You didn't say that in your note,’ I said accusingly.
‘But I said he wouldn't leave his name.’
She'd also said it was a Man with a capital M and you don't get much lower in Lisabeth's book.
In her dictionary, Men came between Sewer and Slime.
I never said she could spell.
‘What's this about flowers?’
‘He kept asking where he could send flowers and whether it would be better to send them to the hospital or to here if she was coming home.’
‘So what did you say, Lisabeth?
Exactly.’
‘Well, exactly —’ she hrumphed some more —‘I said she was still going to be in Maidstone for a few days though we were thinking of moving her to a private hospital.
And that's exactly what Frank said yesterday except you weren't here, of course…’
By then she was talking to my back as I headed downstairs again to the communal phone on the wall.
Salome's hospital number was still pinned up on the noticeboard alongside the little red book where we are supposed to log our calls.
I checked my watch as I dialled: 9.15, which meant the admin shift should be into their first tea-break by now.
It was worth a try.
‘Hello.
Administration, please.
Hello, can I speak to whoever handles press inquiries, please.
Yes.
My name is Fitzroy.’
Do I lie?
‘Yes, from Radio Invicta.’
Well, occasionally.
A male voice came on the line.
‘Hello, I'm trying to clarify a rather confused report we've picked up — I think from the local police — about an incident at the hospital last night, or it could have been early this morning.
We don't like to broadcast things unless we're absolutely sure, of course, so…’
‘But the police told us there was nothing worth reporting,’ said the voice impatiently.
‘We were worried, naturally.’
‘Well, of course,’ I agreed quickly without the faintest idea of what I was agreeing to.
‘They couldn't find anybody outside and there was certainly no one in the wards unaccounted for,’ he went on bossily.
‘So they put it down to a prowler, probably a junkie after drugs.
We have a one hundred per cent record on security as regards drugs, I don't mind telling you.’
‘I'm sure you do, sir.
Now this incident was around midnight, wasn't it?’
Well it was a fair guess.
‘No.’
There was a rustle of paperwork.
‘It was probably 2.06 a.m. when the forced window was noticed.’
Oh how I love a bureaucrat.
‘So someone actually got into the hospital?’
‘No.
The police think that the prowler — that's what they  called him, not me — was disturbed and made off across the car park.’
‘There doesn't seem to be much in it, sir.
Just as well I checked.’
‘Yes it is…just who did you say…?’
‘Thank you.
Goodbye.’
I hung up, feeling vindicated in my analysis of human nature.
(Rule of Life No. 83: Approached in the right way, anyone will tell you anything and it will usually be true.)
I was only smug for about half a minute.
Then I moved into worried.
By eleven o'clock I was standing in front of Patterson's desk laying down the law.
I was dressed in red leather riding gear and red boots and sweating a lot despite the air-conditioning.
That may have ruined the image a bit, after all, not even Prior, Keen, Baldwin could have had that many motorbike-riding clients.
Mind you, if they had Lloyd Allen as a client, they should have been used to anything.
‘I want her moved now, Tel.
Today.
Before end of play this afternoon.
Make a window in your Filofax for the downside of this afternoon or whatever the fuck you have to do, but get it organized.
Okay?’
I thumped his desk with a gauntleted fist and the telephone rattled in its handset.
‘You really think…’
‘I know, Tel.
As long as Sal is in that hospital, she's in danger.
There's been one pretty definite go at her, and you can ask Alec Reynolds if you doubt that — if you've got a ouija board, that is.’
He fluttered his fingers as if he'd picked up something hot.
‘All right, okay, relax.
It's done.
There's a BUPA clinic up West, somewhere near Paddington, I think.
We'll get her in there by tonight.’
‘Good man, Tel, you're a diamond.
And don't worry, it must be deductible from something.’
His eyes lit up for a moment at that.
‘Then what?’ he asked.
‘Well, I thought I'd go and sell ice-cream outside the Stock Exchange, which is why I dressed like this.’
‘Did anyone ever tell you you had a smart mouth?’
‘When they could get a word in.’
‘So you're going out with the black kid, the messenger?’
‘No, I'm going out instead of Luther, although Luther doesn't know it yet and if it isn't Luther who comes when you ring for a rider, then we're in trouble.
But the plan is for me to get a look in that van without, for the moment, the driver noticing anything wrong.’
Tel, I have to say, looked sceptical.
‘Won't he notice that you are somewhat less tinted than our friend Luther?’
‘I'm banking on him being colour blind,’ I came back, but it was getting too easy to wind him up.
‘With this gear on and his helmet with the visor down…
And remember, it's for about three minutes only and the driver will be busy doing whatever it is inside the van.’
Tel reached into a desk drawer, confirming his reputation as the fastest cheque-book east of Chancery Lane.
‘How much will Luther want?’ he asked, going for a pen from his inside suit pocket.
‘Luther will want cash and fifty should do it.’
He got on to the internal phone and asked for petty cash, not specifying any amount.
Maybe petty cash only came in fifties these days.
It was brought in almost immediately by Anna from the postroom, who smiled at me, but it was one of those you-haven't-phoned smiles which are supposed to make you feel guilty and usually do.
As soon as she'd gone, Patterson flipped the five ten-pound notes across the desk.
I scooped them up before he could think of asking for a receipt and zippered them into a jacket pocket.
‘Where did you get the Hell's Angels outfit?’ he asked, then he realized what he'd said.
‘Hey — Hell's Angel.’
‘I rented it, so I'll be putting in an expense claim.’
I hadn't, I'd borrowed it from Duncan but I'd heard the Hell's Angel crack so many times before I suddenly decided  to charge him for it.
And there'd be a drink in it for Duncan, so he'd be happy.
‘Now I want you to call a courier and sort out a couple of juicy documents to somebody not too far away, but it doesn't matter who.
But make the stuff kosher, top grade.
We don't want them thinking they've been sold short or rumbled.’
‘Okay,’ he said slowly.
‘But it goes against the grain.’
‘All in a good cause, Tel, all in a good cause.
Now, any comeback on Alec Reynolds?’
Patterson consulted a notepad on his desk.
‘Alec was an only child, brought up by an aunt, an unmarried aunt, in Preston, would you believe.
His parents died in a car accident while  he was still at school.
No other relatives, nobody asking questions.
The aunt gets his insurance and pension — both generous — and the police reckon the body can be released more or less any time.
I've talked to the aunt and she's taken it well.
She's talking about a funeral next Monday or Tuesday up in Bolton.
Nobody's asked any nasty questions, not even the cops.
Lucky, really.’
‘Not for Alec,’ I said.
‘No.
Oh, there's one other thing.
Salome's blood sample showed no trace of alcohol.
She would have passed a hundred breathalysers.’
‘That's good news.
How did you find out?’
‘I got on to the hospital and then the local police lab and said I was from her insurance company and we operated a no pay clause if drink-driving was involved.’
‘That's very good, Tel,’ I said, genuinely impressed.
‘That's just what I would have done.’
The one thing that had bothered me was having to borrow Lewis Luther's helmet.
I'd got the riding gear from Duncan, but he'd been unable to come up with a red helmet with black visor.
So when Lewis turned up I decided to show him the money straight away.
Patterson had prepared an envelope addressed to the secretary of a small, but well-known, wine and spirits  shipper which had offices in City Road.
It was a draft of PKB's analysis of their half-year results to be announced tomorrow.
Not high-grade stuff, Patterson had said, but bloody useful to get the figures in advance if you held shares.
I had to take him on trust on that.
Maybe I should have consulted Lloyd.
He probably had the company in his portfolio of holdings.
Knowing Lloyd, he probably owned it.
I told Patterson to follow normal procedure and he got one of the girls in the postroom to ring Airborne and say there was a package for delivery a.s.a.p. and give them just the district, EC 1, where it was going.
Lewis Luther was there within five minutes, and I was waiting for him in the foyer by Purvis's desk.
Purvis had even stood up, maybe in the expectation of aggro, so I was glad to disappoint him by greeting Lewis like a soul brother and flashing fifty quid at him.
‘Mr Allen said you might want to do something wicked,’ he said.
‘I'll need your helmet,’ I said.
He balked slightly at that, then he tucked the tenners down his gauntlet and handed it over.
I tried it on and it fitted well enough.
‘You'll need this too,’ said Lewis, tapping his collar radio.
‘Good point, but you call it in first.’
‘Have to do that outside, man.
Can't get no reception inside.’
‘The lad's got a point there,’ said Purvis as if somebody had asked him.
‘Where's Sorley likely to be with the van?’
I asked.
‘Never know till I call,’ Lewis shrugged.
‘But I've never known him closer than a mile to a pick-up.
He's careful that way.’
I bet he was.
‘Okay, let's risk it,’ I said and called the lift.
Lewis stood by my side and eyed me up and down.
‘You think he ain't gonna notice a difference?’
‘With this gear on, he wouldn't know if I was yellow and green striped,’ I said.
‘No man, I didn't mean that,’ said Lewis as the lift doors opened.
‘I meant one of us so handsome and cool and the other…’
There are some people you can go off real quick, aren't there?
In the foyer of the PKB building, Lewis got on the radio and called up ‘Airborne One’.
‘Airborne Two, what is your destination?’
‘City Road, Airborne One,’ said Lewis.
There was pause, then some static crackle and then:
‘Rendezvous is Barbican Centre, Whitecross Street entrance.
Confirm.’
‘Confirmed,’ said Lewis.
He flipped a switch, then took the radio off and slung it round my neck.
‘He won't call again unless something goes wrong, like he gets clamped or stuck in traffic or sumfink like that.
If he does, you're Airborne Two and he likes you to say ‘Confirmed’ instead of Roger and Out or Over or Piss Off, suchlike.’
‘Thanks.
You stay here and keep out of sight.
Is there any signal when I get to the van?’
Lewis stuck out his bottom lip and shook his head.
‘Not really, I just kick the back door and he sticks his head out.’
‘You ever been inside?’
‘Nope.’
‘Okay.
I'll do the business with Sorley and I'll come straight back here so you can do the run proper.
Go back upstairs and ask Sergeant Purvis to get you a coffee,’ I added maliciously.
‘I'll squat here, man.
Less aggro.’
He unzipped his jacket and took out a scrunched-up copy of Motor Cycle News, opened it out, leaned against the wall of the lobby and began to read.
People got in and out of the lifts and didn't give him a second glance.
He could have been put there by the interior decorators.
I slid Lewis's helmet on and cut myself off from the world.
It was a bit unnerving at first and the lining stank of old  aftershave.
I put the visor down before I got out on to Gresham Street and almost walked into the edge of a glass door, but by the time I got to the Kawasaki my eyes had adjusted themselves.
I fumbled Lewis's key into the ignition, the gauntlets handicapping my fingers and adding to the impression that I felt like a spaceman dropped into molasses for gravity training.
The bike started sweetly and proved easier to handle than I'd expected.
It had been a few years since I'd ridden a bike but it's like sex, providing you don't fall off, you soon get back into the swing of it.
I cut round the Guildhall, almost taking out a couple of early season French tourists who hadn't got the hang of looking left first before they crossed the road, and through on to Moorgate.
If I'd been doing a pukka delivery, I could just have carried straight on virtually due north and come to City Road.
To give him his due, Sorley had picked a good place for his sneak preview of Patterson's mail.
Unlike the residences bit of the Barbican, where Sorrel had a flat, the entrance to the Arts Centre part is off Chiswell Street, which was an easy left turn for me just after Finsbury Circus.
Chiswell Street is quiet and sedate nowadays but two hundred years ago it was the powerhouse for the Whitbread brewery which churned out Porter, the dark beer named after the London market porters who knocked it back at a fearsome rate early in the morning.
Nowadays they only get sales like that if one of the Philharmonic Orchestras is in residence round the corner at the Barbican.
Left again, after the brewery (where they still have the Porter Tun Rooms, a tun being a big barrel not a weight, though not many people know that) is Whitecross Street and the Barbican entrance, where many tourists go in and some actually find the theatre or gallery they're supposed to be going to.
I found the red Transit easily enough, it was the only one in the street and it had the same number plate as yesterday.
I parked snug in behind its rear doors, at an angle, straddling  the bike like Lewis had done.
I was about to knock when the door opened.
The Chinless Wonder stuck his head out and said something which was probably ‘You're late’ but I couldn't hear because of the helmet and the idling bike engine.
I took the envelope out of the left-hand saddle-bag and held it across my chest.
This meant Sorley had to lean further out of the van to grab it and as the door opened wider I got a good look inside.
One side of the van's interior had been kitted out with shelving.
The higher shelves held plastic containers of the sort a do-it-yourself handiman would keep screws and nails in so the effect was of a dozen or so pigeonholes.
Each hole was stuffed with envelopes, brown ones, manilla, white and jiffy bags.
The bottom shelf was wider and it held a square white machine which looked like a document shredder.
Then Sorley's arm, the envelope and the rest of him disappeared inside and the door closed.
It couldn't be a shredder; that was just plain daft.
Yet it didn't look like a photocopying machine.
I decided to chance it and killed the bike's engine and took off the helmet.
If anyone had seen me bent over a motorbike with my ear pressed to the back of a Transit van outside the Barbican that morning, probably nobody would have looked twice.
They would have put it down to an alfresco commercial for one of the shows.
I could hear Sorley thumping around inside and then a distinctive whine and a sort of humming stutter.
It could only be one thing, a Fax machine.
The cheeky buggers were faxing the stuff to save time.
I had the bike revved up and the helmet and visor back in place by the time Sorley opened the door and thrust the letter at me.
It was a new envelope and address label, so he must have a typewriter in there too, but unless you were looking for it, you would hardly have spotted the swap.
I turned around and pulled away.
I was confident that Sorley hadn't rumbled me, but I didn't look back.
I turned into Chiswell Street and then risked a look.
There was no sign of the Transit, so I hung a right back the way I'd come.
So now I knew how the Sorley/Cawthorne private intelligence line worked, and I was willing to bet that there was another Fax machine at Pegasus Farm currently on ‘receive’.
Doing that had been easy.
Now came the difficult part: telling Patterson I was borrowing his car.
CHAPTER 10
‘A Fax?
A fucking Fax machine?’
‘Deep breaths, Tel, keep calm.’
‘It's not possible.’
He was beginning to look like a man who wished he smoked.
‘We don't use Fax to send stuff like that because they're not secure.’
‘What do you mean, secure?’
Patterson waved away my stupid question.
‘Oh, not the machines themselves, they're bloody useful.
It's just that most offices put them in the open near the coffee machine or the Ladies loo and anybody can see what's coming over.
So you only send non-confidential stuff that way.
Eyes Only material goes by hand.’
‘By Airborne,’ I said smugly, crossing my feet on the edge of his desk.
He gave me a look which made me wonder if the leather riding gear was knife-proof, then he sprang at the internal phone and pressed two buttons.
‘Ask Howard to get in here,’ he said into the mouthpiece.
Then he stared at the phone rather than me for about a minute until the door opened.
‘This is Howard Golding,’ he said to me but made no effort to tell Howard who I was.
‘He's our analyst for electronics and the communications sector.’
Howard was wearing regulation red striped shirt and braces but his glasses were the trend-setting steel octagon design rather than the circular, coloured owl frames which were on their way out.
He leaned against the wall of Tel's office as there wasn't another chair, and folded his arms.
‘How can I help?’ he asked with a faint American or Canadian twang.
‘Fax machines,’ said Patterson.
‘What do you know about them?’
Howard raised an eyebrow and took a deep breath.
‘Facsimile transmission of hard copy documentation began in this country just after World War II but was not really exploited until the late ‘sixties and even then very limited in numbers and versatility.
Breakthrough came in the ‘eighties with digital technology and speeds of sub-one-minute per page transmission and greatly enhanced copy quality.
I reckon there are now more Faxes around than Telex machines, say 100K in this country.
Something like two dozen brand names, biggest player probably NEC Business Systems with their Nefax machines.
On the horizon, laser printing and faster transmission times as telephones improve.
Growth market, good potential.
I'd flag the whole area as a ‘buy’ without a worry.’
I blinked at Patterson but he seemed to have understood most of it.
‘What about a mobile unit?’ he asked.
‘You mean in a car or something?’
Howard considered for about a micro second.
‘Sure.
If you can have a car phone, in theory you can have a Fax machine to go with it.
There's certainly one mobile unit on the market at the moment, though not many people realize it.
All you need is an interface from the car phone and an inverter from the battery to supply the power.
No problem.
Want me to check it out?’
‘No, never mind,’ said Tel looking at me.
‘Can you have an ex-directory Fax number?’
I asked Howard.
‘They have their own phone lines, don't they?’
‘Sure,’ Howard said.
‘I don't see why you can't have a private line, though it defeats the object of getting people to send you things you need in a hurry.’
He looked at Patterson and said, ‘Anything else, boss?’
Tel shook his head and Howard closed the door on his way out.
‘So where are we?’
He looked at his watch.
‘Apart from late for a lunch meeting.’
I'd taken my feet off his desk while Howard had been in.
It wouldn't have been good for staff morale.
I replaced them.
‘We know how your leaks happened and we have a good idea where the information ends up.
Salome and Alec weren't doing the Exhilarator for their health, were they?’
He looked uncomfortable at that.
I wondered whether it had been his bright idea that sent them there.
‘My guess is that one of them found the other end of the conduit, maybe the Fax machine at Pegasus or evidence of Cawthorne acting on information he shouldn't have had.
Whatever it was, he felt he had to get rid of them.’
‘Are you sure about that?’
He was definitely uncomfortable now.
‘I mean, you are talking serious crime here.’
‘Yes, Tel, it's called murder and the last I heard it was certainly against the law.
I believe the expression round here is ‘downside of legal’.’
‘You can't prove a thing.’
‘Get me a camera and if we repeat this morning's little exercise, we'll be able to prove the leak end of things.
But I want to look round Pegasus Farm and see if we can dig up anything there.
If we blow Sorley he'll just sell the van and do a runner.’
‘The Exhilarator only does night exercises — don't look at me like that, that's what they call them — on Friday and Saturday.
That's why Alec and Salome went then, so they could look around.
They knew what they were looking for.
Think you can do better?’
‘I can't do worse, can I?’
He thought about this.
‘When?’
‘Tomorrow maybe.
From the brochures, you can book the day before.
I'll need some cash.
Expenses.’
He automatically reached for the cheque-book.
‘I'll make it for cash.
I don't want any comebacks on the company.’
‘Sure.’
‘Are you any good at these war game things?’
‘Never been on one.
But I have to look the part.
You know, bored City whizz kid.
I'll have to borrow your BMW.’
‘What?’
‘Well, I can't turn up on the bus, can I?’
‘Haven't you got a car?’
‘Sort of, but it wouldn't create the right impression.’
‘Are you insured?’
‘Up to the hilt, Tel.
Don't worry.’
He scratched his head, then tweaked his nose before fishing in a pocket for the BMW's keys.
‘I'm taking one hell of a chance on you.’
‘What are the options?’
I picked up the keys before he could change his mind.
‘Go to the police?
With what?
Maybe we've got enough to get them interested, but the word'll be out that Prior, Keen, Baldwin leaks like a sieve.
Want that?’
‘Of course not.’
He narrowed his eyes and tried to look tough.
‘But what are you getting out of it?
Are you doing this because you think he hurt Salome?’
‘I'm sure he did, Tel.
I think he waited on Blackberry Hill in the dark until Sal and Alec came round the corner and then he bumped their car off the road and into space.
I didn't know Alec, but Salome's virtually family, so I'm after Cawthorne for that, yeah.
But also —’ I flipped the keys a couple of times as I stood up —‘because I think he enjoyed doing it.’
I rang Sorrel's flat from Sergeant Purvis's desk, and as he was out to lunch I sat on it and rearranged his pencils in a petty and thoroughly satisfying bit of vandalism.
Werewolf answered and said he was in the middle of cooking lunch as Sorrel was out.
I hoped she knew to expect that her kitchen would look like a nuclear test site when she returned.
I told him I had planned to take him to lunch but he said he couldn't wait as he had some business to attend to, but he'd be in a pub called the Banker if I could pick him up about three.
I asked him if he'd misheard the name of the pub and he said gosh how original, he bet nobody had thought of that before and he'd be sure to tell the landlord.
After he'd hung up, I phoned an OADF(F) — old and distinguished friend (female)— called Fly.
I'm sure her mother called her something else, Eunice I think, but most people called her Fly though I've no idea why.
I can be terribly innocent in some things.
Fly ran the Hackney branch of a chainstore opticians and we went back quite a long way together as OADFs go.
She told me she didn't eat lunch any more as it had become a bourgeois meal, but I could call in for a cup of de-caff and con her into whatever it was I wanted.
Fly knew me well.
It's frightening sometimes.
Never having been one to look an unguarded telephone in the mouth, I made another call to the number on the Exhilarator brochure I'd taken from Salome's case.
A woman answered with: ‘The Exhilarator, how can I help?’
‘Good afternoon.
A friend and I have come across your brochure and we'd like to give your course a try.
Would there be a chance, say, tomorrow?’
‘We have a Shoot scheduled for ten a.m., sir, we do not call them assault courses.’
‘I'm so sorry.’
I can crawl when I have to.
‘Could I book?’
‘Certainly, sir.
Briefing is ten a.m. sharp.
How will you be paying?’
‘Cash.’
‘Could I have the names, please.’
‘Maclean and…er…
’ Come on, think fast.
'…Chaney.’
Well, Lon Chaney had played the Wolfman, hadn't he?
And I didn't think that was bad at such short notice.
‘Fine, sir.
Booking confirmed.
We'll see you on parade.
Everything is provided but you might wish to bring your own action footwear.’
Action footwear?
Christ.
That little bridge would have to be crossed later.
For the moment I had two vehicles in PKB's underground car park, Armstrong and Tel's BMW.
Much as I was itching to play with the Bob Marley, I knew I would have more chance of parking Armstrong  illegally when I collected Werewolf.
And I had a change of clothing in Armstrong's boot, so the faithful old retainer won out over the flash German status symbol.
The garage attendant, who almost called in a SWAT team when he saw me arrive that morning, had a few more palpitations when he watched me climb in the back seat and start peeling off my biker's gear.
God knows what he thought when I emerged in jeans and Roar of Disapproval T-shirt (I've no objection to advertising good causes) and got in the driving seat.
I tooted Armstrong's horn as I passed him, but he didn't wave.
One of the many advantages of a delicensed black cab is that unless the cops know it's delicensed, the chances of getting pulled for not wearing a seat-belt are fairly remote.
This means you can eat a Big Mac, suck on a vanilla shake and drive in relative comfort, though I don't recommend it for anyone who hasn't done at least two combat tours driving in Central London.
I cut up back towards Hackney and Fly's opticians, judging I could still make the Banker by three, though I wondered why I was worrying about leaving Werewolf waiting in a pub.
Fly is a tall, skinny, short-haired, very independent lady who dresses and swears like a Vietnam veteran (North Vietnam that is).
I'd once helped her break a habit.
No, that's going too far.
She hadn't actually caught the dragon's tail, but she was reaching.
To my surprise, she'd taken a regular job selling frames and contact lenses and had stuck it and was boss of the shop.
Her gimmick was that she wore a different pair of glasses every day and somehow they all seemed to suit her.
She'd even been on the local TV news for it and it had done wonders for business.
Her eyesight, of course, was 20/20 straight arrow.
I parked Armstrong on double yellow lines outside her shop and dived in.
Fly broke off from a customer and headed me off.
‘You really come for a cup of de-caff, Angel?
I hear you're a city slicker these days.’
‘Is nothing secret in this town?’
‘Village, Angel.
This city is just a collection of villages which happen to share the same map reference.’
‘You've been reading too many Sunday supplements.’
‘You could be right.
What're you after?’
I put on my all-innocent, how-could-you-think-it-of-me expression.
After two seconds, I dropped the pretence.
‘I want a pair of glasses.
The sort we city slickers wear, but with clear glass in the frames.’
Fly tapped a pencil against her teeth.
‘Would that be regular workaday frames, sir, or for dress wear?’
She was serious.
I picked some black carbon fibre frames which had been signed by an Italian designer, made in Japan and retailed in England for over a hundred quid.
Fly produced an aerosol spray and cleaned the clear glass lenses for me.
Then she made me promise to get them back to her in one piece within a week and sold me two tickets to a Ward Bond Retrospective at her film club in Ponder's End.
I'd have to go.
She'd ask questions later.
I wore my new glasses as I drove south to pick up Werewolf.
The Banker is a riverside pub, converted from a warehouse or something at the end of Cousin Lane, a cul-de-sac tucked under the armpit of Cannon Street station.
There's no way draymen in London deliver after lunch-time, so I felt fairly safe there even though I had to rearrange the kegs around Armstrong.
It's a great barn of a pub with a high ceiling, a balcony area and lots of glass in the south wall so you can drink and look at the Thames without having to smell it.
The bar had a headbanging range of Fuller's beers but I decided I'd better be in training for the Exhilarator so I opted for an alcohol-free lager, turned my back to the bar and its temptations and scouted for Werewolf.
The lunch trade had mostly disappeared so he wasn't hard to spot.
He was at a window table but he was ignoring the river, being deep in conversation with a middle-aged man wearing a suit and a short sheepskin car coat with matching brown suede shoes.
Even from this distance you could guess the guy's tailor was based in Dublin.
And  Werewolf was drinking tomato juice.
Another bad sign.
I left them to it but didn't have to wait long.
Within five minutes the older guy got up and left.
I replaced him at the table opposite Werewolf who was staring into his tomato juice.
He looked up and saw the glasses.
‘Bloody hell.
I always said you'd go blind.’
‘Pardon?’
I said, cupping a hand to an ear because I knew the routine.
‘And deaf.’
‘Done the business?’
He made a see-saw gesture with his right hand.
‘Gotta go see a man about a dog at the week-end.
In Dublin.
Go on Saturday, back Sunday.
I'm not stopping.’
‘Family trouble?’
I asked diplomatically.
‘You don't wanna know,’ he said.
Then, looking at me: ‘It's just an errand I have to run for…somebody.
Nothing heavy, trust me.
You know I don't tangle with the looney politico fringe.
Just don't ask, OK?’
‘Don't forget to bring me some poteen,’ I said and left it at that.
From the look in his eyes there wouldn't be a result in pressing it unless I was really keen on acquiring a broken nose.
‘Sorrel's cooking for us tonight,’ he said apropos absolutely nothing.
‘Great.
I've booked us to play soldiers tomorrow.’
He shrugged, then linked his fingers and made his knuckles crack.
‘Good.’
I made a mental note to make sure I got put on his side.
‘She's keen for you to meet her old man,’ he said, then drained the last of his juice.
‘She's not thinking of proposing, is she?’
‘I think she's up to something,’ he said.
‘But she's a good cook, and if I don't get some decent wine in she'll skin me.’
‘Okay, let's go shopping.’
I reached into my wallet and flashed my PKB Amex card at him.
His face lit up.
‘I feel suddenly invigorated beyond measure,’ he said with a grin.
‘Good.
I think we should go in character tomorrow,’ I explained, moving the Amex card out of his reach.
‘Hence the glasses.
We're supposed to be bored Yuppies you know.’
‘So we'll need some clothes…
’ He was catching on.
‘A suit at least…’
‘Or two…’
‘And some Action Footwear.
They specified that.’
‘Some designer Action Footwear…’
‘And we have to turn up in style.’
‘Meaning?’
I flipped Patterson's keys on to the table.
‘Do you want to play with a new BMW?’
I had to run to catch up.
I'll gloss over the afternoon's shopping expedition.
Suffice it to say there is now a branch of Suit & co .
I dare not go to again but there is a Tie Rack where Werewolf and I are on a promise with the girls serving there.
We also managed to find a couple of bottles of Chilean Chardonnay (trust me, it's great) in a very posh wine merchant's where the staff were half way to calling the cops as we walked in.
At the end of our shopping spree, we collected Tel's BMW from Prior, Keen, Baldwin's garage.
This time, the garage attendant just shook his head and walked away, not wanting to know.
I think the thing that really upset him was seeing Werewolf slide across the BMW's bonnet to get to the driver's door.
I knew it would be a race back to Stuart Street and I was pleased that it ended in an honourable draw.
The BMW had the power — too much for the traffic conditions if truth were known — but Armstrong knew the side roads better.
I parked outside No. 9 just as Werewolf reversed into a space two millimetres longer than the BMW across the road.
As was traditional, the race didn't finish until we were both out of our vehicles, leaning on the engines (to prove they'd cooled down) with our arms folded.
It was only as we were doing this and grinning inanely at each other that I noticed the red Transit van turning out of the other end of the street.
I didn't exactly run up the steps to No. 9, but I didn't hang about either.
At that time of the afternoon I knew only Lisabeth would be home, so I wasn't too worried.
Lisabeth could look after herself.
Muggers went around in threes when she was out.
As soon as she opened her flat door to my hammering knock I knew something was wrong.
Her mouth had fallen open and her eyes popped even more than usual.
‘What's happened?’
I almost shook her.
‘What's the matter?’
‘I didn't know you wore glasses,’ she said.
I took them off.
‘There.
Now what's been going down?’
‘Nothing.’
Lisabeth relaxed.
She obviously just had a thing about men who wore glasses.
‘Except the delivery man with the flowers.’
‘The man in the Transit van.’
This from Werewolf who had come up the stairs behind me, his arms loaded with parcels.
‘Sorley,’ I said.
‘What is a Sorley?’ asked Lisabeth.
‘The man with the flowers,’ I said slowly, ‘said what, exactly?’
‘What's with this ‘exactly’ business?
He said he had a bunch of flowers — and he really had — for Mrs Asmoyah.
When I said she wasn't here, he asked where she was and I said Maidstone and he said she'd moved and I said then I didn't know but he could leave the flowers here for Frank but he wouldn't.
Where's the harm in that?’
I assured her there wasn't any harm and that she'd done nothing wrong.
Telling her not to speak to strange men would be like asking if the Pope was free on Sunday.
Half way up the stairs to my flat, Werewolf said quietly:
‘They're on the bloody ball, aren't they?’
‘Christ!
I thought you were Mormons!’
You couldn't blame Sorrel, I suppose.
She'd never seen either of us in a suit before — we were running them in, checking for labels we'd missed and so on— and we had  stood on her doorstep as if we were about to launch into the ‘Have you heard the Good News…’ routine.
Mind you, not many Mormons would turn up at a Barbican flat at 7.30 clutching two bottles of wine.
Fewer still would be dressed as Werewolf was.
He'd bought a red striped shirt to go with his charcoal double-breasted but back at Stuart Street he'd remembered that that was the only shirt he had for tomorrow.
As a consequence, the overall effect of the smart suit was marred by the Miami Dolphins T-shirt and the fact that his brand-new red and black squared silk tie was in a bow knot around his right wrist.
That was the first thing to go.
Without a word she untied it and stuffed it into Werewolf's lapel pocket until it looked like a dress handkerchief, then she moved behind him and pulled the sleeves of his jacket up to the elbows.
She looked me up and down and adjusted my tie an inch or so (I'd gone for green silk and I now had two ties), then said:
‘You'll have to do.
My father's here, so behave yourselves.’
And she said it like she meant it.
Innes McInnes was taller than I'd expected, but then how tall should a millionaire be?
If he was Sorrel's father, then he must have been around his mid-forties at least, but he'd worn well.
The skin was healthily tanned and the hair thin but not receding, and slicked back from the front.
He wore a pencil moustache above which his nose twitched like a rabbit's as he sniffed the wine glass he was holding.
‘Franzia,’ he said, and there was just a hint of Scottish burr.
‘A very nice Cabernet Sauvignon from California.
Try some.’
Sorrel busied herself fetching glasses while she yelled the introductions.
‘Daddy, this is Roy and Francis.’
Francis?
Werewolf avoided my gaze as he sipped wine.
‘Very good, Innes,’ he said politely.
‘Have you bought the winery yet?’
McInnes laughed.
‘It wouldn't make it taste better if I owned it.’
‘But at the moment you're drinking somebody else into house and home,’ argued Werewolf.
Sorry; Francis.
‘He's Irish,’ I explained.
‘It's the Ballymurphy school of economics.’
‘We used to call it living out of the shop.
It never works.
The best publican is the one who buys you a drink but puts the money in the till.’
‘Publicans usually buy us a drink to go somewhere else,’ I pointed out, and Innes McInnes smiled to show us he had all his own teeth.
‘Let's eat,’ said Sorrel, handing over a second, opened bottle of Franzia.
‘It'll be ready by the time you've worked out which cutlery to use.’
We three males looked at each other, then meekly trooped to the circular dining table laid out near the window.
Below us the lights of the City did what they were good at, they just sat there and twinkled.
Sorrel excelled herself with the meal, although her father never mentioned it.
Maybe he ate like that all the time.
Maybe he'd had his taste buds removed by surgery.
Starters were bowls of a rich stock soup with julienne of vegetables (if that's what they're called when they're chopped into sticks) and the earthenware bowls had puff pastry hats on which kept the soup scalding hot.
Then she served a carbonnade of large cubes of beef and triangles of wholemeal bread spread with French mustard, the gravy tasting largely of Guinness.
(I suspected Werewolf's influence here.)
Another bottle of Franzia appeared then and a big piece of Stilton to round things off.
Innes McInnes was obviously a soup-meat-cheese man from way back, but had come up in the world.
He asked a lot of questions about my interest in Cawthorne and I answered honestly.
(Rule of Life No. 5: Always tell the truth; not necessarily all of it, though, and not all at once.)
Yet as we talked and ate, he looked mostly at Werewolf and then at his daughter and occasionally you could see him thinking that maybe he ought to change his Will.
I hadn't asked but I just knew she was his only offspring, and I'd lay odds there wasn't a Mrs McInnes any more.
Over the cheese, he picked up on something I'd said about the PKB file on Cawthorne's dealings.
‘I don't pretend to know what it all meant,’ I said.
‘But some of the references I've picked up since, like Meltdown in the Market, Inter-Broker Dealing and so on.
I haven't found out what TT means, though.’
‘I can help you there,’ said McInnes, reaching inside his jacket for a pen.
‘Pass me the back of an envelope, Sorrel my dear.’
Sorrel couldn't run to the back of an envelope, but found instead a spare section of Filofax pages, just about the most expensive scribble pad you could get short of using ten-pound notes.
‘It means The Touch,’ said McInnes, ‘and it goes like this.’
He began to jot down figures in two columns and he talked as he wrote.
‘Since Big Bang, all the market prices are flashed up on the electronic screens.’
‘The Topic System,’ I threw in.
‘That's right.
More screens than the Odeon at Leicester Square.’
I could relate to that.
‘And most of the shows are X-rated, but the naughty boys can alter the programme.’
He finished scribbling and held the Filofax sheet up so we could see it.
‘A company's prices are shown by dealer with the median across the top.
So, let's say the company is called Bloggs International.’
He'd written:
‘The letters are the firms, the numbers are the prices in pence of a typical Alpha stock and the volumes they are prepared to deal in at a particular time.
Now the trick of course is to buy at the cheapest price or sell at the most  expensive.
Best execution, they call it.
Let's say you were buying a particular stock…’
‘Because you've found something out about them that nobody else knows?’
I tried.
‘You're catching on.’
McInnes winked at me.
Werewolf looked impressed too.
‘The Touch indicates who has what stock.
This top line here —’ he pointed with his pen —‘comes up in a yellow strip, and this is the best bid, best offer line.
Each of the dealing firms has a different amount of stock but you can work out who has what by how keenly the prices compare with the best bid, best offer.
Remember, these volumes of stock are in thousands, so one by one is one thousand shares.
‘Market-makers may be prepared to offer stock in larger sizes at less attractive prices.
Look at this example.
Firm A is dealing in 25s at 293–8, that's 293 pence or 298 pence, buy/sell.
Now he may be willing to buy large at, say, 292 or offer larger than 25 at, say, 299.
To get the stock, of course, he has to trade with the other firms.’
‘Inter Broker Dealing,’ I said knowledgeably.
‘Very good,’ nodded McInnes.
‘So you can use one dealer to trade with the rest and get control of a company?’
‘No.
In theory, if you buy over five per cent of a company, you have to declare it on the Stock Exchange.
You must also remember that whatever deal you do, it's reflected for all to see on the Ticker page of the Topic system.’
‘And all the deals will add to the price, especially if other dealers see something going on and have a punt themselves.
’ Even Werewolf was interested.
‘Absolutely, Francis.’
I did a double take to see who this Francis was, but McInnes was in his stride.
‘So if you want to get as big a share of, say, Bloggs's stock, as quickly as you can, you take out all the firms offering stock at once, before they can deal among themselves.’
‘Taking Out the market-makers,’ I said, more or less to myself.
‘That's right,’ said McInnes.
‘Mean anything?’
‘It explains a reference on Cawthorne's file at Pretty Keen…
’ I realized what I was saying.
‘…
Bastards,’ McInnes completed without batting a manicured eyelid.
‘But how do you take out —’ I looked at the Filofax page and did a quick count —‘eight market-makers at once?’
‘You get several colleagues and the latest British Telecom touch dial screen technology with all the market-makers’ numbers pre-programmed and you ring 'em up at exactly the same time.
If you've spare people or even just another pair of hands, you ring their second numbers as well just to block the lines and it never hurts to put a few idiot inquiries through to the dealing house main switchboard.’
‘So you stop the market-makers dealing with each other.’
‘Exactly.
I think I will, if you don't mind.’
McInnes reached out and took one of Werewolf's Sweet Afton.
He lit it with the air of a man considering big moves in the Irish tobacco market.
I noticed Sorrel's expression.
Her eyes could not have bulged further if Werewolf had told her he only wanted her for her mind.
‘I've never seen you smoke before, Daddy.
What's this?’
McInnes blushed slightly.
‘I only indulge on special occasions, darling.’
‘It's my influence, I'm afraid,’ said Werewolf, straightfaced.
‘The last time I went to Confession the priest called for a packet of green Rizlas and an ounce of Lebanese Gold.’
‘The last time you went to Confession,’ I stirred it, ‘they still allowed smoking on the underground.’
‘Really?’ said Sorrel, joining in wide-eyed.
‘I've read about that.’
‘The point,’ said McInnes, drawing the meeting to order, ‘is that there is little change in basic share prices, unless a real story hits the wires.
Of course, it doesn't have to be true.
It can cover any number of things.
Expectation of good results, mergers, a takeover of a competitor or by one, changes in top management, rumour, innuendo, boredom among the market-makers or sheer bloody-mindedness.’
‘So speculation pushes up the price based on rumour.
Is that what you're saying?’
I asked to give him a lead.
‘Of course, though I think Karl Marx put it better.’
‘He was more long-winded,’ I conceded.
‘Agreed.
But you see now why Salome's job is vital.
The backroom analysts provide ‘the story —’ or they refute someone else's story — on which the jobbers make a market.
They need to be able to convince the big players — the pension fund managers, the insurance companies…’
‘The institutionals,’ I offered.
‘…the institutionals, that's right.
They have to be persuaded to buy a stock, or indeed, sell it.
If Cawthorne has been accessing the research material of somebody like PKB — and who knows who else — then he knows in advance, or can at least have a damn good guess, which way the market-makers are going to go.
‘So, if you get wind of a rumour from Salome on, say, Bloggs International, which says that tomorrow they're going to be taken over on very generous cash terms, then you buy as much Bloggs stock as you can.
If money or credit is no problem, you buy as many as there are on the market, and there is always a market unless the stock is suspended.’
McInnes put out his cigarette and looked at his daughter.
‘Is there any coffee, petal?’
‘Only if you promise not to talk Man's Talk when I'm in the kitchen making gagging noises so that you think I've got an Espresso machine,’ said Sorrel, eyeing him suspiciously.
‘Promise.
And I've got the message.
One coffee-machine added to the birthday list.’
‘Oh Daddy!’
She flushed and stamped into the kitchen.
‘It never fails,’ said McInnes quietly.
Werewolf looked puzzled.
‘It always pays to spoil the child, if female, but not in front of her friends.
Unless you want her out of the way,’ I explained.
Werewolf mouthed an innocent O. Well, about as innocent as he was capable of.
He could make Satan standing at the Gates of Hell shouting ‘Come on down!’ look innocent.
‘She'll expect us to be plotting among ourselves, then,’ he said.
‘So let's do it,’ said McInnes, putting his elbows on the table.
‘What did you have in mind?’
‘You said that as if you have something in mind.’
It was my turn to narrow my eyes.
I realized that was how people got migraines.
‘I might have, but you go first.’
‘Why?’
‘I'm paying for the booze.’
‘Fair enough.
Francis and I —’ Werewolf looked at his fingernails; anything to avoid my smug look —‘are going down to Kent tomorrow to do the Exhilarator.
Or rather, Francis is actually going to play soldiers, I'm sneaking around the place to see what I can see and maybe take a few incriminating photos with my trusty Box Brownie.’
‘Of what?’
McInnes came back sharpish.
‘First off,’ I said, thinking as I spoke, ‘I'm looking for a four-by-four.
A 4-wheel drive vehicle of some sort with a cow-catcher fitted to the front.
Hopefully, it will be a cow-catcher with some paint missing, or even better, a cow-catcher with smears of paint on it which belong to a VW Golf of my acquaintance.
Then there's a Fax machine to check out — the other end of the Cawthorne conduit.’
‘That's good, I like that,’ said McInnes.
‘And if what you've said is kosher, then somewhere there'll be a bank of phones for him to do his dirty dealing on.
I've got Tel — Terry — Paterson lined up at PKB to send a hand delivery via Airborne at eleven-thirty a.m. tomorrow, when we'll be there to see how it's received.’
‘It sounds as if you will,’ said Werewolf, looking around for something else to drink.
‘It looks like I'll be doing my famous General Custer impersonation.
You haven't mentioned any of this up till now.’
‘A good general only briefs his troops the morning of the battle.
Before the pubs open.’
‘Rule of Life?’ asked Werewolf out of the corner of his beard.
‘It will be.’
If it worked.
‘Then what?’
McInnes asked anxiously, one eye on the kitchen door.
‘Then I thought we'd set up the nice Mr Sorley and his mobile Fax van and photograph him in the act of reading other people's mail.’
I didn't think that was bad, considering I'd just thought of it.
‘Then what?’
He was beginning to irritate me.
‘Then we threaten to hand over the negatives to the City Squad or the Stock Exchange or its watchdog committee — it's bound to have one.
I don't think for a minute we'll have to.’
‘And you think Cawthorne will just sit back and take this?’
‘He'll have to.’
Werewolf offered McInnes another cigarette and said: ‘Won't he?’
McInnes shook his head slowly.
‘You're not hitting him where it hurts.’
‘We're showing up his operation so he'll never be able to use it again.’
‘He'll think of another one.’
‘He won't like being bested by friends of a black lady,’ said Werewolf seriously.
‘You're right there,’ said McInnes ruefully.
‘He was always a bit twisted that way.
Flirted with the National Front at one time.’
‘So we hurt his pride,’ I said, hoping that clinched what was sounding to be a very scampy  arguement .
‘But you're still not hitting him where it really hurts.’
‘In the wallet?’ suggested Werewolf.
‘Exactly,’ said McInnes with the sort of grin Colonel Sanders gave when he saw a ‘Free Range Eggs’sign.
‘And I think I can help you there.’
He punched Werewolf gently on the shoulder.
Oh God, he was warming to him.
After coffee, Werewolf offered to wash up.
Sorrel, fearing for her crockery, offered to help him.
I don't think she was fooled for a minute by Werewolf's professional decoy act, but she went along with it.
After five minutes of running water, scraping plates and chinking glass type noises, it went very quiet in the kitchen but I don't think her old man noticed.
Not even that low humming sound which I knew sure as hell wasn't the thermostat on the fridge.
If the kitchen had had a serving hatch, I could have scared the living daylights out of them.
No, scrub that.
Knowing Werewolf, he would have sold tickets.
McInnes was keen to press his thoughts on me.
‘You need to turn the tables on Cawthorne if you really want to stitch him up.’
‘You mean go for the jugular — his bank balance?’
‘Correct.
What we need is a terminal with thin spread.’
He jabbed a finger into the table-top to emphasize his point.
I poured myself some more coffee from the jug Sorrel had left on the table.
I felt I needed a drink but was determined to keep a clear head for tomorrow.
‘Could I have that in English, please?’
I asked him.
He took a deep breath.
‘We need a company that has come to the end of its natural life.
A ‘terminal’.
Its products are no longer in demand, it hasn't the capital or the rating to expand or diversify; its management is moribund.
The company is, shall we say, clapped-out.’
‘Knackered,’ I offered.
‘Flushed down the pan,’ he countered.
‘Belly up and shat upon.’
‘Buggered.’
I thought for a moment.
‘I'll see your ‘buggered’ and raise you a ‘shagged out’.’
‘You get the picture,’ he said, not wanting to play any more.
After all, this was business.
‘So we find a terminally sick company with — what was it?’
‘A thin spread — of shares.’
He saw I was little wiser and slowed his breathing down.
‘A company where only a few outside interests own the shares.
Say, a family where  firty-five per cent of shares are owned by family members and the rest are spread between maybe ten or twelve others, either institutionals or individual punters.
It could be a company where only two or three brokers can make markets in the shares.’
‘Something tells me you have one in mind,’ I said shrewdly.
‘I might have.’
‘And what do we do with it?’
‘We do nothing, except make sure that it is drawn to friend Cawthorne's attention.’
‘For entirely the wrong reasons, of course.’
‘That depends on your point of view.’
‘And Cawthorne buys loadsashares and ends up with a bum company.’
‘And he can't complain to anyone because he would have to admit what made him buy the shares.’
‘A confidential report of some kind which only PKB customers should have seen.’
‘Exactly.
Up the garden path good and proper — if you can fix it with PKB, that is.’
I almost felt sorry for Cawthorne and I must have shown it
‘Don't worry, Cawthorne deserves everything that's coming to him,’ said McInnes in a tone I bet he'd never used on Sorrel.
I agreed with his sentiment, of course.
Though in view of what eventually happened, I did regret thinking that.
But not enough to lose sleep.
CHAPTER 11
‘I just do not believe it,’ said Werewolf.
‘This car has adjustable thigh supports.
I simply cannot go another mile until my thighs are suitably adjusted.’
‘And supported,’ I said.
‘Don't forget that.’
‘Can it massage them as well?’
‘I'll ask the onboard computer.
No, sorry, massager is an optional extra.
Obviously Patterson couldn't run to that.’
‘Mean bastard.
What's his taste in music?’
Werewolf had been reading the owner's handbook of Patterson's BMW and experimenting with the passenger seat, having achieved what seemed like a dozen different positions before we got south of the river.
He was in a filthy mood, first because I'd suggested he sleep on my floor instead of at Sorrel's so we could get an early start, then because I'd made him wear a suit and tie to go with our Yuppie cover (and because I'd insisted on the shirt as well).
Finally, I'd won the toss and got to drive the Bob Marley down to Kent.
His corn flakes had probably gone soggy at breakfast too.
Tel's BMW was one of the new Series 3 two-door jobs.
After years of bullnosing Armstrong through the London traffic it was an awesome driving experience.
I felt like Von Richtofen joyriding Concorde for a day.
Werewolf had one foot on the dashboard and was sorting through Tel's selection of tapes, grunting disapproval at most of the titles.
‘Find anything worth damaging the earholes with?’
I asked while cutting up a British Telecom van — rather niftily I thought.
‘Nah, what you'd expect.
Mostly Dead Hedgehog.’
Dead Hedgehog — middle of the road music — was one of Werewolf's lowest classifications of taste.
‘I never thought he'd be into Acid House, but there must be something.’
Acid House was all the rage; multi-rhythmed electronic stuff popular on the disco circuit but only comprehensible when taken with the designer drugs now supplied as openly as condoms in some of the smarter venues.
‘There's an old Huey Lewis.’
‘Somebody must've left it by mistake.
Stick it on.’
Werewolf proceeded to try and blow all four stereo speakers and by the time he had the volume where he wanted it, and was playing along on his air guitar, we were through Sidcup and heading for the motorway.
‘Tell me again, what's my name?’ he asked between tracks.
‘Chaney.
Don't look at me like that, it was the best I could do on the spur of the moment.’
‘First name?’
‘Up to you.’
‘Jerome G. Chaney,’ he mused.
‘What does the G stand for?’
I asked, knowing I shouldn't.
‘Gobsmacked — at having such a daft name.
What's yours?’
‘Roylance Maclean.
I know it is because that's what it says on my Amex card.’
‘I'm surprised that hasn't self-destructed after the damage you gave it yesterday.
Remember, he who…’
’…acetates is lost.’
We finished together.
The old ones are the best.
‘How did they get Roylance Maclean?’
‘You know how people screw up my name.
I don't know why they do but they just can't accept it.’
‘That's okay, Butch.’
He grinned.
‘Butch?’
‘You be Butch Cassidy and I'll be the Sundance Kid.’
‘Fair enough.’
I didn't mind.
I'm still convinced they got away at the end of the movie.
Mind you, I've never met anyone else who is.
I eased the BMW off the M20 at Wrotham so that by the time we got to the A227 our speed was almost legal.
At Blackberry Hill, I slowed down and explained to Werewolf how I guessed that Salome, coming the other way, down the hill, had been bumped into space.
The yellow and black police barrier was still there as a warning to other drivers coming over the crest of the hill.
Over the top, the road curved around to the left and a roadside milestone said it was two miles to Broughton Street.
I told Werewolf my theory of the track leading from Blackberry Hill to Pegasus Farm, roughly parallel to us but  the other side of the Down.
He unfolded the map I'd brought and agreed with me.
‘The place marked ‘Fisher's Farm’; you reckon that's it?’
‘Yep — and there you are.’
Ahead, on a right-hand bend, was the farm, but it had been a long time since a chicken had shat in that yard.
A discreet wooden sign said: EXHILARATOR ACTION COURSE APPOINTMENT ONLY — ALL VISITORS REPORT TO HEADQUARTERS.
There was a white wooden arrow sign below it pointing to the farmhouse, and that had HQ stencilled on it in Ministry of Defence style.
I pulled into the farmyard and bounced the BMW over the cobbles to where half a dozen cars were parked in front of the farmhouse, a long, low stone building probably about a century old.
Its oak front door was propped open by what looked like a Howitzer shell and there was another arrow sign saying HQ hung over it, pointing inside.
I parked the BMW by reversing between a Mercedes and a sleek Volvo 410 until I was pointing directly towards the yard entrance (Rule No. 277).
Bringing the Bob Marley had been a good idea, there wasn't a cheaper car in the yard, it seemed, except maybe the white Vauxhall Astra with the shirt-button wheels, a car Duncan the Drunken, in a rare lucid moment, had described as a jet-propelled tennis shoe.
I bet myself that was Sorley's, as I'd had him pegged as the Boy Racer type and I was glad the insurance companies were uprating them.
Next to it was a red Porsche 944 with a bumper sticker which read ‘My other car's a Porsche as well.’
How gross.
That one I wanted to be Cawthorne's.
We dismounted from the BMW and Werewolf slipped on a pair of gold-rimmed shades, which reminded me to put on the plain glass Yuppie specs I'd borrowed from Fly.
I thought we both looked pretty good: rich enough to have all the trappings, oiky enough to want to come on an Action Man course.
I unloaded our holdalls from the boot.
Mine advertised Marlboro, Werewolf's had a discreet gold plate in one corner saying Mappin & webb .
I wondered if Sorrel had missed it yet.
The holdalls only contained towels, shampoo and the ‘action footwear’ we'd bought yesterday.
Except mine, that is.
I'd stuffed an Olympus Trip camera into one of my Reeboks and some spare film into the other.
I was using the very fast 12-shot per roll film which estate agents use to make houses look good in the rain.
If you didn't mind a grainy look, you could slam it through any of the while-u-wait colour processing shops and get reasonable black and white prints in an hour.
Proper black and white processing takes weeks these days, unless you have your own darkroom, and sometimes the photo-kiosks think they've cocked it up when the pictures come out sepia and so they don't charge.
As I locked the BMW, Werewolf turned slowly through a circle scanning the farm's outbuildings with his shades.
I asked him what was the matter.
‘Just checking for snipers,’ he answered, and for a second or two he had me doing it as well.
‘Come on,’ I said, jerking my head towards the HQ sign.
‘Let's be careless in there.’
The interior of the farmhouse had been opened out into a reception office, though it still had the original stone floor and a pretty impressive fireplace in the middle of one wall.
The effect was somewhat marred, though, in that the fireplace didn't have a grate or anything, it was filled with what I hoped was a model of a two-inch mortar.
And then I began to notice that the pictures on the walls were all prints of cavalry regiments, and a hatstand in a corner wasn't really a hatstand but another empty shell case with a clutch of regimental flags standing in it.
The desk which was the focus of the room was probably authentic War Office surplus stock.
It even had a 1940's bakelite telephone which seemed to work, but the typewriter was state of the art and so, probably, was the young lady behind it.
Werewolf and I presented our suits to her.
I wondered whether we should salute.
‘Yes, gentlemen?’
‘The name is Maclean.
We have a booking for the ten o'clock shoot.’
She consulted a large desk diary.
‘Ah yes.
That will be £115, inclusive of VAT.
Would you like a receipt?’
‘No,’ I said, ‘that won't be necessary.’
I could almost hear Werewolf's eyebrows go up as I counted out the cash.
I'd decided to pay cash rather than use the PKB Amex card as that would have given the game away as to why we were there.
Paying cash had the added benefit of leaving no record of our visit except a pencilled telephone booking under two untraceable names.
The receptionist took my money and locked it in a drawer of the desk, then stood up.
She was taller than me, which isn't saying a lot.
Her jet-black hair had been precision cut into a circular mop, shaved high at the back and fringed at the front, about half an inch above eye level.
She wore one-piece khaki overalls buttoned to the throat, complete with epaulettes and button-down breast pockets, the left one of which had a name tag saying ‘Boyd’.
It was a good job she wasn't called Ramsbottom or anything like that as the material wouldn't have stretched far enough.
‘Have you played the Exhilarator before, gentlemen?’ she asked.
‘No, not this particular game,’ I said quickly before Werewolf could smart-mouth her.
She'd almost certainly heard them all before.
‘We tend not to use the word ‘game’, sir.
Sergeant Waters will be briefing combatants today.
There are only six of you this morning.
That will be at ten sharp.’
She looked at a Swatch watch which she wore upside down on her right wrist.
It was a quarter to ten.
‘So you've time to get changed.
Please follow me.’
She led us to an unmarked oak door which opened into a short corridor, obviously a modern extension to the farmhouse.
We trooped after her, watching the sway of her buttocks through the khaki coveralls.
‘I dig the action footwear,’ whispered Werewolf.
So did I. Ms Boyd was wearing bright red trainers which were certainly against regulations for any decent regiment  of the line, despite what one hears about the Guards these days.
‘The Library,’ she said, indicating a door to her left, ‘where the briefing takes place.’
The next door had a universal woman sign on it which presumably meant the Ladies changing-rooms, then another door had NO ENTRY in military style print and a padlock and hasp.
‘That's the Armoury where we stock our equipment,’ said Ms Boyd.
‘Weapons issue is immediately after briefing.’
We had reached the last door.
‘And this is the male changing-room.’
Ms Boyd opened the door and took a pace inside.
It was like the changing-rooms of a thousand football clubs, or schools for that matter.
Rows of benches with wire baskets underneath for shoes, clothes pegs above, and at the end a bank of showers and toilet cubicles.
Down one wall were full-length metal lockers with keys in their locks on the end of long thin chains so they looked like dog-tags.
Oh yes, and there were two naked men in the room.
Well, only one was really half naked.
He was wearing a long woolly pullover with hedgehogs all over it, nothing else.
His companion was zipping up a pair of the khaki overalls.
The man in just the pullover put his hands on his hips and faced us in all his glory.
‘Really, Sandy, you ought to knock or you never know what you'll find,’ he said in a plummy voice.
‘Don't fret, Mr Jenkins, I never let the little things in life bother me,’ said Ms Boyd, totally unfazed.
‘Everything's in the lockers,’ she said to us, ‘so get changed and come to the Library.’
The door closed and she was probably back at her desk before Jenkins moved, having abandoned his search for a good come-back.
It was probably as well.
He would have been fighting out of his class.
The Library turned out to be a small lecture room with about twenty hard chairs facing an overhead projector and  screen.
There were bookshelves along one wall, with titles ranging from John Keegan's Six Armies in Normandy and Richard Holmes's Firing Line, which I'd read, to anonymous pulp volumes called A Social History of the Hand Grenade or similar, which I'd no intention of reading.
There was a coffee machine and a pile of styrofoam cups and we helped ourselves.
Dead on ten there were six of us on chairs and ‘Sergeant’ Waters standing by the overhead.
We were all dressed in the regulation issue khaki overalls, but Waters had three stripes on his sleeves in case we didn't know what a sergeant was.
He also wore metal frame square glasses because someone had told him he looked tough in them.
In fact they made him look like a schoolboy showing off his Cadet uniform to a schoolgirl who was really more into sending her underwear to Prince or David Lee Roth.
Or maybe both, if she had spares.
‘Good morning, gentlemen,’ he addressed us.
‘Bring back the receptionist,’ whispered Werewolf.
‘As we are only six, this morning's Shoot will be an exercise in Individual Pennants,’ said Waters, flicking on the projector.
The screen lit up and showed two pennants crudely drawn on the acetate, one yellow and the other red.
They looked like they could have been pinched from a golf course.
‘The object of the exercise is to secure one of these pennants and return it to base.
For this exercise, home base will be the end of the changing-room block.
For those unfamiliar with our operation here, this is the terrain.’
He changed overlays and a schematic map came on the screen.
Waters produced a light pointer and began to explain the topography as if conducting a band.
The farm buildings formed three sides of a square in the south-eastern corner of the property, which was bounded to the right by a shaded area.
Waters zapped his torch on it.
‘First, you should note this area which runs the entire depth of the Exhilarator course.
This is agricultural land leased to a local farmer and is out of bounds.’
He moved the pointer back to the HQ buildings.
‘Behind us, immediately outside, is what we refer to as the Paddock.
It's open grass with not much cover and it slopes down to the pond and the stream which bisect the two parts of the battle area.’
The stream was marked with a blue line and what looked like a child's drawing of a ladder lay across it at one point.
To either side, the map had crudely drawn representations of trees.
‘This wooden bridge is the only link between the two wooded zones,’ recited Waters.
‘It is the only permitted point of crossing of the stream, please bear that in mind.’
‘The wooded zones are known as the Wood —’ he waved his light wand —‘to the north of the stream and, to the south and west of this building, the Orchard.
Both are woodland offering good cover and truly exhilarating terrain.’
I exchanged eye contact with Werewolf's shades.
‘The Wood and The Orchard are today's combat zones.’
I wondered what they did at weekends.
Invade Surrey?
‘The red and yellow pennants will be placed in the Wood and Orchard in ten-metre-square cleared areas.
We do not tell you the location of these areas, nor do we tell you which pennant is in which combat zone.
Your individual objective is to secure one of those pennants and return to base first.
You will leave this HQ at one-minute intervals and that is your minute of grace.
For those sixty seconds you are not a legitimate target, nor can you fire your own weapon.
Questions?’
The guy in front of me — the hedgehog pullover flasher — put a hand up.
‘Which pennant do we go for?
Or doesn't it matter?’
Sergeant Waters slapped his light torch against his thigh.
I got the impression he liked doing that.
‘Good question, sir.
When you are issued with ammunition pouches immediately after this briefing, you will draw either red or yellow paint shells.
Red ammunition aims for red pennant and yellow for yellow.
But remember, out there, you have five enemies.
Only the first one back wins.
There are no other rules.
Next question?’
‘What happens when you hit somebody?’ asked Werewolf.
Sergeant Waters blinked a couple of times.
‘Most people say ‘what happens when I'm hit’,’ he said, then looked around to acknowledge the titters of nervous laughter.
Two guys in front of us turned to look at Werewolf but he stared them down from behind his dark glasses.
‘If you are hit at all, you retire immediately to HQ for a penalty of five minutes.
Myself, Private Boyd or one of the other staff will be here and it is up to you to register with them.
Your five minutes only start when you make yourself known.
Understood?’
We all nodded and there was some general chatter and talk of a ‘sin bin’ nobody had expected.
I studied the map which was still on the screen.
Behind the HQ building, to the right of what Waters called the Paddock but before you got to the Wood, was a small black circle quite close to the boundary fence.
I raised my hand.
‘What's that, between the bottom edge of the wood and the fields?’
I asked.
The answer came from behind us and I felt the hairs on the back of my neck go ping.
‘That is an authentic World War II pillbox, built in 1940 under the supervision of a man called Fisher who actually used to own this farm.
I would like to say that Pegasus Farm was of vital strategic value to the war effort, but I cannot.
The truth is Mr Fisher was a prominent member of the local Home Guard and he managed to persuade whoever it was in charge of building anti-invasion pillboxes that Fisher's Farm was worth defending.
It also meant he only had to walk across the Paddock when he went on night duty.’
There was some desultory laughter and a few heads turned to the back of the room.
I didn't have to.
The voice told me it was Cawthorne as much as if he'd said ‘spade bitch’.
‘Unfortunately, Farmer Fisher used the pillbox for other purposes after the war, notably as a toilet for his farmworkers.
Consequently, it has been closed off and is out of bounds as far as the Exhilarator goes.’
Cawthorne walked to the front as he spoke.
He wore the same khaki overalls as we all did, but he had a major's crown on each shoulder.
He was more modest than I'd given him credit for.
Without meaning to, I found myself avoiding his eyes, slumping down in my chair and concentrating on the back of the one in front.
Werewolf stayed upright, but then he'd never been as close to him as I had.
Cawthorne reached the overhead projector and turned to address us, one hand on the holster on his right hip.
‘A word about your weapons, gentlemen,’ he smarmed, then he went for the quick draw and levelled a long-barrelled pistol at all of us.
I was impressed.
A guy on the front row broke wind.
Werewolf whispered: ‘He's faster when he moves.’
‘This, gentlemen, is what we call the Equalizer,’ Cawthorne said, turning the gun from side to side.
‘It has been specially designed for the Exhilarator course.’
The handgun was a big one, or so I suppose, being no authority on these things.
Put it this way, it looked like something Clint Eastwood wouldn't have minded finding on his Christmas tree.
It had a six-inch barrel, but a solid cylinder underneath it almost as long so that from the business end it looked like an over-and-under shotgun with the lower barrel blocked off.
‘It's a double-action revolver, which means you have to pull back the hammer to cock it before firing.’
He broke the gun in half and showed us the cylinder filled with six red plastic capsules.
‘It fires paint capsules by compressed carbon dioxide in the tube under the barrel.
Accuracy is about thirty yards and we have tried to make the guns as noisy as possible though they still sound more like airguns than the real thing, I'm afraid.
You will be issued with twenty-four paint balls and a spare CO 2 cylinder, although one is usually enough.
You will be issued with a weapons belt and goggles or, for those wearing glasses, a visor for face protection.’
I sank even lower into my seat when he mentioned glasses, but he didn't seem to be looking at me.
‘If you art hit on the torso, from head to knees but excluding the arms, that is a hit and you must return here for a penalty of five minutes.
Other than that, as the Sergeant says, there are no rules.
Out there, it's war!’
We trooped out and back into the changing-room where ‘Private’ Boyd had opened a fire door on to what ‘Sergeant’Waters had called the Paddock.
It was supposed to be like going Over the Top, but it felt more like a gang of reluctant schoolboys setting out on a cross-country run with only the prospect of a quick smoke round the back of the bike sheds to sustain them.
I palmed the Olympus Trip into my overalls while pretending to tidy my sports bag and new suit.
Then Ms Boyd called us to order and get in line for ‘weapons issue’.
I shuffled along behind Werewolf and whispered to him, ‘Head for the Wood to the right and wait for me somewhere near that big conifer.’
‘Which one's the conifer?’ he said out of the corner of his beard.
‘The green one.’
‘That narrows it down.’
The procedure was that Private Boyd handed us each a belt complete with pistol holster and ammo pouches and then Sergeant Waters launched each of us through the door with a pat on the shoulder, telling us we had one minute's start.
Werewolf and I were numbers three and four in the queue and the Sergeant had to tap his watch a couple of times as Werewolf seemed to be requiring more help than the rest of us from Private Boyd in getting his belt on.
What he appeared to be doing was chatting her up.
In reality, he was allowing the guy second in the queue to get a good head start while chatting her up.
Taking his time, he moved over to the door and paused.
He was the only one of the game players not to have fooled around quick-drawing our paint guns as soon as we had got them.
He just stood there with hands on hips until Waters raised a hand to tap him on the shoulder.
Werewolf looked him in the eyes and Waters thought the better of it, saying weakly: ‘Go.’
And Werewolf went, running hard towards the wood.
One of the first two out had peeled off to the left towards the Orchard.
The other had gone for the Wood but had entered well away from the large conifer Werewolf headed for.
He'd just about made it by the time Private Boyd had strapped my gun belt on and issued me with a plastic face visor which fitted with adjustable straps at the back.
Then Waters hit me on the shoulder and I was off across the paddock concentrating on the spot where Werewolf had suddenly vanished into the trees.
It was the sort of distance that Olympic sprinters can cover in less than a minute on their lap of honour.
My time would only be impressive if clocked by sundial but I was pleased with it, though I could have done with a couple of gym sessions to get in shape.
I promised myself I'd never smoke again and I didn't often do that twice in a morning.
I didn't so much take cover in the underbrush, I collided with it.
I'd forgotten just how many sharp edges there were in the countryside.
Then I felt my sleeve being tugged downwards and my feet swept from under me and suddenly I was lying next to Werewolf.
‘I thought you were going to walk all over me, yer clumsy shite.’
‘Rubbish.
I was coming straight for you,’ I panted, misting up the inside of my face visor.
Werewolf had opted for clear plastic goggles but he had already dispensed with them, tying them to his belt.
He had remembered to bring a pair of gloves, unlike me.
I'd also forgotten how many nasty stinging things there were in the country.
‘It's a jungle out here,’ I said to myself.
‘Now what?’ asked Werewolf.
He parted some ferns so we could look back across the Paddock to the changing-rooms where the next toy soldier had just launched himself towards the Orchard.
‘Can you keep them busy for an hour or so?
Make them think there are two of us out here?’
‘No problem.
Give us yer gun and ammo.’
I unbuckled my belt.
‘What colour ammo did you draw?’
‘Yellow.’
‘I'm red, so that should give you a fair spread.
If Patterson struts his stuff he'll request a rider from Airborne just before eleven, so if anything is coming through it should be before eleven-fifteen.’
I took off the stupid visor and placed it behind the conifer.
‘Leave the belt here and head back around eleven-thirty.
Okay?’
‘Sure.’
Werewolf checked over both pistols.
Expertly.
No comment.
‘I'm going over there.’
I pointed to the field Waters had told us was out of bounds.
‘And circle round to the farm buildings to see what I can see.’
‘If you're caught back there, what do you say?’
Werewolf asked with what he thought was an air of innocence.
‘Er…that I'm a casualty?’
‘Good thinking, man.’
He levelled his pistol at me.
‘So I'd better shoot you, hadn't I?’
‘You're starting to enjoy this, you bastard, aren't you?’
Let's just say Werewolf shot me in the ‘lower stomach’ and leave it there.
I know it didn't hurt, the paint pellet hitting and exploding with no more than a mild flick.
It was the surprise and indignity of watching the yellow stain spread which made me wince.
I left Werewolf with a withering look and headed for the edge of the road, cutting back deeper into the trees so I couldn't be seen from the farmhouse when I reached the fenced-off field.
The fence was a four-strand barbed wire job and beyond it were rows of green plants about four feet high.
Ideal cover running all the way to the farmhouse and the road.
Behind me I heard two more shots.
As Cawthorne had said, they were like airguns going off.
Then there was a howl of protest, something like ‘Hey, that's not fair!’
I dropped down and crawled to the front of the wood to have a look.
The guy with the hedgehog pullover, the one called Jenkins, was standing in the Paddock about twenty feet from the conifer where Werewolf had been hiding.
He had both a yellow and a red stain across his chest and he was turning around with his arms out appealing for a referee, then he turned and trudged back to the farmhouse for his time penalty.
It's a man's life.
I doubled back and picked a spot to vault the fence, using a post as a grip.
I thought I did it quite well until I heard the khaki overalls rip.
There was a horizontal tear four inches long just behind my right knee.
People paid sixty quid for denims like that in the King's Road.
The field was laid out in strips about two feet apart and only after pushing into the crop did I realize that the plants were trained up a trellis of almost invisible wires and that I was in a hop field — a ‘beer field’, as Duncan would have called it.
Perfect cover.
So perfect, I had to keep parting the hop bines and leaves to see how close I was to the farmhouse.
As I drew level with the back of the farm, I could see Jenkins remonstrating with Cawthorne and Waters.
He was pointing at his chest which had gone a bright shade of orange.
Against the wall of the changing-room extension, Private Boyd leant against the door with her head bowed, trying to control the giggles.
I would never have a better diversion, I thought, then it did get better.
Another player came out of the wood and began to jog across the Paddock.
Even from this distance it was clear he'd been hit several times in the chest and there was also red paint all over his visor.
Werewolf seemed to be conducting some sort of slaughter out there.
It was getting more like a grousemoor by the minute.
While the Exhilarator high command were busy dealing with another unhappy customer, I ruined some more perfectly good hops — I'm probably personally responsible for the rise in the price of a pint — and pushed through to the fence.
I came over it below the farmhouse and hugged the side wall like I've seen them do in the movies until I could peer round into the farmyard.
Apart from the parked cars, it was deserted.
There were two outbuildings across the yard; one looked like a converted barn and the other had at one time styed pigs.
I was looking for a 4 × 4 vehicle and either building could have housed this year's import quota.
I decided to go for the barn and struck lucky twice in a row.
For starters it wasn't locked and for seconds it was obviously the farm garage.
Lined up, and obviously well serviced, were a small tractor, a ride-on lawn-mower, a small white Citroën AX with French number plates (presumably to impress the odd Frog estate agent) and, at the end of the line, a blue Shogun four-wheel with metallic paint job.
Duncan had guessed right about it being a Shogun, the smaller, two-door version.
They were good little motors.
I'd even driven one once — a mad bass guitarist friend of mine, who'd hit the minor big league with a couple of records, bought three of them to race around the M25 orbital motorway.
(He'd also had each one stencilled TORA across the back door so that in formation on the three-lane motorway they read: Tora!
Tora!
Tora!)
I went straight to the hood of the Shogun, digging the Olympus out of the front of my overalls and trying to guess if there was enough light in the barn.
I need not have worried.
The front of the jeep was as clean as if it had just come off the boat from Japan.
There was no sign that it had ever had a front cow-catcher roll bar fitted.
I took a couple of pictures anyway, not knowing what possible good they would do, then kicked the Shogun in the driver's door just for the hell of it.
Petty, but pleasurable.
Then I heard the slap-slap-slap of rubber-soled feet coming across the yard and did what any ice-cool undercover dude would do; I went into freeze-frame, rabbit-in-headlight shock.
The one thing I didn't have to worry about was losing control of my bodily functions.
Thanks to Werewolf, it looked as if I'd done that already.
Instantly, I just knew that the barn had closed-circuit TV and kicking a company vehicle was a firing squad offence.
Come on, think.
Barns were supposed to have hay in them — they did in the movies — where the hero could hide while the baddies, with a total disregard for blood poisoning or spread HIV, jabbed a pitchfork in and out like a demented barman trying to get the last maraschino out of the bottle.
I glanced around.
The last time this barn had hay in it, Henry VIII took a tenth part in tax.
Henry also had a go at stopping hops being used in good old English ale.
Why do I know such stuff?
Why did I have to think of it now?
Sometimes I worry me.
This wasn't a game.
But hang about, it was.
What if I was ‘discovered’?
I was hiding, working my way round to the Orchard to try for the pennant in there.
Okay, so I didn't have my gun.
Would they notice?
Risk it.
Hadn't Cawthorne himself said there were no other rules?
Where did it say I couldn't go unarmed if I wanted to?
If you're daft enough to pay good money to have paint shot into your crotch, you're daft enough to do anything.
I scurried under the tractor as the doors began to creak open.
The tractor had more ground clearance than the Citroën, which was settled low on its hydraulics, and being found under the Shogun might just be too suspicious.
I wasn't desperate enough to get under the lawn-mower.
The floor of the barn was cold stone and slimy and smelled of engine oil and damp cereals.
I scuttered around until I was facing the doors and pulled my legs in just as they opened fully.
Sergeant Waters stood in the opening, his right hand reaching down to his side.
He produced a set of car keys and loped past the tractor about ten inches from my nose.
I could read ‘Nike’ quite clearly on his trainers until they disappeared one after the other into the Shogun.
The four-wheel started first go and he reversed out into the farmyard.
With the doors open, I could see Cawthorne walking over to him.
He handed Waters a battery-powered megaphone and pointed towards the wood.
Waters nodded a couple of times and set off.
Cawthorne walked back to the farmhouse and in through the front door.
I crawled out from under the back of the tractor just in case anybody thought to peer into the barn, and was about to use the lawn-mower for cover when my foot caught something hard and suddenly I was face down on the ground again.
Only this was more painful than the barn floor and it had a different texture.
I checked my camera to see if it was still in one piece and stuffed it back inside my overalls.
Then I put my hands out to explore what I had tripped over.
After looking out into the daylight, it took my eyes a few seconds to adjust.
Then I realized I was kneeling on a tarpaulin which someone had carefully placed over what could have been a small metal gate — or — the detached ‘fun bumper’ cow-catcher device from a small four-wheel-drive vehicle, say, a Shogun.
You don't have to give me clues on a plate.
I fall over them.
CHAPTER 12
I did the business with my camera, now there was plenty of light with the barn doors open, and was in the process of replacing the tarpaulin when the alarm bells went off and scared the hell out of me for the second time in five minutes.
This was becoming Stress City and I was too old for it.
It wasn't an alarm bell, of course, it was a telephone rigged to an extension bell fitted to the wall of the farmhouse, so that people working outside could hear it.
There were four long rings and then it cut out, but before it stopped, Cawthorne was coming out of the farmhouse and walking quickly towards the Paddock.
I checked my watch: 10.40.
That couldn't be Patterson calling for Airborne yet, but it might well be Airborne out on another document delivery somewhere else.
The four rings and then cut-out sounded like a Fax line connection.
Why bother having an outside bell if the delicious Private Boyd was sitting on reception?
Cawthorne had disappeared around the northern end of the farmhouse, so I ran back the way I had come, around the south end and climbed the fence back into the hop field.
I ran between the bines, parallel to the farm, until I reckoned it was safe to crawl to the fence and risk a look.
I could see the Wood to my right and way across the Paddock I could see Waters in the Shogun patrolling the edge of the Orchard.
There was no sign of Cawthorne and I thought I'd come too far.
Maybe the Fax machine was in one of the outbuildings, but they were the other side of the yard near the barn and Cawthorne had been walking away from them.
Another ‘combatant’ suddenly appeared from the Orchard end of the course, hurrying towards the farm.
Even at this distance I could see he was liberally spattered with yellow paint.
Werewolf was on the move.
Then I realized that I could hear an engine getting louder and the Shogun was bouncing across the Paddock straight towards me.
I was convinced that the grass near the fence was long enough to conceal me, so they couldn't possibly have spotted me.
Not unless they had radar or heat-seeking missiles, which they didn't.
Did they?
I was less convinced about that.
I was about to dive back in among the hops, though I probably smelled like last night's barmaid already, when the Shogun veered off to my right, and then pulled up about twenty feet from me.
A very angry Sergeant Waters jumped out of the driver's door.
I could tell he was angry because he was red in the face and his fists were clenched and he was swearing like a trooper.
Well, I suppose that was in character.
I could see why he was angry: the windscreen of the Shogun was well-smeared with yellow paint and he'd obviously reacted by turning on the windscreen-wipers, the worst thing he could have done.
What I couldn't work out was why he'd driven all the way over here.
There was nothing here except the field and the old disused pillbox Cawthorne had warned us about.
The door of the pillbox opened and Cawthorne stepped out, so close to me that if the wind had changed I could have sniffed his after-shave.
Any closer and I would have fallen over him too.
‘What's the panic?
Don't you know to stay away from here?’
Cawthorne was not pleased.
‘Look at this!’
Waters shook a fist at the windscreen.
‘Just look.
One of those buggers is deliberately spoiling the exercise.’
‘Which one?’
‘I don't know.
I was over by the Orchard and then this.
He must have been up a tree.
We've had four reported in for penalty hits already.
Two of them twice.’
Cawthorne nodded towards the farm.
‘There's another one.’
Sure enough, another player was trudging out of the Orchard towards base.
‘It must be those two in the BMW with the flash suits,’ said Waters.
I was glad we'd made an impression.
‘I didn't rate the weedy one with the glasses,’ said Cawthorne, ‘but the one with the beard looked a hard case.’
‘What do we do?’
‘Has anybody asked for their money back?’
‘Well, no.’
‘Then let the game run and say nothing, but tell Sandy to make sure those two don't get another booking.’
He turned to the pillbox.
‘And don't come here again, I've told you this is private property.
And go and clean my fucking vehicle, okay?’
Waters reversed the Shogun and did a backward handbrake turn, shooting off in a cloud of exhaust fumes and clods of grass and earth.
Temper, temper.
I crawled closer to the pillbox.
It was the same hexagonal design as any of the thousands you can still see along the South Coast or that you suddenly come across in the wilds of East Anglia for no apparent reason until you realize that the fields you're driving through were once airfields littered with empty Lucky Strike packets and B52 bombers.
The  whole concrete structure was sunk into the ground so it seemed only about four feet high.
There were double firing slits on three sides and a metal door set in the side nearest to me.
Cawthorne had had to duck his head to get in there, but he'd left the door wide open.
I had to get half way under the bottom strand of barbed wire to see inside properly and as I did so, my hand closed on something smooth and rubbery half buried in the ground.
I parted some grass and wondered why Cawthorne had bothered to run electric and telephone cables to a disused toilet for farmhands.
I could see why — and hear.
There was a Fax coming through.
The machine had a plastic cover over it, like stereo systems used to have before they became furniture, I suppose to keep the dust out, but there was no mistaking the whirr-buzz sound.
Cawthorne was leaning over the machine, blocking my view of anything else inside the bunker, and I slid around to check whether I could see in through the slits.
No go.
It would have to be the front door.
But not while Cawthorne was in residence.
The door got me thinking.
I crawled along the line of the fence to the nearest point I dare, so I could get a good view of it.
There didn't seem to be any sort of lock on the door; wartime pillboxes wouldn't have needed one, would they?
Sorry, lads, can't beat back the Nazi hordes today, Fred's left the key at home.
The door was metal, on hinges four inches deep.
There was a metal grab bar and two bolts on the outside, one at the top, which could have had padlocks on at some time, to keep playful kids out.
Then again, the pillbox was on private land so maybe that hadn't been a problem.
But I couldn't believe that Cawthorne would be so lax.
He wasn't.
Above the door's right corner was a small black box burglar alarm, almost certainly wired back to the farmhouse or more likely electronic, triggering a bleeper which Cawthorne could carry with him.
It wasn't likely that it was connected to the local cop shop.
He might have had to explain why he'd put a Fax machine out here for the sheep  to use on a quiet day.
Perhaps the sheep were monitoring the futures market in wool.
I guessed that it was set back in the farmhouse, unless he had some sort of remote control toy.
If it was, I reckoned I had a few minutes while he walked back there.
If it wasn't, and he came back and caught me, then I'd have to fall back on my story as an over-enthusiastic games player.
Trying that on Sergeant Waters was one thing.
On Cawthorne, it could be a different ball game and the balls on the line were probably mine.
The Fax machine stopped whirring and Cawthorne moved about, picking sheets from its output tray.
Then I heard the snap of a lighter and a cloud of blue smoke came out of the doorway, followed by a rattle sound.
He was burning the Fax message in a metal waste bin or my name was Roylance Maclean.
Careful bugger, wasn't he?
He came out before the smoke had cleared and swung the door quietly on well-oiled hinges.
He flipped just one of the bolts in a casual way and strode off towards the farmhouse across the Paddock.
He hadn't touched the black box alarm so it was now or never.
I guessed I had no more than four minutes before he got back to base, so I began to count on the old one-and-one, two-and-two, and so on principle in order to concentrate on the job in hand without looking at my watch.
I told myself that I had up to two hundred and no more.
By ten I'd crawled as far as the door.
It took me to twenty to stand into a half crouch and reach up for the bolt.
The door swung open and I scuttled in.
It wasn't as dark as I'd expected.
The four-inch-wide gun slits let in plenty of light, although there were electric wall lights.
Everything was covered in plastic casing to keep the elements out.
Apart from the Fax machine, there was an Amstrad PC with monitor and printer.
No phones — Cawthorne would have mobiles — and apart from the two benches for the machinery and a single typist's swivel chair, nothing else.
Except a long metal trunk on the floor which removed a couple of inches of skin from my right shin as I scraped round it.
That got me to thirty-and-five.
Better do something.
I rattled the plastic cover over the Amstrad but it was firmly locked in place.
It was probably just as well.
I am totally computer hostile so I wouldn't have known what to do with the damn thing.
I've nothing against them, they just hate me, so I became a founder member of the Campaign for Quill Pens and Ink.
It's not a big organization.
The trunk had a hasp and padlock which looked new, though the trunk itself was war surplus.
If I'd had my nailfile with me I'd have had a go at it.
Sixty.
Don't hang about.
I wound up my Olympus and took shots of everything there was.
That took about ten more seconds.
I couldn't think of anything else to do except get out.
That seemed sensible.
I crouched down through the doorway and checked the coast was clear.
As I slid the door bolt home I stopped counting at ninety-two.
A second later there was a loud click and buzz which could only be the black box alarm being activated.
Either I'd counted wrong or Cawthorne walked faster than I'd thought.
Still (Rule of Life No. 1), it's better to be lucky than good.
I worked my way back through the hop field until I could get over the fence and into the wood.
It was just after eleven when I made the conifer where I'd split from Werewolf.
My Exhilarator visor was still in the grass where I'd left it and I sat down beside it to take stock of my stings, bruises and cuts.
I didn't have time to get paranoid about blood poisoning as my heart suddenly stopped beating.
The cause of this was somebody trying to spear me with a javelin, but a javelin with a yellow pennant tied to it.
It landed six inches from my face and before it had stopped quivering in the ground, a red one slapped down next to it.
Before I'd stopped quivering, I realized that they hadn't been thrown, but dropped from above.
And then a shadow passed over me and Werewolf came out of the tree to land perfectly balanced right in front of me.
‘Jeeeesus Christ!’
I said, holding my heart.
‘Nice handle, but I'd stick to Roy if I were you,’ Werewolf said matter-of-factly.
‘Less aggro signing on at the Social Security.’
‘Hey, if I ever did sign on, I'd need a pseudonym.’
I looked at the pennants and so did he.
He was proud of them.
‘You had to get them both, didn't you?’
‘I got bored,’ he said.
‘And you wanted a diversion.
Find anything?’
‘Some, maybe not enough, though.
But it should rattle him.
I'll see what Sorrel's dad can turn up.
Listen.’
In the distance we could hear the outside telephone bell at the farmhouse.
I checked my watch and stood up so I could look across the Paddock.
‘That should be Patterson's Fax coming through if he did what I asked.’
‘What happens?’
I explained rapidly about the pillbox and sure enough we saw Cawthorne set out from the farmhouse, walking diagonally across the Paddock towards the fence.
The pillbox roof was just visible but you had to know it was there to spot it.
Just before he reached it, I used the last two shots on my film, though at that distance I didn't think I'd pick up much.
‘We've done all we can, I reckon.
Let's blow while he's busy in there.’
‘Okay.
You'd better have this.’
Werewolf placed one of the paint pistols in my belt holster, then offered me one of the pennants.
‘And one of these.
It'd look suspicious if I took all the glory, now, wouldn't it?’
I stuffed the Olympus inside my overalls and we jogged back across the Paddock, studiously ignoring the pillbox off to our left.
We were the first back into the changing-rooms and we dumped our holsters and visors on the folding table near the door.
I didn't know if we were supposed to check them in with Private Boyd or not.
Maybe she was warming  up the showers.
Werewolf left the two pennants in the doorway, crossed like ceremonial assegais.
We peeled off our khaki overalls and hung them on hooks.
Mine was ripped and stained around the knees and elbows and had a bright yellow crutchpiece.
Werewolf's, with a quick press, could have come off the peg at any Army and Navy store.
I chivvied him into a quick shower.
Ever since we'd been at university together, I'd known him as a bit of a shower freak, staying in there for ages.
His idea of heaven would be for someone to design a device which would allow him to read a book in there.
If you see Terence Conran, pass it on.
As we emerged wearing only our towels, the rest of the games players drifted in.
Without exception they were splattered in paint as if they'd gone in for action art.
The guy with the hedgehog pullover — Jenkins — probably the worst of the lot, even his visor was obscured.
Nobody said much.
Werewolf softly whistled Mark Knopfler's Going Home from Local Hero and didn't stop even when Jenkins walked up to him and said in a plummy voice:
‘I know this is only a game, but there are rules, old boy.’
Werewolf stopped towelling his armpit and looked at him.
I concentrated on zipping the flies of my trousers, head down, nothing to do with me.
The other players carried on getting changed and opening lockers and stuff, but you could hear a pin drop.
‘Who dares wins, old boy,’ he said quietly.
Jenkins just stood there, unsure of his next six moves.
He was saved by Private Boyd who appeared in the doorway and began to scoop up the gun belts and equipment.
‘Good game, gentlemen?’
‘Fine, absolutely fine.
We were just saying, weren't we?’ said Werewolf loudly.
‘Er…yes.
Exhilarating.
Quite exhilarating,’ said Jenkins, moving away.
Private Boyd walked through, unfazed by the half-clothed bodies scrabbling for cover.
‘Good, good.
Come again soon.’
Werewolf gave her a big smile as she approached.
He was still stark naked but had decided to get dressed.
He started by putting his tie on.
Private Boyd allowed herself a raised eyebrow as she went by.
Jenkins turned as if to say something and Werewolf waved a hand at him.
‘Hey,’ he said quickly before Private Boyd was out of earshot.
‘Do you know the sound of a truly satisfied woman after love-making?’
He said it like it was a joke to be shared, but I winced, knowing what was coming.
‘No,’ said Jenkins, going along with it.
‘Didn't think you did,’ said Werewolf.
With Werewolf driving the BMW, we covered the two miles to the village of Broughton Street at Warp Factor Five.
I spotted a pub called the Hop Pole and asked Werewolf if he fancied a drink.
‘Do fish swim?’ he said, whipping the power steering over and bringing the car to rest in the pub car park in a shower of gravel.
Fortunately, the landlord hadn't seen our arrival and he served us with a smile and an offer of menus.
We ordered pints of bitter and ploughman's lunches and he brought them personally to us as we sat in the bay window-seat of the public bar.
I wasn't used to such good treatment, then it clicked: we were wearing suits.
Maybe there was something in this respectability lark after all.
Werewolf filled me in on his blitzkreig across the Exhilarator course and had to admit that he'd enjoyed himself.
He was getting more beer in when I saw a motorbike pull into the car park.
The rider, in black leathers, stood the bike, a big Honda, near the BMW and began to remove a black crash helmet.
Even from the back, I knew it was Private Boyd.
She left the helmet on the bike — how trusting people are out of London — and unzipped her jacket as she walked to the pub door.
She didn't look at me as she came in, just walked straight  up to the bar.
Without turning round, Werewolf said: ‘What'll you have?’
I was impressed, then I noticed him clocking her in the mirror behind the bar.
‘Pernod and blackcurrant,’ she said.
‘Glad you could make it,’ he said.
How had he managed that?
‘Hello, Sandy,’ said the landlord as he served her.
So she was a regular.
‘You two caused quite a stir back at High Command,’ she said as she joined us.
‘You're far too rough for most of our customers.’
‘Now isn't that just too bad,’ Werewolf said with a smile.
‘I wouldn't try for a rebooking for a while,’ she said, sipping her drink.
‘Blackballed, are we?’ asked Werewolf innocently.
She looked at him over the rim of her glass.
‘I wouldn't say that.’
I bought her some lunch and while Werewolf flirted, I tried to pump her about Pegasus Farm and the operation there.
When Cawthorne was mentioned by name she put her forefinger and thumb together in a circle and made the universal sign for self-abuse.
Not the sort of thing you see in the sign-language translations for the deaf.
‘He gets off playing soldiers like you wouldn't believe,’ she said between mouthfuls of cheese.
‘Even has a secret little den where he takes the other members of his gang.
The big kid.’
‘Is that the pillbox?’
I chanced.
‘Yeah,’ she said without a flicker of suspicion as to why we were interested.
Maybe I'm too cynical.
‘No girl allowed, not in the boys’ secret camp!’
‘What do they get up to, then.
Songs round the campfire?’
‘They play with guns, don't they?’
‘Is one of them a guy called Sorley?’
I asked.
‘Yeah, that's right, and there are a couple of others.
Any chance of the other half?’
She held out her empty glass to me.
‘So they have private games of the Exhilarator, do they?’
I asked as I stood up to go to the bar.
‘What do they do?
Use luminous paint after dark?’
‘Nah,’ said Private Boyd.
‘Real guns.’
She held her hands out as if she held a sub-machine-gun and went ‘Rat-tat-tat-ta.’
I was grateful the bar was empty.
‘Cawthorne collects them.
Thinks I don't know.
Keeps them in a tin trunk in his pillbox.
He's got grenades and smoke bombs and other stuff like my kid brother had a box of toy soldiers.’
She smiled up at me, ‘Not so much blackcurrant this time, eh?
Ta.’
Sandra, but she preferred Sandy, told us that she'd worked at the Exhilarator for five months but was just biding her time before she could move away from her mother and get her own place in London.
Werewolf admired her motorbike, I asked her about weekend games at the farm.
She'd been into biking since she went out with a Hell's Angel called Rafe when she was sixteen.
She didn't work weekends, she said, Cawthorne and Sorley handled things then.
And then it was thanks for the drinks and time to get back as another gang of wallies was booked in for one o'clock.
Before we left, she wrote her phone number on a beer mat and in the car park she slipped it to Werewolf before she put her crash hat on and fired up the engine.
As she roared down the village street, Werewolf unlocked the BMW.
I looked at him over the roof.
‘Watch it, Sundance,’ I said.
‘Sorrel wouldn't like it.’
‘Ah, don't fret yourself.’
He shrugged.
‘We have the same philosophy.
Get your appetite where you can, just remember to eat at home.’
Werewolf pulled up near the Barbican and said he would walk to Sorrel's flat.
I said I would get the BMW back to Patterson before the police helicopters were called out.
‘Do the suits have to go back?’ he asked, fingering a lapel.
‘No way.’
‘Shit.
I would've picked a good one.’
‘Thanks for this morning,’ I said.
‘I owe you one.’
‘I know you do.
Just add it to the list.’
‘I'm on a promise to meet Sorrel's dad tonight,’ I said casually.
‘We'll be out all night.
And tomorrow.’
‘Going anywhere nice?’
‘Nope.
Staying in her flat with a crate of wine and the lights off.
She doesn't know it yet, though.’
‘Message received and understood.’
Sorrel was to be kept out of things.
‘See yer when you get back from Ireland.’
He paused at that and I'll swear he almost looked behind him to see if anyone was earwigging.
‘Actually, I'll need to borrow your gaff on Sunday, if that's okay.’
‘Sure.
You know me.
Open House.’
‘Thanks.
I'll be on the first flight on Sunday.
I've no intention of staying over there longer than I have to, and Sorrel's away for the weekend herself.’
I wondered if she was hunting up an appetite but I didn't ask, just like I didn't ask about Werewolf's trip to Dublin.
My teeth are one of my best assets and I'd like to keep them that way.
‘Okey-dokey.
I'll get something in for breakfast — you bring the duty-frees.’
‘Yer on.
Take care, Angel.’
Don't I always?
As I drove into the underground car park of Pretty, Keen, Bastards, the garageman looked
(a)
amazed that I had returned at all, and
(b)
staggered that there were four wheels and no obvious dents on the car
.
I took the lift up to Reception and Purvis delighted in telling me that Patterson was still at lunch.
‘I'll wait,’ I said, and headed off towards the postroom.
Michelle was the only one on duty there, but she put down the latest James Herbert long enough to tell me that yes, they had sent for an Airborne messenger just after eleven, and that Anna kept asking if I'd called.
I slunk through the dealing room to Patterson's office and got there just as he did.
His tie was askew and his breath smelled of brandy.
If I was a less trusting soul I'd have said he'd had a good lunch.
‘You,’ he said and I nodded agreement.
‘What did you find out?’
‘Just what we thought.
It's Cawthorne all right.
The other end of the leak is down at his farm.’
Patterson sank down into his chair.
‘Get any evidence?’
‘Nothing that would stand up in court.’
‘Court?
Who said anything about a court?’
‘Calm down, man.
Keep the blood pressure down to a dull roar.
It was a figure of speech.’
‘Is my car all right?’
I wondered when we'd get round to that.
‘Yeah, yeah, don't get your knickers in a twist, it's in one piece.’
I flipped the keys on to the desk to reassure him.
‘We've got enough to let Cawthorne know we're on to him, or we have by tomorrow night.
All you have to do is send a couple more things by messenger.’
‘What sort of things?’
He looked suspicious.
‘I'll tell you tomorrow.’
He shrugged, losing interest.
I perched on the edge of his desk.
‘Whatsamatter, Tel?
Come on, cough it.’
‘It's just —’ he reached for a paperclip to fiddle with —‘I — we've been thinking.
Now we know how stuff is leaking, we can plug the leak — get another delivery service.
Cawthorne cuts his losses and goes somewhere else.
Leaves us alone.’
I gave him my killer look, the one I reserve for Springsteen.
It didn't work on Patterson either.
‘Makes sense.
No fuss, no inquiry in the City, no cops.’
He was nodding.
‘No need to worry the senior partners, ‘specially not Mr Keen and his son Snow White, the Homepride Flour Grader.
But what about Alec Reynolds, Tel?
Well, he's out of it, isn't he?
Got him buried yet, or cremated and his ashes scattered down Threadneedle Street or round the corner in your wine bar on the floor with the sawdust?
But there's Salome to think of, Tel, don't forget her, because I won't.’
‘Now look.’
He pointed a finger at me.
Werewolf would have snapped it off.
‘She's getting the best attention money can buy.
Strictly speaking, I should have informed the Kent police when she was fit for visitors, or rather the hospital should have.
But I told them not to, protecting her…’
‘She's conscious?’
He'd pulled his finger back or I would have bitten it.
Springsteen is always showing me how.
‘Yes, this morning.
I've been meaning to phone her husband, but…’
I was half way out of the door.
‘You shitehouse!’ was what I yelled over my shoulder.
Or so the girls from the postroom told me later.
They'd heard it quite clearly.
I bus-hopped back to Hackney, feeling a bit of a prune sitting there in my suit in between a gaggle of wrinklies who'd been blowing their pensions down the supermarket.
They probably thought, at that time of the afternoon, that I'd just been made redundant.
It was too early for me to be a Yuckie — the tabloid newspapers' shorthand for the young city slickers who celebrated the end of a day's trading with too much lager and then reverted to type as the football hooligans they really were under the skin.
They were supposed to terrorize London Transport after dark.
Maybe they did.
Certainly, it was almost impossible to get a taxi in the City after about 8.0 p.m. these days.
If I'm ever strapped for cash I'll cruise around.
You never know who might mistake Armstrong for a real taxi and offer me a few quid as a friendly gesture for giving them a lift.
My third bus dropped me two streets away from home, which gave me a chance to call in at the local florist's and buy a twenty-quid bouquet on PKB's Amex card.
Normally, I get my flowers on Oxford Street just after 7.0 p.m. when the barrowboys have knocked off and gone to the pub, leaving loads of blooms for the Westminster Council rubbish collectors later on.
Nobody could have recognized me walking up Stuart Street.
I don't think anybody could see me behind the bouquet and I had trouble finding the keyhole.
I don't know who frightened who more.
I almost dropped the flowers when I saw Lisabeth on the phone in the hallway as I kicked the door shut.
She jumped back a pace and would have gone further but the phone cable prevented it.
I couldn't blame her, I must have looked like a platoon of Japanese snipers behind all that foliage.
She clutched a hand to her ample bosom — actually not so much a bosom, more a shelf (a cheap shot)— and motioned that the phone was for me.
‘Just one moment, Mr Angel is free now,’ she said into the mouthpiece in a voice I hadn't heard since Fenella's parents had paid us a visit once.
We pantomimed an exchange of flowers for phone, which resulted in her crushing about half a dozen carnations and me getting the phone cord wrapped around my neck.
It was Innes McInnes.
‘Angel?’
‘Yo.’
‘How did it go today?’
‘We survived the Exhilarator and I think we got some candid camera shots which may come in handy.
You had any ideas?’
‘A few.
What do you think Pegasus Farm is worth on the open market?’
That threw me for a minute.
So now I was an estate agent.
Well, I had the suit for it, but then, you see, I'm basically honest.
‘I dunno.
Million and a half?’
‘Mmm.
That's what I thought.
Come and see me later, at the office, about six-thirty.
Know where it is?’
‘Houndsditch, isn't it?
Near the Clanger.’
‘The what?’
‘The pub, the Clanger.
Best pint of draught Bass for — ooh, two hundred yards.’
‘Er…yes, if you say so.
Parking is impossible around here, I'm afraid.’
‘Not for me it isn't.
See you.’
Lisabeth handed over the bouquet, her nose twitching a warning of hay fever sneezing on the Richter Scale.
‘So you've remembered Salome at last, have you?’
There's appreciation for you.
‘Well, Frank was there all night and then he went straight to the office but they sent him home at lunch-time.
He looks very ragged, so I made him go to bed and get some sleep.’
‘He'll get up for me,’ I said, moving towards the stairs.
‘Don't you go disturbing him.
He's had…’
‘Salome recovered consciousness this morning.’
Lisabeth squealed and advanced on me, beaming.
I backed rapidly up the stairs, holding the bouquet between us like Peter Cushing used to hold a crucifix up to Dracula.
Frank sat in the back of Armstrong, occasionally kneeling up on the rumble seat so he could yell in my ear, but all the time talking.
Before we reached the BUPA hospital in Paddington, I felt I knew every temperature change Salome had gone through in the past five days, what her grandmother — phoning twice daily from Jamaica — thought about life, the universe and young people driving around in fast cars, and how difficult Frank had found going to the launderette.
The one thing he didn't ask, for which I was grateful, was what Salome had been doing with Alec Reynolds at midnight on a Saturday down in darkest Kent.
Then again, he'd no reason to think I knew.
A nurse in a pale blue designer trouser suit (how unlike the dear old National Health!) gave Frank a dirty look, as he had rushed out in T-shirt, jeans and trainers.
I still had the suit on — and Fly's glasses if I needed any props — so I got a ‘that'll do nicely’ sort of smile and the up-from-under look which tells you that there are advantages to private medicine.
I made a mental note to ask for an application form on the way out.
She asked us to wait and indicated a nest of Bauhaus leather armchairs.
I'd hardly got comfortable when another  lady — older, but still born after The Beatles had their first Number One — wearing a pink trouser suit with waistcoat, announced herself as the hospital administrator and told us to follow her.
Frank saw me watching the sway of her buttocks as we trooped down a corridor.
‘That reminds me,’ I said out of the corner of my mouth, ‘I must get my watch fixed.’
It was an old one — one of Groucho's actually — but he smiled and relaxed a bit, so it did the job.
The administrator took us one floor up in a lift big enough to ferry a helicopter to the roof.
Maybe some of their patients arrived that way.
‘Mrs Asmoyah is in Primrose,’ she said to Frank.
I thought she was being sarky about my bouquet but then I realized all the rooms were named after flowers.
Primrose was second on the left after Violet if you hung a right after Tulip.
I wondered if they had one called Hemlock for the really ill.
‘We moved her there just before lunch when she came to.’
‘Has a doctor seen her?’ asked Frank anxiously.
‘Of course,’ said the Obergruppenführer administrator in her ‘what-do-you-think-we-are?’voice.
‘Two in fact, the duty doctor and a consultant — a very distinguished one, I might add.’
‘You see, Frank,’ I said, slapping him on the back.
‘Nothing's too good for our Salome.
I told them to spare no expense.’
The administrator smiled.
I'd said the right thing and she'd buttoned me as the one who signed the cheques.
I was in there.
We discussed the administration of the hospital, especially the shift times of the nurses, to allow Frank a few minutes alone with Salome.
I tell you, I'm always thinking of others.
Then I asked the administrator, who was called Lucy (I was right about The Beatles), what the real form was on Sal's case.
‘Nothing unusual really, although of course it's not usual  to get yourself smashed up in a car accident in the first place.
But for people who do suffer head injuries like Mrs Asmoyah, it's not uncommon for them to suddenly come round a week or even ten days later and be perfectly okay.
There may be problems: damage to the eyesight, loss of sense of smell, perhaps amnesia.
That's why we'll keep her in for a week or so, for tests, but our consultant is very pleased with her — and very optimistic.
She's very lucky, having a caring employer like you.’
I had to agree.
I was the soul of philanthropy as I entered the Primrose room.
Strike that.
Make it Primrose Suite.
There was a flat-screen TV and video recorder on a two-tier trolley, both remote controlled, headphones for a radio and tape system, remote-controlled blinds and curtains and a small fridge with the words Personal Bar printed on the door.
So this was how the other half got sick.
I could handle it.
‘Angel!’ croaked Salome from the bed, which seemed to have Frank draped across it like a spare duvet.
There was a lot of hand-clasping, cuddling and a few tears, some of them from Salome.
Then she asked what had happened to Alec, because nobody had told her, and I just looked at a spot about a foot above her head and let Frank do the dirty work.
When Sal stopped sobbing, I asked her how much she remembered about the accident.
It wasn't much.
‘We'd done the Exhilarator course in the evening but we hadn't found anything — except that Cawthorne doesn't like women much, and blacks not at all.’
Frank tensed but I lifted a finger slightly to shut him up.
‘We were staying in a hotel in Maidstone and we went back for a meal, then later, about tennish, we sneaked back to see if there was anything going down.
Cawthorne seemed to be having a private party.
There were a lot of cars at the farm but nobody around.
They were all off in the woods somewhere.
‘We got as close as we dared and we could see torches and they were using…
Alec called them thunderflashes…
’ I nodded to show I understood.
‘And then we heard guns.
Real guns.
Alec said we'd better get out of there, so we did.
I'm sure we weren't seen, but I was pretty scared.’
Her brow creased in puzzlement.
‘I remember getting in the car and driving through the village back to the main road…but…nothing else.’
She reached for Frank's arm and grabbed it with both her hands.
‘Frank!
I just can't remember anything else!
I just don't recall the accident.’
‘Good,’ I said, patting her arm.
‘Let's keep it that way.’