

1 PREFACE
On reflecting about the activities of the last year I looked up enterprise in’ Roget's Thesaurus’.
This states that enterprise is progressive, resourceful, go-ahead, forward looking and reformist.
This I believe describes very well the approach by Elayne Burley and her team.
This also blends well with the ethos of Napier University and I believe that with continued effort Napier will gain the reputation for the development of students who can demonstrate enterprising skills.
I would like to thank all the staff at Napier and our industrial and commercial partners who have contributed to another good year of enterprising activities.
I look forward to working with you all in the coming year to ensure continued success.
Ian Muir, GEC/Marconi, Chair, Enterprise Steering Committee
June 1993
The second year of operation of the Napier Enterprise Centre has seen the activities of the Centre making a real impact on staff and students of the University.
The Enterprise Centre has played a major role in changing the culture of the University by the provision of a range of staff development courses for senior management and academic staff.
It is significant that many of the pilot initiatives of the Centre have already been accepted as mainstream activities of the University.
A key area of the work of the Enterprise Centre, the introduction of transferable skills into all University courses, has made considerable progress.
It is significant that the timetable for this area of work has been maintained despite the absence of a key member of the Enterprise Centre's staff, due to illness, for most of the period.
The Enterprise Lecture is now becoming a major event in the University calendar and this year's lecture was an outstanding success.
One of the successful aspects of the work of the Enterprise Centre has been to forge new and strong links between staff from different faculties and departments and to bring some departments that have previously played a peripheral role into the mainstream of the University's activities.
When the Centre was established it was anticipated that it would be invaluable in making new links between the University and the wider community including industry, commence, schools, other Institutions of Higher Education, LEEL, and Scottish Enterprise, and these have been successfully accomplished.
The Enterprise Centre, under the leadership of Elayne Burley, has already had a considerable influence in effecting change at Napier.
The plans for the coming year indicate that the good work will continue.
Professor James Murray, Vice-Principal
June 1993 
2 OVERVIEW OF THE YEAR
The year has been a very active and exciting one for the Enterprise Centre.
It has seen the consolidation of work commenced in the first year; the forging ahead of‘key’ enterprise activities university wide and the ‘piloting’of a number of innovative projects.
Some changes were made to the membership of the steering committee.
Resignations were received from Richard Scothorne, Lothian Regional, James Winterbottom, Scottish Business in the Community.
The work and support they gave to the Enterprise Centre was greatly appreciated.
It was a pleasure to welcome Anne McGuire, Community Service Volunteers, and Anne Connor, Consultant as new members on the committee.
Anne Connor has also accepted an invitation to be an ‘evaluation’ consultant for the Enterprise Centre.
Since September ‘92, one of the Enterprise Development Officers, Allison Hughes, has been on sick leave.
The curriculum development work of that post has been covered by the other members of the enterprise staff and by Sheila Stewart in her capacity as a temporary Enterprise Development Officer, commencing work from March 1993.
The absence of a member of staff for such a long period of time has, expectedly, resulted in some ‘slippage’ in the area of curriculum development.
This is chiefly in the area of ‘profiling’ and development of records of achievement.
That this ‘slippage’ is so slight is due to the fact that the other Enterprise staff have worked a great deal of extra time and taken on extra responsibilities and I take this opportunity of thanking them for their hard work and support during this period.
This year Ian McCartney took up the new post of Student Enterprise Officer and this addition to the staff has greatly facilitated student enterprise activities.
The establishment of the Enterprise Staff Development Programme; the setting up of an Academic Link scheme; the ‘piloting’ of ‘Live Projects’; a ‘pilot’Student Tutoring scheme; enterprise studentships; the formation of a network of Enterprise Co-ordinators are a few ‘highlights’of what has been a busy programme of work for the year 1992/1993.
The year also saw the beginning of modularisation at the University and with this the initiation of procedures by the Enterprise Centre, in conjunction with the Quality Assurance Unit, to monitor the introduction and development of enterprise in all modules.
This second year in the life of the Enterprise Centre has been characterised by both innovative ‘pilot’ programmes of enterprise work and by future development of initiatives commenced last year.
A high level of commitment from the Enterprise Steering Committee, from the staff of the Enterprise Centre, from our employer partners, and from Napier staff and students has enabled the achievement of the ‘strategic’ aims that were outlined for the year.
Financial management advice and services has continued to be provided by Napier University Ventures Limited and I would take this opportunity to thank Ed Angus and all his staff for the hard work and support they give to the Enterprise Centre.
Finally, I would also thank Professor James Murray, Vice-Principal, and lan Muir, Chairman of the Enterprise Steering Committee for the tremendous support and enthusiasm that they have given to the work of the Enterprise Centre.
It is greatly appreciated by the Director and all the staff of the Enterprise Centre.
Elayne Burley
Director, Enterprise Centre
June 1993 
3 STAFF DEVELOPMENT
INTRODUCTION
To meet the staff development needs of the University's academic staff, in relation to a broad range of enterprise skills, is the main aim of the Enterprise Centre's staff development strategy.
The Enterprise Centre's staff development activities aim to be innovative and to be both proactive and reactive.
The Enterprise Centre's crucial role in the University on staff development is one of initiation — to provide an opportunity to ‘pilot’ new ideas, ‘courses’, schemes etc.
The staff development opportunities provided by the Enterprise Centre are at ‘cross-departmental’, departmental and individual level.
The following are the key areas of work on staff development:—
a) STAFF DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
The Staff Development Programme is distributed to all Departments.
Courses are aimed at academic and academic-related staff.
The Staff Development Programmes for Autumn 1992 and Spring 1993 are summarised in Appendix 2 including a brief description of the feedback gained using course evaluation sheets.
118 members of staff attended training courses and events offered in the Autumn 1992 programme.
Only three courses were fully subscribed, ie. ‘Basic Counselling Skills’, ‘Assertiveness’ and ‘PC Awareness’.
Numbers were low in relation to available places for ‘Presentation Skills’, the ‘Project Evaluation Workshop’ and ‘Leadership, Motivation and Team Building’, and especially disappointing was the limited take-up for sessions related to teaching and learning.
The general response from those who did attend courses was, however, overwhelmingly positive and, as well as comments relating to the subject matter itself, a significant number of participants made more general comments of support, such as:—
‘These seminars are a valuable form of in-service training.
(They) should be a permanent, recurring feature of the University's life.’
‘I am delighted to have the opportunity to participate in this type of training.’
‘Many thanks for organising these workshops.
They open channels of communication between various sites.’
‘I think a lot of lecturers who have come directly into teaching without formal training would appreciate more in-depth workshops on lecturing/teaching skills.’
Feedback gained from tutors and participants was taken into account in planning the Spring 1993 programme.
The programme experimented with a variety of formats and timings to find ways around the constraints on staff time.
With the exception of two seminars on the assessment of enterprise skills, the focus on teaching and learning was taken out of the programme and shifted to a two-day conference (with a menu of sessions to which staff can opt in) held in June 1993 in conjunction with the Educational Development Unit.
The Spring programme included three residential courses.
The first, ‘Introduction to Effective Management’ was held over a Friday/Saturday in a hotel.
Some of the Enterprise Centre's employer partners were invited to nominate participants to the course and the resultant mix was positively received.
The two other residential courses, both ‘Working in Teams’ were weekend events based around outdoor activities and held at the Dounans Outdoor Centre, Aberfoyle.
These courses followed pilot courses run for students during the Autumn Term by staff of the Physical Education Unit.
The course for staff also included input from the Department of Management Studies, giving them a management skills, as well as a personal development, focus.
Another innovation was the ‘Managing Yourself’ personal effectiveness programme.
This course began with an all day Saturday event looking at learning styles and modes of behaviour using a variety of psychometric tests.
It was followed by a series of eight weekly sessions held in the early part of Monday evenings examining a range of issues in the area of personal effectiveness at work.
The programme was devised in response to feedback from the previous term's courses on assertiveness and time management, which suggested that one day courses did not allow for adequate reflection on the issues, practice or follow up discussion.
The course was under-subscribed, but the comments from people taking part were exceedingly positive.
In all, 176 staff attended courses and events in the Spring 1993 programme.
An increase in registrations for courses such as Presentation Skills, which were under-subscribed in the Autumn, was encouraging and suggested that staff were becoming more aware of the programme and that its reputation was growing.
In a similar way, it may be that courses in the Spring programme, which have been low on numbers but well received, will attract more participants if they are repeated.
b) ACADEMIC LINK
The Enterprise Centre first began contacting employers about the Academic Link scheme in September 1992.
The basic idea was to develop partnerships with employers that would enable academic staff at Napier to meet some of their enterprise skills training needs through participation in the training programmes of outside employers.
The Enterprise Centre would reciprocate where appropriate by including staff from the employers' organisations in the Enterprise Centre's staff development programme.
The level of interest shown by employers in the scheme has been very encouraging.
To date, nine organisations have agreed to participate in one form or another, they are:—
Bank of Scotland
Forestry Commission
GEC Marconi Avionics Ltd
Hewlett Packard
Livingston Development Corporation
Rosyth Royal Dockyard
The Scottish Office
Scottish Widows
Standard Life.
The range of courses on offer is very extensive these include the following:—
Communication Skills,
Interviewing,
Making Presentations,
Appraisal Techniques,
Performance Management,
Teamwork,
Leadership Skills,
Effective Meetings,
Delegation,
Motivation,
Negotiating Skills,
Time Management,
Managing Stress,
Assertiveness,
Managing Change,
Project Management,
Report Writing,
Total Quality Management.
Course dates, formats, and registration procedures etc vary considerably among the participating organisations.
It is not therefore possible to publish a programme for the Academic Link scheme.
Rather, each place has to be carefully arranged, on an individual basis, matching staff interests, level and availability with providers' timetables and own internal demands.
The scheme was launched to staff at the end of 1992, since when the Enterprise Centre has received around 15 enquiries from staff and placed five individuals on training courses as follows:
Negotiation Skills Hewlett Packard
Time management Bank of Scotland
Time management Standard Life
Project Management Standard Life
Assertiveness Rosyth Royal Dockyard
Negotiations are  under way to meet a number of other requests from academic staff.
c) PROVISION FOR DEPARTMENTS
The Enterprise Centre has responded to a number of requests from departments to provide staff development opportunities that meet ‘departmental’ staff training needs.
These activities also provide an opportunity for developing effective working relationships with departments and for facilitating the means by which staff can develop skills that are specific to the needs of particular departments.
They also act as an important catalyst for ‘team-building’ for Departments.
The Enterprise Centre has organised and resourced ‘tailor-made’ workshops for the Department of Hospitality and Tourism Management, Department of Civil and Transportation Engineering, Department of Library Services, Students Services Unit and Department of Management Studies.
A number of other Departmental workshops are in the planning stages.
d) TAILOR-MADE COURSES FOR SENIOR STAFF
A number of courses have been organised to meet the particular needs of senior staff in the University.
These ‘staff development’ needs were primarily identified in the Training Needs Analysis carried out with senior staff in the Spring of 1992 and also from ongoing discussions and requests from senior colleagues.
In the Autumn of 1992 a 5 day course in leadership and team-building was held at Outward Bound, Ullswater.
Attended by a dozen staff, representing a wide spectrum of departments, this residential ‘outward bound’ experience received a very positive response from participants.
Peebles Hydro in February 1993 provided the venue for a workshop in ‘Managing Change’; a workshop that was ‘tailor-made’ and facilitated by staff from the Office for Public Management.
The group of Principals and Heads of Department attending the workshop worked extremely hard and enthusiastically on some of the key issues relating to change in the context of their work at the University.
The workshop has stimulated interest in the whole area of organisational development and change.
Follow-up evaluation sessions have been held and a further workshop, developed and organise–l with the Office for Public Management is planned for September 1993.
A residential two-day workshop in ‘Negotiation Skills’ is to be held in June; a tailor-made course to help senior staff develop further the appropriate skills to meet the various ‘negotiation’situations that are particular to managers working in Higher Education.
7
e) INNOVATIONS AND DEVELOPMENTS IN ‘TEACHING AND LEARNING’
A ‘pilot’ residential workshop on ‘Innovation in Teaching and Learning’was held in February for new academic staff.
Jointly planned with the Educational Development Unit the workshop was the first in a series of ‘pilot’ workshops for new academic staff to be organised in the next couple of years.
The aim is to develop an effective induction course for new academic staff that will address their particular requirements.
Similar one-day workshops for new part-time academic staff were piloted in June.
A two-day event of guest lectures, seminars and workshops was held in June.
This two-day event, offering a wide range of topics relating to teaching and learning, will provide an opportunity for both new and experienced academic staff to develop new ideas and skills in ‘teaching and learning’.
f) OTHER STAFF DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES
Community Enterprise Conference — November 1992
A one day conference on Community Enterprise in Higher Education was held at the Royal British Hotel, Edinburgh on November 18th 1992.
The conference was chaired by Professor James Murray, Vice-Principal, Napier and the main speakers were Susan Buckingham-Hatfield (Community Service Volunteers and the West London Institute of Higher Education), Elayne Burley (Director, Napier University Enterprise Centre), and Danny Saunders (University of Glamorgan).
The conference examined some of the key issues relating to CEHE and provided participants with examples of good practice in Community Enterprise and a very sound basis on which to develop Community Enterprise at Napier.
The conference was attended by 60 people; over half the delegates being Napier University staff and the reminder being representatives from other Scottish HEI's and community organisations.
Seminars
A number of seminars on a variety of topics have been arranged during the year.
These topics include
evaluation;
secondment;
assessment of enterprise skills;
development fund projects.
‘Think-Tank’ day for Staff Development Committee — March 1993
A one day workshop was held for the University's Staff Development Committee.
Outside facilitators worked with the committee to look at current staff development issues in the University and to take the first steps in producing a new strategy paper on Staff Development Policy for the University.
Workshops for Course Leaders
Reacting to requests from Course Leaders and Heads of Department, the first in a possible series of workshops for Course Leaders was held at the beginning of June.
This first workshop looked at the role of Course Leader in a ‘Modular’ system and the ‘profiling’of enterprise/transferable skills throughout courses.
It also provided an opportunity for Course Leaders to discuss some of the crucial problems and issues facing them in their pivotal role as course leaders.
4 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT AND ENTERPRISE
a) ENTERPRISE AND MODULARISATION
The embedding of transferable skills through modularisation by the inclusion of ‘enterprise’ in all University courses remains a key element of the Enterprise Centre's programme.
This involves ensuring that staff gain an awareness of appropriate teaching, learning and assessment methods to allow enterprise skills to be developed and assessed.
A key activity is provision of information either through interviewing or through workshops and seminars led by individuals with specific expertise.
However a significant amount of the support work required early in the year was not achieved because of the long term illness of one of the Enterprise Development Officers.
Therefore, although skills are now embedded in all courses reviewed and validated this session, the range of skills is not as comprehensive as is deemed to be desirable by the University.
Some preliminary work has commenced in the area of ‘profiling of skills’ and records of achievement and these will be priorities for development in 1993/1994.
b) INTRODUCTION OF ‘ENTERPRISE’ INTO THE CURRICULUM
With the academic year 1992/93 seeing the first full year of modularised courses at Napier, it was seen as an appropriate time to examine undergraduate, postgraduate, and HND courses in relation to the inclusion of enterprise/ transferable skills in course descriptors.
A starting point for this exercise was to look at the courses due for validation or review in 1993.
A series of interviews were held between course leaders and staff from the Napier Enterprise Centre to discuss course documents and the enterprise content.
The following are some of the ‘key’ points of information from these interviews:—
there is wide support and commitment to the inclusion of enterprise skills;
development of skills is already present in some courses;
some course  leaders' definition of ‘enterprise’ differed from that given by the Enterprise Centre — a number believe that a particular  industry's skills should be included under the umbrella of enterprise.
The following needs were identified:—
Course leaders require on going assistance and support addressing the whole of enterprise skills.
Support in the development of enterprise in different ‘levels’ and the assessment of enterprise skills.
Prior to the course validation event, a subcommittee comprising — was set up to consider each course and review its ‘enterprise’ content.
Recommendations are then sent from this group to the chairman of the Validation panel and the respective course leader, detailing these recommendations and expressing approval or otherwise of enterprise in the course.
In the event of any shortcomings in a document with respect to enterprise content, the subcommittee agreed the following two courses of action:—
1)
To approve ‘enterprise’ in the course modules subject to a number of specific items to be addressed.
In this situation the issues to be addressed will be described in detail and discussed with the course leader.
2)
To note the work done by course team/module leaders in beginning to address ‘enterprise skills’ within a course but to note that further work would be required to be done.
This development will be in conjunction with a member of staff of the Enterprise Centre so that‘revised’ Enterprise statements are then completed and approved within a date set by the Validation/Review Panel.
A list of courses that have been considered during the session are given in Appendix (3).
c) DEVELOPMENT OF ELECTIVE MODULES
During the year, the Enterprise Centre has worked with other Departments/ Units to pioneer two innovative elective modules, which seek to address the development of students' enterprise skills in new settings.
COMMUNITY ENTERPRISE
Following a successful conference on community enterprise in higher education held in November 1992, the Enterprise Centre has worked with the Department of Industrial and Social Studies on an elective module in ‘Community Enterprise’.
The module, which will run for the first time from February 1994, offers students an opportunity to spend time working with a voluntary/ community organisation.
After some preparatory work in Napier, they will learn at first hand about how organisations work, relating theory to the aims of their particular community partner organisation and how it achieves those aims.
At the same time, they will develop transferable skills, especially self management, planning, negotiation, communication and other inter-personal skills.
The Enterprise Centre will find suitable placements or approve students' own choice.
Assessment will be in the form of a personal log and oral presentation.
Initially the module is being offered at Level II only and no previous experience or specific skills are required.
It is the Enterprise Centre's intention to go on to develop, for future years, related modules at higher levels which will enable increasingly complex tasks and projects to be undertaken with community partner organisations.
Team Development in Practice
In November 1992, with funding from the Enterprise Development Fund, the Physical Education Department piloted a team development course for students in an outdoor setting.
These pilot events have been developed, in conjunction with the Department of Industrial and Social Studies, to form the core of a new elective module ‘Team Development in Practice’ being offered for the first time in semester one 1993/94.
The module is intended to prepare students to work effectively in a group and to understand the benefits of teamwork in achieving a common goal.
Preparatory lectures will give a theoretical perspective to a residential weekend at an outdoor centre.
In this environment, students will be given opportunities to realise the need for new skills and abilities and their development will be supported in, what may be at times, personally challenging situations.
The course will use group exercises, both indoor and outdoor, to develop students' understanding of how teams work, the differing roles in teams and leadership and communication skills.
5 EMPLOYER PARTNERSHIPS
a) EMPLOYER CONTACTS DATABASE
The Enterprise Centre co-ordinated the Employer Contacts Group a group of key individuals from the Industrial Liaison Office, the Principal's Office, the Development Office and Napier Business School, and the University's Computer Unit, to develop  an employer contacts database.
The aim has been to provide a central resource, that will:
help develop inter-departmental communication and links in this area;
enable staff, who are approaching particular employers, to be better informed about existing links between Napier and those employers; and
raise awareness internally about the wide range of contact which Napier has with industry and the enormous spread of employers with which the University works.
The database — built in the first instance on information provided by the Industrial Liaison office, the Principal's Office, Napier University Ventures Ltd, the Development Office and the Enterprise Centre — became generally available on the University computer network in March 1993.
It is being kept up to date by members of the Employer Contacts Group.
A guidance note on its use has been issued to all members of academic and academic-related staff.
Records held relate to organisations in the private, public and voluntary sectors with which Napier has had contact of one kind or another.
The database holds two kinds of information — general information on each organisation (name, address, business type etc.) and more specific information about the particular contacts with that organisation (type of contact, date, Napier contact person etc.).
The database currently holds approximately 1,000 records.
The next step will be to ask individual Departments if they can supplement the data and provide updates to that data on a regular basis.
b) LIVE PROJECTS
This year, the Enterprise Centre ‘piloted’ a Live Projects scheme.
Live Projects involve students, individually or in teams, in project work concerned with meeting a real need which has been identified by an outside employer.
Thus, they offer a way of working with employer partners in the active development of students' enterprise skills.
The Enterprise Centre believes that, managed properly, live projects can have benefits for all the parties involved.
an opportunity to test their knowledge and skills against the real world;
a chance to develop their personal transferable skills, such as communications, planning, teamwork and the management of resources;
experience of liaising with an external client.
an opportunity to tackle a problem or task which they might not otherwise have the time or resources to take on;
access to the University's expertise and resources (eg. libraries, laboratories, computing facilities);
an opportunity to influence and enrich students' educational experience.
closer links with the wider community;
a better understanding of employers' requirements with the respect to the transferable skills of graduate recruits;
a chance to contribute to the economic and social strength of the local area;
an active learning programme for students.
Students gain:
Employers gain:
The University gains:
Live project work is already a feature of many courses at Napier.
The Enterprise Centre's role is to act as a catalyst to encourage further development of live project work so that an increasing number of students get an opportunity to tackle this special combination of project work and contact with industry and to co-ordinate the evaluation of the ‘Live Projects’ scheme.
In the first instance, the Centre has worked with a small number of course leaders, helping to identify, through its own contacts, appropriate live projects.
Then, working with staff and using these projects as ‘guinea pigs’, the Centre has begun to look at what makes projects of this kind succeed and whether there are general support mechanisms (eg. materials, training) which the Enterprise Centre could help to develop as a resource for academic staff.
For 1993–94, more departments and courses will be joining the Live Projects scheme.
To help promote the scheme, the Enterprise Centre welcomed the award of a grant of £1,000 by the Lothian Education Business Partnership.
This was used to fund the production (by students in the Department of Publishing, Print Media and Communications) of a new leaflet to publicise Napier student live projects to a wider range of employers.
The leaflet was launched at an event for employers held at the end of June 1993.
A list outlining the 1992–93 Live Projects is given in Appendix 3.
c) LOCAL ENTERPRISE COMPANIES
Links are being established with Local Enterprise Companies.
A ‘Working Together’ seminar was held in Edinburgh in October.
The seminar was hosted jointly by Napier Enterprise Centre and Edinburgh University Enterprise Centre.
The seminar brought together Board members and officials of LECs and staff from the two Universities.
Participants at the seminar learnt more about EHE, about the current activities of the two Enterprise Centres and also were given an opportunity to develop further contacts and working relationships between LECs and the Higher Education Institutions.
Following this seminar a number of avenues have been explored for work with LECs, particularly in the area of ‘live projects’ and secondments.
The Enterprise Centre's ‘local’ LEC — LEEL has been supportive of a number of areas of the centre's activities and sponsored the 1993 Napier Enterprise Lecture.
6 STUDENT ACTIVITIES
a) GENERAL OVERVIEW
In August 1992, Ian McCartney took up his post as Student Enterprise Officer at the Enterprise Centre.
The main responsibilities of this post are to develop student-centred and student-initiated projects throughout the University.
The Student Enterprise Officer has also been heavily involved in the evaluation process of Enterprise and Modularisation by interviewing groups of students to gauge their opinions of the development and assessment of Enterprise content within modules.
By this evaluation awareness of transferable skills amongst students has increased, and also knowledge of Enterprise Centre activities.
Liaison with other Student Enterprise Officers has been beneficial, with the formation of the Scottish Student Enterprise Forum.
This has built a very strong link in Student Enterprise across Scotland to the extent that many Student Enterprise Officers in other areas see this Forum as a basis for good practice.
The Student Enterprise Officer at Napier is also a member of the working party for the 1993 National Student Enterprise Conference at Bradford in August.
This Conference will provide an opportunity for students and Student Enterprise Officers across Britain to meet and exchange ideas on Enterprise in Higher Education.
The formation of the Napier Debating Society has, unfortunately, progressed slowly; however, with the changeover in Sabbatical Officers of the Napier Students Association it is hoped that the Society will be able to start a recruitment drive in Fresher's Week of academic year 1993/94.
Links with the Napier Students Association are strong.
These links are vital as this body is the main vehicle for communicating to the maximum number of students at Napier.
b) STUDENT TUTORING
Napier University became one of the partners in the pilot year of the Lothian Student Tutoring Scheme in August 1992.
By November 1992, 30 Napier students from 5 Napier departments were tutoring in 4 local secondary schools.
The aims of Student Tutoring are:
to develop students' social, communication and organisational skills;
to reinforce learning gained at University in a practical situation; and
to raise the aspirations of school pupils towards pursuing Higher Education.
Students were matched to schools by subject and timetable availability, and each school nominated a ‘Link Teacher’ to be the first point of contact for the student when on school premises.
Students attended school 10–12 times to complete the programme.
(see Appendix 6)
An interim questionnaire was issued to students after 2–3 school visits to gauge initial reactions to the Scheme, with final questionnaires issued to both students and teachers on completion of the Scheme to evaluate the Scheme as a whole.
Findings from the questionnaire outlined key areas for consideration in the future of the scheme:
tutors need to be utilised in more effectively for their fullest potential to be realised;
the matching process should be more stringent to ensure students are allocated to the correct classroom situation;
communication between school and University needs to be clearer to eliminate problems in timetabling of examinations, school and University holiday schedules, etc.
However, despite these teething problems, the overall response to the pilot of the Student Tutoring Scheme was highly favourable, from the viewpoints expressed by both student and teacher.
Final questionnaires elicited such responses as ‘highly enjoyable’, ‘very rewarding’ and ‘good fun’.
In the next academic year the Tutoring Scheme is to be extended throughout the University.
Students from all departments will be invited to  enrol , more secondary schools will be involved, and there will also be the possibility of tutoring in primary schools.
c)
ENTERPRISE STUDENTSHIPS
The summer vacation of 1993 sees the first 10 Enterprise Studentships being awarded.
Students from all departments were invited to submit bids for up to £1000 to carry out a project of their own initiative that would develop their enterprise skills.
Three of these studentships were sponsored by John Menzies plc.
Of the 23 bids submitted, 10 were eventually funded, the projects themselves being very varied, and all Faculties of the University being represented.
(Appendix 6)
The grants were awarded on the basis that the projects would develop enterprise skills in the participating students.
The projects will be supported and supervised over the summer months by staff of the Enterprise Centre.
The grant will be distributed over 3 monthly payments to ensure maximum accountability.
All students will be expected to submit a brief report of their project by September 1993 and also give a short presentation at an event to be arranged in October 1993.
7 THE ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT FUND
The aim of the Enterprise Development Fund grant scheme is to support projects that will contribute to the achievement of the objectives of the enterprise initiative at Napier.
That is projects which will enable students and/or staff to develop their enterprise skills and which will make the University more responsive to the world of work.
The Development Fund is open to faculties, departments, units, cross-disciplinary and course teams and to students.
Grants may be provided of up to £10,000 in any one financial year.
The total amount available for 1992–93 was £35,000.
Applications for grant are assessed on the basis of:—
the extent to which the planned project will contribute to the aims of the enterprise initiative,
the degree to which the project is innovatory in terms of testing new ideas or introducing established ideas into new settings;
the extent to which the project will, or has the potential to, disseminate enterprise activities within the University;
the extent to which the project represents a genuine partnership between staff, students and employers;
the degree of inter-disciplinary involvement;
the numbers of students and employers involved in the project both directly and indirectly; and
the extent of contributions (in cash and/or in kind) from the University and from employer partners.
During the period of this report, twenty-six applications were considered by the Development Fund Sub-Committee of the Enterprise Steering Committee.
Eleven were awarded funding.
Details of funded projects are given in Appendix 4.
Concerns have been the small number of inter-disciplinary and student-led projects put up for funding.
The Enterprise Studentship scheme was introduced this year to encourage student projects.
The Enterprise Centre will continue to encourage faculties and departments to consider cross-curricular applications.
EVALUATION
All grant recipients are required to describe in their project reports, the progress and achievements of the project in relation to 
(i)
the timetable which was set for the tasks of the project, and
(ii)
the results of the monitoring of the project.
To assist project teams, the Enterprise Centre repeated its successful workshop on project evaluation in March 1993 and issued written guidance on the preparation and structure of project reports.
These actions have begun to bring about an improvement in the value and appropriateness of project reports.
8 OTHER ACTIVITIES
a) ENTERPRISE LECTURE
The second Napier Enterprise lecture was held on March 22nd.
The lecture received generous sponsorship from Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise Limited.
The guest lecturer was Margaret Murray, Head of Education Policy, CBI UK.
She gave an excellent and innovative lecture on ‘Skills for the 21st Century’ which stimulated a highly participative discussion following her presentation.
The lecture was attended by 200 guests — employer partners, staff and students, and was followed by the Enterprise Dinner.
The event provided an excellent opportunity to both heighten the profile of the Enterprise Centre and to show appreciation to all employers, staff and students who had supported the work of the department during the past year.
b) DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION
To facilitate the dissemination of information about the work of the Enterprise Centre a network of Enterprise Co-ordinators has been established.
These co-ordinators have been nominated by departments and they play a crucial role in communications between the Departments and the Enterprise Centre.
Periodic meetings are held with the co-ordinators to inform them of current activities and this important group of staff have been very responsive and supportive in disseminating information to their departments.
The Enterprise Newsletter is also a key mechanism for the dissemination of information.
Three newsletters have been produced in the course of the year, one being specifically produced for ‘freshers’ week.
The circulation of each newsletter is 5000 (approx) and it is distributed to students, all academic staff, academic-related staff, members of the court of the University, and to a wide variety of external organisations.
The newsletter is also an excellent ‘Public Relations’ voice for the Enterprise Centre.
Seminars on Development Fund Projects, seminars and receptions for Employer Partners, conferences, the Enterprise Lecture are other means by which the activities of the Enterprise Centre are communicated within the University and also externally.
c) BUSINESS START-UP TRAINING — GRADUATE ENTERPRISE
In response to requests from a number of Departments within the University, the Enterprise Centre looked at the provision made for students wishing to start their own businesses or with business ideas which they want to explore.
It soon became apparent that the discontinuation of the Scottish Graduate Enterprise programme, that had offered local workshops as well as a national training course at Stirling, had left a gap for those students with an active interest in business start-up as a career option.
After consultation with other HEIs in Lothian, it was decided to run a joint scheme consisting, in the first instance, of a series of two-day training workshops open to any student or recent graduate of one of the Region's HEIs.
Successful applications for financial assistance to Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise Limited and to Edinburgh District Council enabled three workshops to be held during the period June/July 1993 at separate venues in the University of Edinburgh, Queen Margaret College and Napier University.
Registrations were coordinated by Napier Enterprise Centre.
d) SCOTTISH ENTERPRISE IN HIGHER EDUCATION
Staff of the Enterprise Centre have been involved in a number of activities in SEHE.
The regular meetings of the Directors SEHE group have provided excellent opportunities for networking and sharing information.
Involvement in SEHE activities include co-operation in production of a publicity booklet for SEHE; the second Scottish EHE conference in Aberdeen; work on Student Records of Achievement through the Scottish Student EHE network.
A high level of involvement in SEHE enables examples of innovative, good practice to be shared and disseminated and maximises the use of all resources.
9 EVALUATION
The overall aim of the Enterprise Centre is to enable students and staff to develop the essential enterprise/transferable skills to operate and succeed in a changing employment and business environment and thus make Napier University more responsive to the needs of work.
The Evaluation and Monitoring Sub-committee agreed a ‘working’ framework for evaluation of the work of the Enterprise Centre that focused on the evaluation of one or two objectives within each area of work.
Following is a brief description of preliminary evaluation carried out to date in relation to these objectives:
a) STUDENT ACTIVITIES
Objective — Through modularisation provide students with an opportunity to develop a range of enterprise skills.
The academic year 1992/3 has seen the first year of fully modularised courses at Napier.
Each module is required to include ‘Enterprise’.
Because ‘enterprise skills’ have to be a component of every module this will lead to the involvement of 100% of undergraduate students in EHE within 4 years.
The Enterprise Centre this year commences evaluation of this process; students and module leaders were to be interviewed as part of this evaluation.
Departments were selected from all Faculties of the University.
Two modules from each of the departments selected were evaluated in Semester 1, with the process repeated in Semester 2.
Students were interviewed in groups at the start of the Semester to assess their level of understanding of transferable skills and their expectations of the benefits that development of transferable skills would bring to them.
Questionnaires were also given to students to allow individual opinions to be expressed outside of the group discussions.
Follow-up interviews were conducted near the end of the Semester to investigate how ‘reality’ matched their expectations.
Module leaders were interviewed shortly after the initial student interviews to assess academic expectations of the expectations of students.
Conclusions arrived at from the interim report following Semester 1 interviews pointed to an apparent need (indeed, a desire) on the part of students for them to be told of the Enterprise Content in each module in advance and for a level of understanding about transferable skills to be attained by students upon their arrival at Napier.
Semester 2 interviews saw an increase in the awareness of transferable skills.
It was felt by some students that areas of the ‘Enterprise’ component may have been downplayed somewhat if there was no visible link between the ‘content’and assessment; however, more students expressed the view that they would scrutinise the Enterprise component of future optional and elective modules before selection.
In the coming year, following this ‘pilot’ evaluation, a more comprehensive evaluation, looking at profiling and assessment of transferable skills, will be carried out.
Objective — Facilitate and support student initiated enterprise activities
Although the Student Tutoring Scheme and the Enterprise Studentships have been the main focus of Student Enterprise activities within Napier over the last year, students have been involved in ‘enterprising’ activities elsewhere:
several Journalism students formed part of the reporting team of Summit Radio, a week-long project of topical, cultural and current affairs radio programmes timed to coincide with the Edinburgh Summit in November 1992;
a Napier student formed part of the decision-making team of the Northern Britain Network, a network designed to share and disseminate information about student activities in the UK from Sheffield northwards; and
Napier students have been involved in the initial development of a prototype portfolio for Records of Achievement alongside student representatives from other Scottish EHE institutions.
The success of the pilot year of the Student Tutoring Scheme coupled with the interest shown in Enterprise Studentships has acted as a launchpad for Student Enterprise within Napier.
Awareness within the student body of Napier Enterprise Centre is growing rapidly, with regular publicity on notice boards and in the student newsletter supporting and augmenting this awareness; the higher the profile that Napier Enterprise Centre achieves amongst the students of Napier, the more the student enterprise activities will multiply.
b) STAFF ACTIVITIES
Objective — Provide staff development programmes on enterprise skills and working with employers
Evaluation on staff development activities is primarily obtained from feedback/evaluation forms completed by participants.
New staff development activities and provision and revision of activities is based primarily on feedback received.
Appendix 3 has a chart that includes some detailed evaluation comments from participants.
Objective — Through the development of an academic link scheme provide new learning opportunities for staff and thus provide a means of updating staff familiarity with the world of work.
The Academic Link scheme, described in the Staff Development section, is still in its ‘formative’ stage.
Following participation in the scheme, participants are requested to complete an evaluation form.
Staff feedback on the experience has been most positive, particularly on the benefit derived from spending time with people from a different working environment.
It is hoped that the number of staff involved in Academic Link will increase as the scheme becomes more widely known and its reputation grows.
However, administration of the scheme is costly in terms of time and it seems unlikely that it would be feasible to operate it on a large scale.
Evidence so far suggests, though, that it is proving its value, both for the individuals concerned and also means of making links with employers which could develop into other areas such as project work, secondments etc..
c) EMPLOYER PARTNERSHIPS
Objective — to involve employers in staff development activities
Through the ‘academic link’ scheme and also through employer participation in the Enterprise Centre staff development programme, work is moving towards achievement of this objective.
Further work now requires to be done on more ‘in-depth’ evaluation of this involvement.
Objective — to involve employers in project work, case studies and course design
Preliminary ‘evaluation’ as part of Development Fund project work and live project work indicates that Departments are increasingly involving employers in the planning and support of this work.
When the ‘live projects’ scheme is extended in the coming year more effective evaluation procedures will be developed and will be more comprehensive in relation to the assessment of what ‘learning’and skills development is actually achieved through ‘employer-based’projects.
During the summer months the evaluation framework will be revised and a new evaluation strategy will be proposed for the use during the next couple of years.
Anne Connor, a member of the Enterprise Steering Committee, will be acting as a consultant on evaluation issues and will be heavily involved in the review and revision of this ‘framework for evaluation’.
The evaluation strategy will continue to provide mechanisms to assess the effectiveness of the Enterprise Centre in working with its three ‘target’ groups — students, staff and employers and in ‘embedding’enterprise as a core University activity.
10 FUTURE STRATEGY — 1993/1994
The strategic plan for the Enterprise Centre will continue to:
be innovative and proactive in the on-going development of Enterprise in Higher Education at Napier;
evaluative and review the work programme and revise objectives appropriately;
build upon achievements of the previous years and consolidate any successful ‘pilot’ work from previous year.
The following are the main elements of this strategy for the forthcoming year:
a) STAFF DEVELOPMENT
continuing development of the Enterprise Staff Development programme at the institutional level.
A programme that is innovative and both proactive and reactive;
continuation of partnership work with Heads of Department to develop  tailor-made staff development activities to meet departmental training needs.
Aim to work with all departments during the next two years;
further development and further evaluation of Academic Link;
in conjunction with the Educational Development Unit ‘pilot’ induction courses for new academic staff.
Aim to present a final proposal to Principal's Committee by end of 1994;
develop and establish a staff development workshop/information in co-operation with the Library and the Educational Development Unit.
b) CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT
introduction of enterprise/transferable skills in all undergraduate postgraduate and diploma courses;
establishment of a system ‘piloted’ in second semester 1993, of scrutinising courses prior to‘validation’and thus providing support and advice to both validation panels and course teams before and after the validation event;
further development of ‘evaluation’ procedures for evaluating the introduction of enterprise/transferable skills throughout the curriculum;
through consultation with heads of department and course leaders identify ‘course profiles of enterprise skills’ for recognised routes of study;
‘pilot’ student records of achievement with a selected number of departments.
c) EMPLOYER PARTNERSHIPS
The ‘pilot’ live projects scheme will be extended university wide.
Support materials for both employer partners and academic staff will be developed and the scheme evaluated.
The Enterprise Centre will continue to co-ordinate the future development and maintenance of the employer database.
During the course of the year an  evaluation of the ‘usage’ of the Database will be carried out.
a concentrated effort will be made with departments to encourage further involvement of employer partners as guest lecturers; in the process of course development; in selection of staff.
organisation of the first European Enterprise Lecture in September 1993 and a third Enterprise Lecture in Spring 1994.
develop an effective evaluation of Employer Partnerships
d) ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT FUND
a revision of the guidelines and the current operation of the Development Fund;
to be proactive in the encouragement of inter-departmental projects and student initiated projects;
to continue to provide and further develop a series of seminars related to the Development Fund — eg seminars on project support; evaluation of Development projects.
e) STUDENT ACTIVITIES
to co-ordinate and evaluate a Student Tutoring Scheme throughout the University and co-ordinate these activities as part of the Lothian Student Tutoring Scheme;
to build upon the ‘pilot’ scheme for Enterprise Studentships by evaluation and by spotting further external sponsorship for Enterprise Studentships;
to ‘launch’ a Napier Student Debating Society and to assist in the development of student societies and associations;
the Student Enterprise Officer to continue to play an active role in both Scottish and UK National student enterprise networks.
The future strategy for 1993/94 is composed of consolidation and further development of work piloted in previous years and innovation of new enterprise activities throughout the University.
This strategy, for the third year of work of the Enterprise Centre, will facilitate the integration of the work of the Enterprise Centre as a crucial and core activity of the University.