

MNPs MULTI-NATIONAL PRACTICES INFORMATION PACK Oct 92
INTRODUCTION
This (second) information pack contains information about the steps to be taken by foreign lawyers to be registered on the Law Society's register of foreign lawyers, and on forming an MNP.
The previous pack contained the full text of the Multi-National Legal Practice Rules 1991, which made detailed amendments to the rules governing solicitors, largely so as to apply those rules to registered foreign lawyers practising in partnership with solicitors in England and Wales, where appropriate with special provisions.
The full text is in Professional Standards Bulletin 6 and is therefore not reprinted here; but notes on important provisions, with extracts from the current rules as amended, are to be found in Part III.
Included in the pack is a list of approved foreign legal professions, and a list of foreign regulatory bodies whose professional rules do not prohibit practice in partnership with solicitors in England and Wales.
For a person to become a registered foreign lawyer it is necessary that his or her profession be one approved by the Law Society, and that its rules do not prohibit partnership in England and Wales with solicitors.
It is likely that in future further legal professions or professional bodies as appropriate will be added to the two lists.
As and when this happens an addenda note will be inserted in information packs as they are sent out, but it will be wise to check with Professional Ethics (address and telephone number in Part IV) if there has been any considerable lapse of time between receiving your pack and applying for registration, if your profession/regulatory body is not on the list in your pack.
The application forms shown in the pack are specimen forms only and should not be used.
Forms can be obtained from Records at Ipsley Court (address in Part IV).
Application forms (forms FLR1 or FLR2) with fees should be returned to the Finance Section at  and will be forwarded on to Ipsley Court once your fee has been processed.
Other forms (FLRA and FLRB) may be sent direct to Ipsley Court.
Part IV contains a short list of addresses of people you may need to contact in connection with your application.
For ease of reference, a separate list of fees and compensation fund contributions is set out in Part I. These fees apply only for the practising year 1992/93.
Solicitors wishing to enquire as to the interpretation of rules applying to multi-national practices and/or registered foreign lawyers should telephone or write to Professional Ethics.
PART I — FORMING A MULTI-NATIONAL PRACTICE
NOTE ON FORMING A MULTI-NATIONAL PRACTICE
The purpose of this note is to explain the changes brought about by the Courts and Legal Services Act to allow for multi-national partnerships i.e. partnerships in England and Wales between English (or Welsh) solicitors and foreign lawyers.
The Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 (‘the 1990 Act’) came into force on  and removed the statutory ban on partnerships between solicitors and non-solicitors.
The Solicitors' Practice Rules were amended to permit, as from, partnerships between solicitors and ‘registered foreign lawyers’(‘RFLs’).
This type of partnership is described in the 1990 Act as a ‘multi-national partnership’(‘MNP’).
Also on  section 9 of the Administration of Justice Act 1985, and the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988, came into force.
The Act and the rules as amended permit solicitors, on their own or in conjunction with RFLs, to practise in corporate form in England and Wales provided the practice is recognised by the Law Society as a recognised body (‘RB’).
The steps required to become and remain an RFL are explained below.
It is now possible, in England and Wales, for solicitors to practice in partnership with RFLs in an MNP, and for solicitors and RFLs to own shares in (and by directors of) an RB.
Conduct and rules
An MNP practising in England and Wales will need to comply with all the rules applying to solicitors in England and Wales, because both solicitors and their RFL partners will be directly subject to the rules.
The overseas office of an MNP is in a slightly different position; the solicitors practising from that office (including all the solicitor partners, whether resident overseas or not) are governed by the Solicitors' Overseas Practice Rules 1990, and solicitor partners will be responsible for ensuring the office's compliance.
Special requirements
There are no special requirements in relation to the formation of a multi-national partnership — save that all the partners must be either solicitors or RFLs and there must be at least one of each to make it an MNP.
However, it is important to take note of the following matters:—
Indemnity cover
An MNP will require cover under the Solicitors' Indemnity Fund in respect of its offices in England and Wales.
Solicitors' Indemnity Fund Ltd. should be informed of the formation of any MNP.
If an MNP succeeds to the whole or part of the practice of a firm of solicitors, it will have the benefit of cover for the remainder of the indemnity year.
In other cases, the MNP will be liable to play contributions as a new practice.
The Fund covers the overseas branch offices of firms of solicitors, and the overseas branch offices of MNPs having 75% or more solicitor principals; the indemnity contributions of such an MNP will be calculated on a world-wide basis.
The Fund does not cover the overseas branch offices of MNPs with fewer than 75% solicitor principals.
Such an MNP will have to obtain separate indemnity cover for overseas branch offices; only the gross fees of the MNP's offices in England and Wales will be taken into account in calculating its indemnity contributions; and those partners in the MNP who normally practise from overseas offices will not be included in the number of principals for the purpose of calculating the contributions.
Investment business
An MNP doing investment business will require authorisation either from the Law Society or from another regulator.
The Law Society Financial Services Section should be informed of the formation of an MNP which claims the benefit of an investment business certificate issued by the Law Society to a predecessor firm of solicitors.
In any other case where authorisation by the Law Society is sought, the MNP should apply to the Financial Services Section for an investment business certificate — a fee is payable.
Notification
Although there is no requirement to notify the Society of the name and address of a newly formed MNP, it may be necessary for separate reasons, such as the need to keep the Law Society informed of a solicitor's practising address.
In any case, solicitors and RFLs who have formed MNPs are invited to notify Records, since a knowledge of the way in which MNPs are developing will be of interest and use, and will help to prevent errors arising from inadequate information.
Overseas partnerships and corporate practices
It is important to note that solicitors practising wholly overseas may go into partnership with foreign lawyers, whether RFLs or not but unless all the foreign lawyer partners are RFLs the partnership may not practise in England and Wales.
Similarly, a solicitor overseas may practice in corporate form with foreign lawyers, whether RFLs or not, unless the corporate practice also wishes to practise in England and Wales, in which case the corporate practice would need to be an RB and have its registered office in England and Wales.
RFL participation in an RB
The Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988 (as amended) require that an RB must have at least one solicitor shareowner and at least one solicitor director, and that only solicitors and RFLs may be shareowners or directors.
The company secretary does not need to be a solicitor or an RFL.
A separate information pack is available from Ipsley Court on the formation of an RB.
NOTES ON HOW TO BECOME A REGISTERED FOREIGN LAWYER
A foreign lawyer becomes an RFL by going through a process of registration which is set out in the 1990 Act.
Once the foreign lawyer is registered as an RFL, he or she may enter into partnership with an English solicitor.
The procedure for registration and renewal of registration is contained in section 89 and Schedule 14 of the 1990 Act.
It was necessary for the Council of the Law Society to make a number of regulations in connection with this process.
They became operative on , and the registration process started from that date.
Incorporated practices
The commencement of section 9 of the Administration of Justice Act 1985 on , made it possible for an RFL to become a director of and own shares in an RB.
This note applies as much to an RFL who wishes to participate in an incorporated practice as to an RFL who wishes to enter into partnership with an English solicitor.
The register
The Law Society maintains the register of foreign lawyers under section 89 of the 1990 Act.
The information on the register is available to the public.
The first foreign lawyers were registered as RFLs on .
How to apply
An application for initial registration by a foreign lawyer should be made on Form FLR1.
Printed forms produced by the Law Society Records Office must be used, not the sample forms supplied for information only.
Application may only be made by a foreign lawyer, i.e. a person who is not an English (or Welsh) solicitor or barrister but who is a member, and entitled to practise as such, of a legal profession regulated within a jurisdiction outside England and Wales.
Thus an English solicitor or barrister who is dually qualified cannot apply to become an RFL.
There are two fees payable on application on initial registration.
The first one is the registration fee, which is determined by the Council of the Law Society with the concurrence of the Master of the Rolls.
For the practising year 1992/93 the registration fee is £320.
The second fee is known as the initial contribution and is a payment towards the Solicitors' Compensation Fund.
The level of the initial contribution is prescribed by the Council of the Law Society.
For the practising year 1992/93 the initial contribution is £150.
As part of the registration process the Law Society must satisfy itself that the legal profession of which the applicant is a member is one which is so regulated as to make it appropriate:—
(a) for solicitors to enter into a multi-national partnerships with members of that profession; and
(b) for members of that profession to be officers of recognised bodies.’
If the Society is satisfied that the above criteria are fulfilled, and if the appropriate forms are duly completed and the fees have been paid, the Law Society may at its discretion register the foreign lawyer in the register of foreign lawyers.
The Society may impose conditions on any registration.
Confirmation as to home rules
An applicant for registration is asked, unless such confirmation has already been received, to produce confirmation from each of his or her home law societies, bars, chambers or courts that its professional rules do not prohibit practice in partnership with English solicitors in England and Wales.
A list of confirmations already received is included on page 16.
It should nevertheless be noted that the foreign lawyer must satisfy himself or herself that the rules of his or her home bar or law society are not breached in relation to the particular partnership or incorporated practice involved.
Certificate of good standing
In addition every applicant must provide a certificate of good standing from each of his or her home law societies, bars, chambers or courts.
Overseas lawyer status
Overseas lawyer status is a form of non-voting membership of the Law Society.
An RFL who practises mainly from an office or offices in England and Wales can apply for this status without further change.
In the case of Scottish and Northern Irish solicitors, application would not be for overseas lawyer status but for full membership of the Society.
As from overseas lawyer status will be replaced by Affiliate status.
It will be the same as overseas lawyer status but Scottish and Northern Irish solicitors may, from that date, have affiliate status instead of full membership of the Law Society, if they wish.
Duration of registration as an RFL
The 1990 Act provides that every registration shall have effect from the day on which it is entered in the register.
In the normal course of events, the registration continues unless and until it is cancelled by the Society.
Each person on the register will be given a renewal date (31st October in each year (by which that person must apply for the registration to be renewed.
If the Society does not receive an application for renewal by the renewal date the Society may cancel that person's registration.
Registration late in the practising year — a warning
Registration will only last until 31st October in each year, no matter what the date of the initial registration, and a further fee is payable on renewal of registration.
In addition, an RFL who enters, later in the practice year, into an MNP or RB which holds or receives clients' money, will pay the annual compensation fund contribution on renewal of registration.
Later applicants may therefore wish to wait until the new practising year commences to avoid paying two sets of fees within a short period.
Renewal of registration
An RFL who wishes to remain on the register should apply to the Law Society annually by 31st October in each year for renewal of his or her registration.
The form to be used for this is Form FLR2, which should be sent out automatically by the Law Society Records Office at the appropriate time.
The sample forms supplied for information only should not be used.
There is payable with each application for renewal a renewal fee, and, where applicable, an annual contribution to the Compensation Fund and a special levy in respect of the Compensation Fund.
The renewal fee is set by the Council with the concurrence of the Master of the Rolls.
For the practising year 1992/93 the renewal fee is £320.
The level of the annual contribution to the Compensation Fund is set by the Council.
For an RFL who has practised mainly from an office or offices in England and Wales as principal of an MNP which has held or received client's money in the period  to , the fee is £600.
For an RFL who has practised mainly from an office or offices overseas as principal of an MNP which has held or received client's money in the period  to , the fee is £150.
Similar provisions apply to RFLs practising through an RB in respect of annual contributions, on the basis that share-owners and directors are treated as if they were principals.
There is no annual contribution if the RFL has not practised in an MNP or RB which has hold or received clients' money.
The special levy, in years when it is levied, is payable where an RFL has held or received clients' money in connection with an MNP, or where the MNP has held or received clients' money.
There is no special levy on RFLs for the practice year 1992/93.
Where an RFL is covered by a compensation fund of his or her own jurisdiction it may be possible, in limited circumstances, to obtain, on application, a full or partial abatement of the requirement to pay an annual contribution or a special levy.
See rule 4 of the Solicitors' Compensation Fund (Foreign Lawyers' Contributions) Rules 1991 at pages 45 and 46 below.
In addition to the above payments an RFL who is a partner in or held out as a partner in an MNP is required to produce evidence of payment of the appropriate contribution to the Solicitors' Indemnity Fund.
(See pages 4–5 re indemnity requirements.)
Automatic suspension
Registration is automatically suspended where:—
(a) a bankruptcy order or its equivalent is made against the RFL whether in this or another jurisdiction; or
(b) the RFL is struck off or suspended in any of his or her home jurisdictions — in this case the Society has a discretion to terminate the suspension, thus re-instating the RFL, on application by the RFL.
Solicitors' Disciplinary Tribunal
An RFL is subject to the Solicitors' Disciplinary Tribunal, including its power to fine the RFL, to strike the name of the RFL off the register or to suspend his or her registration.
Cancellation of registration
There are several circumstances in which the registration of a foreign lawyer may be cancelled.
The main one is where an RFL fails to apply for his or her registration to be renewed by the renewal date (see above).
Alternatively, the RFL may apply for his or her own entry to be cancelled.
This should be done on form FLRB.
An RFL's registration will be cancelled where he or she dies, becomes an English solicitor or barrister, and will normally be cancelled if he or she ceases to be a member of any regulated legal profession or ceases to be entitled to practise as such.
The Law Society may refuse to cancel an RFL's entry where there are outstanding complaints about the RFL concerning his or her professional conduct or where there are proceedings pending against him or her before the Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal.
Appeals
There are rights of appeal against decisions of the Law Society and of the Solicitors' Disciplinary Tribunal.
Change of name
Regulations have been made setting out the circumstances and the way in which the name of an RFL may be changed on the register.
Circumstances in which a change of name would be permitted would include marriage or the acquisition of a title.
Any application for change of name should be made on form FLRA.
The Law Society will require evidence such as a marriage certificate, deed poll or statutory declaration.
LIST OF FEES PAYABLE FOR THE PRACTISING YEAR 1992–1993
ON INITIAL REGISTRATION
All applicants
Initial registration fee £320
Initial compensation fund contribution £150
Total £470
ON RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION
RFL who has practised as principal of an MNP (or as shareowner or director of an RB) which has held or received client's money in the practising year 1991/1992
RFL who has practised mainly from an office or offices in England and Wales
Renewal fee £320
Annual Compensation Fund contribution £600
Special Levy NIL
Total £920
RFL who has practised mainly from an office or offices outside England and Wales
Renewal fee £320
Annual Compensation Fund contribution £150
Special Levy NIL
Total £470
RFL who has not practised as principal of an MNP (or as shareowner or director of an RB) which has held or received client's money in the practising year 1991/1992
Renewal fee £320
Annual Compensation Fund contribution NIL
Special Levy NIL
Total £320 
REGISTER OF FOREIGN LAWYERS
LIST OF APPROVED PROFESSIONS
The Standards and Guidance Committee is satisfied that the professions listed below are so regulated as to make it appropriate for solicitors to enter into MNPs with members of those professions, and for members of those professions to be officers of recognised bodies, in accordance with Schedule 14 paragraph 2(2) of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
Every applicant for initial registration is required to produce confirmation from the relevant law society, bar, chamber or court that its professional rules do not prohibit practice in partnership with English solicitors in England and Wales (except where such confirmation from that body has already been received).
The Committee will consider whether other professions should be added to this list as and when requested to do so.
PART II REGISTRATION FORMS AND REGULATIONS
FOREIGN LAWYERS REGISTRATION REGULATIONS 1991
Regulations dated  made by the Council of the Law Society with the concurrence of the Master of the Rolls under schedule 14 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
THE REGISTER
1.
The register of foreign lawyers shall specify, in respect of each registered foreign lawyer the following information:—
(i)
full name;
(ii)
title;
(iii)
date of birth;
(iv)
name of practise(s);
(v)
practising address(es);
(vi)
where the registered foreign lawyer is practising in partnership with one or more solicitors, the partners of the registered foreign lawyer;
(vii)
where the registered foreign lawyer is a director of a recognised body, the other directors of that recognised body;
(viii)
the profession(s) to which and the jurisdiction(s) in which the registered foreign lawyer is admitted and entitled to practise;
(ix)
the date by which the registered foreign lawyer shall apply for his or her registration to be renewed.
2.
The information specified in regulation 1 above may be inspected by any person during office hours.
REGISTRATION
3.
On an application for registration, the Law Society may require the applicant to provide to the Society:—
(i) a certificate of good standing from each of the applicant's home law societies, bars, chambers or courts (as appropriate) in such terms as the Law Society may from time to time specify;
(ii) confirmation from each of the applicant's home law societies, bars, chambers or courts (as appropriate) that its professional rules do not prohibit practice in partnership with English solicitors in England and Wales; and
(iii) such other information as the Law Society may reasonably require.
RENEWAL
4.
The date by which each registered foreign lawyer must apply for his or her registration to be renewed is  and 31st October in each subsequent year.
5.
Every entry in the register shall specify the date by which each registered foreign lawyer shall apply for his or her registration to be renewed.
6.
On an application for renewal of registration, the Law Society may require the registered foreign lawyer to provide to the Society evidence satisfactory to the Society that the registered foreign lawyer is complying with any indemnity rules or is exempt from them.
CHANGE OF NAME
7.
An application by a registered foreign lawyer that his/her name by changed upon the register, whether by reason of marriage, the acquisition of a title or otherwise, shall be made to the Law Society on form FLR A.
8.
An application under regulation 7 above shall be supported by a deed poll, statutory declaration or other document of like effect by the registered foreign lawyer providing evidence satisfactory to the Law Society of the change of name.
REMOVAL OF NAME
An application by a registered foreign lawyer that his/her name be removed from the register shall be made to the Law Society on form FLR B.
INTERPRETATION
In these regulations:—
‘foreign lawyer’ means a person who is not a solicitor of the Supreme Court of England and Wales or a barrister called to the English Bar but who is a member, and entitled to practise as such, of a legal profession regulated within a jurisdiction outside England and Wales;
‘Form FLR A’ means the form FLR A set out in the schedule to these regulations, as may be amended, modified or replaced from time to time;
‘Form FLR B’ means the form FLR B set out in the schedule to these regulations, as may be amended, modified or replaced from time to time;
‘indemnity rules’ means rules made under section 37 of the Solicitors Act 1974;
‘registered foreign lawyer’ means a foreign lawyer who is registered under section 89 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990;
‘register of foreign lawyers’ means the register maintained by the Law Society under section 89 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990;
‘registration’ means registration in the register maintained by the Law Society under section 89 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
COMMENCEMENT
11.
These regulations shall come into force on .
FORM FLR A
APPLICATION FOR CHANGE OF NAME IN THE REGISTER OF FOREIGN LAWYERS
I,(a)[]of (b)[]hereby apply to the Law Society that my name be changed in the register of foreign lawyers.
My name is at present shown in the register of foreign lawyers as (c)[].
My foreign lawyer registration number is []
My name as I request it be shown in the register in future is (d)[].
I confirm that this is the name by which I intend to be known in all my professional practices as a lawyer.
(e)
My practising address(es) is/are []
I enclose with this application the following evidence of change of name:(f)[]
I certify that the facts set out in this form FLR A are true.
SIGNED:…
Registered foreign lawyer
DATE:…
NOTES:
(a)
Full name of applicant.
(b)
Address of applicant.
(c)
Full name of applicant as shown on the register of foreign lawyers.
(d)
Full new name of applicant.
(e)
Where this is not the case, please supply details.
(f)
Specify evidence of change of name being a marriage certificate, deed poll, statutory declaration or other document.
An English translation of the document submitted must accompany this form.
FORM FLR B
APPLICATION FOR CANCELLATION OF REGISTRATION IN THE REGISTER OF
FOREIGN LAWYERS
I,(a)[]of (b)[]hereby apply to the Law Society that my registration in the register of foreign lawyers be cancelled (c).
My foreign lawyer registration number is….
I am not aware of any complaint of professional misconduct or disciplinary proceedings brought or to be brought against me in respect of any practice in a multi-national partnership/recognised body and I do not know of any cause for such proceedings to be brought.
I certify that the facts set out in this form FLR B are true.
SIGNED:…
Registered foreign lawyer
DATE:…
NOTES:
(a)
Full name of applicant.
(b)
Address of applicant.
(c)
Applicants are reminded that registration is required by a foreign lawyer who is:
(i)
in partnership with a solicitor where the partnership practises in England and Wales;
(ii)
a director or member of a recognised body;
(iii)
a beneficial owner of any share in a recognised body;
(iv)
a partner in a multi-national partnership which is authorised by the Law Society in the conduct of investment business.
NOTE ON THE MULTI-NATIONAL LEGAL PRACTICE RULES 1991, WITH EXTRACTS FROM CURRENT RULES
The Multi-National Legal Practice Rules 1991 (‘MNLPR’) amended rules affecting solicitors extensively, so as to apply them to registered foreign lawyers practising in partnership with solicitors in England and Wales.
Copies of the practice rules and other provisions may be obtained from Professional Ethics.
Important provisions include:—
Multi-national partnerships
Rule 7(6) of the Solicitors' Practice Rules 1990 has been amended so as to allow solicitors to go into partnership with registered foreign lawyers.
That part of the rule now reads:—
‘(6)(a) A solicitor shall not enter into partnership with any person other than a solicitor, a registered foreign lawyer or a recognised body.
(b) A recognised body shall not enter into partnership with any person other than a solicitor or a recognised body.
(c) In this paragraph ‘solicitor’ means a solicitor of the Supreme Court of England and Wales.
The definition of an MNP is a partnership whose members consist of one or more RFLs and one or more solicitors.
It should be noted that an RFL may not go into partnership with a recognised body.
An MNP must have at least one partner who is a solicitor admitted for three years or (if the firm does no litigation or advocacy in England and Wales) an RFL qualified in his or her own jurisdiction for three years — see Practice Rules 13(1) (a) below.
Name of an MNP
Rule 11(1) (A) of the Solicitors' Practice Rules was inserted by the MNLPR and reads as follows:—
‘The firm name used by a multi-national partnership shall consist only of the name or names of one or more lawyers, being present or former principals of either the multi-national partnership or a predecessor legal practice, together with, if desired, other conventional references to the firm and to such persons; or a name approved in writing by the Council as the name of the multi-national partnership or of a predecessor legal practice.’
The practical effect of this provision is that if an MNP is formed by, say, a merger of a foreign legal firm and an English firm, the firm name used by either may be adopted as the name of the MNP if it is made up of the names of present or former principals who are or were lawyers; a new name may be used derived from the names of one or more present or former principals of either firm; a name previously approved by the Council may be used; or application may be made for approval in writing by the Council of a name which does not otherwise comply with the requirements of rule 11(1) (A).
In all cases conventional references to the firm may be used as part of the name.
Supervision and management
Rule 13 of the Solicitors' Practice Rules 1990 has been amended to read as follows:—
‘(1) Solicitors shall ensure that every office where they or their firms practise is and can reasonably be seen to be properly supervised in accordance with the following minimum standards:
(a) Every such office shall be attended on each day when it is open to the public or open to telephone calls from the public by:
(i) a solicitor who holds a practising certificate and has been admitted for at least three years; or
(ii) in the case of an office from which no right of audience or right to conduct litigation is exercised and from which no exercise of any such right is supervised, a registered foreign lawyer who is a principal of the firm and who has been qualified in his or her own jurisdiction for at least three years;
who shall spend sufficient time at such office to ensure adequate control of the staff employed there and afford requisite facilities for consultation with clients.
In the case of a firm in private practice such solicitor may be a principal, employee or consultant of the firm, provided that the firm must have at least one principal who is a solicitor who has been admitted for at least three years, or alternatively, in the case of a firm none of whose principals exercise any right of audience or right to conduct litigation or supervise or assume responsibility for the exercise of any such right, a foreign lawyer who has been qualified in his or her own jurisdiction for at least three years;
(b) Every such office shall be managed by one of the persons listed below who shall normally be in attendance at that office during all the hours when it is open to the public or open to telephone calls from the public:—
(i)
a solicitor holding a current practising certificate;
(ii)
a Fellow of the Institute of Legal Executives confirmed by the Institute as being of good standing and having been admitted as a Fellow for not less than three years;
(iia)
in the case of an office from which no right of audience or right to conduct litigation is exercised and from which no exercise of any such right is supervised, a registered foreign lawyer who is a principal of the firm’
(iii)
in the case of an office dealing solely with conveyancing, a licensed conveyancer; or
(iv)
in the case of an office dealing solely with property selling and surveying, a chartered surveyor or person holding another professional qualification approved by the Council under Rule 14 of these rules.
(2) In determining whether or not there has been compliance with the requirement as to supervision in paragraph (1) of this rule, account shall be taken of,inter alia , the arrangements for principals to see incoming mail.
(3) Where daily attendance or normal attendance in accordance with sub-paragraphs (1)(a) or (1)(b) of this rule is prevented by illness, accident or other sufficient or unforeseen cause for a prolonged period, suitable alternative arrangements shall be made without delay to ensure compliance.
(4) A solicitor's employee who would not otherwise qualify under sub-paragraph (1)(b) of this rule to manage an office and who was 50 years of age or more on  and had at that date been continuously employed in connection with the practice of that solicitor for not less than 20 years shall, provided he or she exercised the duty of management at that date, be entitled to continue to do so until retiring or attaining the age of 70 years, whichever first happens.
(5) In this rule:
(a) references to a principal shall be construed, in relation to a recognised body, as references to a director of that body;
(2) in paragraph (2) of this rule, ‘principals’ shall be construed, except in relation to a firm none of whose principals exercise any right of audience or right to conduct litigation or supervise or assume responsibility for the exercise of any such right, as referring to principals who are solicitors; and
(c)‘right of audience’ and ‘right to conduct litigation’shall be construed in accordance with Part II and section 119 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.’
The practical effect of the amendment is to make it clear that an RFL cannot supervise or manage the office of a multi-national practice, except where no right of audience or right to conduct litigation is exercised from the office or supervised from it.
Status of RFLs
Rule 18(1A) of the Solicitors' Practice Rules 1990 was inserted by the MNLPR, and reads as follows:—
‘(a) For the avoidance of doubt, neither registration in the register of foreign lawyers, nor anything in these rules or in any other rules made under Part II of the Solicitors Act 1974 or section 9 of the Administration of Justice Act 1985, shall entitle any registered foreign lawyer to be granted any right of audience or any right to conduct litigation within the meaning of Part II and section 119 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990, or any right to supervise  or assume any responsibility for the exercise of such rights.
(b) A registered foreign lawyer shall do nothing in the course of practising in partnership with a solicitor which, if done by a solicitor would put the solicitor in breach of any of these rules or any other rules, principles or requirements of conduct applicable to solicitors.
(c) A registered foreign lawyer shall do nothing in the course of practising as the director of a recognised body which puts the recognised body in breach of any of these rules, or any other rules, principles or requirements of conduct applicable to recognised bodies.’
The effect of this is to make clear that registration as an RFL does not entitle the RFL to undertake work which may only be done by a solicitor, and also that an RFL must not put solicitors or recognised bodies in breach of rules, or other requirements of conduct.
Note also that a foreign lawyer (whether an RFL or not) who is employed by an English solicitor has all the rights of a solicitor's clerk, and as such can, under supervision, do all reserved activities except advocacy in open court.
However, an RFL who becomes a partner does not have the status of a solicitor's clerk.
Becoming a partner may thus have drawbacks as well as benefits.
Recognised bodies — directors
Rule 4 of the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988 has been amended to read as follows:
‘A recognised body shall not have as a director any person who is not a solicitor or a registered foreign lawyer; provided that all times at least one of the directors shall be a solicitor.’
An RB must have at least one director who is a solicitor admitted for three years or (if the RB does no litigation or advocacy in England and Wales) an RFL qualified in his or her own jurisdiction for three years — see Practice Rule 13(1) (a) and (5)(a) above.
Recognised bodies — ownership of shares
Rule 5 of the Solicitors Incorporated Practice Rule 1988 has been amended to read as follows:—
‘(1) A recognised body shall not have as a member any person who is not a solicitor, a registered foreign lawyer or a recognised body.
(2)(a)(i) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5) of this Rule a member of a recognised body shall not hold any share in the body for another person save as nominee for a solicitor, a registered foreign lawyer or a recognised body who or which is himself or itself a member or officer of the recognised body or for a solicitor or registered foreign lawyer who is working in the practice of the body or for a receiver appointed under section 99 of the Mental Health Act 1983 in respect of any such solicitor or registered foreign lawyer’ and
(ii) at all times at least one share in the body must be so held either by a member who or which is a solicitor or a recognised body and who or which beneficially owns that share; or by a member who or which holds that share as nominee for a solicitor or for a recognised body or for a receiver appointed under section 99 of the Mental Health Act 1983 in respect of a solicitor.
(b) A member of a recognised body shall disclose to the body the nature and extent of any interests in shares registered in his name and the persons by whom such interests are held.
The recognised body shall maintain a record of the identity of all persons, other than the member in whose name a share is registered, holding such interests.
The record shall be kept in respect of each person on it for at least three years from the date on which that person ceased to hold any interest in any share in the body.
(c) A member of a recognised body shall not create any charge or other third party interest (save as permitted by sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph) over any share in the recognised body.
(3) In paragraphs (4) and (5) of this Rule references to the beneficial owner of a share do not include a person in whose name that share is registered and who beneficially owns that share.
(4)(a) Where a member of a recognised body dies the recognised body shall ensure that any shares registered in his name at the time of his death are within twelve months of his death registered in the name of a solicitor or a recognised body or (where permitted by paragraph (2)(a)(i) of this Rule) a registered foreign lawyer or (where the recognised body is a company limited by shares) are acquired by the recognised body itself.
(b) A solicitor, a registered foreign lawyer or a recognised body who or which is the personal representative of a deceased member of or beneficial owner of a share in a recognised body may elect to be entered in the register of members of the recognised body but no member shall hold any share as personal representative for longer than twelve months from the date of the death of the deceased.
(c) Where a beneficial owner of a share in a recognised body dies, a member may notwithstanding sub-paragraph (2)(a) of this Rule, continue to hold such share for the personal representative of the deceased for a period of not longer than twelve months from the date of the death; provided that voting rights shall only be exercised in respect of any share held in reliance on this sub-paragraph where the only personal representative in respect of the deceased beneficial owner's interest in the share is a solicitor, a registered foreign lawyer or a recognised body.
(5)(a) Where one of the following specified events happens, to a member of or a beneficial owner of a share in a recognised body, that is to say:(where such member or beneficial owner is a solicitor) his name is struck off or removed from the roll or his practising certificate is suspended (including automatic suspension on bankruptcy) or withdrawn; or (where such a member or beneficial owner is a registered foreign lawyer) his name is struck off the register or his registration is suspended (including automatic suspension on bankruptcy, or on striking off or suspension in his own jurisdiction) or cancelled; or (where such a member or beneficial owner is a recognised body) its recognition is revoked or expires (including automatic expiry on liquidation, making of an administration order or appointment of an administrative receiver);
then —
(i) where the specified event happens in respect of a member, any share registered in his name may, notwithstanding paragraph (1) of this Rule, remain so registered for a period of not longer than six months from the date of the specified event; provided that no voting rights shall be exercised in respect of any such share while it remains so registered; and
(ii) where the specified event happens in respect of a beneficial owner of a share, a member may, notwithstanding sub-paragraph (2)(a) of this Rule, continue to hold such share for the beneficial owner or, as the case may be, his trustee in bankruptcy or liquidator from a period of not longer than six months from the date of the specified event; provided that no voting rights shall be exercised in respect of any share held in reliance of this sub-paragraph.
(b) A solicitor or registered foreign lawyer who is the trustee in bankruptcy or liquidator of a member of or a beneficial owner of a share in a recognised body may elect to be entered in the register of members of the recognised body but no member shall hold any share as trustee in bankruptcy or liquidator for longer than six months from the date of the bankruptcy order or winding-up order as the case may be.
(6) A member of a recognised body shall not exercise any voting rights in respect of any share held in breach of any part of this Rule and the chairman of a meeting shall not accept any vote tendered in breach of this paragraph or paragraph (7) of this Rule.
(7) For the purpose of attending and voting at meetings a member of a recognised body shall not appoint as a proxy or corporate representative any person other than a solicitor who is a member or officer of or who is working in the practice of, or a registered foreign lawyer who is a member or director of,(a) the recognised body or (b) a recognised body which is itself a member of the recognised body.
(8) A recognised body shall so far as possible ensure that its members comply with this Rule and Rule 6.’
The effect of this rule is that at least one share must be owned by a solicitor; and that the only persons who may own shares in a recognised body are solicitors and RFLs.
There are detailed provisions regarding the transfer of shares and regarding holding shares as nominee.
Recognised bodies — name
Rule 22 of the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988 has been amended to read:—
‘(1) The name of a recognised body shall consist only of one or more of the following:
(a) the name or names of one or more solicitors, registered foreign lawyers or recognised bodies who are members or former members of the body;
(b) the name or part of the name of any predecessor firm or recognised body in practice at the time of the formation of the body provided that such name did not infringe Rule 11 of the Solicitors’ Practice Rules 1990 (or any rule for the time being replacing that Rule) or this Rule;
(ba) in the case of a recognised body which has at least one registered foreign lawyer as a director, member or beneficial owner of a share, the name or part of the name of a predecessor legal practice which was in practice at the time of the formation of the body, provided that such name consisted of the name or names of present or former principals and conventional references to such persons and to the practice;
(c) other conventional references to any such person, firm or body as is referred to in sub-paragraphs (a),(b) and(ba) of this paragraph;
(d) conventional references to the body such as‘and Company’;
(e) the word ‘solicitor’ or ‘solicitors’;
(f) in the case of a recognised body which has at least one registered foreign lawyer as a director, member or beneficial owner of a share:
(i) the words ‘solicitor(s)’ and ‘registered foreign lawyer(s)’; or
(ii) the word ‘solicitor(s) together with words denoting the countries or jurisdictions of qualification of those registered foreign lawyers and their professional qualifications;
provided that in any such name the constituent elements must be placed in order, with the largest category first; and provided that there must be no breach of the principle set out in paragraph 14(b) of the Solicitors’ Publicity Code (use of the word ‘lawyer(s)’).
(2) The name of a recognised body must include the name of at least one solicitor, foreign lawyer or recognised body included by virtue of sub-paragraphs (1)(a),(b) or (ba) of this Rule.
(3) The name of a recognised body which is a company limited by shares must have ‘limited’ or ‘ltd.’as its last word except that the name of a body which has its registered office in Wales may have ‘cyfyngedig’or ‘cyf.’as its last word.
(4) Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2) of this Rule the Council may approve in writing some other name for a recognised body.’
Designation of a multi-national practice
Paragraph 6 of the Solicitors' Publicity Code 1990 has been amended to read as follows:
‘(a)Provisions applying to all firms 
A firm may use, in addition to its name, a designation of the practice.
Such a designation must include:
(i) the word ‘solicitor(s)’; or
(ii) as an additional option in the case of publicity conducted outside England and Wales (including the notepaper of an office outside England and Wales), the word ‘lawyer(s)’.
The designation must not be misleading, nor must it be based on an area of practice in which a claim to specialisation or particular expertise would be improper (see paragraph 2(b) above).
There must be no breach of paragraph 14(b) below on the use of the word ‘lawyer(s)’.
(b)Additional provisions applying to multi-national practices 
In the case of a practice which has at least one registered foreign lawyer as a partner, director, registered member or beneficial owner of a share, a designation used in publicity conducted in England and Wales (including the notepaper of an English or Welsh office) must include:
(i) the words ‘solicitor(s)’ and ‘registered foreign lawyer(s)’; or
(ii) the word ‘solicitor(s)’ together with words denoting the countries or jurisdictions of qualification of the foreign lawyers who are partners, directors, registered members of beneficial owners of shares in the practice and their professional qualifications.
In the designation, such constituent elements must be placed in order, with the largest category first.’
Naming partners and staff on notepaper and in other publicity
Paragraph 7 of the Solicitors' Publicity Code 1990 has been amended to read as follows:—
‘(a)Provisions applying to all practices 
(i) A member of staff (including a partner or director) other than a solicitor who holds a current practising certificate may only be named in a practitioner's publicity, including stationery, if the status of that person is unambiguously stated.
(ii) The term ‘legal executive’ may only be used in a practitioner's publicity, including stationery, to refer to a Fellow of the Institute of Legal Executives; and ‘trainee solicitor’to refer to a person under articles of training.
(iii) Practitioners are reminded of the danger of inadvertently holding out persons as partners in a firm by inclusion of both partners' and non-partners' names in a list.
The status of non-partners must be indicated for avoidance of doubt whenever a situation of inadvertent holding out might otherwise arise.
(iv) The following terms, used alone or in combination, will be deemed to indicate that a person is a solicitor holding a current practising certificate, unless it is made clear that the person is not so qualified:
(A)
associate;
(B)
assistant;
(C)
consultant.
(v) The following terms, used alone or in combination, will be deemed to indicate that a person is not a solicitor holding a current practising certificate, unless a contrary indication appears:
(A)
executive;
(B)
clerk;
(C)
manager;
(D)
secretary;
(E)
paralegal.
(vi) The appearance against a person's name of an indication that he or she is qualified in a jurisdiction other than England and Wales, or the title licensed conveyancer, or registered foreign lawyer, or the title of any other profession, will be deemed to indicate that the person is not a solicitor holding a current practising certificate, unless a contrary indication appears.
(See also paragraph 14(b) below on the use of the word ‘lawyer(s)’).
(b)Additional provisions applying to multi-national practices 
(i) In the case of a practice which has at least one registered foreign lawyer as a partner, director, registered member or beneficial owner of a share, the notepaper of an English or Welsh office of the practice must contain either:
(A)
a list of the partners or directors; or
(B)
a statement that the list of the partners or directors and their professional qualifications is open to inspection at that office (see also paragraph 1(d) (ii) above, the Business Names Act 1985 and Rule 23 of the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules).
(ii) Any such list, as well as a list of the partners or directors in any other publicity conducted in England and Wales, must indicate the countries or jurisdictions of qualification of the partners or directors and their professional qualifications.
(iii) Where the notepaper of an English or Welsh office of the practice includes neither a designation of the practice (see paragraph 6(b) above)nor a list of the partners or directors, the statement required by sub-paragraph (b)(i)(B) above must also state that the partners or directors are (as the case may be) solicitors and registered foreign lawyers, or describe them in such other terms which, as applied to those partners or directors, would be permitted by paragraph 6(b) (i) or (ii) above.
In any such statement or description, the constituent elements must be placed in order, with the largest category first.
(iv) Sub-paragraph (b)(iii) above does not apply to the notepaper of a recognised body if a designation would merely repeat part of the body's name.
(v) For the purposes of sub-paragraphs (b)(ii) and (iii) above:
(A) there must be no breach of the principle set out in paragraph 14(b) below on the use of the word ‘lawyer(s)’; and
(B) the word ‘solicitor(s)’ is sufficient in itself to indicate that a solicitor's jurisdiction of qualification is England and Wales.’
NOTE ON INDEMNITY PROVISIONS AFFECTING MULTI-NATIONAL
PRACTICES
The Solicitors' Indemnity Rules apply to multi-national practices — both MNPs and RBs.
A multi-national practice having an office in England and Wales must have indemnity cover from the Solicitors Indemnity Fund.
Overseas branch offices also have compulsory cover under the Solicitors' Indemnity Fund, except in the case of an MNP having fewer than 75% solicitor principals.
Rule 12.18(b) of the Solicitors' Indemnity Rules 1992 reads as follows:—
‘In the case of a multi-national partnership of which fewer than 75% of the principals are solicitors, any overseas offices of the Practice shall be deemed to form a Separate Practice from its offices in England and Wales.’
The effect of this is that the Solicitors' Overseas Practice Rules, and not the Solicitors' Indemnity Rules, apply to the overseas offices in respect of indemnity.
Rule 17 of the Solicitors' Overseas Practice Rules requires that solicitors be covered by insurance or other indemnity as appropriate given the local conditions, and various other factors.
NOTE ON INVESTMENT BUSINESS AUTHORISATION
PROVISIONS AFFECTING MULTI-NATIONAL PRACTICES
The Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 allows the Law Society to grant investment business certificates to MNPs.
The Solicitors' Investment Business Rules apply to multi-national practices with investment business certificates.
There is a requirement in the rules to notify the Society on Form MNP before any investment business is conducted by, or under the supervision of, a partner or director who is an RFL; and to inform the Society if an RFL has become or ceased to be a partner or director in a firm having the benefit of an investment business certificate.
Fees for investment business certificates are calculated according to the number of principals in an MNP or directors and shareholders in an RB.
Principals, directors and shareowners who practise mainly from overseas offices which do not conduct investment business in or into the UK are disregarded for this calculation.
A multi-national practice is not obliged to obtain authorisation from the Law Society for the conduct of investment business, but may instead seek authorisation from some other regulator.
NOTE ON ACCOUNTS PROVISIONS AFFECTING MULTI-NATIONAL
PRACTICES
The Solicitors' Accounts Rules 1991 and the Accountant's Report Rules 1991 apply to MNPs' offices in England and Wales.
If an MNP holds or receives clients' money, all solicitor and RFL principals must comply with the rules as to the keeping of clients' money in client accounts, keeping records of transactions, and deliver an annual accountant's report.
The rules also apply to an RB.
In respect of overseas offices of MNPs, the solicitor principals must comply with rules 12–16 of the Solicitors' Overseas Practice Rules 1990, which have much the same effect.
An RB with an overseas office must comply with the Overseas Practice Rules in respect of that office.
NOTE OF PROVISIONS REGARDING SEPARATE BUSINESSES
Solicitors are prohibited from offering certain services, except as part of a solicitor's practice or an MNP.
The reason for this is to ensure that all services central to a solicitors' practice are regulated by the Law society.
There are some services which can be offered by a solicitor as part of his or her practice, but which are not central to the practice of a solicitor.
These may be offered through a separate business, but subject to certain safeguards, to ensure that customers of the separate business do not believe they are receiving services from a solicitor's practice.
These prohibitions and safeguards, and certain exceptions, explanatory provisions and transitional provisions, are set out in rule 5 of the Solicitors' Practice Rules 1990.
The rule has been amended to insert a new paragraph (4A)(a) to deal with multi-national partnerships.
RFL principals of an MNP are not prohibited from having separate legal practices as foreign lawyers, but they are obliged to institute certain safeguards so as to ensure that clients of the foreign legal practice do not believe they are receiving services through an MNP.
A new paragraph (4A)(b) provides for a slight relaxation of the rule in respect of RFLs having separate businesses outside England and Wales.
The text of the rule is as follows:—
‘(1)(Application of the rule )
This rule applies only to such services as may properly be offered as part of a solicitor's practice.
(2)(Prohibition in respect of certain services )
Solicitors shall not by themselves or with any other person set up, operate, actively participate in or control any business, other than a solicitor's practice or a multi-national partnership, which offers any of the following services:
(a)
the conduct of any matter which could proceed before any court, tribunal or inquiry, whether or not proceedings are commenced;
(b)
advocacy before any court, tribunal or inquiry;
(c)
instructing Counsel;
(d)
acting as executor or trustee;
(e)
drafting any will;
(f)
giving legal advice;
(g)
property selling;
(h)
investment business as defined in the Financial Services Act 1946;
(i)
any activity reserved to solicitors (whether solely or together with other persons) by the Solicitors Act 1974 or any other statute; or
(j)
drafting legal documents other than those comprised in the above sub-paragraphs.
(3)(Safeguards for the public )
Where a solicitor by himself or herself or with any other person without breach of paragraph (2) of this rule operates, actively participates in or controls any business, other than a solicitor's practice or a multi-national partnership, which offers any service which may properly be offered as part of a solicitor's practice, the solicitor shall ensure?
(a) that the name of that business has no substantial element in common with the name of any practice of the solicitor;
(b) that the words ‘solicitor(s)’, ‘attorney(s)’ or ‘lawyer(s)’are not used in connection with the solicitor's involvement with that business;
(c) that any clients referred by the practice of the solicitor to that business are informed in writing that, as the customers of that business, they do not enjoy the statutory protection attaching to clients of a solicitor; and
(d) that, where the business shares premises or reception staff with any practice of the solicitor, all customers of the business are informed in writing that, as customers of that business, they do not enjoy the statutory protection attaching to clients of a solicitor.
(4)(Exceptions )
(a) The prohibition in paragraph (2) of this rule shall not apply to a business consisting of a management consultancy or a company secretarial service and which offers none of the services specified in that paragraph save the drafting of documents under sub-paragraph (2)(j) and the giving of legal advice, provided such drafting or advice is ancillary to the main purpose of the business.
(b) The prohibition in paragraph (2) of this rule shall not apply to prevent a solicitor who is qualified as a lawyer of a jurisdiction other than England or Wales, patent agent, trade mark agent or European patent attorney from having a separate practice as such; and such a practice shall not be subject to the provisions of sub-paragraphs (3)(a) and (b) of this rule.
(4A)(Multi-national partnerships )
(a) Where all or any of the principals of a multi-national partnership have a separate legal practice as foreign lawyers:
(i) neither the prohibitions in paragraph (2)(a) to (j) of this rule nor the safeguards in paragraph (3)(a) to (d) of this rule shall apply in relation to the separate legal practice; but
(ii) all the principals of the multi-national partnership shall ensure:
(A) that any clients referred by the multi-national partnership to the separate legal practice are informed in writing that, as clients of that practice, they do not enjoy the statutory protection attaching to clients of a multi-national partnership, and
(B) that, where the separate legal practice shares premises or reception staff with the multi-national partnership, all clients in England and Wales of the separate practice are informed in writing that, as clients of that practice, they do not enjoy the statutory protection attaching to clients of a multi-national partnership.
(b) Notwithstanding paragraphs (2) and (5)(a) of this rule, a registered foreign lawyer will not be in breach of these rules by virtue of setting up, operating, actively participating in or controlling a business outside England and Wales, provided:
(i) the registered foreign lawyer's involvement in the business is not in breach of his or her own professional rules;
(ii) the registered foreign lawyer's solicitor partners play no role in setting up, operating, actively participating in or controlling the business; and
(iii) the business does not offer in England and Wales any of the services set out in paragraph (2)(a) to (j) of this rule.
(5)(Explanatory provisions )
(a) This rule applies whether the business concerned is in England and Wales or outside the jurisdiction; but nothing in this rule prevents the setting up outside the jurisdiction of a practice complying with Rules 8 or 9 of the Solicitors' Overseas Practice Rules 1990.
(b) No part of this rule applies to a solicitor solely by virtue of the fact that?
(i) the solicitor is a non-executive director of a company; or
(ii) the solicitor, as the employee of a non-solicitor, does work permitted by virtue of Rule 4 of these rules.
(c) A separate practice as a notary public operated by a solicitor in conjunction with his or her practice as a solicitor shall not be regarded as a business ‘other than a solicitor's practice’ for the purpose of this rule.
(6)(Transitional provisions )
(a) Until three years after the coming into force of the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988, no part of this rule shall apply:
(i) to a wholly owned executor and trustee company or nominee company already providing services before the coming into force of those rules; or
(ii) to a wholly owned company to provide company secretarial services already providing services before .
(b) Until  no part of this rule shall apply to any business already providing services before  without putting the solicitor in breach of the Solicitors' Practice Rules 1936/72 (as amended).’
SOLICITORS' COMPENSATION FUND (FOREIGN LAWYERS' CONTRIBUTIONS)
RULES 1991
Rules dated  made by the Council of the Law Society with the concurrence of the Master of the Rolls under Schedule 14 paragraph 7 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 to regulate the contributions of registered foreign lawyers to the Solicitors' Compensation Fund.
Rule 1 — Interpretation
In these rules:
(a)
‘the Act’ means the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990:
(b)
‘annual contribution’ has the meaning given in Schedule 14 paragraph 7 of the Act;
(c)
‘the Council’ means the Council of the Law Society;
(d)
‘multi-national partnership’ has the meaning given in section 89 of the Act;
(e)
‘recognised body’ has the meaning given in section 9 of the Administration of Justice Act 1985;
(f)
‘registered foreign lawyer’ has the meaning given in section 89 of the Act; and
(g)
‘special levy’ has the meaning given in Schedule 14 paragraph 7 of the Act.
Rule 2 — Remission of annual contribution for RFLs not holding
clients' money
Where a registered foreign lawyer has not, at any time during the period specified in the application for renewal of his or her registration, either:
(i) practised as a partner in a multi-national practice which held or received clients' money; or 
(ii) been a director or member of or a beneficial owner of any share in a recognised body which held or received clients' money; or
(iii) been a director or member of or a beneficial owner of any share in a recognised body which directly or indirectly owned any share in another recognised body which held or received clients' money;
the registered foreign lawyer shall not be required to make an annual contribution.
Rule 3 — Reduced annual contributions for RFLs mainly
practising overseas
Where a registered foreign lawyer is required to pay an annual contribution, but has, during the period specified in his or her application for renewal of registration, mainly practised from an office or offices outside England and Wales, that annual contribution shall be reduced to one quarter of the full amount determined under Schedule 14 paragraph (7)(2)(a) of the Act, rounded to the nearest five pounds.
Rule 4 — Discretion to reduce or remit annual contribution or
special levy
Where a registered foreign lawyer who would, apart from this rule, be required to pay an annual contribution or special levy, claims, and the Council agrees, that he or she is so covered in respect of dishonesty or failure to account, whether by a compensation fund other than the Solicitors' Compensation Fund, or by an indemnity fund other than the Solicitors' Indemnity Fund, or by compulsory insurance, that there is a substantial reduction in the risk to the Solicitors' Compensation Fund in respect of his or her practice in comparison with the risk presented by a solicitor practising in a like manner, the Council may reduce that annual contribution or special levy to such amount as the Council thinks fit or to zero.
Rule 5 — Decision on matters to be determined under these
rules
The decision of the Council on any matter to be determined under these rules shall be final.
Rule 6 — Commencement
These rules shall come into force on .
PART IV
USEFUL ADDRESSES
INCORPORATED PRACTICES Information Pack April 93
INTRODUCTION
This (second) information pack is intended to assist solicitors in considering the question of whether to incorporate all or part of their practice, and, if they wish to do so, to assist solicitors in making the appropriate application for recognition by the Law Society.
The full text of the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988 is included in this pack, together with an introduction.
Rules 15 to 21 deal with the process of application and recognition by the Society.
A solicitors' incorporated practice allowed under the Rules will be known as a recognised body.
Application forms may be obtained from Solicitors Records, and should be returned to the Finance Department .
Specimen memorandum and articles for both limited and unlimited companies, with introductory notes, are also included in the pack.
Whilst certain provisions in the memorandum and articles are essential in order to comply with legal provisions and/or with the rules, all that is required is that the memorandum and articles of a recognised body comply with both the rules and the necessary legal provisions; the format does not have to be followed.
Please do not submit the memorandum and articles for approval.
Also included in the pack are specimen compensation fund covenants for completion by either a recognised body or an individual solicitor or registered foreign lawyer.
When bringing Section 9 of the Administration of Justice Act 1985 into force on  the Lord Chancellor also made the Solicitors' Incorporated Practices Order.
The Administration of Justice Act itself makes amendments to some legislation referring to solicitors.
The Order applies, disapplies or modifies all references to solicitors in other legislation, to cover recognised bodies.
The Order is available from HMSO.
Solicitors wishing to enquire as to the interpretation of the rules should telephone or write to Professional Ethics,.
INDEX
PART I
THE RULES
INTRODUCTION TO
SOLICITORS' INCORPORATED PRACTICE RULES 1988 (AS AMENDED)
S.9 of the Administration of Justice Act 1985 (AJA) authorised the Council to make rules enabling solicitors to incorporate their practices.
The Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988 (the Rules) enable solicitors to incorporate either as a company limited by shares or as an unlimited company.
The Rules include a provision permitting registered foreign lawyers to be directors and members of incorporated practices with solicitors.
A registered foreign lawyer (‘RFL’) is a person registered in accordance with section 89 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
The Rules, as amended, are shown in full below.
Commencement of the Rules
There are a considerable number of references to solicitors in existing legislation and, when S.9 was brought into force, these references were applied to incorporated practices by the Solicitors' Incorporated Practices Order.
The order, S.9, and thus the Rules were brought into force on .
Recognition by the Council
R.2 contains the fundamental requirement that an incorporated practice must be recognised by the Council as being a suitable body to undertake the provision of professional services such as are provided by individuals practising as solicitors or by multi-national partnerships (‘MNPs’).
Accordingly in the Rules an incorporated practice which has been so recognised is referred to as a ‘recognised body’.
R.2 also provides that a recognised body may only provide the professional services described above.
Management and control
R.3 provides that a recognised body must be managed and controlled by solicitors or other recognised bodies or by such persons together with one or more RFLs.
This does not mean that all aspects of day-to-day management must be in the hands of solicitors, or solicitors and RFLs, provided the effective management is so exercised.
R.3 makes it clear that the company secretary need not be a solicitor or an RFL.
Directors
R.4 provides that only solicitors with practising certificates and RFLs may be directors of a recognised body, and that at all times at least once of the directors shall be a solicitor.
Shareholders (referred to in the Rules as ‘members’)
R.5 contains three fundamental provisions:
(a) only solicitors with practising certificates, RFLs and other recognised bodies may be shareholders of a recognised body, and
(b) a shareholder may not hold shares for others save as nominee for another solicitor with a practising certificate or an RFL or recognised body who is a shareholder or officer of the recognised body or who is working in its practice; a shareholder may not create any charge or other third party interest over his shares.
A solicitor or RFL for whom a shareholder holds shares as nominee is referred to as the beneficial owner of the shares, and
(c) at least one share must be held by a solicitor or recognised body; thus no recognised body can be comprised only of RFL members.
R.5 provides periods of grace within which matters must be rectified where a shareholder (or a beneficial owner of shares) is struck off or where his or her practising certificate is suspended (including automatic suspension on bankruptcy) or expires without being renewed; or in the case of an RFL his or her name is struck off the register or his registration is suspended (including automatic suspension on bankruptcy) or cancelled or on striking off or suspension in his or her own jurisdiction).
R.5 also contains provisions dealing with the death of a shareholder (or beneficial owner of shares).
R.5(2) (b) provides that a shareholder who holds shares as nominee must disclose details of the interests of the beneficial owners to the recognised body, which must maintain a record of them.
R.5(6) provides that a shareholder shall not exercise any voting rights in respect of any share held in breach of any part of R.5 — a breach could come about either because a shareholder is not permitted to be a shareholder or because a shareholder is holding for another person who is not permitted to be a beneficial owner.
R.5(7) restricts who may be appointed by a shareholder as a proxy or corporate representative.
Parts of R.5 are rules to be observed by the recognised body itself; other parts are rules to be observed by the individual shareholders.
R.5(8) provides that a recognised body shall so far as possible ensure that its shareholders comply with Rs.5 and 6 (R.6 makes provision with respect to mental health).
Proper service to clients
R.7 provides that a recognised body shall at all times remain able to provide a proper service to its clients.
This is not intended to place a greater burden on recognised bodies than on traditional practices.
Registered office and practice overseas
R.8 provides that a recognised body's registered office must be in England and Wales and at its place of business or one of its places of business.
A recognised body could practice overseas as well as in England and Wales, subject, of course, to local law and compliance with the Overseas Practice Rules.
The Incorporated Practice Rules do not apply to a practice conducted entirely outside England and Wales.
Solicitors may set up a corporate practice to practice solely outside England and Wales provided that(a) this is permitted by local law,(b) all the directors and shareholders are solicitors, lawyers of another jurisdiction or members of the Bar of England and Wales acting in accordance with the Overseas Practice Rules of the Bar and (c) the practice complies with the Overseas Practice Rules; but such a company could not practice in England and Wales.
Conditions which must at all times be satisfied by recognised
bodies if they are to remain recognised
R.9 sets out the circumstances in which a body's recognition automatically expires.
These are:
(a) where a recognised body ceases to be registered under the Companies Act as an unlimited company or a company limited by shares;
(b) where a recognised body which is an unlimited company re-registers without the Council's consent as a company limited by shares;
(c) where a recognised body ceases to have at least one shareholder who is able to exercise voting rights in respect of at least one share.
However, an exception provides that recognition will not expire solely because the death of a shareholder or shareholders has left the recognised body with no shareholder able to exercise such voting rights.
This exception is dependent upon the fulfilment of certain conditions.
One of the conditions is such that it would be advisable for solicitor shareholders (particularly in a company with only a few shareholders) to appoint in their will only a solicitor or solicitors as personal representative in respect of their shares.
(d) where a winding-up or administration order is made or where a resolution for voluntary winding-up is passed or where an administrative receiver is appointed.
Revocation of recognition
R.10 enables the Council to revoke recognition where it was granted as a result of error or fraud.
The Disciplinary Tribunal may revoke recognition where there has been a breach of the Rules or other conduct requirements.
Top-up insurance
The Solicitors' Indemnity Rules extend to recognised bodies the requirement to make contributions to the Solicitors' Indemnity Fund (SIF); in return the Fund will provide cover of £1,000,000 in respect of each and every claim.
However, a limited liability incorporated practice is required by R.13 to take out top-up insurance over and above the £1,000,000 provided by SIF.
The additional cover required is for a further £500,000 in respect of each and every claim or a further £2 million on an aggregate basis.
Compensation Fund Covenant
Each shareholder of (and beneficial owner of shares in) an incorporated practice is required to submit to the Council a covenant, the effect of which will be that the costs of grants paid from the Compensation Fund in respect of the practice will in certain circumstances be recoverable from its shareholders.
The covenant in effect places shareholders of an incorporated practice in the same position as the partners in a partnership.
Applications for recognition
R.15 details what must be submitted to the Council on applying for recognition.
R.16(1) provides that recognition may be granted to a company where the Council is satisfied as to certain matters.
R.16(2) indicates some of the circumstances in which the Council may refuse to grant recognition.
Duration of recognition
R.18 provides that broadly recognitions remain in force for three years; specifically a recognition remains in force until the third 31st May next after it is granted.
Duties of solicitors and RFLs participating in a recognised
body
R.24(1) provides that it is the duty of an officer of a recognised body to take all reasonable steps to ensure that the body complies with the Rules and other conduct requirements, whether that officer is a solicitor or an RFL.
R.24(2) provides that any solicitor or RFL participating in a recognised body must not cause any breach of the Rules or other conduct requirements.
R.24(2) confirms, for the avoidance of doubt, that a solicitor or RFL who participates in a recognised body remains personally subject to all the requirements of conduct affecting solicitors.
Miscellaneous
R.19 requires a recognised body to notify the Society of certain changes and occurrences.
R.22 contains provisions as to the name of a recognised body.
R.23 requires that a recognised body includes certain information on its stationery, etc.
Memorandum and Articles of Association
The Rules do not require the use of a particular memo an articles.
However R.15 requires a declaration when a company applies for recognition that its memorandum and articles enable it (i) to remain in compliance with certain key rules and (ii) so far as possible to ensure continued compliance by its shareholders with certain key Rules.
Suggested model memoranda and articles for both limited and unlimited companies are included in this pack and certain provisions in those models (or provisions to like effect) are identified in an introductory notes as being necessary if the incorporated practice is to be able to comply with and remain in compliance with the Rules.
Must a Recognised Body Comprise the Whole of the Practice?
Solicitors may wish to incorporate part, but not all, of a practice; for example, the property selling and/or financial services departments of the practice.
The Rules allow this.
If those who beneficially own shares are the same in number and identity as the principals in the unincorporated firm of solicitors then the firm and the recognised body will normally be treated as one practice for the purpose of the Indemnity Rules; i.e. only one contribution, based on one gross fee return, will be payable.
Top-up insurance will be required in addition(see Rule 13), where the recognised body is a company limited by shares.
The ability to incorporate only part of the practice will be important to those firms having or wishing to set up separate executor, trustee or nominee companies.
Such companies, unless they become recognised bodies, will be caught by Rule 5 SPR 1990 subject to the transitional provisions in sub-section (6) of that Rule, if applicable.
Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988
[as amended by the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Repeals Rules
1990 and the Multi-National Legal Practice Rules 1991 and the
Solicitors' Accounts (Consequential Repeals) Rules 1991]
Rules dated  made by the Council of the Law Society with the concurrence of the Master of the Rolls under section 9 of the Administration of justice Act 1985, Part II of the Solicitors Act 1974 and schedule 15 paragraph 6 of the Financial Services Act 1985, regulating the incorporated practices of solicitors and registered foreign lawyers in England and Wales and overseas.
1.
Interpretation
In these Rules, except where the context otherwise requires:
(1)(a)‘the Act’ means that Administration of Justice Act 1985;
(b)‘authorised insurers’, ‘the Council’, ‘practising certificate’, ‘the roll’ and ‘the Society’shall have the meanings assigned to them in the Solicitors Act 1974;
(c)‘firm’ means an unincorporated partnership consisting of solicitors or recognised bodies or both, or a multi-national partnership and includes also a solicitor who is a sole practitioner;
(ca)‘foreign lawyer’ and ‘registered foreign lawyer’shall have the meanings assigned to them by section 89 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990;
(d)‘indemnity rules’ means rules made under section 37 of the Solicitors Act 1974 and section 9 of the Act;
(e)‘member’ means a person who agrees to become a member of a body corporate and whose name is entered in its register of members;
(ea)‘multi-national partnership’ means an unincorporated partnership consisting of one or more registered foreign lawyers and one or more solicitors;
(f)‘person’ includes a body corporate;
(g)‘recognised body’ means a body corporate for the time being recognised by the Council under these Rules as being a suitable body to undertake the provision of professional services such as are provided by individuals practising as solicitors or by multi-national partnerships;
(h)‘solicitor’ means a person qualified to act as a solicitor under section 1 of the Solicitors Act 1974;
(i)‘Solicitors Indemnity Fund’ means the Fund established under the Solicitors' Indemnity Rules 1987.
(2) A reference to a Rule is a reference to one of the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988.
(3) A reference to any provision of an Act of Parliament includes a reference to any statutory modification or re-enactment of that provision for the time being in force.
(4) Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter, words in the singular include the plural and words in the plural include the singular.
Requirement as to recognition by the Council
(1) Subject to the provisions of these Rules, a body corporate may carry on business consisting of the provision of professional services such as are provided by individuals practising as solicitors or by multi-national partnerships provided that before commencing any such business such body corporate shall have been recognised by the Council as being a suitable body to undertake the provision of such services and provided that at all times while carrying on such business it remains so recognised.
(2) A recognised body may carry on only such business as is referred to in paragraph (1) of this Rule.
3.
Management and control
A recognised body shall at all times be managed and controlled by solicitors or recognised bodies or by such persons together with one or more registered foreign lawyers; provided that there shall be no breach of this Rule where the secretary of a recognised body is not a solicitor, a registered foreign lawyer or a recognised body.
4.
Directors
A recognised body shall not have as a director any person who is not a solicitor or a registered foreign lawyer; provided that at all times at least one of the directors shall be a solicitor.
5.
Shares
(1) A recognised body shall not have as a member any person who is not a solicitor, a registered foreign lawyer or a recognised body.
(2)(a)(i) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5) of this Rule a member of a recognised body shall not hold any share in the body for another person save as nominee for a solicitor, a registered foreign lawyer or a recognised body who or which is himself or itself a member or officer of the recognised body or for a solicitor or registered foreign lawyer who is working in the practice of the body or for a receiver appointed under section 99 of the Mental Health Act 1983 in respect of any such solicitor or registered foreign lawyer; and
(ii) at all times at least one share in the body must be so held either by a member who or which is a solicitor or a recognised body and who or which beneficially owns that share; or by a member who or which holds that share as nominee for a solicitor or for a recognised body or for a receiver appointed under section 99 of the Mental Health Act 1983 in respect of a solicitor.
(b) A member of a recognised body shall disclose to the body the nature and extent of any interests in shares registered in his name and the persons by whom such interests are held.
The recognised body shall maintain a record of the identity of all persons, other than the member in whose name a share is registered, holding such interests.
The record shall be kept in respect of each person on it for at least three years from the date on which that person ceased to hold any interest in any share in the body.
(c) A member of a recognised body shall not create any charge or other third party interest (save as permitted by sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph) over any share in the recognised body.
(3) In paragraphs (4) and (5) of this Rule references to the beneficial owner of a share do not include a person in whose name that share is registered and who beneficially owns that share.
(4)(a) Where a member of a recognised body dies the recognised body shall ensure that any shares registered in his name at the time of his death are within twelve months of his death registered in the name of a solicitor or a recognised body or (where permitted by paragraph (2)(a)(i) of this Rule) a registered foreign lawyer or (where the recognised body is a company limited by shares) are acquired by the recognised body itself.
(b) A solicitor, a registered foreign lawyer or a recognised body who or which is the personal representative of a deceased member of or beneficial owner of a share in a recognised body may elect to be entered in the register of members of the recognised body but no member shall hold any share as personal representative for longer than twelve months from the date of the death of the deceased.
(c) Where a beneficial owner of a share in a recognised body dies, a member may notwithstanding sub-paragraph (2)(a) of this Rule, continue to hold such share for the personal representative of the deceased for a period of not longer than twelve months from the date of the death; provided that voting rights shall only be exercised in respect of any share held in reliance of this sub-paragraph where the only personal representative in respect of the deceased beneficial owner's interest in the share is a solicitor, a registered foreign lawyer or a recognised body.
(5)(a) Where one of the following specified events happens, to a member of or a beneficial owner of a share in a recognised body, that is to say:(where such member or beneficial owner is a solicitor) his name is stuck off or removed from the roll or his practising certificate is suspended (including automatic suspension on bankruptcy) or withdrawn; or (where such a member or beneficial owner is a registered foreign lawyer) his name is struck off the register or his registration is suspended (including automatic suspension on bankruptcy, or on striking off or suspension in his own jurisdiction) or cancelled; or (where such a member or beneficial owner is a recognised body) its recognition is revoked or expires (including automatic expiry on liquidation, making of an administration order or appointment of an administrative receiver);
then —
(i) where the specified event happens in respect of a member, any share registered in his name may, notwithstanding paragraph (1) of this Rule, remain so registered for a period of not longer than six months from the date of the specified event; provided that no voting rights shall be exercised in respect of any such share while it remains so registered; and
(ii) where the specified event happens in respect of a beneficial owner of a share, a member may, notwithstanding sub-paragraph (2)(a) of this Rule, continue to hold such share for the beneficial owner or, as the case may be, his trustee in bankruptcy or liquidator for a period of not longer than six months from the date of the specified event; provided that no voting rights shall be exercised in respect of any share held in reliance of this sub-paragraph.
(b) A solicitor or registered foreign lawyer who is the trustee in bankruptcy or liquidator of a member of or a beneficial owner of a share in a recognised body may elect to be entered in the register of members of the recognised body but no member shall hold any share as trustee in bankruptcy or liquidator for longer than six months from the date of the bankruptcy order or winding-up order as the case may be.
(6) A member of a recognised body shall not exercise any voting rights in respect of any share held in breach of any part of this Rule and the chairman of a meeting shall not accept any vote tendered in breach of this paragraph or paragraph (7) of this Rule.
(7) For the purpose of attending and voting at meetings a member of a recognised body shall not appoint as proxy or corporate representative any person other than a solicitor who is a member or officer of or who is working in the practice of, or a registered foreign lawyer who is a member or director of,(a) the recognised body or (b) a recognised body which is itself a member of the recognised body.
(8) A recognised body shall so far as possible ensure that its members comply with this Rule and Rule 6.
6.
Mental health
A recognised body shall not have as a director or solicitor or registered foreign lawyer while he is a patient as defined by section 94 of the Mental Health Act 1983 or while he is a person as to whom powers have been exercised under section 98 (emergency powers) of that Act and no voting rights shall be exercised in respect of any shares registered in the name of or beneficially owned by such a solicitor or registered foreign lawyer.
7.
Proper service to clients
A recognised body shall at all times remain able to provide a proper service to its clients.
8.
Registered office
The registered office of a recognised body shall be in England and Wales and at the place of business or one of the places of business of the body.
9.
Conditions which must at all times be satisfied
(1) The following conditions shall at all times be satisfied by a recognised body and where any condition fails to be satisfied by a recognised body the recognition of the body by the Council shall expire:
(a) a recognised body shall be registered in  England and Wales under the Companies Act 1985 as an unlimited company having a share capital or as a company limited by shares;
(b) a recognised body which is an unlimited company shall retain its status as an unlimited company, save where the Council consents to the body being re-registered as limited by shares under the Companies Act 1985;
(c) a recognised body shall, notwithstanding sub-paragraphs (4)(c) and (5)(a) of Rule 5, at all times have at least one member holding a share or shares in the circumstances set out in Rule (5)(2)(a)(ii) of these rules and able to exercise voting rights in respect of at least one share in the body, except that the recognition of a body shall not expire solely because:
(i) the practising certificate of any member is withdrawn due to non-renewal under Section 14(5) of the Solicitors Act 1974 provided that a new practising certificate is issued within two months of such expiry; or
(ii) the death of a member has left a recognised body with no member able to exercise voting rights in respect of at least one share in the body provided (a) that within three months of the death the recognised body has at least one member able to exercise such voting rights, and (b) that until proviso (a) has been fulfilled either at least one share in the body is beneficially owned by a solicitor or a recognised body or the only personal representative in respect of at least one share in the body is a solicitor or a recognised body.
(2) The recognition of a recognised body shall expire where a winding-up order or an administration order under Part II of the Insolvency Act 1986 is made with respect to the body or where a resolution for voluntary winding-up is passed with respect to the body or where a person is appointed administrative receiver of the body.
10.
Revocation of recognition
The Council may revoke the recognition of a recognised body if that recognition was granted as a result of any error or fraud.
11.
[Repealed]
12.
Application of principles and requirements of conduct to
recognised bodies
All the principles and requirements of conduct affecting solicitors shall apply in all respects mutatis mutandis to recognised bodies.
13.
Top-up insurance
(1) A recognised body which is a company limited by shares shall insure with authorised insurers against the losses referred to in paragraph (3) of this Rule over and above the maximum indemnity provided from time to time by the Solicitors Indemnity Fund.
(2) The insurance required by paragraph (1) of this Rule shall provide, over and above that maximum indemnity, a minimum cover of either £500,000 on an each and every claim basis or £2,000,000 per annum on an aggregate basis.
(3) The losses against which a recognised body is required to insure under this Rule are all losses arising from claims in respect of civil liability incurred in the practice of the recognised body by the recognised body or by any of its officers or employees or former officers or employees or by any solicitor or registered foreign lawyer who is or was a consultant to or associate in the body's practice or is or was working in the practice as an agent or a locum tenens; save that a recognised body shall not be required to insure against losses arising from claims of a type excluded, by the indemnity rules applicable from time to time to recognised bodies, from being afforded indemnity by the Solicitors Indemnity Fund.
(4) The insurance required by paragraph (1) of this Rule shall cover the insured in respect of:
(a) Any claim first made or intimated during the period of insurance, and
(b) any claim arising out of circumstances notified to the insurer during the period of insurance as circumstances which might give rise to a claim.
(5) A recognised body which is required to insure under this Rule shall each twelve months after recognition is granted to it under these Rules, or at any other time when so required by the Council, submit to the Council evidence of compliance with this Rule.
14.
Compensation Fund covenant
(1) Each member of and each beneficial owner of a share in a recognised body shall submit to the Council, in such form as the Council may from time to time prescribe, a covenant under seal (referred to in these Rules as a ‘Compensation Fund covenant’) that he or it will jointly and severally with the other members of and beneficial owners of any shares in the body reimburse the Society, when required to do so by the Council, in respect of any grant made out of the Compensation Fund under paragraph 6 of Schedule 2 to the Act where:
(a) such grant is made in consequence of some act or default of the recognised body or any of its officers or employees; and
(b) at the time of such act or default the covenantor is or was a member of or a beneficial owner of a share in the recognised body;
provided that a member or a beneficial owner of a share shall only be required to reimburse the Society to the extent that the Society has been unable to recover the amount of the grant from the recognised body or the officer or employee committing the act or default or the personal representative, trustee in bankruptcy or liquidator or any such person.
(2) The Compensation Fund covenant shall include a covenant by the covenantor that before transferring any share or transferring a beneficial interest in any share or holding any share as nominee he or it will ensure that the intended transferee or beneficial owner submits a Compensation Fund covenant to the Council.
(3) A recognised body shall not enter in its register of members any person until that person has submitted a Compensation Fund covenant to the Council and shall so far as possible ensure that all beneficial owners of any shares submit such a covenant to the Council.
15.
Applications for recognition
A body corporate seeking recognition under these Rules shall submit to the Council:
(a) a completed application signed by all the members and directors of the body (in the case of a member which is a recognised body two directors of that body shall sign on its behalf save that where a body has only one director that director shall sign on its behalf) in such form as the Council may from time to time prescribe, which application shall include?
(i) the names and addresses of all solicitors who are members of the body, and (separately designated) the names and addresses of all registered foreign lawyers who are members of the body;
(ii) the names and registered offices of all recognised bodies who are members of the body;
(iii) the nature and extent of the interest held in any share by any person other than the member in whose name the share is registered and the identity of the person by whom such interest is held (including, separately designated, the identity of any such person who is a registered foreign lawyer);
(iv) the names and addresses of all directors of the body (including, separately designated, all directors who are registered foreign lawyers);
(v) the name, the registered office and any other proposed place or places of business of the body;
(vi) a statement as to whether the body is a company limited by shares or an unlimited company;
(vii) reasonably sufficient information in respect of any of the matters referred to in Rule 16(2) except such information as has been provided by the body in a previous application under this Rule;
(viii) a declaration:
(a) that the body complies with Rules 3–6, 8, 9 and 22 and that its members comply with Rules 5 and 6; and
(b) that the memorandum and articles of association of the body are such as to enable the body (i) to continue to comply with Rules 3–6 and (ii) so far as possible to ensure continued compliance by its members with Rules 5 and 6;
(b) evidence of compliance with the indemnity rules applicable from time to time to recognised bodies;
(c) in the case of a body which is a company limited by shares, evidence of compliance with Rule 13 (top-up insurance);
(d) Compensation fund covenants by all the members of the body and by all the beneficial owners of any shares in the body;
(e) a copy of the certificate of incorporation of the body;
(f) any other documentation or information which the Council may require;
(g) such fee as the Council may from time to time prescribe in connection with such applications.
16.
Grants and refusals of recognition
(1) Where a body corporate has applied for recognition in accordance with Rule 15 the Council may recognise the body as a suitable body to undertake the provision of professional services such as are provided by individuals practising as solicitors or by multi-national partnerships where the Council is satisfied:
(a) that the body complies with Rules 36, 8, 9 and 22 and that its members comply with Rules 5 and 6;
(b) that the body complies with the indemnity rules applicable from time to time to recognised bodies; and
(c) that, in the case of a body which is a company limited by shares, it complies with Rule 13 (top-up insurance).
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the Council's discretion under paragraph (1) of this Rule the Council may refuse to recognise a body where:
(a) a director or member of the body is or has been a director or member of a recognised body which has been the subject of an order or direction under paragraphs 18 or 21 of Schedule 2 to the Act or the recognition of which has been revoked under Rule 10 of these Rules or has expired under Rule 9 of these Rules; or
(b) a director or member has been the subject of an order under section 47(2) (a)–(c) of the Solicitors Act 1974 or Schedule 14 paragraph 15(4) (a)–(c) of the Courts and Legal Services Act 190;
(c) the powers conferred by Part II of Schedule 1 to the Solicitors Act 1974 have been exercised in respect of the body or in respect of a firm or recognised body of which a director or member of the body applying for recognition is or has been a principal or a director or member as the case may be; or
(d) a director or member:
(i) has been convicted of a criminal offence involving fraud, dishonesty or violence; or
(ii) has had a bankruptcy order made against him or has made a composition or arrangement with his creditors or has made a proposal for a voluntary arrangement under Part VIII of the Insolvency Act 1986 or is or has been a director of a company in respect of which an administration order under Part II of the Insolvency Act 1986 or a winding-up order has been made or in respect of which a resolution for voluntary winding up has been passed or which has made a proposal for a voluntary arrangement under Part I of the Insolvency Act 1986 or in respect of which a person has been appointed receiver or administrative receiver; or
(iii) has had an order made against him which is not a bankruptcy order but which has the same or a similar effect under the law in force in any territory outside England and Wales;
(iv) has been struck off or suspended from practice as a lawyer or a jurisdiction other than England and Wales; or
(e) for any other reason the Council thinks it proper in the public interest not to recognise the body.
17.
Requirements on refusal; right of appeal if recognition
neither granted or refused within specified period
(1) Where the Council refuses an application for recognition it shall notify the applicant of the refusal and of the grounds on which it has been refused.
(2) Where the Council has within three months beginning with the date when an application for recognition was received by the Council neither granted nor refused recognition, an appeal to the Master of the Rolls may be brought under paragraph 2 of Schedule 2 to the Act as if the application had been refused by the Council.
For the purpose of calculating the period of three months referred to in this paragraph time shall not run in August.
18.
Duration of recognition
(1) Every recognition granted under these Rules shall, subject to paragraph (2) of this Rule, remain in force until the end of the third 31st May next after that recognition is granted except where prior to that time the recognition expires under Rule 9 or is revoked.
(2) Where an application is made in accordance with Rule 15 by a body which at the date of the application is already recognised under these Rules and the Council has neither granted nor refused a new recognition by the time when the body's existing recognition would, apart from this paragraph, expire in accordance with paragraph (1) of this Rule, the existing recognition shall not expire at that time but shall continue in force until a new recognition is granted or refused.
19.
Duty to notify the Society of certain matters and to
provide items required by the Council
(1) A recognised body shall notify the Society in writing:
(a) not less than 28 days before the change is implemented, of any change in the body's name, registered office or principal office if different from its registered office;
(b) forthwith of any change:
(i) in the body's members, directors, or place or places of business other than those referred to in sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph;
(ii) with respect to the interests held in any share in the body by a person other than the member in whose name the share is registered and in the identity of the person by whom any such interest is held;
(c) forthwith of any of the occurrences referred to in Rule 9(2) or where a condition referred to in Rule 9(1) ceases to be satisfied.
(2) The Council may (in order to ascertain whether or not any of these Rules or other rules, principles or requirements of conduct applicable to recognised bodies by virtue of these Rules or section 9 of the Act are being complied with) at any time by written notice require a recognised body or an officer or member of the body to submit to the Council any report, certificate, audit or other documentation or information which the Council may require and the recognised body or the officer or member as the case may be shall submit such item to the Council within such period as may be reasonably determined by the Council.
20.
Certificate of recognition
Where a Council recognises a body under these Rules it shall issue to the body a certificate of recognition which shall state:
(a) the name and registered office of the recognised body;
(b) the dates of granting and expiry of recognition; and
(c) whether the body is a company limited by shares or an unlimited company.
21.
List of recognised bodies
The Society shall maintain a list containing the name, registered office and other place or places of business of every body for the time being recognised by the Council under these Rules, which list shall be available for inspection by the public.
22.
Name
(1) The name of a recognised body shall consist only of one or more of the following:
(a) the name or names of one or more solicitors, registered foreign lawyers or recognised bodies who are members or former members of the body;
(b) the name or part of the name of any predecessor firm or recognised body in practice at the time of the formation of the body provided that such name did not infringe Rule 11 of the Solicitors' Practice Rules 1990 (or any rule for the time being replacing that Rule) or this Rule;
(ba) in the case of a recognised body which has at least one registered foreign lawyer as a director, member or beneficial owner of a share, the name or part of the name of a predecessor legal practice which was in practice at the time of the formation of the body, provided that such name consisted of the name or names of present or former principals and conventional references to such persons and to the practice;
(c) other conventional references to any such person, firm or body as is referred to in sub-paragraphs (a),(b) and (ba) of this paragraph;
(d) conventional references to the body such as‘and Company’;
(e) the word ‘solicitor’ or ‘solicitors’;
(f) in the case of a recognised body which has at least one registered foreign lawyer as a director, member or beneficial owner of share:
(i) the words ‘solicitor(s)’ and ‘registered foreign lawyer(s)’; or
(ii) the word ‘solicitor(s)’ together with words denoting the countries or jurisdictions of qualification of those registered foreign lawyers and their professional qualifications;
provided that in any such name the constituent elements must be placed in order, with the largest category first; and provided that there must be no breach of the principle set out in paragraph 14(b) of the Solicitors' Publicity Code (use of the word ‘lawyer(s)’).
(2) The name of a recognised body must include the name of at least one solicitor, foreign lawyer or recognised body included by virtue of sub-paragraphs (1)(a),(b) or (ba) of this Rule.
(3) The name of a recognised body which is a company limited by shares must have ‘limited’ or ‘ltd.’as its last word except that the name of a body which has its registered office in Wales may have ‘cyfyngedig ’or ‘cyf .’
as its last word.
(4) Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2) of this Rule the Council may approve in writing some other name for a recognised body.
23.
Requirement to state certain matters on stationery, etc.
(1) The names of all the directors of a recognised body shall be stated either on the body's stationery or in a list of the names of all the directors maintained at the body's registered office provided that in the latter case the body's stationery must state that such a list of all the directors' names is open to inspection at the body's registered office and must state the address of that office.
(1A) In the vase of a recognised body which has at least one registered foreign lawyer as a director, member or beneficial owner of a share, there must, in addition to paragraph (1) of this Rule, also be compliance with paragraph 7(b) of the Solicitors' Publicity Code.
(2) A recognised body which is a company limited by shares shall comply with Chapter I (appearance of company name and other particulars on stationery, etc.) of Part XI of the Companies Act 1985.
(3) On the stationery of a recognised body which is an unlimited company it shall be stated, either as part of the body's name or otherwise, that the body is a body corporate.
(4) Where a recognised body which is an unlimited company is a partner in partnership with a solicitor or another recognised body it shall be stated on the stationery of the partnership, either as part of the body's name or otherwise, that the recognised body is a body corporate except where this is so stated on a list of the names of all the partners maintained by the partnership at its principal place of business in pursuance of section 4(3) of the Business Names Act 1985.
24.
Duty of officers; application of Rules, etc., to officers,
members, employees, etc.
(1) It is the duty of a solicitor who or a recognised body which is an officer of a recognised body, or a registered foreign lawyer who is a director of a recognised body to take all reasonable steps to ensure compliance by any recognised body of which he or it is an officer with these Rules and any rules, principles or requirements of conduct applicable to recognised bodies by virtue of these Rules or section 9 of the Act.
(2) A solicitor who is an officer, member or employee of or who is otherwise working in the practice of a recognised body, or a recognised body which is an officer or member of a recognised body, or a registered foreign lawyer who is a director or member of a recognised body, shall not by any act or omission by himself (or itself) or with any other person cause, instigate or connive at any breach of these Rules or any rules, principles or requirements of conduct applicable to recognised bodies by virtue of these Rules or section 9 of the Act and, for the avoidance of doubt, it is confirmed that a solicitor who is an officer, member or employee of or who is otherwise working in the practice of a recognised body remains personally subject to all the rules, principles and requirements of conducting affecting solicitors.
25.
Waivers
In any particular case or cases the Council shall have a power to waive in writing any of the provisions of these Rules for a particular purpose or purposes expressed in such waiver and to revoke such waiver.
26.
Commencement
These Rules shall come into force on the coming into force of section 9 of the Administration of Justice Act 1985.
PART II
MEMORANDUM AND ARTICLES
INTRODUCTORY NOTE
to
MEMORANDUM AND ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION
of a
SOLICITORS' LIMITED LIABILITY INCORPORATED PRACTICE
The Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules (the Rules) as amended by the Multi-National Legal Practice Rules 1991 do not require the use of these Memorandum and Articles of Association; they are included in this pack for guidance only.
However, the Companies Act 1985 as amended by the Companies Act 1989 (referred to below as ‘the Companies Act’) requires the use of some of the provisions in the Memorandum.
Certain provisions (or provisions to like effect) in the Articles are necessary for an incorporated practice to be able to comply with and remain in compliance with the Rules.
These provisions are identified below.
It should be noted that the rules require a declaration when a company applies for recognition that its memorandum and articles enable it to remain in compliance with certain key Rules.
Provisions not identified below as being required by the Companies Act or as being necessary to ensure a practice's ability to comply with the Rules are simply suggested by way of guidance; practitioners should be aware that other approaches may be taken to the matters covered by such provisions.
Memorandum
Clauses 1, 2, 4 and 5 must be used in order to comply with s.2 of the Companies Act.
S.2 of that Act also requires a company to state its objects.
Practitioners are strongly advised to use Clause 3(a) as under the Rules a solicitors' incorporated practice is permitted only to ‘carry on business consisting of the provision of professional services such as are provided by individuals practising as solicitors or by multi-national partnerships.’
The powers set out in the rest of Clause 3 are standard matters often appearing in a company's memorandum and, as is common practice, they are broadly worded for the sake of completeness.
It must however be emphasized that these powers cannot be used by a solicitors' incorporated practice to do anything in breach of the Solicitors Act 1974, the Rules or any rules, principles or requirements of conduct applicable to incorporated practices — in this regard attention is drawn to the proviso set out in Clause 3(a).
Articles
Certain Articles (or articles to like effect) need to be included to enable an incorporated practice to comply with and remain in compliance with the Rules.
These are Articles 4–8, 11(8) and (11), 15(1), 16, 22 and 24(1) and (4), and these, for ease of identification, are printed in bold in the Articles.
Specimen memorandum of association for a solicitors' incorporated practice which is a company limited by shares
THE COMPANIES ACT 1985
A PRIVATE COMPANY LIMITED BY SHARES
MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION -of-[]
1.
The Company's name is
2.
The Company's registered office is to be situated in England and Wales.
3.
The Company's objects are:—
(a) To carry on business consisting of the provision of professional services such as are provided by individuals practising as solicitors and by multi-national partnerships PROVIDED THAT nothing in any sub-clause of this Clause shall give the Company power to do anything in breach of the Solicitors Act 1974, the Rules or any rules, principles or requirements of conduct applicable to recognised bodies by virtue of the Rules or section 9 of the AJA.
(b) To purchase or by any other means acquire and take options over any property whatever, and any rights or privileges of any kind over or in respect of any property.
(c) To apply for, register, purchase, or by other means acquire and protect, prolong and renew, whether in the United Kingdom or elsewhere any patents, patent rights, brevets d'invention, licences, secret processes, trade marks, designs, protections and concessions and to disclaim, alter, modify, use and turn to account and to manufacture under or grant licences or privileges in respect of the same, and to expend money in experimenting upon, testing and improving any patents, inventions or rights which the Company may acquire or propose to acquire.
(d) To acquire or undertake the whole or any part of the business, goodwill, and assets of any person, firm, or company carrying on or proposing to carry on the business or any part of the business which the Company is authorised to carry on and as part of the consideration for such acquisition to undertake all or any of the liabilities of such person, firm or company, or to acquire an interest in, amalgamate with, or enter into partnership or into any arrangement for sharing profits, or for co-operation, or for mutual assistance with any such person, firm or company, or for subsidising or otherwise assisting any person, firm or company, and to give or accept by way of consideration for any of the acts or things aforesaid or property acquired, any shares, debentures, debenture stock or securities that may be agreed upon, and to hold and retain, or sell, mortgage and deal with any shares, debentures, debenture stock of securities so received.
To improve, manage, construct, repair, develop, exchange, let on lease or otherwise, mortgage, charge, sell, dispose of, turn to account, grant licences, options, rights and privileges in respect of, or otherwise deal with all or any part of the property and rights of the Company.
(f) To invest and deal with the moneys of the Company not immediately required in such manner as may from time to time be determined and to hold or otherwise deal with any investments made.
(g) To lend and advance money or give credit on any terms with or without security to any person, firm or company (including without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing any holding company, subsidiary or fellow subsidiary of, or any other company associated in any way with, the Company), to enter into guarantees, contracts of indemnity and suretyships of all kinds, to receive money on deposit or loan upon any terms, and to secure or guarantee in any manner and upon any terms the payment of any sum of money or the performance of any obligation by any person, firm or company (including without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing any such holding company, subsidiary, fellow subsidiary or associated company as aforesaid).
(h) To borrow and raise money in any manner and to secure the repayment of any money borrowed, raised or owing by mortgage, charge, standard security, lien or other security upon the whole or any part of the Company's property or assets (whether present or future), including its uncalled capital, and also by a similar mortgage, charge, standard security, lien or security to secure and guarantee the performance by the Company of any obligation or liability it may undertake or which may become binding on it.
(i) To draw, make, accept, endorse, discount, negotiate, execute and issue cheques, bills of exchange, promissory notes, bills of lading, warrants, debentures, and other negotiable or transferable instruments.
(j) To apply for, promote, and obtain any Act of Parliament, order or licence of the Department of Trade and Industry or other authority for enabling the Company to carry any of its objects into effect, or for effecting any modification of the Company's constitution, or for any other purpose which may seem calculated directly or indirectly to promote the Company's interests, and to oppose any proceedings or applications which may seem calculated directly or indirectly to prejudice the Company's interests.
(k) To enter into any arrangements with any government or authority (supreme, municipal, local or otherwise) that may seen conducive to the attainment of the Company's objects or any of them, and to obtain from any such government or authority any charters, decrees, rights, privileges or concessions which the Company may think desirable and to carry out, exercise, and comply with any such charters, decrees, rights, privileges, and concessions.
(l) To subscribe for, take, purchase, or otherwise acquire, hold, sell, deal with and dispose of, place and underwrite shares, stocks, debentures, debenture stocks, bonds, obligations or securities issued or guaranteed by any other company constituted or carrying on business in any part of the world, and debentures, debenture stocks, bonds, obligations or securities issued or guaranteed by any government or authority, municipal, local or otherwise, in any part of the world.
(m) To control, manage, finance, subsidise, or co-ordinate or otherwise assist any company or companies in which the Company has a direct or indirect financial interest, to provide secretarial, administrative, technical, commercial and other services and facilities of all kinds for any such company or companies and to make payments by way of subvention or otherwise any other arrangements which may seem desirable with respect to any business or operations of or generally with respect to any such company or companies.
(n) To promote or form any other company for the purpose of acquiring the whole or any part of the business or property or undertaking or any of the liabilities of the Company, or of undertaking any business or operations which may appear likely to assist or benefit the Company or to enhance the value of any property or business of the Company, and to place or guarantee the placing of, underwrite, subscribe for, or otherwise acquire all or any part of the shares or securities of any such company as aforesaid.
(o) To sell or otherwise dispose of the whole or any part of the business or property of the Company, either together with or in  portions , for such consideration as the Company may think fit, and in particular for shares, debentures, or securities of any company purchasing the same.
(p) To act as agents or brokers and as trustees for any person, firm or company, and to undertake and perform sub-contracts.
(q) To remunerate any person, firm or company rendering services to the Company either by cash payment or by the allotment to him or them of shares or other securities of the Company credited as paid up in full or otherwise as may be thought expedient.
(r) To pay all or any expenses incurred in connection with the promotion, formation and incorporation of the Company.
(s) To support and subscribe to any charitable or public object and to support and subscribe to any institution, society, or club which may be for the benefit of the Company or its Directors or employees, or may be connected with any town or place where the Company carried on business; to give or award pensions, annuities, gratuities, and  superannuation or other allowances or benefits or charitable aid and generally to provide advantages, facilities and services for any persons who are or have been Directors of, or who are or have been employed by, or who are serving or have served the Company, or any company which is a subsidiary of the Company or the holding company of the Company or a fellow subsidiary of the Company or the predecessors in business of the Company or of any such subsidiary, holding or fellow subsidiary company and to the wives, widows, children and other relatives and dependants of such persons; to make payments towards insurance; and to set up, establish, support and maintain superannuation and other fund or schemes (whether contributory or non-contributory) for the benefit of any such persons and of their wives, widows, children and their relatives and dependants; and to set up, establish, support and maintain profit sharing schemes for the benefit of any of the employees of the Company or share purchase schemes for the benefit of any of the solicitor or registered foreign lawyer employees of the Company and to lend money to any such employees or to trustees on their behalf to enable any such purchase schemes to be established or maintained.
(t) Subject to and in accordance with a due compliance with the provisions of Sections 155 to 158 (inclusive) of the Act (if and so far as such provisions shall be applicable), to give, whether directly or indirectly, any kind of financial assistance (as defined in Section 152(1) (a) of the Act) for any such purpose as is specified in Section 151(1) and/or Section 151(2) of the Act.
(u) To distribute among the Members of the Company in kind any property of the Company of whatever nature.
(v) To procure the Company to be registered or recognised in any part of the world.
(w) To do all or any of the things aforesaid in any part of the world and either as principals, agents, contractors or otherwise, and by or through agents, brokers, sub-contractors or otherwise and either alone or in conjunction with others.
(x) To do all such other things as may be deemed incidental or conducive to the attainment of the Company's objects or any of them.
AND so that:—
(1) None of the objects set forth in any sub-clause of this Clause shall be restrictively construed but the widest interpretation shall be given to each such object, and none of such objects shall, except where the context expressly so requires, be in any way limited or restricted by reference to or inference from any other object or objects set forth in such sub-clause, or by reference to or inference from the terms of any other sub-clause of this Clause, or by reference to or inference from the name of the Company.
(2) None of the sub-clauses of this Clause and none of the objects therein specified shall be deemed subsidiary or ancillary to any of the objects specified in any other such sub-clause, and the Company shall have as full a power to exercise each and every one of the objects specified in each sub-clause of this Clause as though each sub-clause contained the objects of a separate Company.
(3) The word ‘Company’ in this Clause, except where used in reference to the Company, shall be deemed to include any partnership or other body of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated and whether domiciled in the United Kingdom or elsewhere.
(4) In this Clause ‘the Act’ means the Companies Act 1985 as amended by the Companies Act 1989 and ‘the AJA’means the Administration of Justice Act 1985 as amended by Schedule 18, paragraph 54 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990, but so that any reference in this Clause to any provision of the Act or the AJA shall be deemed to include a reference to any statutory modification or re-enactment of that provision for the time being in force and the reference to the Solicitors Act 1974 shall be deemed to include a reference to any statutory modification or re-enactment thereof for the time being in force.
(5) In this Clause ‘the Rules’ means the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988 or any modification or re-enactment thereof for the time being in force.
(6) In this Clause ‘recognised body’ means a body corporate for the time being recognised by the Council of the Law Society under section 9 of the AJA and the Rules.
(7) In this Clause ‘registered foreign lawyer’ means a person registered in accordance with S.89 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
4.
The liability of the members is limited.
5.
The Company's share capital is []divided into []shares of []each.
We, the subscribers to this Memorandum of Association, wish to be formed into a Company pursuant to this Memorandum; and we agree to take the number of shares shown opposite our respective names.
Names and addresses of Subscribers Number of Shares taken by each Subscriber
Total shares taken
Dated
Witness to the above signatures.
Specimen articles of association for a solicitors' incorporated practice which is a company limited by shares
THE COMPANIES ACT 1985
A PRIVATE COMPANY LIMITED BY SHARES
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION -of-[]
PRELIMINARY
1.
The Articles hereinafter contained and, subject as hereinafter provided, the regulations contained in Table A in the Schedule to the Companies (Tables A to F) Regulations 1985 as amended by the Companies (Tables A–F)(Amendment) Regulation 1985 (hereinafter referred to as ‘Table A’) shall constitute the regulations of the Company subject always to the Rules (as hereinafter defined).
In the case of any variation or inconsistency between these Articles and the regulations in Table A, the provisions of these Articles shall prevail.
In the case of any variation or inconsistency between the Rules and the regulations of the Company the provisions of the Rules shall prevail.
2.
Regulations 24, 40, 41, 54, 56, 60, 61, 63 64 to 69 (inclusive), 73 to 81 (inclusive), 87, 94, 95 and 118 of Table A shall not apply to the Company.
3.
For the purposes of these Articles, except where the context otherwise requires:—
(1)‘the Act’ means the Companies Act 1985;
‘the AJA’ means the Administration of Justice Act 1985;
‘the Council’ means the Council of the Society;
‘member’ means a person whose name is entered in the Company's register of members;
‘practising certificate’ and ‘the roll’have the meanings assigned to them in the Solicitors Act 1974;
‘recognised body’ means a body corporate for the time being recognised by the Council under Section 9 of the AJA and the Rules;
‘registered foreign lawyer’ means a person registered in accordance with S.89 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990;
‘the Rules’ means the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988 as amended by the Multi-National Legal Practice Rules 1991 or any modification or re-enactment for the time being in force;
‘the Society’ means the Law Society; and
‘solicitor’ means a person qualified to act as a solicitor under s.1 of the Solicitors Act 1974.
(2) Words importing gender include a reference to both other genders, words in the singular include a reference to the plural and vice versa.
(3) Any reference to any provision of the Act, the AJA, the Solicitors Act 1974 or any provision of any other statutory act relevant to these Articles shall be deemed to include a reference to any statutory modification or re-enactment of that provision for the time being in force.
MEMBERS
4.
No person shall be a member of the Company unless he is a solicitor, a registered foreign lawyer or a recognised body.
5.
A member shall not hold a share for another person save as permitted by the Rules.
A member shall not create any charge or other third party interest (save as permitted by the Rules) over any share.
6. (1) A member shall disclose to the Company in writing:
(a) the nature and extent of any interests in shares registered in his name and the persons by whom such interests are held, and
(b) any change in the nature and extent of such interests or in the identity of the persons by whom such interests are held
forthwith on the creation of or the change in the interest concerned.
(2) The Company may require a member to furnish any information, document or other matter which the Directors may think necessary for the purpose of enabling the Company to comply with the Rules and the member shall furnish the information, document or other matter required within such period as may be determined by the Directors.
7.
The Directors shall not enter in the Company's register of members any person until that person and any person for whom he holds a Share as nominee has submitted to the Council a Compensation Fund covenant as required by the Rules and furnished evidence of such submission to the Directors.
THE RULES
8.
The management of the Company and the allotment, issue, holding, transfer and transmission of all shares in the capital of the Company shall be subject to the Rules and nothing in the regulations of the Company shall be construed as authorising any breach of the Rules or any rules, principles or requirements of conduct applicable to recognised bodies by virtue of the Rules or Section 9 of the AJA.
UNISSUED SHARE CAPITAL
9. (1) After the initial allotment any shares proposed to be issued shall first be offered to the members in proportion as nearly as may be to the number of the existing shares held by them respectively.
(2) The offer shall be made by notice specifying the number of shares offered, and limiting a period (not being less than fourteen days) within which the offer, if not accepted, will be deemed to be declined.
(3) After the expiration of that period those shares which are declined or deemed to be declined shall be offered in the proportion aforesaid to the persons who have within the said period accepted all the shares offered to them.
Such further offer shall be made in the same manner and limited by a like period as the original offer.
(4) Any shares not accepted pursuant to such offer or further offer as aforesaid not including fractions unalloted shall be under the control of the Directors who may allot, grant options over or otherwise dispose of the same to such persons who are qualified to be members on such terms and in such manner as they think fit, provided that such shares shall not be disposed of on terms which are more favourable to the subscribers thereof than the terms on which they were offered to the members.
(5) No share may be issued unless it is fully paid or credited as fully paid on or before allotment.
(6) Subject to the provisions of this Article and Article 4 the Directors are unconditionally authorised for the purposes of Section 80 of the Act to allot shares and grant rights to subscribe for, or convert securities into, shares in the Company up to the nominal amount of authorised share capital with which the Company is incorporated at any time or times during the period of five years from the date of adoption of these Articles.
The Directors may, after that period, allot any shares or grant any such rights under this authority in pursuance of an offer or agreement so to do made by the Company within that period.
The authority hereby given may at any time (subject to the said Section 80) be renewed, revoked or varied by Ordinary Resolution of the Company in General Meeting.
(7) Sections 89(1) and 90(1) to (6)(inclusive) of the Act shall be excluded from applying to the Company.
TRANSFER AND TRANSMISSION OF SHARES
10.
In the next succeeding Article the following words shall bear the following meanings:—
(1)‘Shares’ shall mean Shares in the capital of the Company;
(2)‘Member’ shall mean a person whose name is entered in the Company's register of members;
(3)‘Proposing Transferor’ shall mean a Member or any other person proposing to transfer Shares;
(4)‘Transfer Notice’ shall mean a written notice served by a Member or any other person on the Company indicating his desire to transfer Shares;
(5)‘the Prescribed Price’ shall mean the price per Share certified pursuant to paragraph (3) of the next succeeding Article;
(6)‘Purchaser’ shall mean a person willing to purchase Shares comprised in a Transfer Notice.
11. (1) A Member or any other person proposing to transfer any Shares shall give a Transfer Notice to the Company and the Transfer Notice shall constitute the Company his agent for the sale of the Shares therein mentioned at the Prescribed Price to any Member or Members.
A Transfer Notice once given shall not be revocable except with the consent of the Directors and except as provided in paragraph (2) below.
(2) Forthwith upon receipt of any Transfer Notice the Company shall procure the Auditors for the time being of the Company (acting as experts and not as arbitrators) to certify the Prescribed Price.
Forthwith upon receipt of the certificate as to the Prescribed Price, the Company shall notify the Proposing Transferor thereof.
The Proposing Transferor may (save where a Transfer Notice is given or deemed to be given pursuant to paragraphs (7)–(10) of this Article) within seven days of receipt of such notification revoke his Transfer Notice, provided that the Proposing Transferor shall in such circumstances be liable for the Auditors costs in certifying the Prescribed Price.
At the same time as giving such notice to the Proposing Transferor, the Company shall offer the Shares comprised in the Transfer Notice to the Members (other than the Proposing Transferor) for purchase at the Prescribed Price on terms that in case of competition the Shares so offered shall be sold to the Members accepting the offer in proportion (as nearly as may be, and without increasing the number sold to any Member beyond the number applied for by him) to their existing holdings of Shares.
All such offers of Shares shall be made by notice in writing and every such offer shall limit a time (not being less than twenty-one days or more than forty-two days) within which the offer must be accepted or, in default, will be deemed to have been declined.
It is hereby declared for the avoidance of doubt that any Member to whom Shares are offered in accordance with this Article shall be at liberty to accept some only of the Shares so offered.
(3) The Auditors shall within fourteen days of a request by the Company certify to the Company the Prescribed Price, that is to say the price which in their opinion represents a fair value for the Shares comprised in the Transfer Notice as between a willing vendor and a willing purchaser and, in making such determination, the Auditors shall not take any account of whether such Shares comprise a majority or minority interest in the Company (and shall assume that the entire issued share capital of the Company is being sold).
(4) If the Company shall within the period limited for acceptance find a Purchaser or Purchasers willing to purchase all the Shares concerned and shall give notice in writing thereof to the Proposing Transferor, he shall be bound, upon payment of the Prescribed Price, to transfer such Shares to the respective Purchasers thereof.
Every such notice shall state the name and address of each Purchaser and the number of Shares agreed to be purchased by him, and the purchase shall be completed at a place and time to be appointed by the Directors.
(5) If in any case a Proposing Transferor, after having become bound to transfer any Shares to a Purchaser, shall make default in transferring the Shares, the Directors may receive the purchase money on his behalf and may authorise some person to execute on behalf of and as attorney for the Proposing Transferor any necessary instruments of transfer and the Company shall hold the purchase money in trust for the Proposing Transferor.
The receipt of the Company for the purchase money shall be a good discharge to the Purchaser who shall not be bound to see to the application thereof and, after the name of the Purchaser has been entered in the register in purported exercise of the aforesaid powers, the validity of the proceedings shall not be questioned by any person.
(6) If the company shall not within the period limited for acceptance find a Purchaser or Purchasers willing to purchase all the Shares comprised in the Transfer Notice the Proposing Transferor shall at any time within [three]months after the Directors have so confirmed their inability to him in writing be at liberty to transfer the Shares to any person not being a Member but capable of being a Member under these Articles on a bona fide sale at any price not being less than the Prescribed Price but in that event the Directors may, in their absolute discretion, decline to register any such transfer of any Share and shall not be required or bound to state the reason for any refusal.
The Directors may require to be satisfied that any Share being transferred under this paragraph are being transferred in pursuance of a bona fide sale for the consideration stated in the instrument of transfer without any deduction rebate or allowance whatsoever to the Purchaser.
Note: Practitioners must decide whether they wish to alter the word in square brackets.
(7) In the event that a Member dies or in the event that the name of a Member is struck off or removed from the roll or his practising certificate is suspended or expires without being renewed or where a Member is a registered foreign lawyer his name is struck off the register of foreign lawyers or his registration is suspended or cancelled or (where a Member is a Recognised Body) its recognition is revoked or expires, the Directors may require the Member or, as the case may be, his legal personal representatives, trustee in bankruptcy, liquidator, administrator or administrative receiver to give a Transfer Notice in respect of all the Shares then registered in the name of the Member or deceased member.
Such Transfer Notice shall not in any circumstances be capable of revocation.
Regulations 29 to 31 of Table A shall take effect subject to this paragraph.
(8) In the event that a Member holds any Shares or a beneficial owner has an interest in any Shares in the Company in such circumstances that the Rules are broken the Directors may at any time resolve that the Member holding the Shares concerned shall (unless he shall have already given a Transfer Notice) be deemed to have given a Transfer Notice in respect of such Shares.
Notice of the passing of any such resolution shall forthwith be given to the Member affected thereby.
Such Transfer Notice shall not in any circumstances be capable of revocation.
Note: Paragraph (8), or a provision to the like effect, needs to be adopted if a recognised body is to be able to ensure that shares are not held in breach of the Rules.
Paragraph (8) cannot stand on its own.
If practitioners adopt paragraph (8) but not Article 10 and the remainder of Article 11 they must include in their Articles provisions specifying the effect of a deemed Transfer Notice (as provided for by paragraph (8)).
The effect in essence must be that a Transfer Notice constitutes the Company the agent for the sale of the shares.
(9) For the purpose of ensuring that a transfer of Shares is duly authorised hereunder or that no circumstances have arisen whereby the Directors are empowered to require that a Transfer Notice be given or to resolve that a Transfer Notice be deemed to have been given the Directors may from time to time require any Member or past Member or the legal personal representatives, trustee in bankruptcy, liquidator, administrator or administrative receiver of any Member or any person named as transferee in any instrument of transfer lodged for registration to furnish to the Company such information and evidence as the Directors may think fit regarding any matter which they may deem relevant to such purpose.
Failing such information or evidence being furnished the Directors may give the person from whom the information or evidence required notice that, if the information or evidence in question is not furnished within such periods as may be determined by the Directors and stated in the notice, the Directors may refuse to register the transfer in question or (in case no transfer is in question) may require that a Transfer Notice be given in respect of the Shares concerned.
Failing the information or evidence being furnished within the period stated in the notice, the Directors shall be entitled to refuse to register the transfer in question or (in case no transfer is in question) to require that a Transfer Notice be given in respect of the Shares concerned.
(10) In any case where under the provisions of this Article the Directors may require a Transfer Notice to be given in respect of any Shares, if a Transfer Notice is not duly given within a period of two weeks of demand being made, a Transfer Notice shall be deemed to have been given in respect of such Shares at the expiration of the said period.
Such a deemed Transfer Notice shall not in any circumstances be capable of revocation.
In any case as aforesaid the provisions of this Article shall take effect.
(11) A Member shall before transferring any Share or holding any Share as nominee ensure that the intended transferee or beneficial owner submits to the Council a Compensation Fund covenant as required by the Rules and shall furnish evidence of such submission to the Directors.
(12) Any notice required to be given under this Article by the Company to a Member or by a Member to the Company shall be given or served either personally or by sending it by first class post to the registered office of the Company or, as the case may be, to the registered address of the Member or (if he has no registered address within the United Kingdom) to the address, if any, within the United Kingdom supplied by him to the Company for the giving of notice to him.
When a notice is sent by post, service of the notice shall be deemed to be effected by properly addressing, prepaying and posting a letter containing the notice and to have been effected at the time at which the letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.
(13) With the consent in writing of all Members for the time being the restrictions imposed by this Article may be waived or varied in relation to any proposed transfer of Shares.
Note: If the only remaining members would be registered foreign lawyers those members could not accept all the shares because under the Rules there must be at least one solicitor member.
In such a case at least one share would have to be taken up by a solicitor or a recognised body to avoid expiry of the recognition.
PROCEEDINGS AT GENERAL MEETINGS
12.
No business shall be transacted at any meeting unless a quorum is present at the time when the meeting proceeds to business.
[Two]persons entitled to vote upon the business to be transacted, each being a member or a proxy for a member or a duly appointed corporate representative, shall be a quorum.
Note: Practitioners must decide whether they wish to alter the word in square brackets.
13.
If a quorum is not present within half an hour from the time appointed for the meeting, the meeting shall stand adjourned to the same day in the next week at the same time and place or to such time and place as the Directors may determine.
VOTES OF MEMBERS
14.
Subject to the Rules and to any rights or restrictions attached to any shares, on a show of hands every member who (being an individual) is present in person or (being a recognised body) is present by a duly authorised corporate representative [, not being himself a member entitled to vote,]shall have one vote and on a poll every member shall have one vote for every share of which he is the holder.
Note: Practitioners must decide whether they wish to include the words in square brackets.
15. (1) A member shall not tender a vote in breach of the Rules and any vote so tendered shall not be accepted.
(2) Where a member fails to disclose or furnish any information, document or other matter which he is required to disclose or furnish to the Company under Article 6 the Directors may resolve that no vote shall be tendered or accepted in respect of any share held by or for him until the member shall have disclosed or furnished the information, document or other matter required.
Notice of the passing of such resolution shall forthwith be given to the member affected thereby.
Note: 15(2) will assist a recognised body to enforce Article 6.
16.
For the purpose of attending and voting at meetings a member shall not appoint any person as a proxy or corporate representative contrary to the Rules.
17.
An instrument appointing a proxy shall be in writing, executed by or on behalf of the appointer and shall be in the following form (or in a form as near thereto as circumstances allow or in any other form which is usual or which the Directors may approve):—
‘[]Limited
I/We, of, being a member/members of the above-named company, hereby appoint of, being a solicitor/registered foreign lawyer who is a member or officer of or who is working in the practice of either the Company or a recognised body which is a member of the Company at the time of the meeting or any adjournment thereof, or failing him, of, being a solicitor/registered foreign lawyer who is a member or officer of or who is working in the practice of either the Company or a recognised body which is a member of the Company at the time of the meeting or any adjournment thereof as my/our proxy to vote in my/our name[s] and on my/our behalf at the annual/extraordinary general meeting of the Company to be held on 19, and at any adjournment thereof.
Signed on 19.’
18.
Where it is desired to afford members an opportunity of instructing the proxy how he shall act the instrument appointing a proxy shall be in the following form (or in a form as near thereto as circumstances allow or in any other form which is usual or which the Directors may approve):—
‘[]Limited
I/We, of, being a member/members of the above-named company, hereby appoint of, being a solicitor/registered foreign lawyer who is a member or officer of or who is working in the practice of either the Company or a recognised body which is a member of the Company at the time of the meeting or any adjournment thereof, or failing him, of, being a solicitor/registered foreign lawyer who is a member or officer of or who is working in the practice of either the Company or a recognised body which is a member of the Company at the time of the meeting or any adjournment thereof as my/our proxy to vote in my/our name[s] and on my/our behalf at the annual/extraordinary general meeting of the Company to be held on 19, and at any adjournment thereof.
This form is to be used in respect of the resolutions mentioned below as follows:
Resolution No. 1 *for *against
Resolution No. 2 *for *against
*Strike out whichever is not desired
Unless otherwise instructed, the proxy may vote as he thinks fit or abstain from voting.
Signed this day of 19.’
19.
A vote given or poll demanded by proxy or by the duly authorised corporate representative of a recognised body shall be valid notwithstanding the previous determination of the authority of the person voting or demanding a poll unless notice of the determination was received by the Company at the office or at such other place at which the instrument of proxy was duly deposited before the commencement of the meeting or adjourned meeting at which the vote is given or the poll demanded or (in the case of a poll taken otherwise than on the same day as the meeting or adjourned meeting) the time appointed for taking the poll.
DIRECTORS
20.
In these Articles, the expression ‘the Directors’ means the directors for the time being of the Company or (as the context shall require) any of them acting as the Board of Directors of the Company.
21.
Unless and until otherwise determined by the Company by ordinary resolution in general meeting, the number of Directors shall not be subject to any maximum and the minimum number of Directors shall be one.
22.
No person shall be appointed or re-appointed or act as a Director unless he is a solicitor or a registered foreign lawyer.
APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTORS
23. (1) No person shall be appointed a Director at any general meeting unless either:—
(a) he is recommended by the Directors; or
(b) not less than fourteen nor more than thirty-five clear days before the date appointed for the general meeting, notice executed by a member qualified to vote at the general meeting has been given to the Company of the intention to propose that person for appointment, together with notice executed by that person of his willingness to be appointed.
(2) Subject to paragraph (1) above, the Company may by ordinary resolutions in general meeting appoint any solicitor or registered foreign lawyer who is willing to act to be a Director, either to fill a vacancy or as an additional Director.
(3) The Directors may appoint a solicitor or registered foreign lawyer who is willing to act to be a Director, either to fill a vacancy or as an additional Director, provided that the appointment does not cause the number of Directors to exceed any number determined in accordance with these Articles as the maximum number of Directors.
A Director so appointed shall hold office only until the next following annual general meeting.
If not re-appointed at such annual general meeting he shall vacate office at the conclusion thereof.
DISQUALIFICATION OF DIRECTORS
24.
The office of a Director shall forthwith be vacated:—
(1) if he ceases to be qualified to act as a solicitor under Section 1 of the Solicitors Act 1974, or, in the case of a registered foreign lawyer his name is struck off the register of foreign lawyers or his registration is suspended or cancelled.
(2) if by notice in writing to the Company he resigns the office of Director;
(3) if he becomes bankrupt or insolvent or makes any arrangement or composition with his creditors;
(4) if he becomes a patient as defined by Section 94 of the Mental Health Act 1983 or becomes a person as to whom powers have been exercised under Section 98 of that Act;
(5) if he is removed from office by a resolution duly passed under  Section 303 of the Act;
(6) if he is prohibited from being a Director by any order made under the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986.
ALTERNATE DIRECTORS
25. (1) Any Director may at any time appoint another Director or any other person being a solicitor or registered foreign lawyer who is a member or officer of or is working in the practice of the Company approved by the Directors to be his alternate Director and may at any time terminate such appointment.
Any such appointment or removal shall be by written notice, letter, telegram, cablegram, telex or telefax message or other form of visible communication from the Director to the Company and shall be effective upon delivery at the registered office of the Company or at a meeting of Directors.
(2) The appointment of any alternate Director shall terminate if and when the Director by whom he has been appointed vacates his office as Director and upon the happening of any even which, if he were a Director, would cause him to vacate such office.
(3) An alternate Director shall (except when absent from the United Kingdom) be entitled to receive notice of meetings of the Directors and shall be entitled to attend and vote as a Director at any such meeting at which the Director appointing him is personally present and generally at such meeting to perform all functions of his appointor as a Director and for the purpose of the proceedings at such meeting the provisions of these Articles shall apply as if he were a Director.
If he is himself a Director, he shall be entitled in such circumstances as aforesaid to exercise the vote or votes of the Director or Directors for whom he is an alternate in addition to his own vote.
If his appointor is for the time being absent from the United Kingdom or temporarily unable to act through ill-health or disability his signature to any resolution in writing of the Directors shall be as effective as the signature of his appointor.
To such extent as the Directors may from time to time determine in relation to any committees of the Directors, the foregoing sentence shall also apply mutatis mutandis to any meeting of any such committee of which his appointor is a member.
An alternate Director as such shall not (save as aforesaid) have power to act as a Director nor shall be deemed to be a Director for the purpose of these Articles.
(4) An alternate Director shall be entitled to contact and be interested in and benefit from contracts or arrangements and to be repaid expenses and to be indemnified to the same extent mutatis mutandis as if he were a Director [but he shall not be entitled to receive any remuneration from the Company in respect of his appointment as alternate Director].
Note: Practitioners must decide whether they wish to include the words in square brackets.
PROCEEDINGS OF DIRECTORS
26.
Whenever the minimum number of Directors shall be one such Director shall have authority to authorise all the powers and discretions by the regulations of the Company expressed to be vested in the Directors generally and Regulation 89 of Table A shall be modified accordingly.
27.
Subject to such disclosure as is required by Section 317 of the Act, a Director may vote in respect of any contract or arrangement in which he is interested or upon any matter arising out of the same and may be counted in the quorum present at any meeting at which any such contract, arrangement or matter is proposed or considered and if he shall so vote his vote shall be counted.
WINDING UP
28.
In Regulation 117 of Table A the words ‘with the like sanction’ shall be inserted immediately before the words ‘determine how such division’.
INDEMNITY
29.
Subject to Section 310 of the Act, every Director or other officer of the Company shall be entitled to be indemnified out of the assets of the Company against all losses or liabilities which he may sustain or incur in or about the execution of the duties of his office or otherwise in relation thereto, including any liability incurred by him in defending any proceedings, whether civil or criminal, in which judgement is given in his favour or in which he is acquitted or in connection with any application under Sections 144(3) or (4) or 727 of the Act in which relief is granted to him by the Court, and no Director or other officer shall be liable for any loss, damage or misfortune which may happen to or be incurred by the Company in the execution of the duties of his office or in relation thereto.
GRATUITIES AND PENSIONS
30.
The Directors may exercise the powers of the Company conferred by Clause 3(s) of the Memorandum of Association of the Company and shall be entitled to retain any benefits received by them or any of them by reason of the exercise of any such powers.
INTRODUCTORY NOTE
to
MEMORANDUM AND ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION
of a
SOLICITORS' UNLIMITED LIABILITY INCORPORATED PRACTICE
The Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules (the Rules) as amended by the Multi-National Legal Practice Rules 1991 do not require the use of these Memorandum and Articles of Association; they are included in this pack for guidance only.
However, the Companies Act 1985 as amended by the Companies Act 1989 (referred to below as ‘the Companies Act’) requires the use of some of the provisions in the Memorandum.
Certain provisions (or provisions to like effect) in the Articles are necessary for an incorporated practice to be able to comply with and remain in compliance with the Rules.
These provisions are identified below.
It should be noted that the rules require a declaration when a company applies for recognition that its memorandum and articles enable it to remain in compliance with certain key Rules.
Provisions not identified below as being required by the Companies Act or as being necessary to ensure a practice's ability to comply with the Rules are simply suggested by way of guidance; practitioners should be aware that other approaches may be taken to the matters covered by such provisions.
Memorandum
Clauses 1 and 2 must be used in order to comply with s.2 of the Companies Act.
S.2 of that Act also requires a company to state its objects.
Practitioners are strongly advised to use Clause 3(a) as under the Rules a solicitors' incorporated practice is permitted only to ‘carry on business consisting of the provision of professional services such as are provided by individuals practising as solicitors or by multi-national partnerships.’
The powers set out in the rest of Clause 3 are standard matters often appearing in a company's memorandum and, as is common practice, they are broadly worded for the sake of completeness.
It must however be emphasised that these powers cannot be used by a solicitors' incorporated practice to do anything in breach of the Solicitors Act 1974, the Rules or any rules, principles or requirements of conduct applicable to incorporated practices — in this regard attention is drawn to the proviso set out in Clause 3(a).
Articles
Certain Articles (or articles to like effect) need to be included to enable an incorporated practice to comply with and remain in compliance with the Rules.
These are Articles 4–8, 11(8) and (11), 15(1), 16, 22 and 24(1) and (4), and these, for ease of identification, are printed in bold in the Articles.
Article 31 (also printed in bold) should be used as S.7 of the Companies Act requires an unlimited company's articles to state the amount of share capital with which it proposes to be registered.
Specimen memorandum of association for a solicitors' incorporated practice which is an unlimited company having a share capital
THE COMPANIES ACT 1985
AN UNLIMITED COMPANY HAVING A SHARE CAPITAL
MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION -of-[]
1.
The Company's name is
2.
The Company's registered office is to be situated in England and Wales.
3.
The Company's objects are:—
(a) To carry on business consisting of the provision of professional services such as are provided by individuals practising as solicitors and by multi-national partnerships PROVIDED THAT nothing in any sub-clause of this Clause shall give the Company power to do any thing in breach of the Solicitors Act 1974, the Rules or any rules, principles or requirements of conduct applicable to recognised bodies by virtue of the Rules or section 9 of the AJA.
(b) To purchase or by any other means acquire and take options over any property whatever, and any rights or privileges of any kind over or in respect of any property.
(c) To apply for, register, purchase, or by other means acquire and protect, prolong and renew, whether in the United Kingdom or elsewhere any patents, patent rights, brevets d'invention, licences, secret processes, trade marks, designs, protections and concessions and to disclaim, alter, modify, use and turn to account and to manufacture under or grant licences or privileges in respect of the same, and to expend money in experimenting upon, testing and improving any patents, inventions or rights which the Company may acquire or propose to acquire.
(d) To acquire or undertake the whole or any part of the business, goodwill, and assets of any person, firm, or company carrying on or proposing to carry on the business or any part of the business which the Company is authorised to carry on and as part of the consideration for such acquisition to undertake all or any of the liabilities of such person, firm or company, or to acquire an interest in, amalgamate with, or enter into partnership or into any arrangement for sharing profits, or for co-operation, or for mutual assistance with any such person, firm or company, or for subsidising or otherwise assisting any person, firm or company, and to give or accept by way of consideration for any of the acts or things aforesaid or property acquired, any shares, debentures, debenture stock or securities that may be agreed upon, and to hold and retain, or sell, mortgage and deal with any shares, debentures, debenture stock of securities so received.
To improve, manage, construct, repair, develop, exchange, let on lease or otherwise, mortgage, charge, sell, dispose of, turn to account, grant licences, options, rights and privileges in respect of, or otherwise deal with all or any part of the property and rights of the Company.
(f) To invest and deal with the moneys of the Company not immediately required in such manner as may from time to time be determined and to hold or otherwise deal with any investments made.
(g) To lend and advance money or give credit on any terms with or without security to any person, firm or company (including without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing any holding company, subsidiary or fellow subsidiary of, or any other company associated in any way with, the Company), to enter into guarantees, contracts of indemnity and suretyships of all kinds, to receive money on deposit or loan upon any terms, and to secure or guarantee in any manner and upon any terms the payment of any sum of money or the performance of any obligation by any person, firm or company (including without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing any such holding company, subsidiary, fellow subsidiary or associated company as aforesaid).
(h) To borrow and raise money in any manner and to secure the repayment of any money borrowed, raised or owing by mortgage, charge, standard security, lien or other security upon the whole or any part of the Company's property or assets (whether present or future), including its uncalled capital, and also by a similar mortgage, charge, standard security, lien or security to secure and guarantee the performance by the Company of any obligation or liability it may undertake or which may become binding on it.
(i) To draw, make, accept, endorse, discount, negotiate, execute and issue cheques, bills of exchange, promissory notes, bills of lading, warrants, debentures, and other negotiable or transferable instruments.
(j) To apply for, promote, and obtain any Act of Parliament, order or licence of the Department of Trade and Industry or other authority for enabling the Company to carry any of its objects into effect, or for effecting any modification of the Company's constitution, or for any other purpose which may seem calculated directly or indirectly to promote the Company's interests, and to oppose any proceedings or applications which may seem calculated directly or indirectly to prejudice the Company's interests.
(k) To enter into any arrangements with any government or authority (supreme, municipal, local or otherwise) that may seen conducive to the attainment of the Company's objects or any of them, and to obtain from any such government or authority any charters, decrees, rights, privileges or concessions which the Company may think desirable and to carry out, exercise, and comply with any such charters, decrees, rights, privileges, and concessions.
(l) To subscribe for, take, purchase, or otherwise acquire, hold, sell, deal with and dispose of, place and underwrite shares, stocks, debentures, debenture stocks, bonds, obligations or securities issued or guaranteed by any other company constituted or carrying on business in any part of the world, and debentures, debenture stocks, bonds, obligations or securities issued or guaranteed by any government or authority, municipal, local or otherwise, in any part of the world.
(m) To control, manage, finance, subsidise, or co-ordinate or otherwise assist any company or companies in which the Company has a direct or indirect financial interest, to provide secretarial, administrative, technical, commercial and other services and facilities of all kinds for any such company or companies and to make payments by way of subvention or otherwise any other arrangements which may seem desirable with respect to any business or operations of or generally with respect to any such company or companies.
(n) To promote or form any other company for the purpose of acquiring the whole or any part of the business or property or undertaking or any of the liabilities of the Company, or of undertaking any business or operations which may appear likely to assist or benefit the Company or to enhance the value of any property or business of the Company, and to place or guarantee the placing of, underwrite, subscribe for, or otherwise acquire all or any part of the shares or securities of any such company as aforesaid.
(o) To sell or otherwise dispose of the whole or any part of the business or property of the Company, either together with or in  portions , for such consideration as the Company may think fit, and in particular for shares, debentures, or securities of any company purchasing the same.
(p) To act as agents or brokers and as trustees for any person, firm or company, and to undertake and perform sub-contracts.
(q) To remunerate any person, firm or company rendering services to the Company either by cash payment or by the allotment to him or them of shares or other securities of the Company credited as paid up in full or otherwise as may be thought expedient.
(r) To pay all or any expenses incurred in connection with the promotion, formation and incorporation of the Company.
(s) To support and subscribe to any charitable or public object and to support and subscribe to any institution, society, or club which may be for the benefit of the Company or its Directors or employees, or may be connected with any town or place where the Company carried on business; to give or award pensions, annuities, gratuities, and superannuation or other allowances or benefits or charitable aid and generally to provide advantages, facilities and services for any persons who are or have been Directors of, or who are or have been employed by, or who are serving or have served the Company, or any company which is a subsidiary of the Company or the holding company of the Company or a fellow subsidiary of the Company or the predecessors in business of the Company or of any such subsidiary, holding or fellow subsidiary company and to the wives, widows, children and other relatives and dependants of such persons; to make payments towards insurance; and to set up, establish, support and maintain superannuation and other fund or schemes (whether contributory or non-contributory) for the benefit of any such persons and of their wives, widows, children and their relatives and dependants; and to set up, establish, support and maintain profit sharing schemes for the benefit of any of the employees of the Company or share purchase schemes for the benefit of any of the solicitor or registered foreign lawyer employees of the Company and to lend money to any such employees or to trustees on their behalf to enable any such purchase schemes to be established or maintained.
(t) Subject to and in accordance with a due compliance with the provisions of Sections 155 to 158 (inclusive) of the Act (if and so far as such provisions shall be applicable), to give, whether directly or indirectly, any kind of financial assistance (as defined in Section 152(1) (a) of the Act) for any such purpose as is specified in Section 151(1) and/or Section 151(2) of the Act.
(u) To distribute among the Members of the Company in kind any property of the Company of whatever nature.
(v) To procure the Company to be registered or recognised in any part of the world.
(w) To do all or any of the things aforesaid in any part of the world and either as principals, agents, contractors or otherwise, and by or through agents, brokers, sub-contractors or otherwise and either alone or in conjunction with others.
(x) To do all such other things as may be deemed incidental or conducive to the attainment of the Company's objects or any of them.
AND so that:—
(1) None of the objects set forth in any sub-clause of this Clause shall be restrictively construed but the widest interpretation shall be given to each such object, and none of such objects shall, except where the context expressly so requires, be in any way limited or restricted by reference to or inference from any other object or objects set forth in such sub-clause, or by reference to or inference from the terms of any other sub-clause of this Clause, or by reference to or inference from the name of the Company.
(2) None of the sub-clauses of this Clause and none of the objects therein specified shall be deemed subsidiary or ancillary to any of the objects specified in any other such sub-clause, and the Company shall have as full a power to exercise each and every one of the objects specified in each sub-clause of this Clause as though each sub-clause contained the objects of a separate Company.
(3) The word ‘Company’ in this Clause, except where used in reference to the Company, shall be deemed to include any partnership or other body of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated and whether domiciled in the United Kingdom or elsewhere.
(4) In this Clause ‘the Act’ means the Companies Act 1985 as amended by the Companies Act 1989 and ‘the AJA’means the Administration of Justice Act 1985 as amended by Schedule 18, paragraph 54 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990, but so that any reference in this Clause to any provision of the Act or the AJA shall be deemed to include a reference to any statutory modification or re-enactment of that provision for the time being in force and the reference to the Solicitors Act 1974 shall be deemed to include a reference to any statutory modification or re-enactment thereof for the time being in force.
(5) In this Clause ‘the Rules’ means the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988 or any modification or re-enactment thereof for the time being in force.
(6) In this Clause ‘recognised body’ means a body corporate for the time being recognised by the Council of the Law Society under section 9 of the AJA and the Rules.
(7) In this Clause ‘registered foreign lawyer’ means a person registered in accordance with S.89 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
We, the subscribers to this Memorandum of Association, wish to be formed into a Company pursuant to this Memorandum; and we agree to take the number of shares shown opposite our respective names.
Names and addresses of Subscribers Number of Shares taken by each Subscriber
Total shares taken
Dated
Witness to the above signatures.
Specimen articles of association for a solicitors' incorporated practice which is an unlimited company having a share capital
THE COMPANIES ACT 1985
AN UNLIMITED COMPANY HAVING A SHARE CAPITAL
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION -of-[]
PRELIMINARY
1.
The Articles hereinafter contained and, subject as hereinafter provided, the regulations contained in Table A in the Schedule to the Companies (Tables A to F) Regulations 1985 as amended by the Companies (Tables A–F)(Amendment) Regulations 1985 (hereinafter referred to as ‘Table A’) shall constitute the regulations of the Company subject always to the Rules (as hereinafter defined).
In the case of any variation or inconsistency between these Articles and the regulations in Table A, the provisions of these Articles shall prevail.
In the case of any variation or inconsistency between the Rules and the regulations of the Company the provisions of the Rules shall prevail.
2.
Regulations 3, 24, 32, 34, 35, 40, 41, 54, 56, 60, 61, 63, 64 to 69 (inclusive), 73 to 81 (inclusive), 87, 94, 95 and 118 of Table A shall not apply to the Company.
3.
For the purposes of these Articles, except where the context otherwise requires:—
(1)‘the Act’ means the Companies Act 1985;
‘the AJA’ means the Administration of Justice Act 1985;
‘the Council’ means the Council of the Society;
‘member’ means a person whose name is entered in the Company's register of members;
‘practising certificate’ and ‘the roll’have the meanings assigned to them in the Solicitors Act 1974;
‘recognised body’ means a body corporate for the time being recognised by the Council under Section 9 of the AJA and the Rules;
‘registered foreign lawyer’ means a person registered in accordance with S.89 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990;
‘the Rules’ means the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988 as amended by the Multi-National Legal Practice Rules 1991 or any modification or re-enactment for the time being in force;
‘the Society’ means the Law Society; and
‘solicitor’ means a person qualified to act as a solicitor under s.1 of the Solicitors Act 1974.
(2) Words importing gender include a reference to both other genders, words in the singular include a reference to the plural and vice versa.
(3) Any reference to any provision of the Act, the AJA, the Solicitors Act 1974 or any provision of any other statutory act relevant to these Articles shall be deemed to include a reference to any statutory modification or re-enactment of that provision for the time being in force.
MEMBERS
4.
No person shall be a member of the Company unless he is a solicitor, a registered foreign lawyer or a recognised body.
5.
A member shall not hold a share for another person save as permitted by the Rules.
A member shall not create any charge or other third party interest (save as permitted by the Rules) over any share.
6. (1) A member shall disclose to the Company in writing:
(a) the nature and extent of any interests in shares registered in his name and the persons by whom such interests are held, and
(b) any change in the nature and extent of such interests or in the identity of the persons by whom such interests are held
forthwith on the creation of or the change in the interest concerned.
(2) The Company may require a member to furnish any information, document or other matter which the Directors may think necessary for the purpose of enabling the Company to comply with the Rules and the member shall furnish the information, document or other matter required within such period as may be determined by the Directors.
7.
The Directors shall not enter in the Company's register of members any person until that person and any person for whom he holds a Share as nominee has submitted to the Council a Compensation Fund covenant as required by the Rules and furnished evidence of such submission to the Directors.
THE RULES
8.
The management of the Company and the allotment, issue, holding, transfer and transmission of all shares in the capital of the Company shall be subject to the Rules and nothing in the regulations of the Company shall be construed as authorising any breach of the Rules or any rules, principles or requirements of conduct applicable to recognised bodies by virtue of the Rules or Section 9 of the AJA.
UNISSUED SHARE CAPITAL
9. (1) After the initial allotment any shares proposed to be issued shall first be offered to the members in proportion as nearly as may be to the number of the existing shares held by them respectively.
(2) The offer shall be made by notice specifying the number of shares offered, and limiting a period (not being less than fourteen days) within which the offer, if not accepted, will be deemed to be declined.
(3) After the expiration of that period those shares which are declined or deemed to be declined shall be offered in the proportion aforesaid to the persons who have within the said period accepted all the shares offered to them.
Such further offer shall be made in the same manner and limited by a like period as the original offer.
(4) Any shares not accepted pursuant to such offer or further offer as aforesaid not including fractions unalloted shall be under the control of the Directors who may allot, grant options over or otherwise dispose of the same to such persons who are qualified to be members on such terms and in such manner as they think fit, provided that such shares shall not be disposed of on terms which are more favourable to the subscribers thereof than the terms on which they were offered to the members.
(5) No share may be issued unless it is fully paid or credited as fully paid on or before allotment.
(6) Subject to the provisions of this Article and Article 4 the Directors are unconditionally authorised for the purposes of Section 80 of the Act to allot shares and grant rights to subscribe for, or convert securities into, shares in the Company up to the nominal amount of authorised share capital with which the Company is incorporated at any time or times during the period of five years from the date of adoption of these Articles.
The Directors may, after that period, allot any shares or grant any such rights under this authority in pursuance of an offer or agreement so to do made by the Company within that period.
The authority hereby given may at any time (subject to the said Section 80) be renewed, revoked or varied by Ordinary Resolution of the Company in General Meeting.
(7) Sections 89(1) and 90(1) to (6)(inclusive) of the Act shall be excluded from applying to the Company.
TRANSFER AND TRANSMISSION OF SHARES
10.
In the next succeeding Article the following words shall bear the following meanings:—
(1)‘Shares’ shall mean Shares in the capital of the Company;
(2)‘Member’ shall mean a person whose name is entered in the Company's register of members;
(3)‘Proposing Transferor’ shall mean a Member or any other person proposing to transfer Shares;
(4)‘Transfer Notice’ shall mean a written notice served by a Member or any other person on the Company indicating his desire to transfer Shares;
(5)‘the Prescribed Price’ shall mean the price per Share certified pursuant to paragraph (3) of the next succeeding Article;
(6)‘Purchaser’ shall mean a person willing to purchase Shares comprised in a Transfer Notice.
11. (1) A Member or any other person proposing to transfer any Shares shall give a Transfer Notice to the Company and the Transfer Notice shall constitute the Company his agent for the sale of the Shares therein mentioned at the Prescribed Price to any Member or Members.
A Transfer Notice once given shall not be revocable except with the consent of the Directors and except as provided in paragraph (2) below.
(2) Forthwith upon receipt of any Transfer Notice the Company shall procure the Auditors for the time being of the Company (acting as experts and not as arbitrators) to certify the Prescribed Price.
Forthwith upon receipt of the certificate as to the Prescribed Price, the Company shall notify the Proposing Transferor thereof.
The Proposing Transferor may (save where a Transfer Notice is given or deemed to be given pursuant to paragraphs (7)–(10) of this Article) within seven days of receipt of such notification revoke his Transfer Notice, provided that the Proposing Transferor shall in such circumstances be liable for the Auditors costs in certifying the Prescribed Price.
At the same time as giving such notice to the Proposing Transferor, the Company shall offer the Shares comprised in the Transfer Notice to the Members (other than the Proposing Transferor) for purchase at the Prescribed Price on terms that in case of competition the Shares so offered shall be sold to the Members accepting the offer in proportion (as nearly as may be, and without increasing the number sold to any Member beyond the number applied for by him) to their existing holdings of Shares.
All such offers of Shares shall be made by notice in writing and every such offer shall limit a time (not being less than twenty-one days or more than forty-two days) within which the offer must be accepted or, in default, will be deemed to have been declined.
It is hereby declared for the avoidance of doubt that any Member to whom Shares are offered in accordance with this Article shall be at liberty to accept some only of the Shares so offered.
(3) The Auditors shall within fourteen days of a request by the Company certify to the Company the Prescribed Price, that is to say the price which in their opinion represents a fair value for the Shares comprised in the Transfer Notice as between a willing vendor and a willing purchaser and, in making such determination, the Auditors shall not take any account of whether such Shares comprise a majority or minority interest in the Company (and shall assume that the entire issued share capital of the Company is being sold).
(4) If the Company shall within the period limited for acceptance find a Purchaser or Purchasers willing to purchase all the Shares concerned and shall give notice in writing thereof to the Proposing Transferor, he shall be bound, upon payment of the Prescribed Price, to transfer such Shares to the respective Purchasers thereof.
Every such notice shall state the name and address of each Purchaser and the number of Shares agreed to be purchased by him, and the purchase shall be completed at a place and time to be appointed by the Directors.
(5) If in any case a Proposing Transferor, after having become bound to transfer any Shares to a Purchaser, shall make default in transferring the Shares, the Directors may receive the purchase money on his behalf and may authorise some person to execute on behalf of and as attorney for the Proposing Transferor any necessary instruments of transfer and the Company shall hold the purchase money in trust for the Proposing Transferor.
The receipt of the Company for the purchase money shall be a good discharge to the Purchaser who shall not be bound to see to the application thereof and, after the name of the Purchaser has been entered in the register in purported exercise of the aforesaid powers, the validity of the proceedings shall not be questioned by any person.
(6) If the company shall not within the period limited for acceptance find a Purchaser or Purchasers willing to purchase all the Shares comprised in the Transfer Notice the Proposing Transferor shall at any time within [three]months after the Directors have so confirmed their inability to him in writing be at liberty to transfer the Shares to any person not being a Member but capable of being a Member under these Articles on a bona fide sale at any price not being less than the Prescribed Price but in that event the Directors may, in their absolute discretion, decline to register any such transfer of any Share and shall not be required or bound to state the reason for any refusal.
The Directors may require to be satisfied that any Share being transferred under this paragraph are being transferred in pursuance of a bona fide sale for the consideration stated in the instrument of transfer without any deduction rebate or allowance whatsoever to the Purchaser.
Note: Practitioners must decide whether they wish to alter the word in square brackets.
(7) In the event that a Member dies or in the event that the name of a Member is struck off or removed from the roll or his practising certificate is suspended or expires without being renewed or where a Member is a registered foreign lawyer his name is struck off the register of foreign lawyers or his registration is suspended or cancelled or (where a Member is a Recognised Body) its recognition is revoked or expires, the Directors may require the Member or, as the case may be, his legal personal representatives, trustee in bankruptcy, liquidator, administrator or administrative receiver to give a Transfer Notice in respect of all the Shares then registered in the name of the Member or deceased member.
Such Transfer Notice shall not in any circumstances be capable of revocation.
Regulations 29 to 31 of Table A shall take effect subject to this paragraph.
(8) In the event that a Member holds any Shares or a beneficial owner has an interest in any Shares in the Company in such circumstances that the Rules are broken the Directors may at any time resolve that the Member holding the Shares concerned shall (unless he shall have already given a Transfer Notice) be deemed to have given a Transfer Notice in respect of such Shares.
Notice of the passing of any such resolution shall forthwith be given to the Member affected thereby.
Such Transfer Notice shall not in any circumstances be capable of revocation.
Note: Paragraph (8), or a provision to the like effect, needs to be adopted if a recognised body is to be able to ensure that shares are not held in breach of the Rules.
Paragraph (8) cannot stand on its own.
If practitioners adopt paragraph (8) but not Article 10 and the remainder of Article 11 they must include in their Articles provisions specifying the effect of a deemed Transfer Notice (as provided for by paragraph (8)).
The effect in essence must be that a Transfer Notice constitutes the Company the agent for the sale of the shares.
(9) For the purpose of ensuring that a transfer of Shares is duly authorised hereunder or that no circumstances have arisen whereby the Directors are empowered to require that a Transfer Notice be given or to resolve that a Transfer Notice be deemed to have been given the Directors may from time to time require any Member or past Member or the legal personal representatives, trustee in bankruptcy, liquidator, administrator or administrative receiver of any Member or any person named as transferee in any instrument of transfer lodged for registration to furnish to the Company such information and evidence as the Directors may think fit regarding any matter which they may deem relevant to such purpose.
Failing such information or evidence being furnished the Directors may give the person from whom the information or evidence required notice that, if the information or evidence in question is not furnished within such periods as may be determined by the Directors and stated in the notice, the Directors may refuse to register the transfer in question or (in case no transfer is in question) may require that a Transfer Notice be given in respect of the Shares concerned.
Failing the information or evidence being furnished within the period stated in the notice, the Directors shall be entitled to refuse to register the transfer in question or (in case no transfer is in question) to require that a Transfer Notice be given in respect of the Shares concerned.
(10) In any case where under the provisions of this Article the Directors may require a Transfer Notice to be given in respect of any Shares, if a Transfer Notice is not duly given within a period of two weeks of demand being made, a Transfer Notice shall be deemed to have been given in respect of such Shares at the expiration of the said period.
Such a deemed Transfer Notice shall not in any circumstances be capable of revocation.
In any case as aforesaid the provisions of this Article shall take effect.
(11) A Member shall before transferring any Share or holding any Share as nominee ensure that the intended transferee or beneficial owner submits to the Council a Compensation Fund covenant as required by the Rules and shall furnish evidence of such submission to the Directors.
(12) Any notice required to be given under this Article by the Company to a Member or by a Member to the Company shall be given or served either personally or by sending it by first class post to the registered office of the Company or, as the case may be, to the registered address of the Member or (if he has no registered address within the United Kingdom) to the address, if any, within the United Kingdom supplied by him to the Company for the giving of notice to him.
When a notice is sent by post, service of the notice shall be deemed to be effected by properly addressing, prepaying and posting a letter containing the notice and to have been effected at the time at which the letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.
(13) With the consent in writing of all Members for the time being the restrictions imposed by this Article may be waived or varied in relation to any proposed transfer of Shares.
Note: If the only remaining members would be registered foreign lawyers those members could not accept all the shares because under the Rules there must be at least one solicitor member.
In such a case at least one share would have to be taken up by a solicitor or a recognised body to avoid expiry of the recognition.
PROCEEDINGS AT GENERAL MEETINGS
12.
No business shall be transacted at any meeting unless a quorum is present at the time when the meeting proceeds to business.
[Two]persons entitled to vote upon the business to be transacted, each being a member or a proxy for a member or a duly appointed corporate representative, shall be a quorum.
Note: Practitioners must decide whether they wish to alter the word in square brackets.
13.
If a quorum is not present within half an hour from the time appointed for the meeting, the meeting shall stand adjourned to the same day in the next week at the same time and place or to such time and place as the Directors may determine.
VOTES OF MEMBERS
14.
Subject to the Rules and to any rights or restrictions attached to any shares, on a show of hands every member who (being an individual) is present in person or (being a recognised body) is present by a duly authorised corporate representative [, not being himself a member entitled to vote,]shall have one vote and on a poll every member shall have one vote for every share of which he is the holder.
Note: Practitioners must decide whether they wish to include the words in square brackets.
15. (1) A member shall not tender a vote in breach of the Rules and any vote so tendered shall not be accepted.
(2) Where a member fails to disclose or furnish any information, document or other matter which he is required to disclose or furnish to the Company under Article 6 the Directors may resolve that no vote shall be tendered or accepted in respect of any share held by or for him until the member shall have disclosed or furnished the information, document or other matter required.
Notice of the passing of such resolution shall forthwith be given to the member affected thereby.
Note: 15(2) will assist a recognised body to enforce Article 6.
16.
For the purpose of attending and voting at meetings a member shall not appoint any person as a proxy or corporate representative contrary to the Rules.
17.
An instrument appointing a proxy shall be in writing, executed by or on behalf of the appointer and shall be in the following form (or in a form as near thereto as circumstances allow or in any other form which is usual or which the Directors may approve):—
‘[]Limited
I/We, of, being a member/members of the above-named company, hereby appoint of, being a solicitor/registered foreign lawyer who is a member or officer of or who is working in the practice of either the Company or a recognised body which is a member of the Company at the time of the meeting or any adjournment thereof, or failing him, of, being a solicitor/registered foreign lawyer who is a member or officer of or who is working in the practice of either the Company or a recognised body which is a member of the Company at the time of the meeting or any adjournment thereof as my/our proxy to vote in my/our name[s] and on my/our behalf at the annual/extraordinary general meeting of the Company to be held on 19, and at any adjournment thereof.
Signed on 19.’
18.
Where it is desired to afford members an opportunity of instructing the proxy how he shall act the instrument appointing a proxy shall be in the following form (or in a form as near thereto as circumstances allow or in any other form which is usual or which the Directors may approve):—
‘[]Limited
I/We, of, being a member/members of the above-named company, hereby appoint of, being a solicitor/registered foreign lawyer who is a member or officer of or who is working in the practice of either the Company or a recognised body which is a member of the Company at the time of the meeting or any adjournment thereof, or failing him, of, being a solicitor/registered foreign lawyer who is a member or officer of or who is working in the practice of either the Company or a recognised body which is a member of the Company at the time of the meeting or any adjournment thereof as my/our proxy to vote in my/our name[s] and on my/our behalf at the annual/extraordinary general meeting of the Company to be held on 19, and at any adjournment thereof.
This form is to be used in respect of the resolutions mentioned below as follows:
Resolution No. 1 *for *against
Resolution No. 2 *for *against
*Strike out whichever is not desired
Unless otherwise instructed, the proxy may vote as he thinks fit or abstain from voting.
Signed this day of 19.’
19.
A vote given or poll demanded by proxy or by the duly authorised corporate representative of a recognised body shall be valid notwithstanding the previous determination of the authority of the person voting or demanding a poll unless notice of the determination was received by the Company at the office or at such other place at which the instrument of proxy was duly deposited before the commencement of the meeting or adjourned meeting at which the vote is given or the poll demanded or (in the case of a poll taken otherwise than on the same day as the meeting or adjourned meeting) the time appointed for taking the poll.
DIRECTORS
20.
In these Articles, the expression ‘the Directors’ means the directors for the time being of the Company or (as the context shall require) any of them acting as the Board of Directors of the Company.
21.
Unless and until otherwise determined by the Company by ordinary resolution in general meeting, the number of Directors shall not be subject to any maximum and the minimum number of Directors shall be one.
22.
No person shall be appointed or re-appointed or act as a Director unless he is a solicitor or a registered foreign lawyer.
APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTORS
23. (1) No person shall be appointed a Director at any general meeting unless either:—
(a) he is recommended by the Directors; or 
(b) not less than fourteen nor more than thirty-five clear days before the date appointed for the general meeting, notice executed by a member qualified to vote at the general meeting has been given to the Company of the intention to propose that person for appointment, together with notice executed by that person of his willingness to be appointed.
(2) Subject to paragraph (1) above, the Company may by ordinary resolutions in general meeting appoint any solicitor or registered foreign lawyer who is willing to act to be a Director, either to fill a vacancy or as an additional Director.
(3) The Directors may appoint a solicitor or registered foreign lawyer who is willing to act to be a Director, either to fill a vacancy or as an additional Director, provided that the appointment does not cause the number of Directors to exceed any number determined in accordance with these Articles as the maximum number of Directors.
A Director so appointed shall hold office only until the next following annual general meeting.
If not re-appointed at such annual general meeting he shall vacate office at the conclusion thereof.
DISQUALIFICATION OF DIRECTORS
24.
The office of a Director shall forthwith be vacated:—
(1) if he ceases to be qualified to act as a solicitor under Section 1 of the Solicitors Act 1974, or, in the case of a registered foreign lawyer his name is struck off the register of foreign lawyers or his registration is suspended or cancelled.
(2) if by notice in writing to the Company he resigns the office of Director;
(3) if he becomes bankrupt or insolvent or makes any arrangement or composition with his creditors;
(4) if he becomes a patient as defined by Section 94 of the Mental Health Act 1983 or becomes a person as to whom powers have been exercised under Section 98 of that Act;
(5) if he is removed from office by a resolution duly passed under Section 303 of the Act;
(6) if he is prohibited from being a Director by any order made under the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986.
ALTERNATE DIRECTORS
25. (1) Any Director may at any time appoint another Director or any other person being a solicitor or registered foreign lawyer who is a member or officer of or is working in the practice of the Company approved by the Directors to be his alternate Director and may at any time terminate such appointment.
Any such appointment or removal shall be by written notice, letter, telegram, cablegram, telex or telefax message or other form of visible communication from the Director to the Company and shall be effective upon delivery at the registered office of the Company or at a meeting of Directors.
(2) The appointment of any alternate Director shall terminate if and when the Director by whom he has been appointed vacates his office as Director and upon the happening of any even which, if he were a Director, would cause him to vacate such office.
(3) An alternate Director shall (except when absent from the United Kingdom) be entitled to receive notice of meetings of the Directors and shall be entitled to attend and vote as a Director at any such meeting at which the Director appointing him is personally present and generally at such meeting to perform all functions of his appointor as a Director and for the purpose of the proceedings at such meeting the provisions of these Articles shall apply as if he were a Director.
If he is himself a Director, he shall be entitled in such circumstances as aforesaid to exercise the vote or votes of the Director or Directors for whom he is an alternate in addition to his own vote.
If his appointor is for the time being absent from the United Kingdom or temporarily unable to act through ill-health or disability his signature to any resolution in writing of the Directors shall be as effective as the signature of his appointor.
To such extent as the Directors may from time to time determine in relation to any committees of the Directors, the foregoing sentence shall also apply mutatis mutandis to any meeting of any such committee of which his appointor is a member.
An alternate Director as such shall not (save as aforesaid) have power to act as a Director nor shall be deemed to be a Director for the purpose of these Articles.
(4) An alternate Director shall be entitled to contact and be interested in and benefit from contracts or arrangements and to be repaid expenses and to be indemnified to the same extent mutatis mutandis as if he were a Director [but he shall not be entitled to receive any remuneration from the Company in respect of his appointment as alternate Director].
Note: Practitioners must decide whether they wish to include the words in square brackets.
PROCEEDINGS OF DIRECTORS
26.
Whenever the minimum number of Directors shall be one such Director shall have authority to authorise all the powers and discretions by the regulations of the Company expressed to be vested in the Directors generally and Regulation 89 of Table A shall be modified accordingly.
27.
Subject to such disclosure as is required by Section 317 of the Act, a Director may vote in respect of any contract or arrangement in which he is interested or upon any matter arising out of the same and may be counted in the quorum present at any meeting at which any such contract, arrangement or matter is proposed or considered and if he shall so vote his vote shall be counted.
WINDING UP
28.
In Regulation 117 of Table A the words ‘with the like sanction’ shall be inserted immediately before the words ‘determine how such division’.
INDEMNITY
29.
Subject to Section 310 of the Act, every Director or other officer of the Company shall be entitled to be indemnified out of the assets of the Company against all losses or liabilities which he may sustain or incur in or about the execution of the duties of his office or otherwise in relation thereto, including any liability incurred by him in defending any proceedings, whether civil or criminal, in which judgement is given in his favour or in which he is acquitted or in connection with any application under Sections 144(3) or (4) or 727 of the Act in which relief is granted to him by the Court, and no Director or other officer shall be liable for any loss, damage or misfortune which may happen to or be incurred by the Company in the execution of the duties of his office or in relation thereto.
GRATUITIES AND PENSIONS
30.
The Directors may exercise the powers of the Company conferred by Clause 3(s) of the Memorandum of Association of the Company and shall be entitled to retain any benefits received by them or any of them by reason of the exercise of any such powers.
SHARE CAPITAL
The Company's share capital is []divided into []shares of []each.
ALTERATION OF SHARE CAPITAL
32.
The Company may be special resolution:—
(a) increase the share capital by such sum to be divided into shares of such amount as the resolution may prescribe;
(b) consolidate and divide all or any of its share capital into shares of a larger amount than its existing shares;
(c) subdivide its shares, or any of them, into shares of a smaller amount than its existing shares;
(d) cancel any shares which at the date of the passing of the resolution have not been taken or agreed to be taken by any person;
(e) reduce its share capital and any share premium account in any way.
NOTICE OF GENERAL MEETINGS
33.
The words ‘at least seven clear days’ notice’shall be substituted for the words ‘at least fourteen clear days’notice’in Regulation 38 of Table A.
PART III
FORMS AND DOCUMENTS
Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988
Compensation Fund Covenant
DEED OF COVENANT
for use by a solicitor or registered foreign lawyer who is or proposes to become a member of and/or a beneficial owner of a share or shares in a body corporate seeking recognition or already recognised under the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988.
BY this deed, I,…
[name of covenantor]
of…
being or proposing to become a member of and/or a beneficial owner of a share or…shares in…(hereinafter called ‘the Company’), HEREBY COVENANT with the COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY (hereinafter called ‘the Council’) that,if recognition is granted to the Company by the Council under section 9 of the Administration of Justice Act 1985 ,[delete words in italics if the Company is already recognised]I will jointly and severally with the other members of and beneficial owners of shares in the Company reimburse the Law Society, when required to do so by the Council, in respect of any grant made out of the Compensation Fund under paragraph 6 of Schedule 2 to the Administration of Justice Act 1985 where:
(a) such grant is made in consequence of some act or default of the Company or any of its officers or employees, and
(b) at the time of such act or default I am a member of or a beneficial owner of a share or shares in the Company
but to the extent only that the Law Society has been unable to recover the amount of the grant from the Company or the officer or employee committing the act or default or the personal representative, trustee in bankruptcy or liquidator of any such person or body corporate.
I further  covenant with the Council that before transferring any share in the Company or transferring a beneficial interest in any such share or holding any such share as nominee I will ensure that the intended transferee or beneficial owner submits to the Council a Compensation Fund covenant as required by Rule 14 of the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988 (or any modification or re-enactment of that provision for the time being in force).
In this deed any reference to a provision of the Administration of Justice Act 1985 shall be deemed to include a reference to any statutory modification or re-enactment of that provision for the time being in force.
IN WITNESS whereof I have set my hand to this deed this in the presence of:
…day of…19….
Signature of witness:…
SIGNED and DELIVERED by the above named Address…
…
[covenantor][signature of covenantor]
Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988
Compensation Fund Covenant
DEED OF COVENANT
for use by a recognised body (or body seeking recognition) which is or proposes to become a member of and/or a beneficial owner of a share or shares in a body corporate seeking recognition or already recognised under the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988.
BY this deed,…
[name of covenantor]
whose registered office is at…
being or proposing to become a member of and/or a beneficial owner of a share or…shares in…(hereinafter called ‘the Company’), HEREBY COVENANT with the COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY (hereinafter called ‘the Council’) that,if recognition is granted to the Company by the Council under section 9 of the Administration of Justice Act 1985 ,[delete words in italics if the Company is already recognised]it will jointly and severally with the other members of and beneficial owners of shares in the Company reimburse the Law Society, when required to do so by the Council, in respect of any grant made out of the Compensation Fund under paragraph 6 of Schedule 2 to the Administration of Justice Act 1985 where:
(a) such grant is made in consequence of some act or default of the Company or any of its officers or employees, and
(b) at the time of such act or default it is a member of or a beneficial owner of a share or shares in the Company
but to the extent only that the Law Society has been unable to recover the amount of the grant from the Company or the officer or employee committing the act or default or the personal representative, trustee in bankruptcy or liquidator of any such person or body corporate.
It further  covenants with the Council that before transferring any share in the Company or transferring a beneficial interest in any such share or holding any such share as nominee it will ensure that the intended transferee or beneficial owner submits to the Council a Compensation Fund covenant as required by Rule 14 of the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988 (or any modification or re-enactment of that provision for the time being in force).
In this deed any reference to a provision of the Administration of Justice Act 1985 shall be deemed to include a reference to any statutory modification or re-enactment of that provision for the time being in force.
IN WITNESS whereof…[covenantor]has executed and delivered this deed this…day of…19….
SIGNED by us, two directors of the covenantor or a director and the secretary of the covenantor pursuant to a resolution of the board of directors and in accordance with the covenantor's Articles of Association:
…
Signature…
Signature
DIRECTOR (DIRECTOR/SECRETARY) *
*Delete as appropriate                
PART IV
TAX CONSIDERATIONS
To incorporate or not to incorporate — Fiscal Considerations
, solicitor and member of the Revenue Law Committee
This article is written in the context of Section 9 of the Administration of Justice Act 1985 being brought into force enabling solicitors' practices to incorporate in accordance with the Incorporation Rules approved by the Master of the Rolls.
It is concerned solely with the fiscal aspects of incorporation which have previously been considered in an article by  in the Gazette number 29 .
It must be stressed that these aspects can only be considered in the context of the tax rates and rules at the time.
Fiscal advantage of incorporation
The alleged advantage of incorporation is that tax on profits retained within the business can be paid at Corporation Tax rates, 25% in the case of the Small Companies Rate or 33% main rate, rather than Income Tax at the individual's marginal rate, currently 25% or 40%.
The Small Companies Rate applies where profits do not exceed £250,000 with marginal relief up to profits of £1,250,000.
Thus, the maximum saving is 15% in respect of the portion of income over and above the aggregate of the 25% rate band (currently £23,700) and allowance (personal allowance, married couples allowance) and interest charges and personal pension payments.
As can be seen from the example below a typical partner in a firm who is married, pays interest on a practice loan and, being aged between 46 and 50, makes personal pension plan contributions of 25% of his share of profit, is unlikely to hit the 40% tax rate before his earnings exceed £45,000 (the example assumes maximum pension contributions.
In practice many partners will probably not be using their full relief).
Example A
Let us posit a partnership of 5 partners, each with a taxable share of profits of £60,000, so that their taxable income profiles are as follows:—
Share of Profits 60,000.00
Personal Allowance (3,295.00)
Married Couples Allowance (1,720.00)
Interest on practice loan (4,000.00)
Personal Pension Plan (15,000.00)
Half Class 4 National Insurance Contribution (453.00)
Total (35,532.00)
Basic Rate Band (23,700.00)
Taxable at 40% £11,832.00
The partners need to retain working capital in the practice.
They do not wish to provide further working capital by means of borrowing or it may be imprudent to do so.
In these circumstances it is tempting to look at incorporation so that each partner's ‘take’ from the business in the form of salary is limited to an amount that avoids tax being paid at any rate greater than the basic rate of 25%.
Using example A, it is not then simply a question of allocating each former partner a salary of £48,168 (i.e. £60,000–£11,832).
To arrive at a salary that produces no income tax liability above the 25% rate, account has to be taken of the revised reliefs to set against the salary.
For example, as the salary will be lower than £60,000 there will be less pension relief and the deduction of half the Class 4 National Insurance Contribution will in any event fall out of account.
However, the principle can readily be seen that the salary can be cast at such a level that no or little tax is paid at a rate above the basic rate of income tax.
At first sight, therefore, our five partner firm is talking in round terms of a tax saving of 15% × £11,832 × 5 = £8,874.
National Insurance Contributions
At this stage it is  necessary to compare the position of a self employed partner and the employee of the company in relation to National Insurance contributions.
A partner will pay a flat rate Class 2 contribution of £267.80 together with a Class 4 contribution of 6.3% of profits between the lower earnings limit of £5,900 and the upper earnings limit of £20,820 which gives a Class 4 contribution of £905.94.
One half of the Class 4 contribution is tax deductible and, using the 25% rate, the net cost of Class 4 insurance is therefore £792.70.
The total net National Insurance bill for a self employed partner, even if his earnings exceed the upper earnings limit, is therefore £1,060.50.
Let us suppose that following incorporation the partners award themselves salaries of £43,500 which is about the level required to ensure that tax on the salary does not exceed the basic 25% rate.
Taking the more favourable contracted out rate the employee's National Insurance contribution is 2% up on the lower earnings limit of £2,704 and 7% up on the difference between the lower earnings limit and the upper earnings limit of £20,280.
The employee's contribution is therefore £1,284.40 and roughly equates to the sum of the Class 2 and Class 4 contributions paid by a self employed person on the same income.
No part of the employee's contribution is tax relievable.
The employer's contribution is, however, 10.4% on the full corpus of salary of £43,500 and this amounts to £4,524.
This is fully tax relievable in the employer's hands so the liability nets down to £3,393 for the employer.
Thus it will be seen that the additional National Insurance contribution liability which has been manufactured by the switch from self employed to PAYE status outstrips the saving in tax at this level of earnings.
Purists will argue that the additional contributions purchase additional benefits but many will not find this a good point.
The Break Even Point
The point at which the saving of the differential tax at 15% on income outstrips the increased National Insurance liability is likely to be in the region of earnings of £75,000 as is illustrated by the following example.
Example B
Self Employed
Profits 75,000
National Insurance (net) 1,060.50
Tax at 15% on 11,832 per Example A 1,774.80
Tax at 15% on excess of Example B over Example A (after allowing 25% of additional pension relief on 11,400) 1,822.50
4,657.80
Company
Salary 43,500
Retained Profits 31,500
National Insurance
— Employees 1,284.00
— Employers (met) 3,393.00
4,677.40
The price which has been paid for the lower rate of tax on income has been the additional National Insurance charge and also the locking up of the profits in excess of the salary of £43,500 as retained profit in the company.
The retained profit can be unlocked by declaration of a dividend.
Whilst this at least saves National Insurance contributions the incentive must be to take out salary at least to a level of £71,400 so as to get the maximum allowance base for pension contributions.
(An even higher pension base may be applicable where the cash limit of £71,400 does not apply to old style retirement annuity contracts).
Moreover, even the payment of dividends might, in the long term, backfire as one of the proposals which has been canvassed is precisely the payment of the equivalent of National Insurance contributions on investment income.
And, of course, the payment of dividend itself re-instates the 40% tax rate and defeats the tax motive for incorporating in the first place.
Acceleration of tax liability
A partnership with a  tax year end pays its tax on profits in two instalments on 1st January and 1st July  i.e. on average 23 months after the year end.
PAYE on salaries will be payable on a current basis so that on the bulk of the Corporation's former partnership profits tax will be accelerated by some 28 months.
If income in excess of salary is extracted by means of dividend than Advance Corporation Tax will become payable.
Similarly, on the profits retained in the company the due date for payment of Corporation Tax is 9 months after the end of the company's year or 14 months in advance of the partnership date.
Moreover, incorporation itself would involve a cessation for income tax purposes.
If profits have been rising that will increase tax payments as the Revenue can elect to reassess the two years preceding the tax year in which the cessation takes place on an actual basis.
The acceleration of the income tax liability may prove to be particularly serious in the context of firms which reached a peak income in the boom year of 1988, slipped back in the two subsequent years and are now again on a rising profit curve.
The Inland Revenue consultative document ‘A Simpler System for Taxing the Self Employed’ contains proposals which, if implemented, would in any event result in an acceleration of the tax liability for partnership.
However, this is scant comfort as it simply brings the dates for payment of tax by the self employed such as partners on to a more current basis similar to that applicable to companies and PAYE employees.
Other disadvantages
The following further difficulties associated with incorporation can be identified.
A. The partnership may have an advantageous cash basis for accounting for profits without any work in progress calculations.
The Revenue would undoubtedly seek to drive through an earnings basis for the future.
B. Insofar as surplus income is retained in the company the retiring partner will seek to extract his share of surplus income by asking an enhanced price for his shares in the company on retirement.
Not only may there be difficult in persuading contributing members of the company to pay a suitably enhanced price but also it may be difficult to satisfy the conditions for the company to qualify as a ‘family company’ for the purpose of obtaining Capital Gains Tax Retirement Relief.
C. If the partners own their business premises then they will want to keep those premises outside the company in view of the notorious problem of the double charge to Capital Gains Tax on properties held within a company.
Retirement Relief is normally available on the disposal of a business asset by an individual which has been used by his family company.
Again the problem will arise that it will be unlikely that a company will satisfy the text to qualify as a family company.
D. There will be tax consequences when shares change hands on introduction of new members, death and retirement.
The normal rules applicable to dealings in shares will apply.
This is to be contrasted with the flexible Capital Gains Tax rules for partnerships outlined in Statement of Practice D12 of  as amended on .
Conclusion
The conclusion is, inevitably, that there is no tax incentive to incorporate.
Partners in firms with lower profits will be paying tax at only 25% in any event.
With firms of medium size profits the saving is neutralised by the increased cost of National Insurance contributions.
With the more profitable firms the differential between the main companies rate and the individual higher rate is only 7%.
Incorporation was seen as an advantage when there was a sharp differential between personal income tax rates and the Corporation Tax rate.
As long as the differential remains at the present level incorporation cannot be justified on fiscal grounds.
An alternative — The Service Company
Some tax can be saved by using a service company owned by the partnership which then charges a fee to the partnership for the rendering of non-legal services, for example administrative and computer services.
However, the saving is limited as the Revenue only normally allow the service company to make a 10% profit.
In Example A five partners produce a taxable profit of £300,000.
If they are on a 30% profit ratio the total expenditure will be about £700,000.
If the service company were allowed to generate profit of £35,000 then the 15% tax saving would be approximately £5,250.
As the Revenue only allow a 10% mark up the tax gains cannot exceed 1.5% of the turnover put through the company.
The overall saving is therefore small.
Another alternative — A company as a partner
There appears to be nothing against a company being granted recognition by the Council to provide professional services such as are normally provided by individuals practising as solicitors by providing those services as itself a member of a partnership with other individual solicitors.
This opens up the route for having a company a partner and allocating to the company partner such share of the profits as the partners think appropriate in each year.
The shareholders in the company would hold their shares in their individual profit sharing ratios within the partnership.
Thus, a reserve could be built up within the funds of the company partner making use of the small companies corporation tax rate.
The arbitrary rule restricting profit to a 10% margin applying to service companies would not operate.
It would be necessary to establish the company partner as a genuine partner.
There would probably be no need to transfer substantial assets of the business into the new company and the appropriate step might be to allocate part of the solicitors' clientele to the company partner to establish it as having a regular practice.
With appropriate allocation of profits from year to year the company partner could be used as a means of building up partnership capital at the more favourable tax rate.
The National Insurance contribution complications would be avoided as there would be no need to pay directors' salaries as the individual partners would rely on their own shares of profit as their source of earnings and the company partner would only be a vehicle for building up capital.
However, other disadvantages would remain.
It should be borne in mind that the company would be assessed to tax by reference to its accounting period ending on normal incorporation tax principles and not on a preceding year basis.
Retiring partners would still have the difficulty of disposing of their shares on retirement and putting themselves within the scope of retirement relief.