

One
To vs zero: a meaningful distinction?
The existence of two versions of the infinitive poses the problem of their status in the linguistic system of English.
Are they distinct forms of the verb or simply variants of a single verb form — the infinitive?
What is the role of the to which distinguishes them on the level of the sign?
Various answers have been suggested to these questions.
Joos (1964: 52) exemplifies an approach which proposes two separate verb forms — the "infinitive" , which is always preceded by to, and the "presentative" , which is not.
Such an analysis is highly implausible however because it fails to recognize that the to infinitive poses a problem of syntax which goes beyond the level of the individual word.
Joos's "infinitive" is in fact made up of two words — to plus the bare infinitive — as can be seen from the possibility of inserting an adverb between them (I want to really scare him) and of finding to all by itself, something which is strictly impossible with inflections (I don't want to).
Moreover, his proposal cannot account for the close relationship between pairs of sentences such as:
(1a) Thus by reducing the temperature of matter in the gaseous state it can be made to pass through all three physical states.
(Isaacs 1963: 46; in van Ek 1966: 121)
(1b) Thus by reducing the temperature of matter in the gaseous state one can make it pass through all three physical states.
The alternative to Joos's view is that the two editions of the infinitive are variants.
The crucial question arises here, however, as to whether this variation is meaningful or not.
Most analysts simply assume that it is not, calling to an "infinitive marker" and confining themselves to an enumeration of the types of context in which each form of the infinitive is found (cf.
Zandvoort 1957: 4).
It is sometimes suggested in addition that the bare infinitive is a sort of grammatical fossil which is only found in petrified form in certain fixed constructions (Curme 1931: 456).
Schibsbye (1965: 24) suggests on the other hand that "the infinitive with and without to corresponds in the main to the two sides of the infinitive, the nominal and the verbal" : the infinitive with to is found in positions similar to those in which one finds substantives, adjectives and adverbs, while the infinitive without to "is generally closely connected with an auxiliary verb, and forms a single unit with it as regards stress and intonation" .
Besides the fact that it is not always true — the bare infinitive has many uses where it is not in relation with an auxiliary — this distinction between the two infinitives is also purely distributional: Schibsbye simply lists the various contexts where each infinitive is found without developing any difference of meaning.
Other linguists imply even more clearly that there is no difference in meaning between the two versions of the infinitive by claiming that to is meaningless when it precedes the bare infinitive form.
Jespersen, for instance, is of the opinion that although "to had at first its ordinary prepositional meaning of direction…the meaning of the preposition has been weakened and in some cases totally extinguished" (1927: 10).
In fact to "has now come to be a mere empty grammatical appendix to the infinitive" (1940: 154).
Chomsky (1957: 100) goes even further, for he holds that to is a morpheme that "can hardly be said to have a meaning in any independent sense" .
This position is echoed by Lehrer (1987: 256), who states that "to has no meaning of its own" , by Buyssens (1987: 341), who asserts that it is a "well-known fact that when the infinitive is used as the subject, the predicate, or the direct object of the sentence, it is normally preceded by a meaningless to" , and by Andersson (1985: 57), who distinguishes between the preposition to, which has a meaning, and the pure to infinitive marker, "which only has the syntactic function to introduce [sic]an infinitive" .
Treating to as meaningless in some or all of its uses with the infinitive raises several serious problems however.
Not the least of these is that this does not square very well with the way to is learned by children.
Bloom et al. "s study of how to is acquired in infinitival complement constructions led them to the clear conclusion that" the children learned to with the meaning "" direction towards "" and not as a meaningless syntactic marker"(1984: 391).
A second problem is that it seems somehow contradictory that to should have meaning in some of its uses but not in others.
A glaring example of this is Andersson's claim that to has meaning in He trained the dog to perform some very clever tricks, where it is prepositional, but not in He taught the dog to perform some very clever tricks, where it is "a pure infinitive marker without meaning" (1985: 267).
Jespersen (1940: 157) sets the problem in more general terms: To is used with an infinitive in the first place where the usual meaning of the preposition is distinctly felt: he went to fetch his hat /he was led (inclined) to believe — or is more or less vaguely present: ready to believe/anxious to believe.
See especially the infinitive of purpose and result.
But then it is used extensively where a preposition seems to be naturally required, but where to is really inadequate, as in the infinitive of reaction: glad to meet you (cf Fr. charmé de vous voir).
And finally where there seems to be no intrinsic need for a preposition: to see her is to love her.
If what Jespersen suggests were true, however, one might expect to to show some tendency to be dropped in the uses where it is "meaningless" and there is no sign of this occurring in any of the functions listed either by Buyssens or by Jespersen.
And if to is completely meaningless when used with the infinitive, why isn't it tending to disappear completely?
Or why isn't its occurrence completely haphazard?
Such questions cast serious doubts on the likelihood of to having no meaning in these uses.
Conclusive evidence that the bare and to infinitives cannot be treated as meaningless variants is provided however by Jespersen's observation that there are some cases where both forms can occur in the same context.
The examples given are:(2) I have seen hastier people than you stay all night.
(3) Seeing flight to be impossible, he surrendered.
(Jespersen 1940: 280)
These give rise to minimal pairs such as:(4a) I saw him be impolite.
(4b) I saw him to be impolite.
In itself, the occurrence of both infinitive forms in the same context is in flagrant contradiction with the idea of meaningless contextual variation.
But more important, once the semantics of the two constructions is examined, the hypothesis of meaningless variants must be ruled out once and for all: the two constructions do not mean the same thing.
According to Jespersen (1940: 158, 180), see with the bare infinitive denotes "immediate perception" , whereas with the to infinitive the meaning conveyed is that of "inference" or "logical conclusion" .
The use of the infinitive after see is not an isolated case moreover.
The minimal pair in (5a) and (5b) provides further evidence of the meaning distinction:(5a) I had nine people call.
(5b) I had nine people to call.
In addition, it has been pointed out (Erades 1950: 123) that it is not exactly the same thing to ask someone Will you help me get these letters addressed? as it is to ask Will you help me to get these letters addressed?
One can only conclude that the bare and to infinitives are anything but meaningless contextual variants.
They can be used to make distinctions of meaning which are sometimes very subtle but certainly very real.
This implies that the to preceding the infinitive has meaning.
The next question is obviously: What kind of meaning?
In order to show what kind of meaning the to and bare infinitive have, we shall begin by uses where the infinitive is found with a full verb.
The method used will be mainly that of attempting to contrast the two versions in the same context.
Two
The infinitive incident to full verbs
That the to preceding the infinitive should bring a meaning of its own into the context is no surprise for a semantically oriented approach to language, since from this point of view the very raison d'être of a linguistic sign is to express meaning.
The analysis proposed here will therefore be in sharp contrast to theories of language which admit empty grammatical entities such as "dummy do" without a prior scrutiny of meaning.
Of course, any language may have semiological vestiges from the past which coexist alongside productive forms.
One such example is the distinction between the strong and weak forms of the past tense in English: there is absolutely no difference in the grammatical meaning of "past" between two forms such as spoke and talked.
Even where there are two signs in use for the same verb, as with he bade and he bidded, one immediately recognizes a unity of meaning ( "past" ).
That the to and bare infinitives, on the other hand, can express differences of meaning, as witnessed by the contexts mentioned at the end of the previous chapter, shows that they are not mere meaningless fossils.
The approach to meaning taken in this study, as mentioned in the Introduction, distinguishes between two states in which meaning exists in the human mind.
The first state, called "potential meaning" , corresponds to the permanent meaning-capacity which a word or morpheme possesses before it is utilized in any particular situation.
Potential meaning is meaning as it resides in the speaker's unconscious even when he is not speaking.
The second state, called "actual meaning" , is the signification which a  word or morpheme evokes when applied to a particular experience in a unique, actual act of speech.
Actual meaning is thus that part of the potential meaning which is brought to consciousness by a particular experience to be expressed.
In the view of language taken here, therefore, potential meaning is seen as an instrument for representing or conceptualizing particular experiences in such a way as to make them sayable.
The problem of defining the potential meaning of the to infinitive has already been posed, in a summary way, in the comment from Jespersen (1940: 157) cited in Chapter 1.
Quirk et al.(1985: 687) suggest something quite similar to Jespersen — "the infinitive marker to may be viewed as related to the spatial preposition to through metaphorical connection" — and illustrate this by the series: How far this metaphorical connection extends is not specified, but it is significant that both Quirk et al.and Jespersen feel that where to is clearly felt to have meaning it can be connected with the preposition to in the spatial sense of movement towards a point.
The existence of other cases where this connection apparently cannot be made, as pointed out by Jespersen, indicates however that this sense cannot be taken as descriptive of the full potential for meaning which to has in contemporary English.
The postulate put forward in this study is that the potential meaning of to before the infinitive is more abstract than that found in the spatial use of the preposition, and can be stated as follows: the possibility of a movement from a point in time conceived as a before-position to another point in time which marks the end-point of the movement and which represents an after-position with respect to the first.
This greater abstraction in meaning is due to a shift from the essentially spatial sense of the preposition to a strictly temporal sense with the infinitive.
The  potential meaning of to with the infinitive can therefore be diagrammed in the following manner: The potential meaning of to as described above fits in with that of the bare infinitive in the following very simple way: the latter evokes that which defines the end-point of the movement denoted by to.
More precisely, the infinitive evokes an event, and to, the movement from an instant situated before this event up to the instant at which the event begins.
This view is similar to Hirtle's description (1975: 20) of the to infinitive as referring an event "to any point in time prior to its realization" , since to can be seen to evoke that which comes before the realization of the event.
However, in contrast to that of Hirtle, the analysis put forward here proposes that without to the idea of a prior position in time is not evoked, since otherwise the particle would be completely redundant and hence meaningless, which has been shown not to be the case.
That to situates the bare infinitive's event as an after-position with respect to something else explains why so many grammarians associate the to infinitive in some or all of its uses with notions such as "future" (Wierzbicka 1988: 188), "mere potentiality for action" (Quirk et al.1985: 1191), "unrealized" (Dixon 1984: 592) or "hypothesis" (Bolinger 1978: 10; 1968: 124).
Even Mair, who proposes no basic meaning for the to infinitive, is led by his careful examination of the data to observe that with practically no exceptions all the matrix verbs followed by to + infinitive in the direct object, ditransitive, monotransitive raising, complex transitive, and SVOA constructions can be characterized as "forward-looking predicates" (1990: 102, 104-5).
The view of to taken here also accounts for the impression of what Riddle (1975: 467) calls "control" which one often feels with the to infinitive, i.e. the implication that the matrix event is responsible for or affects the complement event (cf. the difference between Jane forgot to be cautious and Jane forgot that she was cautious).
If the matrix event is felt to "control" the infinitive event's realization, then the matrix event must obviously be conceived as a conditioning factor with respect to the latter, and therefore as logically prior to(i.e. before) the infinitive event.
While these descriptions of the semantic value of to + infinitive are too specific to be adequate characterizations of the potential meanings involved here (in fact they correspond to actual meanings of the construction in particular contexts), they are nevertheless faithful reflections of the potential meaning of to and of the fact that the latter always evokes the bare infinitive's event as an after-position with respect to some position before its realization.
The so-called "bare infinitive" will be analysed here as evoking a perfective view of the realization of an event, i.e. the image of an event as unfolding in time from its beginning to its end in the case of an action-like event or as actualizing its full lexical content at each instant of its existence in the case of a state-like one.
(For further details on the action-like/state-like distinction and its relation to the simple form of the verb, see Hirtle 1988.)
That this is so can be seen by contrasting sentences such as those evoked in Chapter 1 and repeated here:(1a) I had nine people to call.
(1b) I had nine people call.
Preceded by to the infinitive is felt to evoke an action referred to a point in time prior to its realization:(la) above situates call as being supposed to follow the existence of the obligation to realize this event, denoted by had.
Not preceded by to, as in (1b), the infinitive evokes the actual realization of the action of calling from beginning to end in the past time-stretch referred to by had.
The meaning of the to infinitive is thus in fact a combination of two potentials: the potential meaning of the bare infinitive, which gives the speaker the possibility of representing the realization of any action as unfolding from its beginning through to its end and any state as having a fully actualized lexical content; and the potential significate of to, which affords the speaker the possibility of representing any movement in time from a before-position to an after-position (corresponding here to the beginning of the infinitive event).
The remainder of this chapter will  be devoted to examining how the potential provided by the two versions of the infinitive is actually used by speakers of English in contexts where the infinitive occurs after full verbs.
As a means of analysing the meaning of to, special attention has been given to contexts in which the two infinitives can be contrasted, since in such cases to is the only variable in a constant linguistic context.
2.1 TWO TYPES OF MEANING EXPRESSED BY THE TO INFINITIVE
On the basis of the meanings expressed, all the uses of the to infinitive can be divided into two general types which at first sight might seem to be in direct contradiction with one another.
In some of its uses, the to infinitive evokes an event as non-realized or yet to be realized.
This recalls the sort of impression referred to by Wierzbicka, Quirk et al., Dixon, and Bolinger quoted above:(2) He tried to get free.
(3) He wanted to get free.
In others however it evokes the opposite impression of the event actually being realized, as in:(4) He managed to get free.
(5) I forced him to tell the truth.
(This, in passing, shows that one cannot reduce the potential meaning of to to the notions "future" , "potential" , "unrealized" or "hypothetical" .)
All of the uses of the to infinitive with full verbs in the corpus fall into one or the other of these two categories.
The infinitive event is expressed as non-realized with verbs expressing desire (He wants, wishes, desires to leave), endeavour (He tried, attempted, endeavoured to explain it to me), verbal command (He asked, told, ordered, commanded them to open the door), requirement (The law requires you to purchase a licence.
The car needs to be  fixed), etc.
On the other hand, the infinitive event is understood to be realized after verbs of achievement (I managed, got to ask the Prime Minister a question), causation (I persuaded, convinced him to give up smoking), etc.
Granted the potential meaning of to postulated above, these two general categories provide a clear illustration of Guillaume's principle (1984: 134–5) that actualizing a potential meaning is an operation of thought which takes place while the speaker is mentally constructing a sentence and which he intercepts when he has found the representation which he feels as adequate for what he wants to express.
The first type of usage, that where the infinitive is non-realized (He tried to get free), would appear to arise when the movement denoted by to is not carried to its end-point, i.e. when only the beginning of the movement signified by to is actualized: The second type, where the sense is rather that the infinitive's event is actually realized (He managed to get free), seems to arise where the speaker has actualized the whole of the movement signified by to, thus reaching the point where the realization of the infinitive event takes place.
In a diagram: Verbs such as try evoke a movement towards the beginning of the infinitive event but do not reach it, whereas verbs like manage take one all the way up to the point of actual realization.
The existence of two different ways of actualizing the potential meaning of to in discourse is clearly seen in sentences which can be ambiguous:(6) I got up and opened my mouth to commence a downright torrent of abuse.
(E. Brontë 1847: 236)
Here to commence could mean either "in order to commence" (implying that the person changed his mind before actually saying anything) or "and commenced" (implying realization).
In the quotation above only the first sense is intended by the author — the full potential of a word is never actualized entirely in any one of its uses.
Nevertheless, such examples provide striking confirmation that there are two possible interceptions, early and late, of the movement denoted by to, two possible ways of thinking to in its uses with the infinitive.
The explanations given above provide the general framework of analysis to which the various actual uses of to before the infinitive will be referred in this study.
Accounting for the use of this form in any context will always imply relating the particular meaning actualized in the context to the permanent potential significate postulated for it in tongue, and will consequently involve:(1) showing that the common denominator of a before/after sequence is present (the constant element evoked by to), and (2) showing how the speaker has fit the particular experience he is talking about into this potential by intercepting the operation of actualizing it at the appropriate moment (the variable element expressed by to).
As for the bare infinitive, its use will be explained in terms of the absence of a before/after sequence between the event denoted by the full verb and that denoted by the infinitive.
The contrast between the to and bare infinitives can therefore be stated as one of subsequence (before/after relationship) vs non-subsequence (the bare infinitive's event is not conceived as an after-position with respect to something else).
The rest of this chapter will constitute an attempt to explain by means of this hypothesis the various uses of these two forms where they both occur with the same or similar full verbs.
2.2 THE INFINITIVE AFTER HAVE
Breitenstein (1980: 193) gives three different senses for have in its use with the bare infinitive:(a) I'll have him clear up this mess (an instruction)(b) I won't have you say that (a strong wish)(c) I never had such a thing happen to me (an experience)
We will save sense (a) for the section on causatives, as it is related to that of make.
Senses (b) and (c) however can both be treated in terms of the notion of "passively experiencing" some event, with (b) implying on top of that a refusal to stand by passively and let someone do something without intervening.
If we analyse the relation between the event of "passively experiencing" denoted by have and that of saying or happening denoted by the infinitive, it becomes obvious immediately that the two must be conceived as occurring in the same stretch of time: one can only experience something while it is happening.
The use of the bare infinitive after have in its "passive experience" sense can therefore be explained by the absence of a before/after relation between the passive experiencing (denoted by have) and the event which is experienced (expressed by the infinitive).
As for the to infinitive, we have already alluded to the impressions associated with its use after have + direct object with regard to(1a)—(1b) above.
In I had nine people to call, had evokes the state of having the people on one's list and is thus expressive of a concrete obligation to call them.
The relation between an obligation concretized in the form of presence on a list and the realization of the action called for by this presence is obviously one of subsequence, whence the use of the to infinitive.
Have + direct object + to can also evoke the idea of "having present for the purpose of" :(7a) He had four examiners to ask him all sorts of questions.
(7b) He had four examiners ask him all sorts of questions.
The same type of relation holds however between the having present and the realization of the purpose for which the examiners  were present in (7a) as between the existence of obligation and the realization of the object of obligation in (1a).
Indeed just as (1a) does not say that any calls were made,(7a) does not necessarily imply that any questions were actually asked by the examiners at all(while (7b) does).
This use, then, also follows from the potential meaning of to postulated above.
Since the to infinitive, as just seen, expresses a non-realized event in these uses, it will be analysed as involving an initial interception of to, as with try diagrammed above.
The actual meaning of the bare infinitive, on the other hand, can be characterized as a form of non-subsequence involving complete coincidence in time between two events — the experiencing and the event experienced.
It should perhaps be pointed out before going on to the next set of examples to be discussed that most of the uses found with have admit of only one of the two interpretations given above.
Thus (8) and (9) can be construed as "passive experience" , while (10) admits only of an obligational-type interpretation:(8) I had a horse run away with me.
(Robinson 1860: 119; in Visser 1973: 2269)
(9) I had two dogs die of snake bite.
(Galsworthy 1926: 4; in Visser 1973: 2269)
(10) I had myself to look to first of all.
(Stevenson 1886: 36; in Jesperson 1940: 227)
2.3 THE INFINITIVE AFTER HELP
With the verb help, the contrast between the two infinitives is harder to observe, as can be seen from (11) and (12), where to keep and to explain could be substituted without altering their import to any significant degree:(11) Several photographs and charts of the galaxy help the non-scientist keep up with the discussion…
(BUC C13 0730 6)
(12) The histories of cease and quit are less varied but the senses found for them in earlier times help explain some of the semantic differences that will be described below.
(Freed 1979: 109)
Since this arises in a great many examples with help, one might well wonder whether the two infinitives do express different meanings here.
Indeed, most grammarians claim that there is absolutely no difference in meaning between the two constructions, the only contrast being that the bare infinitive is more colloquial, or more American (cf.
Quirk et al.1985: 1206).
While it is true to say that the bare infinitive is more frequent in American English — Algeo (1988: 22) found that the Brown University Corpus has only 25 per cent usage of to infinitives after help where the Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen Corpus has 73 per cent— this begs the question nevertheless because both the bare and the to infinitives are used on both sides of the Atlantic.
This means that the problem of whether they can be used to make distinctions of meaning is a real one and must be addressed, instead of merely alleging geographical distribution as the explanation for infinitival usage with this verb.
This is all the more requisite as there are certain uses in which the to infinitive cannot be substituted for the bare form (e.g. (13)) and, vice versa, where the bare infinitive cannot replace its counterpart with to, as in (14).
(13) Mrs Arthur Goldberg, wife of the Secretary of Labour, paints professionally and helps sponsor the Associated Artists' Gallery in the District of Columbia.
(BUC F29 0420 2)
(14) The Bonaventure was quivering and lurching like an old spavined mare.
Her stern was down and a sharp list helped us to cut loose the lifeboat, which dropped heavily into the water.
(BUC N21 0150 14)
Such uses suggest very strongly that there is in fact a difference in meaning between the two constructions.
The existence of a meaning distinction is backed up furthermore by the opinions of a certain number of grammarians who  all have more or less similar impressions as to the nature of the semantic contrast here.
Commenting on the contrast between zero and to in the sentence Will you help me get (to get) these letters addressed?,
Erades (1950: 123), for example, observes that while the sentence with the bare infinitive "can only mean one thing, viz. Will you share with me the work of addressing them?" , that with the to infinitive allows the interpretation that "the help may be afforded by some other means, such as relieving the speaker of other duties or tasks" .
Wood (1962: 107-8) says almost the same thing: to can be omitted after help "only when the" helper "does some of the work, or shares in the activity jointly with the person that is helped" .
Christophersen and Sandved (1969: 149) point out that help is "nearly always" used with to when it means "contribute to" , as in This helps to make our life bearable.
Bolinger (1974: 75) presents the difference between (15a) and (15b) below as one of "immediate" vs "mediate" assistance:(15a) He helped me climb the stairs by propping me up with his shoulder (He climbed with me).
(15b) He helped me to climb the stairs by cheering me on.
And Gee (1975: 311) argues that whereas in I helped them carry the load "I take part in the carrying" , this is not necessarily implied by the sentence with to, where "I need not actually have done any carrying" , as shown by:(16a) I helped them to carry the load by having my secretary get them a cart.
(16b) * I helped them carry the load by having my secretary get them a cart.
The consensus then is more or less that help + bare infinitive is used when the helper participates directly in the activity for which he is giving assistance, while help + to is preferred when the assistance is felt as mediate or indirect.
Examples from our corpus confirm these observations but show that the line between mediate and immediate assistance is not always as easy to draw as Erades and Wood make it out to  be.
Thus there are clear cases of indirect assistance, such as(14) above (where the bare infinitive sounds strange because "a sharp list" cannot participate in the action of "cutting loose" , but rather must be conceived as providing a necessary condition for its realization).
The same sort of thing is true of (17)—(20) below:(17) By 1853, the new partnership announced the precision vernier calliper as the first fruit of their joint efforts.
The basic significance of this invention helped them to follow it rapidly in 1855 by the development of a unique precision gear cutting and dividing engine.
(BUC H26 0490 5)
(18) It [= the whisky]helped me to be brave.
(Fleming 1970: 159; in Lind 1983: 270)
(19) The whisky helped me not to stagger under the blow.
(Fleming 1971: 134; in Lind 1983: 270)
(20) But it [= what was said]had helped to panic him.
(Clifford 1969: 124; in Lind 1983: 270)
The use of the bare infinitive in any of the above cases would make the subject of help seem too active.
It is no coincidence that the subject refers to an inanimate being in all five sentences where only to is appropriate ((14) and (17)—(20)).
Lind (1983: 270) has pointed out that in his corpus the to infinitive is six times more frequent than the bare form with inanimates.
There are fewer contexts where only the bare infinitive seems appropriate.
Besides (13) above, the following two uses have been found:(21)…its members will supplement technical advisers by offering the specific skills needed by developing nations…
They will help provide the skilled man-power necessary to carry out the development project…
(BUC H19 1800 6)
(22) Weld contributed to the anti-slavery convictions of such men as…, and helped provide ideas which  underlay Harriet Beecher Stow's Uncle Tom's Cabin.
(BUC D14 1780 6)
In all three cases, it seems hard to conceive helping in any other way than as doing part of the activity denoted by the infinitive oneself.
These sentences support Erades's and Wood's intuitions about the meaning of the bare infinitive construction.
There is a broad grey area between the two poles represented by (17)—(20) and (21)—(22), however, where both constructions make fairly good sense.
Concretely, Erades's and Wood's characterization of the bare infinitive structure as evoking the helper as taking part of the work upon himself is too restrictive.
This has been pointed out by Lind (1983: 271), who adduces the following examples to show that there is "no correlation between active participation and omission of to" :(23)…he said briefly, helping me climb in through the rear window.
(Francis 1971: 173)
(24) He put a hand under her elbow and helped her stumble the few steps she had to take.
(Alexander 1970: 90)
(25) He…helped her sit down.
(Lait 1970: 148)
The helper obviously did not do part of the actions denoted by the infinitives in these sentences.
This is not the case when the bare infinitive construction occurs with an inanimate subject either: despite Wood's contention that "we could scarcely say These tablets will help you sleep" , since the tablets, being inanimate, "cannot do part of the sleeping" , the following have been found:(26) That [= the injection]was to help you relax.
(Voss Bark 1968: 127; in Lind 1983: 271)
(27) I have given him something [= some kind of drug]that should help him come round.
(Markham 1970: 28; in Lind 1983: 271)
(28) You never gave information which might help others get in ahead of you.
(Canning 1971: 163; in Lind 1983: 271)
(29) I hope these pointers will help you discharge your new duties according to the traditions of your department.
(Brophy 1966: 60; in Visser 1973: 2320)
In none of these cases can the inanimate subject of help be conceived as relaxing, coming round, getting in ahead of someone or discharging duties.
And yet the bare infinitive has been chosen by the speaker.
A better characterization of the meaning of the bare infinitive structure in these uses is that it evokes "helping" as direct or active involvement in the bringing into being of the action denoted by the infinitive.
Thus drugs can be said to act on people and relax them (26) or bring them around (27); information can put some people in a favourable position with respect to others (28); and pointers can be seen as guiding people (i.e. as somehow active or operative) in the proper discharge of their duties.
In contrast, help + to evokes help as a condition which enables the helpee to realize the event denoted by the infinitive.
The two views are practical equivalents in most contexts, but the existence of a distinction shows through in cases such as(13) and (14) above.
As with have, therefore, the bare infinitive after help denotes an event which is actually realized.
However, unlike the uses seen with have, the to infinitive does not evoke an unrealized objective or goal, but rather an event which is actually accomplished.
Its actual meaning here corresponds therefore to an interception of to at the final point of its movement.
Sentence (14) above can therefore be diagrammed in the following way: As for the presence of a before/after relation, the impression that comes through constantly with the use of to is that the infinitive event is depicted as a consequence or result of the action of helping.
The helping is represented therefore as a prior condition or circumstance which enables someone to realize the action denoted by the infinitive.
This has proven to be the case in all of the uses of to examined to date.
The bare infinitive, in contrast, represents its event as an object of co-operation between the helper and the helpee: even though this close co-operation does not always involve the helper actually doing part of the helpee's activity for him it seems to imply a view of the helper as instrumental in the realization of the infinitive's event.
This excludes a relationship of "before" to "after" between the helping and the event which is realized thanks to the help, and explains the occurrence of the bare form of the infinitive.
2.4 THE INFINITIVE AFTER VERBS OF PERCEPTION
Usage in the active
A before/after sequence would also appear to be excluded from the representation of the relation between the event of the main verb and that of the infinitive in the case of the verbs of perception.
In a sentence such as(30), the event saw obviously cannot be conceived as existing before the beginning of the crossing:(30) I saw him cross the street.
The impression here is similar therefore to that already observed with have denoting "experience" .
This impression of coincidence in time between the action of perceiving and the event perceived is common to all the various verbs of perception:(31) "Look out for those movers!" 
Winston watched him hurry down the drive to his car.
(BUC K28 0790 2)
(32) I heard soft padding steps approach.
(Marchant 1954: 136; in Scheurweghs 1959: 239)
(33) I was on my beat…when I observed this young man…run out of the door.
(Crofts 1925: 11; in Visser 1973: 2253)
(34) No one noticed them arrive.
(Hughes 1929: 125; in Visser 1973: 2253)
(35) He felt his hair stand on end.
(Mansfield 1924: 213; in Jespersen 1940: 281)
Surprisingly, however, all these verbs (except, apparently, watch can also be construed with the to infinitive:(36) I saw them to be obnoxious.
(Bolinger 1974: 66)
(37) Seeing flight to be impossible, he surrendered.
(Jespersen 1940: 280)
(38) I have observed the result of our disputes to be almost uniformly this.
(Lamb 1823: 106; in Visser 1973: 2253)
(39) A hand which I noticed to be surprisingly powerful.
(Hughes 1961: 30; in Visser 1973: 2253)
(40) "Come, come" , cried Emma, feeling this to be an unsafe subject.
(Ward 1915: 101; in Visser 1973: 2251)
(41) We might hear him by his blowing to be a monstrous, huge and furious beast.
(Defoe 1719: 27; in Jespersen 1940: 281)
If the tendency observed with have and help holds true here, the to infinitive should evoke its event as somehow subsequent to that of the verb of perception in these sentences.
Pertinent comments  made by linguists and grammarians all focus however on the meaning of the verb of perception alone.
Everyone agrees that when the to infinitive is substituted for the zero form, verbs of perception undergo a lexical shift.
Palmer (1988: 199) proposes that when followed by the to infinitive, verbs of perception function as verbs of reporting, so that He saw the children to be eating their lunch means "He reported the children to be eating their lunch" .
This paraphrase is not entirely appropriate as a description of the meaning expressed however; Jespersen (1940: 280) does a better job of it when he characterizes the sense of see with the bare infinitive as that of "immediate perception" , and its sense with the to infinitive as that of "inference" .
The lexical shift from immediate perception to inference is perhaps most obvious with the verb feel: with the to infinitive, as in (40) above, this verb is practically the equivalent of think.
Likewise in (36) saw evokes not mere visual perception but rather an inference which the speaker has drawn about the character of the people in question on the basis of what he has been able to observe of their behaviour or even of their appearance, and so could be said by someone who had only seen a photograph of them.
As Bolinger (1974: 66) points out, see refers here to the mental apprehension of a fact, the realization that they were obnoxious, whereas I saw them be obnoxious would simply mean "I beheld their obnoxious behaviour" .
Similar comments could be made about all the other examples given above.
Bolinger points out furthermore that the use of the to infinitive after verbs of perception when they shift to the inferential sense fits into an overall pattern with the object + infinitive construction.
All conceptual verbs (evoking notions such as believing, proving, judging, understanding, discovering, assuming, inferring, saying) refuse the bare infinitive:(42) * I believe him be the man.
(43) * We thought it be the right choice.
(44) * Can you prove it happen?
(Bolinger 1974: 66)
The to infinitive is called for with such verbs, so it is not surprising that  perceptual verbs should take to before the infinitive when used in the more conceptual inferential sense.
Bolinger does not mention it, but the opposite is also true: exclusively perceptual verbs refuse the to infinitive.
This is the case with the verb watch, which is never found in constructions with to:(45) * I watched them to be obnoxious.
Its exclusively perceptual meaning also bars it from being construed with a that-clause, whereas this construction is a close equivalent of the to infinitive with verbs of perception in their conceptual use:(46) * I watched that they were obnoxious.
(47) I saw (observed, noticed, felt) that they were obnoxious.
The that-clause is also characteristic of the class of purely conceptual verbs:(48) I believed (proved, understood, discovered, assumed, inferred) that he was there.
It evokes a fact, i.e. an object of conception, rather than an object of perception.
The reason for the verbs of perception being construed with to in their conceptual sense is suggested by comments made by Cotte (1982b) and Gramley (1987).
The first author shows quite clearly that the idea of inference or mental perception is connected to an impression of "afterness" or subsequence, as are all the other uses with to which we have seen up to this point.
Commenting on the sentence He saw flight to be impossible, Cotte observes (p. 71): Ici, pas de perception physique, mais un jugement sur flight, posé avant be impossible, qui lui est attribué au terme d'une réflexion; to s'impose car la deuxième prédication n'est pas un donné perçu globalement et existant indépendamment de see, mais une construction dont l'actualité n'est posée qu'en guise de conclusion.
Gramley (p. 20) seems to be on much the same track when he notes, concerning I saw the library to have burned down: What the speaker saw was not an occurrence, but physical evidence for a condition, a state; for example, the speaker saw the site, the ruins.
[To the sentence above]the question may be asked, "How do you know?" 
This is appropriate because states are cognitively concluded to exist in the real world on the basis of evidence of some kind.
A perceived event then is not in the same relation to the act of perceiving it as an inferred event is to the act of inferring it.
The former exists throughout the process of perception; the latter, however, has no existence before being conceived by the mind, and exists only as a conclusion which arises as a result of, after, the mental operation of inferring that the state of affairs it describes is true.
In the example given by Cotte, the impossibility of fleeing is not something which is immediately perceivable by the sense of vision.
Although it may have taken only an instant, the person to whom this sentence refers had to make the logical jump from what he could see of the possible escape routes open to him to the realization that flight was impossible.
The discovery of the impossibility of fleeing thus comes after the mental process of sizing up the situation denoted by saw, and this calls for the use of to.
The above explanation holds for all the verbs of perception.
It also permits us to understand why only to is used with a verb such as discern:(49) We discerned it to be a man.
(Smollett 1748: 458; in Visser 1973: 2250)
Discerning involves drawing a conclusion as to the identity of an object based on careful scrutiny.
Recognition of the identity of something takes place in the mind, not in the senses, and therefore implies a previous (though perhaps almost instantaneous) mental process.
We can now account moreover for the observation made by Poutsma (1923: 41) that a perfect infinitive is always preceded by to when used with a verb of perception:(50) Mr Lorry observed a great change to have come over the doctor (and not *observed a great change have come over the doctor).
(Dickens, no reference given)
In the context above, Mr Lorry did not perceive the actual change itself as it came over the doctor.
What he perceived was rather the state of the doctor and he inferred from this that a change must have taken place at some time before that moment.
Thus observe has the meaning of mental inference and the to infinitive denotes the conclusion drawn from what was directly perceived.
Indeed this corresponds exactly to the meaning of the perfect infinitive, which does not evoke the event come directly but rather indirectly, through the result phase which this event leaves behind it in time.
The perfect infinitive thus presents an event — a result phase — not as something which is itself directly perceived but rather as something which is inferred from a comparison of what is directly observed — the present state of the doctor — with what was observed at some earlier moment.
One difficulty encountered in verifying the explanation proposed above is a pair of sentences with the to infinitive cited by van Ek (1966: 151) as examples of "see denoting physical rather than mental perception" :(51) It (viz. Mrs B."s death) might be soon, for I can see worthy Mrs Bonner to be breaking visibly.
(Meredith 1861: 204)
(52) In less than a generation, the male population shed their finery and cosmetics for the eclipse plumage of modern times.
The change happened under the guidance of Beau Brummel, though Fox, according to Wraxall, had "first thrown a sort of discredit on dress" — and this great alteration, which Walpole had seen to begin, took place within the Age of Scandal.
(White 1966: 21)
The first example is not a real problem because van Ek has misconstrued it.
Like all the other uses of see + to infinitive denoting inference, the sentence above can be paraphrased by means of a that- clause:(53) It might be soon, for I can see that Mrs Bonner is breaking visibly.
See thus evokes the apprehension of a fact, something which involves an interpretation of the external symptoms captured by the senses: from what he can see, the speaker has concluded that Mrs Bonner is breaking visibly.
This factual value would give way to one of perception of an ongoing phenomenon if the to infinitive were dropped:(54) I can see Mrs Bonner breaking visibly.
The use of the to infinitive in the second example is more difficult to account for.
A careful examination of the full context, however, suggests that see may well denote mental inference here as well.
The author of the book from which this passage is taken (White 1966) situates the beginning of the "great alteration" in dress in 1793, only four years before Walpole's death, so that it is hardly likely that anyone could directly perceive such a major change in this short stretch of time.
Moreover, Walpole, described in the same book (p. 83) as someone who "thrived on gossip, and on playing at loo or at hazard with a duchess or two" , could very well have been a sufficiently astute observer of social mores to deduce that the first manifestations which he had seen of the new way of dressing constituted the beginning of a major trend.
Thus it is quite plausible to suggest that see evokes some form of inference here.
An examination of the actual meaning expressed by the to infinitive after verbs of perception in the active voice shows therefore a necessary before/after relationship between the event of the verb of perception (which has shifted to evoke the notion of inference) and the event of the infinitive (which denotes the conclusion reached by means of the inference).
This sequential representation, on the other hand, does not characterize the verbs of perception in their basic perceptual sense, where the  relation is rather one of coincidence in time between the perceiving and the phenomenon being perceived.
Since the inference sense of the verbs of perception implies that the conclusion inferred is actually reached, this use of the infinitive involves a final interception of to.
The diagram corresponding to (36) is therefore: With the above analysis we can now account for the paradoxical fact that the verb perceive is found more frequently with the to infinitive than with the bare version:(55) No one could possibly enter his rooms without perceiving him to be a man of wealth.
(Galsworthy 1909: 43; in van Ek 1966: 132)
(56)…the reactionary, for whatever motive, perceives himself to be a part or a partner of something that extended beyond himself…
(BUC G25 1790 8)
The reason is simply that since its meaning is more abstract than that of see, hear, watch, etc., it lends itself more easily to the inference-type sense than do the latter.
Thus in (55) and (56) above, the that-clause paraphrase is quite appropriate, and in (56) perceive is practically equivalent in meaning to think.
Perceive can still occur in the sense of physical perception, however, as can be seen from:(57) It was with some trepidation that I perceived the hour approach.
(C. Bronteuml; 1848: 188; in Jespersen 1940: 280)
(58) He had perceived one human being after another reveal quite nakedly their tumultuous feelings.
(Walpole 1914; in van Ek 1966: 131)
Unlike the active voice, the passive poses a problem with verbs of perception, since the distribution of the infinitive appears to be in systematic contradiction with what is observed above.
In the passive, verbs of perception almost always take the to infinitive:(59) He was seen to enter the building at 10:00.
Usage in the passive
(60) She was heard to shut the door a few minutes later.
This occurs even though they apparently retain the "true" meaning of physical perception.
The sort of problem we are addressing here — finding a semantic explanation for the distribution of the infinitive after verbs of perception in the passive — is treated in a diametrically opposite way by formal-grammar truth-semantics accounts such as that of Higgenbotham 1983.
The latter declares *John was seen leave ungrammatical because the embedded clause seen leave is "unsupported" , i.e. constitutes "a subject—predicate sequence that exhibits none of the internal inflectional structures of a full sentence or clausal complementation" (i.e. neither tense, nor infinitival to, nor progressive -ing), whereas John was seen to leave is said to be grammatical because here leave is "supported" (by to), and can therefore serve as an argument for the verb see (pp. 123–4).
Overlooking the causal nature of meaning with respect to usage leads here to obvious circularity within the formal framework however: to is first defined as necessary to support a clausal complement with no discussion of the data which contradict this postulate (cf She helped lift him out of the bed; You've missed things.
Or not been let run up against them), and then the "ungrammaticality" of *John was seen leave is explained by the absence of to.
The approach taken here does not afford us the luxury of such explanations: we must seek the reason for the peculiar distribution of the infinitive with perception verbs in the passive voice in the meaning expressed by the sentence.
A first clue that the meaning-relations are not the same in the active and passive voices is the existence of a certain controversy about the meaning of the passive construction, something one  does not find in the case of the active.
Thus while both Higgenbotham (1983: 124) and Palmer (1988: 189) feel that a sentence such as John was seen to leave has the reporting "see that" meaning (i.e. "Somebody saw that John left" ), Mittwoch (1990: 121) points out that if this were the case one would expect the perfect form of the infinitive to be completely acceptable and complement negation to be considerably better in a passive sentence than in the corresponding active one, which is not the case in (61) and (62):(61)?
John was seen to have left.
(62) * John was seen not to leave.
Bolinger (1974: 86-7) seems to side with Palmer and Higgenbotham, for he maintains that the to infinitive evokes not a perception but rather a fact: The passive tends to be used in situations where the interest is not in perceptions but in impersonal facts — for example, in the testimony of a witness who says He was seen to stoop over and pick up some object, and then stuff it in his pocket.
However he does not go so far as to paraphrase by "see that" , as does Palmer.
I too hesitate to identify the meaning of John was seen to leave as "Somebody saw that John left" .
The passive is certainly more impersonal and factual than the active construction but nevertheless one feels that an analysis such as that of Palmer and Higgenbotham, which equates He was seen to walk away and He was seen to be walking away as both having the reporting "see that" meaning, loses sight of a slight but real semantic distinction.
This distinction manifests itself in the fact that the "see that" paraphrase fits the second sentence very well but is very awkward for the first.
Indeed the second sentence seems to be merely the passive reformulation of what is expressed by Someone saw him to be walking away, with the inferential or conceptual sense of see rather than the perceptual one.
The following, all paraphrasable by that-clauses (paraphrases are given in brackets after each one), are also examples of this:(63) In the first stage of cellular reproduction the chromosomes (which in the resting stage are not individually identifiable) appear in the nucleus, each of which on inspection with a microscope can be seen to consist of two identical filaments called chromatids.
(Isaacs 1963: 90; in van Ek 1966: 155)
( "on inspection with a microscope it can be seen that each nucleus consists of two identical filaments" )
(64)…and what is more the ideas themselves, if we are not too overawed by the empressement with which they are presented, on examination are seen to be not so very original after all.
(Ford 1961: 491; in van Ek 1966: 155)
( "on examination it is seen that these ideas are not so very original after all" )
(65) Justice must not only be done —(…)— but must manifestly be seen to be done.
(Cecil 1962: 154; in van Ek 1966: 155)
( "people must also see that justice is being done" )
(66)…she must make it plain before the evening begins that some or all of the financial responsibility for it will be hers.
An argument over the restaurant bill or at the cinema box office is humiliating and undignified for a man, and her good manners must save him from being put in such a situation.
Similarly, since most men like to be seen to do the paying it is a tactful precaution if, at the start of the evening out, she gives him the theatre tickets "to take care of" …
(LOB F08 77 8)
( "most men like people to see that they are the ones who do the paying" )
The sentence He was seen to walk away, on the other hand, seems to reformulate passively the content of Somebody saw him walk away, with see being apparently used in its perceptual sense in both the active and the passive constructions.
In order to discern the reason for the use of to with the infinitive in passive sentences of the type just mentioned, we must begin therefore by trying to observe the kind of meaning which these sentences express and the type of context in which they are used.
Be seen to is found quite often for instance in the sort of context alluded to by Bolinger in which one gets the impression that someone is establishing the facts:(67) Nobody had been seen to enter the house or leave it.
(Faure and Casanova 1968: 322)
(68) Ianthe Ambrose could have gone overboard any time after 9.10, when she was seen to leave the lecture, and on her own statement she had been no swimmer.
(Blake 1961: 96; in van Ek 1966: 155)
(69) Take Gardner Willings.
He had left after the scuffle; had been seen to leave.
(BUC L14 0800 7)
The passive of hear is also often used to present an occurrence as an attested fact:(70) This term was also used by the cowboy in the sense of a human showin"fight, as one cowboy was heard to say, he arches his back like a mule in a hailstorm.
(BUC F35 0350 1)
(71) "Washington" , President Kennedy has been heard to remark ironically, "is a city of southern efficiency and northern charm" .
(BUC F19 1240 3)
(72) This was the last time in his life that he was heard to raise his voice.
Henceforth he spoke always in a monotonous whisper…
(J. Conrad 1895: 246)
(73) The man paused to distribute dazzling smiles to the customers, and Mrs Hale was heard to mutter,"The Billy  Butlin of the Aegean.
He'll be calling us "lads and lasses" any moment".
(Blake 1961: 25; in van Ek 1966: 89)
(74) McKinley was overhead to say that he would like to get the knife into Spencer's possessions…
(BUC P07 0280 5)
All the above cases, typical of the construction we are studying, give the impression that the speaker's intent is to assert the occurrence of the infinitive event as a fact.
The impression just described can be related moreover to the before/after idea which to has been seen to express in its other uses.
We will argue that in uses such as these perception is being evoked only inasmuch as the act of perception is the condition allowing one to assert that the infinitive event actually occurred.
Perceiving is therefore not thought of as an instant-by-instant following of a phenomenon with the senses, but rather as a condition (conceived as an abstract before-position) from whose existence the occurrence of the infinitive action can be inferred resultatively or factually, the latter being conceived therefore as an after-position.
This explains why the to infinitive is used here and not the bare form.
The view just proposed accounts for the rather curious fact that there are no passive constructions followed by the to infinitive with the verb watch, as both Fries (1964: 21) and Mittwoch (1990: 119) have pointed out:(75) He was seen to cross the street.
(76) * He was watched to cross the street.
This is perfectly understandable if in fact after passives the to infinitive evokes a mental construct.
It was shown above (cf. (45)) that watch can only evoke a process of voluntarily laying hold of sense data by means of visual perception.
See, on the other hand, because it can evoke the bare fact of visual perception, is capable of evoking perception merely as a cause of knowledge and no more than that.
The following example of the verb hear, while not equivalent  to "is reported to have" , represents another case where perception is evoked merely as the condition for asserting a fact:(77) With these words, Mr Weller left the room, and immediately afterwards was heard to shut the street-door.
(Dickens 1890: 423)
Although the expressive effect is not easy to pinpoint, one can detect an impression of resultativity, as though the passive abstracts from any particular hearer so that the infinitive evokes the resulting impression that was left with all present.
Mr Weller may not have actually been the one who shut the door but it was inferred from what was heard that he was.
The abstraction from any particular perceiver and consequent presentation of a collective resulting impression can also be felt in the following stage direction:(78) They go out, whereupon John is seen to slightly push aside the portière and peep into the room.
Satisfied that the room is empty, he enters quickly, closes the door behind him emphatically, and throws himself on the settee with a groan of weariness.
(Pinero 1895: 263; in Jespersen 1940: 315)
Here the actual process of perception by the audience is less important than the knowledge resulting from perception which the playwright wants the audience to receive at this point in the play.
In (79) it is not just the action itself which is asserted:(79) He had a singular red cap on — not like a sailor's cap, but of a finer colour; and as the few yielding planks between him and destruction rolled and bulged, and his anticipative death-knell rung, he was seen by all of us to wave it.
(Dickens 1850: 404)
The to infinitive here asserts an occurrence not just as an attested fact but as a significant fact, something which tells one about the character of the subject.
This recalls Mittwoch's observation (1990: 118) that with hear "there seems to be a constraint that  the sound perceived must be naturally associated with, and attributable to, the referent of the infinitival subject" :(80) She was heard to mutter a curse under her breath /sing the national anthem.
(81)?
The branch was heard to snap.
By making the direct object of the active construction into the subject of the passive, as in (80) above, it becomes, according to our analysis, the topic of predication to which the infinitive event is attributed on the basis of the occurrence of perception.
This implies of course that the infinitive event's realization by the subject has to constitute sufficiently significant information about the referent which the latter refers to for the sentence to be worth uttering.
This analysis is confirmed by another fact which Mittwoch does not point out — the constraint she describes does not apply to subjects with indefinite reference, as can be seen from (82), which is much better than (81) above:(82) A branch was heard to snap,
The explanation proposed here accounts for this fact in the following way.
Sentences with subjects having definite referents, such as(80), assert the definite referent's having performed the infinitival event based on the fact that perception of this event took place, and, as stated above, this means that the definite referent's having performed this action must be significant enough to be stated as a fact (known through the perceptual event having taken place).
A sentence with an indefinite referent, such as(82), on the other hand, simply asserts that there was a snap (based on the fact that a perceptual event took place): because the subject's referent is indefinite it is the mere occurrence of the infinitival event and not its realization by a certain person or thing which constitutes sufficiently significant information here, whence the acceptability of such uses.
In the following two examples the vocabulary itself suggests an inference beyond what is strictly perceivable:(83) He may be seen, as he enquires of an official the time of  the next train, to summon up the semblance of a smile.
(The Times, 17 March 1955, in Scheurweghs 1959: 241)
(84) The tune was heard to come from no further away than where the track slings around the shoulder of the hill.
(Pudney 1954: 39; in Scheurweghs 1959: 240)
One can observe the expression of a person's face, in this case a faint smile, but not the effort he makes to produce it, the summoning up.
Likewise in (84) one cannot hear a tune "come" from somewhere (cf. the strangeness of *I heard the tune come from the top of the hill): its source of emission can only be identified by a process of deduction which interprets what is directly observed in order to arrive at the conclusion that the sound is coming from such-and-such a point.
Hear approaches therefore the sense of judge in this context, a shift which justifies the to infinitive.
Some affirmative uses give a slightly different impression from that of being able to assert the occurrence of an event because of its having been perceived — a suggestion that there is a difference between what perception would lead one to think and the way things really are:(85) Once again the direction in which something is seen to move might depend upon the ratios of firing in cells sensitive to movement in different directions, and after prolonged movement in one direction a stationary image would produce less firing in the cell which had just been stimulated more than normally, hence apparent movement in the opposite direction would be seen to occur.
This explanation of Figural After Effects is based on…
(LOB J25 179 10)
(86)…
Osgood gives considerable regard and space to a paper by Brown and Voth (1937) on apparent movement, in which an experiment is described where four lights disposed at the corners of a square are flashed on and off successively, going round the square.
Bartley (1941) also devotes some pages to this.
According to these authors, when the interval between successive  lights in such a set-up is around 150 millisec., a single light is seen to describe a circle.
(Sylvester 1960: 231)
(87) He appears to be unaware of after-image phenomena and, so far as I can make out, puts forward an explanation, instead, which says that movement can be perceived when no object is seen to move!
Presumably the reason why the lights appear stationary while the "ghost" is seen to revolve is that during the duration of any light the stimulus from it is accompanied by fused after-images of the other three.
(Sylvester 1960: 236)
Here also however it can be shown that the event see is thought as logically anterior to the event denoted by the infinitive.
Indeed this is what accounts for the impression given by this type of use that there is a difference between what was perceived and what actually happened.
Perception is not conceived as a direct grasping of an occurrence here but rather as the means by which the perceiver obtains a resulting impression which may or may not correspond to what actually happened.
All of the above contexts represent cases where the physical stimuli captured by the sense organs produce a false impression in the person sensing.
This usage is therefore closely related to the other uses where the to infinitive evokes a result (the knowledge resulting from perception).
The only difference is that whereas in the cases seen previously (59)—(84), perception is represented as giving rise to true knowledge, in (85)—(87) above it is depicted as giving rise to a false impression.
In both cases however the infinitive evokes a result — something therefore which is conceived as coming after the actual operation of perception.
The evidence thus confirms the intuition felt by Palmer and others that the verbs of perception evoke something more conceptual in the passive.
We have seen above that this involves a shift from the concrete perceptual meaning of "following a phenomenon with the senses" to viewing perception merely as the basis for asserting that the infinitive's event really took place.
The extremely rare use of the bare infinitive with the passive of perceptual verbs adds further proof that this is the case.
Although only two attested examples of this usage have been found in modern English, the contrast between the bare and the to infinitive in these contexts confirms the percept/concept distinction observed above:(88) The smallest pin could be heard drop.
(Literary World, 9 November 1889: 381; in Poutsma 1926: 432)
(89) Not only a pin, even a dead mosquito, might have been heard drop.
(Gerard 1913: 217; in Poutsma 1923: 48)
As would have been expected, the construction with the bare infinitive expresses direct perception of an event — to be more precise, the possibility of direct perception (because of could and might have).
The sentences above evoke a silence which was so absolute that the perception of a pin or a dead mosquito dropping to the floor was possible.
The substitution of the to infinitive, possible only in (88), would create a very different effect:(90) The smallest pin could be heard to drop.
In order to give meaning to this sentence one would have to imagine a situation such as the following: someone was sorting pins of different sizes on a table; without him seeing it, the smallest of these pins fell off the table and was heard to hit the floor by those present in the room.
This shows that the to infinitive necessarily implies the assertion that the pin actually dropped.
In other words, the sentence with to asserts drop as a fact and perception is invoked merely as the means which has brought one to the knowledge of this fact: perception took place; therefore the dropping can be inferred and asserted.
This places one in the domain of knowledge or facts and the perceiving necessarily precedes the logical conclusion to which it gives rise.
This is probably why, alongside the numerous examples of be seen to and be heard to in the affirmative, none have been found in the negative:(91) * He wasn't seen to cross the street.
(92) * He wasn't heard to say that Bill was looking for trouble.
While the fact that a phenomenon was perceived allows one to infer and assert that it actually occurred, the converse is not true: the fact that it was not perceived does not mean that it did not take place.
Not perceiving something does not prove anything.
This can be illustrated by a sentence in the active such as They didn't see him cross the street, which in fact usually implies that he did cross the street, even though he was not seen doing it.
Since the negative passive construction with the to infinitive would imply that the non-occurrence of the infinitive event was being inferred and asserted from the absence of perception, it is not normally used by speakers of English.
Thus with perceptual verbs in the passive, the to infinitive involves a subtle shifting of the perceptual verb into the conceptual field with the consequent evocation of an inference and not just something directly perceived.
The passive evokes perception resultatively and not operationally and calls for a representation of the phenomenon perceived as a fact, the knowledge and assertion of which is a consequence of perception having taken place, rather than as something which is followed instant-by-instant by means of the operation of the sense faculties.
This accounts for the use of the to and not the bare infinitive here, the actual meaning of to in this type of use being of course the result of a final interception, as in the case of usage in the active.
2.5 THE INFINITIVE AFTER FIND
The verb find follows the same pattern as the verbs of perception in its use with the infinitive.
When used with the bare infinitive, it denotes a direct experiencing of, and so contemporaneity in time with, an occurrence and can often be replaced by see — although it denotes perception in a more abstract way than the latter — or by have in its experiential sense:(93) Rather surprised to find them break fence at this season.
(Mannin 1930: 39; in Kruisinga and Erades 1960: 357)
(94)… "suffering as usual" , but hoped, he told Arthur, "to find this place agree with me better than Naples" .
(LOB G06 29 11)
(95) Outdoors you will find Wren create new green dimensions with sensitive landscaping that creates a community and not just a row of houses.
(The Observer, 18 July 1965; in van Ek 1966: 68)
This use seems to be confined to British English.
When used with the to infinitive, on the other hand, find denotes rather the discovery of a fact:(96) I measured the tail of the dead rat, and found it to be two yards long.
(Swift 1735: 308; in Jespersen 1940: 281)
Being two yards long is not an immediately perceivable attribute of a rat's tail since it requires a previous act of measuring in order to be known.
Knowledge of this fact being the result of the finding, the to infinitive is required in order to evoke it in the subsequence of the event of discovering denoted by the main verb.
Find's use with the infinitive thus further confirms our hypothesis on the meaning distinction between the two versions of the infinitive.
2.6 THE INFINITIVE AFTER KNOW
Another verb which can take both infinitives is know.
We shall begin by discussing uses where it expresses the mere state of being aware of a fact, a sense which calls for the use of the to and never the bare infinitive.
The following sentences taken from van Ek (1966: 104-5) illustrate this use:(97) I knew him as a man to be very much like myself.
(Osborne 1962: 244)
(98)…the nineteenth century ethos, which we now  know to have been less stable and free from doubt than was once imagined.
(Ford 1961: 14)
(99)…in civil or criminal cases you must not put forward what you know to be a false case.
(Cecil 1962: 142)
Comments on the meaning of this construction bring out an interesting contrast between the infinitive and a that-clause, which will help to explain the use of to before the infinitive here.
All observers seem to agree that, as Mair (1990: 200) puts it, "the infinitival construction generally serves to express a combination of knowledge and subjective judgment" while the that- clause expresses "plain knowledge" (cf. also Riddle 1975: 471; Dixon 1984: 590; Wierzbicka 1988: 50-1).
Regarding (100a) and (100b), Riddle observes for instance that (100a)"does not entail that the woman in question is actually intelligent.
It is merely an expression of Jane's opinion to that effect."
(100a) Jane knows her to be intelligent.
(100b) Jane knows that she is intelligent,
In (100b) however"it seems that the woman's intelligence is attested to by an outside source.
This sentence does entail that the woman is intelligent."
It will be argued here that the above-noted tendency of the infinitival construction to imply greater subjectivity and possibility of doubt indicates that know is being evoked not just as the state of "being aware of a fact" in these uses but also as the condition for being able to attribute to the direct object of know the event denoted by the infinitive.
This conditioning idea, absent in the that-clause construction, is what I believe accounts for the less factual tone of the infinitival structure: explicitly evoking one's knowledge as the condition allowing one to assert something (rather than flatly stating one's awareness of a fact) tends to suggest that what one is saying is a personal opinion rather than a matter of objective fact.
It should be pointed out however that the to infinitive construction does not always imply  non-entailment of the truth of the complement, as Riddle's comments above might give one to understand.
The following have been found where the complement does seem to be entailed:(101) She was charged with receiving the mink-coat knowing it to have been stolen.
(The Times, 30 April 1955; in van Ek 1966: 105)
(102) Fortunately a gentleman was on the engine who knew the lad to be deaf…
(LOB A40 160 7)
(103)…the image of the cloud was also in their minds.
Moreover, they knew it to be a cloud.
Yet they could "see" animals in it.
(LOB F01 137 1)
(104)…he didn't protest any more to say he loved her because he knew it to be untrue.
(LOB K07 135 13)
While (104) does seem to imply something close to "feel" , in the other three cases know merely evokes what allowed the "knowers" in question to identify the things or persons known as stolen, deaf, or clouds.
The common denominator of this type of use is not therefore non-entailment but rather viewing knowledge of the referent denoted by the direct object of know as a condition for attributing what the infinitive denotes to this referent.
Since a condition has a logical priority with respect to what it allows, there is a before/after relation between what know predicates and what the infinitive does, which calls for the use of to.
The above explanation also allows a clearer view of the relation between know and the other verbs which belong to the conceptual field, and shows why such verbs are all followed by to + infinitive.
Take the examples of these verbs suggested by Bolinger:(105) I believe him to be the man.
(106) We thought it to be the right choice.
(Bolinger 1974: 66)
One observes that the only difference between these verbs and know lies in the type of condition invoked as allowing one to represent the person or thing denoted by the direct object as being in the state denoted by the infinitive: knowledge vs belief or opinion.
An example has even been found where two kinds of condition — and consequently two degrees of certainty — are evoked with respect to the same event:(107) One of them knew, or anyhow guessed, the other to have caused the accident.
(R. Macaulay 1920: 164; in Jespersen 1940: 282)
The notion of "the other having caused the accident" is presented from two points of view: how it is arrived at (by the process of guessing), which is reminiscent in this respect of find examined above; and how the notion is judged (it is considered to be a fact), the sense suggested by know.
In each case, whether represented as a guess or as a known fact, the notion is seen as conditioned by a mental process or state which allows one to predicate it and so is represented as a consequence thereof by means of the to infinitive.
Know can also be followed by the bare infinitive, however, in a sense which is different from the one just discussed:(108) I've not known anything like this happen in the College before.
(Newby 1952: 179; in Scheurweghs 1959: 240)
(109) I had never known him ask a favour of this kind before.
(Snow 1961: 25; in van Ek 1966: 104)
All observers agree that here know does not express the mere awareness of a fact, but functions rather as a verb of perception (Jespersen 1940: 282; van Ek 1966: 104; Palmer 1988: 200); that is to say, here I have known means "I have actually experienced, seen, or heard" (cf.
Jespersen 1940).
This use involves then a shift in the way knowing is conceived, from the static, resultative sort of knowledge evoked by I knew it to be untrue to an operative view of knowing as "directly experiencing" something.
These two ways of viewing know can be diagrammed to show  the relationship between them: While know is not alone in being able to undergo such a shift (cf.
Hirtle 1975: 37 for examples with realize, agree and understand), its meaning places it in the unique position of becoming the equivalent of a verb of perception when it is used in the operative sense.
This has obvious consequences for the use of the infinitive: since operative know evokes the following of the infinitive's event from beginning to end through direct experience, there is no way to conceive know as existing before the beginning of the event perceived, and therefore no to before the infinitive.
There are certain limitations on the operative sense of know which are not found with the verbs of perception however: Quirk et al.(1985: 1205) point out that "know followed by the bare infinitive is confined mainly to British English and to the perfective aspect" .
While we cannot explain why this sense should be restricted to British English (the Brown Corpus confirms Quirk et al."s claim), it is possible to offer some explanation for its tendency to occur in the perfective aspect.
This seems to be a reflection of the primacy of the resultative "possess knowledge" sense over the operative "obtain knowledge" one in the potential meaning of know.
The perfective aspect, as Hirtle 1975 has shown, evokes something resultative: it represents the subject of the verb as being in the result phase of the event denoted by the past participle.
In the case of the operative sense of know, this means that in the perfective aspect the subject of know is conceived as having the results of directly experiencing something.
This obviously produces an impression which is quite similar to the more dominant "be aware" sense — that of the subject as possessing knowledge — the only difference being that the perfective explicitly evokes this knowledge as the result of the operation of obtaining it.
This equivalence with the dominant "be aware" sense of know may explain the tendency for operative-sense know to occur in the perfective.
Know can also be found in the operative sense followed by the to infinitive:(110) I've never known him to lie to me.
(O'Neill 1934: 39; in Visser 1973: 2313)
(111) Why, Lily, I never knew you to recite poetry before.
(O'Neil 1934: 34; in Visser 1973: 2313)
In American English, in fact, this is the only usage found.
The distinction between operative know followed by the bare or to infinitive could be imputed to dialectal differences if, as Quirk et al.(1985: 1203) suggest, know + to infinitive was always in British English a "factual verb" expressing the resultative sense, but this is not the case.
There are numerous examples of the operative sense construed with to in British English as well:(112) I had never known him to pass the garden-gate before.
(Dickens 1850: 127; in Jespersen 1940: 283)
(113) I have known her to be thrown into fainting fits by the King's taxes.
(Dickens 1850: 79; in van Ek 1966: 105)
(114) He had known Chinese to eat opium as well as inhale it.
(The Times, 8 October 1955; in van Ek 1966: 105)
(115) "Poor St Joseph," they say,"I always get what I want from him.
I've never known him to fail.
(Thurston 1909: 4; in Kruisinga 1931: 241)
(116) I have known him to get up at three o'clock in the morning.
(Times Weekly Edition, 21/12, 17; in Kruisinga 1931: 241)
(117) "He is acting, Carry" — "No," said Caroline,"he is not.
I have never known Evan to lie."
(Meredith 1861: 183; in Kruisinga 1931: 241)
(118) I've known them to strike their children in front of visitors.
(Leech 1987: 37)
This means that we must examine the data carefully to see whether there is any difference in meaning between the uses with and without to, and then seek an explanation for the curious appearance of to with this sense of know.
The operative sense expressed by know and the reason for the occurrence of the bare infinitive having been defined above, our job here will be to delimit the use of the to infinitive construction.
The significant feature of this use is the fact that the infinitive always evokes a type of behaviour which is characteristic of someone or something.
This concurs with Visser's observation (1973: 2313) that to occurs after know "mainly in questions with ever or in statements with never or other semi-negatives" , that is, in generalizing contexts referring to someone's experience during their entire life-span.
All of our examples are of this type (cf. above).
In contrast, the to infinitive could not be used in the following two sentences, where reference is made to nonce happenings:(119) I never knew anyone do so much in so short a time.
(Ward 1884: 86; in Visser 1973: 2313)
(120) I never knew a little adventure happen so quickly as in East Africa.
(The Times, 29 January 1957; in van Ek 1966: 104)
In (119) the bare infinitive do is the equivalent of "who did" and it is only by means of the indefinite pronoun anyone that the speaker is able to generalize from the particular performance of the event do which was directly experienced.
(120) is the beginning of a newspaper article describing a successful lunch-hour lion-hunting expedition, and so also evokes a (very) singular occurrence.
In both examples, one could substitute see for know with little change in meaning.
The defining features of the use of the to infinitive, then, are the evoking of the infinitive's event as characteristic behaviour of the direct object of know and the incapacity of evoking the perceiving of a particular happening.
This suggests that with to the infinitive's event is conceived as something which is known and attributed to someone as a result of experience.
In other terms, knowing is not represented as the direct experiencing of a  phenomenon here, but rather, as with the passive of perceptual verbs, as the condition for attibuting a characteristic to someone.
Thus even though know has the operative sense in this use, the operation of obtaining knowledge is seen merely as the condition for predicating the infinitive's event of the direct object.
This condition/consequence relation between know and the infinitive is what calls for the use of to.
All this helps explain the obligatory use of the to infinitive after know in the passive:(121) Mrs MacAnder was known to contribute articles to "The Ladies' Kingdom Come" .
(Galsworthy 1925: 103; in Jespersen 1940: 315)
(122) Criminals have been known to jest even upon the scaffold.
(McCosh 1850: 397; in Visser 1973: 2313)
(123) Patriotic Englishmen have been known to strike in time of war.
(Barker 1947: 30; in Scheurweghs 1959: 241)
(124) Hunt was never known to refuse a proposal of this sort.
(Thackeray 1862: 559; in Visser 1973: 2408)
Again it is not merely the experiencing of the occurrence of each of these events on a number of occasions which is expressed, but rather what is known about the persons referred to by the subjects of these sentences as the result of either experience or receiving information about them from some other source.
There is even the possibility that the knowledge evoked here may have been obtained indirectly, through some other channel than direct experience, as a speaker could utter any of the above four sentences without ever having observed what he is asserting at all.
(This undoubtedly has to do with the resultative nature of the passive.)
It is also to be noted that in all of the cases above the to infinitive expresses, not a particular happening, but something characteristic of the person referred to.
To summarize, where know means "experience directly" , the knowing is frequently represented as accompanying the action experienced, instant by instant, throughout its duration — a  coincidence in time which calls for the bare infinitive.
Experience can also be evoked as the condition for attributing a characteristic behaviour to someone, however, and this explains the possibility of using to even with the operative sense of know.
(This sense is found only in the present perfect or the past, but never in the non-past.)
In the resultative sense of know, which can be found both in the non-past and the past (I know/knew it to be true), know merely evokes a state of possessing knowledge, and this state is conceived as the condition for representing the infinitive event as a reality.
As with the verbs of perception, then, to is used here to evoke an abstract before/after relation of condition to consequence, and the movement it signifies as a potential in tongue is actualized with a final interception.
2.7 THE INFINITIVE AFTER VERBS DENOTING CAUSATION
Much has been written on the subject of causative verbs and causativity, and, more particularly, about the semantic and transformational relation between lexical causatives (such as the verb kill) and periphrastic forms (such as cause to die).
Our task in this section will be different and more specific however: to account for infinitival usage alone after verbs denoting causation.
To set the problem in more concrete terms, we must seek an answer to the question as to why make and have are followed by the bare infinitive, while cause, occasion, get and all the other causatives are construed with to infinitives.
It has been suggested (Dixon 1984: 586) that the omission of to here "may just be an irregularity with a diachronic explanation — like the plural of mouse being mice — that has simply to be learnt by users" .
As Mittwoch (1990: 125) points out, however, the fact that historically make vacillated for a long time between to and zero (cf. the biblical He maketh me to lie down in green pastures) calls for a deeper explanation of why the bare infinitive won out.
She speculates that the reason is purely syntactic, being connected with the fact that make (unlike cause) can take a "small clause" , as in You make me angry.
This, to our mind, does not explain anything, besides not being distinctive of verbs followed by bare infinitives (cf.
They got him angry /They got him to go to  the party).
The type of explanation sought here will be based rather on the meaning of the causative verb governing the infinitive.
Other attempts have been made to deal with the types of complements found after causative verbs from a more or less "semantic" point of view (cf.
Dirven 1989, Haiman 1985 and 1983, Givon 1980 and 1975).
These studies have led their authors to speak of a sort of "binding hierarchy" (Givon 1980) characterizing the various types of complement constructions.
Thus it is that Givon 1980 talks of verbs being reduced in finiteness and argues that the degree of reduction is related to the degree to which the event evoked by the complement is bound to the agent or experiencer in terms of his influence over it.
Make and have are at the top of the binding hierarchy and take the "highly non-verbal" bare infinitive; order is lower on the scale and takes the to infinitive; next comes insist, which is followed by a subordinate clause containing a finite subjunctive form, and then think, construed with a subordinate clause in the indicative.
While such studies as these do bring out the peculiar status of the causatives make and have (which, I would agree, do involve a closer bond between the causative event and the event caused), they are nevertheless based on abstract semantic categories which have been set up a priori in logico-truth-conditional terms — Wierzbicka (1988: 237) aptly characterizes them as "ready-made labels" — and therefore lose sight of the fact that each individual language is a system where meaning is bonded to form in permanent and idiosyncratic fashion (cf. the comments on Ransom 1986 in the Introduction).
Givon typifies this approach in that he scales make, have and cause according to "two semantic properties that are universally attested:(a) intended (controlled) vs unintended (uncontrolled) causation…;(b) mediated vs direct causation" (1980: 335).
Make is classified as a "direct control causation verb" , have as a "mediated control causation verb" and cause as a "noncontrol causation verb" .
As inevitably occurs when abstract semantic properties are posited independently of form and then forms sought which express these properties, however, the binding hierarchy explanation, while offering some significant observations, does not square very well with the full range of data from actual language use.
Indeed, the explanation proposed by Givon actually leads him to distort the data in English to fit  the "universally attested" semantic properties used as tools of analysis.
The distinction made between make and cause as intended vs unintended causation, for instance, is based on the claim that one can say:(125) John accidentally/inadvertently caused Mary to drop her books.
but not (126) * John accidentally/inadvertently made Mary drop her books.
(Givon 1975: 66)
Example (126), however, is perfectly normal English, as confirmed by the following contexts where make denotes unintentional causation:(127) Oops!
I'm sorry.
I just made you miss your bus.
(128) Other women — they only made me love you more.
(O'Neill 1947: 130)
(129) That dress makes you look overweight.
Moreover, as pointed out by Mair (1990: 122), cause can be used to express intended causation:(130) By transferring the DNA from a rough-coated bacterium to a smooth-coated one, he caused the latter to produce rough-coated offspring, and the character bred true thereafter.
The classification of have as evoking causation which is intentional but requires the intervention of a third party ( "mediated control" ) is based on the purported questionable acceptability of (131) and (132) as compared with the fully "acceptable" (133):(131)?
I caused her to lose her temper by sending John to taunt her.
(132)?
I made her lose her temper by sending John to taunt her.
(133) I had her lose her temper by sending John to taunt her.
Actual usage, once again, would seem however to be exactly the opposite:(133) makes no sense whatsoever, while (131) and (132) are fairly normal.
Problems such as these show the need for a language-specific approach to English causatives which respects and investigates the way meaning correlates with form in English first of all.
Only after causatives have been studied from this point of view both in English and in other languages will we be in a position to attempt valid generalizations across languages.
We shall begin our investigation of how causative verbs interact with the infinitive in English by looking at the contrast between make and cause because, although these two verbs seem quite similar in meaning, they are not followed by the same form of the infinitive:(134) While most enzymes cannot make a reaction occur that would not take place in their absence, they speed up reactions so that they occur at the temperatures and other conditions which prevail within living organisms.
(Isaacs 1963: 100; in van Ek 1966: 118)
(135)…raising the temperature of some solid and liquid compounds causes them to decompose into their elements (or oxidize if they are heated in air)…
(Isaacs 1963: 47; in van Ek 1966: 41)
In contemporary English neither *Most enzymes cannot make a reaction to occur nor *Raising the temperature of some solid and liquid compounds causes them decompose into their elements are possible.
The obvious question is: If both verbs denote causation, why are they not followed by the same version of the infinitive?
If, as is postulated here, usage is determined by the meaning to be expressed, the answer must be that there are two different ways of conceiving causation in English, make representing it in a way  that calls for the bare infinitive, cause in a way requiring the representation of abstract movement in time signified by to.
But how exactly can causation be conceived in two such different ways?
In attempting to discern what distinguishes the notions of making and causing, it soon becomes obvious that there are many objects which can be conceived as being made but not as being caused: this is true, for example, of cars, boats, bread, plastic, in short anything that is brought into being by a process of fabrication.
On the other hand, an accident is caused (by bad road conditions, for example) but not made.
One can cause concern or consternation (by one's reckless behaviour), but it is inconceivable to apply the concept of making to these notions.
Certain objects admit of both verbs however and the contrast in meaning is highly revealing, as the pair of examples below from the Brown University Corpus shows:(136)…such comments as the following which was made by one of the Kohnstamm-negative subjects…
(BUC J28 1910 11)
(137) If you have a 6-to-8 inch drain pipe, you may easily wash out all the debris when the grate is out.
Of course, your 6-inch torrent of water may cause a lot of comment as it passes through or by neighbouring lots…
(BUC E19 1500 11)
Here make denotes the direct involvement of its agent in the production of the comments: it is the "Kohnstamm-negative subjects" themselves who emit comments in (136) above.
Cause, in contrast, evokes only indirect involvement of its agent in bringing the comments into being: a "6-inch torrent of water" cannot make a comment but the fact of its passage through someone's lot might certainly provoke uncharitable remarks from the owner.
That which causes a comment is thus at one remove from the comment and is not the sole agent necessary to bring it into being.
The person who makes a comment, on the other hand, is the one who actually utters it.
In more general terms, make can be characterized as denoting causation as direct or "concurrent" with the production of the effect — a person who  makes a comment does the making and the commenting at the same time since the two processes can be identified with one another: make, in other words, evokes the actual producing of an effect.
Cause, in contrast, denotes causation as indirect or "antecedent" , i.e. as doing something which provokes the occurrence of an effect.
Other examples confirm this distinction:(138a) It was then I knew that they were making war against Man, the individual within!
(BUC G27 1050 1)
(138b) Military power does not cause war; war is the result of mistrust…
(BUC B17 1240 8)
(139a)…and was told "the newspapers had made a mistake" .
So I started making some calls of my own.
(BUC C01 0610 5)
(139b)…reflected solar radiation is not expected to cause sizable errors in the measurements of planetary radiation.
(BUC J01 1250 7)
In (138a) and (139a) make implies that it is the person(s) referred to by its subject (they, the newspapers) who themselves engage in warfare or commit an error, whereas in (138b) and (139b) cause represents its subject as a condition or circumstance which provokes engagement in warfare or commission of an error by some other agent.
In this respect cause recalls the impression of an enabling condition associated with the verb help when used with the to infinitive.
The distinction just seen with noun objects is also applicable to examples with the infinitive and will allow us to account for the distribution of to with cause and make.
Thus in (140) below the lighting of a fire is presented as a condition which would have permitted Pops to be found sooner, but the fire could not be conceived as acting on Pops directly itself and "making him be found" :(140) A fire wouldn't have mattered except that it would cause Pops to be found sooner.
He might not be found for days,(BUC L24 1080 6)
On the other hand, in (141) the "she" is represented as exerting a direct influence on the speaker in order to bring about his carrying her upstairs: the suggestion is that the speaker was given no choice, that he was acting under coercion.
(141) She just about made me carry her upstairs and then she clung to me…
(BUC K18 0290 6)
In (140), make cannot be substituted for cause — the causation evoked is too indirect — nor can cause substitute for make in (141), for the opposite reason.
This situation of mutual exclusion was found to be the case in a certain number of sentences in our corpus.
Thus only cause seems appropriate in the uses given below:(142)…moved the governor's race forward a few months, causing the campaigning to get started earlier than usual.
(BUC B14 1360 1)
(143) Something of this can be learned from "The Way to the Churchyard" (1901), an anecdote about an old failure whose fit of anger at a passing cyclist causes him to die of a stroke or seizure.
(BUC G15 0900 12)
(144) As in the theory of perception…the eye is recognized as an integral part of the brain.
But then this theory confesses that it is completely at a loss as to how the image can possibly be received by the brain.
The opening paragraph of the chapter titled the Theory of Representative Perception, in the book…, says "…passed on to the brain, and there, by some unexplained process, it causes the brain to have a perception" .
(BUC F03 0890 6)
(145) I asked if this was because television was causing fewer people to go out to the cinema and she replied no.
(LOB G49 182 6)
(146)…slackness in the Eisenhower Administration had caused America to lag behind Russia in nuclear development.
(LOB A01 147 7)
In (142)—(144), the impression is one of a stimulus–reaction relation: the subject of cause evokes the stimulus, the infinitive the reaction.
In (145) and (146), the subject of cause is clearly a condition, and the to infinitive evokes its consequence: the causal agent is not conceived as actually doing anything in either of these sentences but merely as having been the condition giving rise to a new state of affairs.
In all of these cases, therefore, we have "antecedent" causality, the cause being represented as prior to the effect.
Contexts in which only make is possible fall into two types.
There are cases like (141), where make evokes a form of coercion:(147)—"Big Hans made me come.
Big Hans said."
— "A fat hell on Big Hans." 
(BUC K24 0520 3)
(148) If it were not for an old professor who made me read the classics I would have been stymied.
(BUC N18 0050 7)
(149) How could he exert authority over them — make them toe the line, as he had to — if he knuckled under…
(BUC N09 1330 2)
(150)…the teacher probably would make him stand face-to-wall in a corner instead of stay in after school.
(BUC N27 1560 3)
(151) "What about Ballestre?" 
I had to shake her to make her listen.
(BUC K18 0330 8)
(152) What's the matter, Joe, you scared of me?
Think I'm going to make you introduce a drunk as your wife?
(BUC P19 1580 2)
(153) It's those two, all right.
Harris and Geely.
I made them show me their identification…
(BUC L05 1000 3)
Here the impression is that the object of make is given no choice but to perform the action expressed by the infinitive: in (147) the speaker even uses make to decline any personal responsibility for what he did — he was "acting under coercion" , a paraphrase bringing out the concurrent nature of the causation involved in these sentences.
The other type of expressive effect found in contexts where only make is possible can be illustrated by (154)—(156):(154)…beautiful canvases of mountains and forms.
He even makes the city look like one of Thoreau's handouts.
(BUC P10 1260 8)
(155)…and even the Soviet morticians could not make him look presentable.
(BUC B20 1110 2)
(156)…might try providing standard vacation time off but make the vacation pay depend on the number of hours worked.
(BUC E30 1910 11)
Here the object of make is felt to be completely under the sway of the subject and so to have no initiative of its own: the causal agent brings about a change in this object in an immediate fashion without any room for a condition–consequence or stimulus–reaction relationship.
One can characterize make here as evoking the mere production of an effect for which the "maker" is entirely responsible.
Cause might suggest that room is left for the object of causation to produce its effect as a secondary cause reacting to the stimulus of the primary one and so would not be used in these contexts.
Even when make and cause are mutually substitutable (with the consequent change in the version of the infinitive), as in (134) and (135), a slight difference in meaning can be perceived.
While it is true that cause could be inserted in (134), it is significant that the writer has used make with a subject ( "enzymes" ) which actively produces chemical reactions and is even described in the same sentence as an agent that speeds them up.
In (135), although make would have been possible, the writer has chosen cause, and has thus felt it to be more appropriate to represent the subject of the verb ( "raising the temperature of a compound" ) as an external condition which sets off a reaction of decomposition in compounds rather than as an agent which exerts its causative action at the same time as the reaction occurs.
The following examples, where only make is possible, are more difficult:(157)…the famous Howe sewing machine.
Curious as to what made it work, he built a crude model of it in wood.
(BUC H26 0660 12)
(158) I don't know what makes you think you can get away with this kind of business…
(BUC N05 0920 6)
In (157) the reference seems to be to an active or working principle whose action is represented as coinciding in time with the functioning of the sewing machine.
(158) evokes the presence of some idea or attitude in the person's mind which, in spite of other pressures, exerts a direct and effectual influence on his thinking.
In the light of this examination of usage with cause and make, it is readily understandable why the former takes the to infinitive while make does not.
Make evokes merely the idea of "producing an effect" (= the event expressed by the infinitive), so that causation is represented as operating instant by instant throughout the actualization of the latter and the two events are felt to coincide in time.
The situation is quite similar therefore to that with the verbs of perception, which explains why Kruisinga and Erades (1960: 366) have pointed out that "the perception or causing is  thought of as happening simultaneously with what is perceived or caused" .
Cause, on the other hand, situates the causal agent prior to the event caused and so requires the to infinitive.
In fact, the two manners of conceiving causation are quite parallel to the two ways of envisaging assistance expressed by help.
These observations account for the distinction of usage between make and cause quite adequately.
They do not, however, cover the whole field of causation.
Force, for example, conveys an idea of coercion similar to that expressed by make in many of its uses, and yet, like cause, it is followed by the to infinitive:(159) An injury forced Skorich to quit after the 1949 season.
(BUC A14 0230 7)
This fact, which seems to run counter to our explanation, calls for a deeper look into the meaning of force.
Force and oblige
In contrast to make, which focusses essentially on the notion of producing an effect, force explicitly evokes the means used to bring about the realization of this effect, namely force, and so refers to something prior to the effect's coming into being.
Evidence that force evokes antecedent causality is found in the contrast between (160) and (161):(160) The average consumer is becoming more sophisticated regarding product and advertising claims, partly because of widespread criticism of such assertions.
This problem can force a change in marketing approach in many kinds of businesses.
(BUC E28 0290 7)
(161) Ford has decided to make a change in marketing approach this year.
Like cause in (137), force here implies some agent other than its subject ( "this problem" ) as the actual author of the change in marketing approach ("force many businesses to change…
").
The  subject of make, on the other hand, refers to the persons who will actually effect the change, and the making and the changing are felt to coincide in time ( "concurrent causation" ).
A similar distinction can be observed with infinitives.
Thus in (162) one gets the impression of a person laughing against his own will, because of some external coercion.
(162) He forced me to laugh.
However, in (163) the first reading is something like "he provoked my laughter" , with the clear impression of a causal agent directly producing the laughter without any independent intervention of "me" .
(163) He made me laugh.
In a second reading, a note of coercion, or rather moral suasion, can be felt, but even here one gets the impression that "he" reduced any opposition so that the causee was again a mere instrument acting under coercion.
This recalls the habitual remark of youngsters admitting to some misdemeanor performed under the influence of another: He made me do it!, which would be significantly different from He forced me to do it which implies an action one was pushed into by means of force rather than one performed under coercion.
Force thus denotes antecedent causality, as does cause.
Oblige, like force, evokes more than merely producing an effect and it too is followed by the to infinitive:(164)…servants, whom he had obliged to accompany him.
(Walpole 1765: 422; in Visser 1973: 2283)
The notion of antecedent causality arises here because an obligation necessarily exists before it is fulfilled.
As a consequence, oblige can be used even when the event denoted by the to infinitive has not yet been realized:(165) The law obliges everyone to pay his taxes.
(Webster's 1961, sub "oblige" )
The normal interpretation of (165) does not imply that everyone actually pays his taxes: the sentence simply evokes a state of obligation in which every individual finds himself by virtue of the law.
As would be expected, such a use would not be possible with make, since the law would appear to be actually bringing about the paying of taxes ( "concurrent causation" ):(166) * The law makes everyone pay his taxes, With oblige, on the other hand, the tax law is depicted as simply imposing a state of obligation in the present, which leaves the future actualization of paying taxes up to each individual, who may or may not actually pay them.
Cotte (1982a: 138) describes the contrast between oblige and make in different but complementary terms.
Commenting on (167a) and (167b), he observes that only oblige can be followed by a "resultative structure" , whereas make "supposes a concomitance between causation and the actualization of the effect being caused, which forces the latter to refer to the operation itself rather than to the state which results from it" .
(167a) That obliged him to have everything finished earlier.
(167b) * That made him have everything finished earlier, Cotte thus feels the same impression as that described above: antecedent vs concurrent causation.
Occasion, get, order, tell and have
Of the other verbs denoting causality, get and occasion resemble cause more than force and oblige do in that they evoke causality without the idea of coercion.
Occasion is almost a synonym of cause in many contexts:(168) She asked Mathilda what occasioned Manfred to take Theodore for a spectre.
(Walpole 1765: 193; in Poutsma 1923: 43)
Since an occasion is a circumstance favouring the occurrence of an event, one can see how occasion can evoke a mediate cause which sets the stage for a subsequent reaction.
That is, "taking Theodore for a spectre" is represented as a response to (and so arising after) the stimulus provided by the occasion.
This explains the exclusive use of the to infinitive after this verb.
Get emphasizes the obtaining of a result:(169) Quite apart from the difficulty of getting subjects to behave "naturally" in the course of a psychological investigation, there is the difficulty of getting what is significant in behaviour to exhibit itself clearly.
(Thomson 1961: 23; in van Ek 1966: 76)
To be more exact, get itself evokes the efforts required to obtain a certain behaviour from someone or something and the to infinitive expresses the result obtained.
This can be seen most clearly by contrasting get with make in uses such as:(170a) He made us laugh.
(170b) He got us to laugh.
(171a) She made me look stupid.
(171b) She got me to look stupid.
Whereas make focusses on the mere producing of an effect, get evokes something which precedes the effect — prolonged efforts in (170b), persuasion winning out over unwillingness in (171b)— and so to must be used before the infinitive to represent the latter's event as a result coming after what led up to it.
Order and tell are like get but simply evoke more specific means of obtaining a result.
Although close in meaning to order, tell and get, have is followed by the zero infinitive (cf.
Quirk et al.1985: 1205) and so requires special attention:(172) Have a man go through this desk and all papers, and collect every record and scrap of evidence around.
(Linsky 1947: 83; in Visser 1973: 2269)
As with make, however, a closer examination of have shows that it contrasts with order, tell and get in denoting concurrent and not antecedent causality.
The difference between have, on the one hand, and order and tell, on the other, can be illustrated quite easily.
The latter do not necessarily imply that the infinitive event actually occurs:(173) Miriam now ordered Pengally to break down the gate, but he said he really couldn't go that far.
(BUC G32 0500 10)
The sense expressed would therefore be diagrammable as: This is not the case with have, which always carries the implication that this event is actualized:(174) * Miriam now had Pengally break down the gate, but he said he really couldn't go that far.
Have denotes an exercise of authority which is effectual, that is, which ensures the realization of the action commanded.
This does not distinguish have from get, however, as the latter also implies effectual causation:(175) * Miriam now got Pengally to break down the gate, but he said he really couldn't go that far,
In a diagram: There is a significant distinction in meaning between the two nevertheless, and it accounts for the use of the bare infinitive  with the former.
We have already seen how get denotes the process leading to the obtaining of a result and so is represented as occupying a before-position with respect to the infinitive's event (= the result).
Have, in contrast, eliminates any reference to a tension leading up to the realization of the infinitive and represents the latter as being "already in the bag" .
i.e. it carries the presupposition that the person acted upon is subject to the dominion of the causal agent.
Here is how one observer describes this peculiar meaning of have: In the have causative the causer assumes the causee's "readiness to serve" ; the causee is treated as a cooperative performer of the causee's will, as someone to whom the causer's will can be communicated (either directly or by an intermediary) and who will be neither unable to understand it nor unwilling to perform it.
(…) the causee is expected to comply with the causer's will and there is no assumption or expectation of unwillingness on his or her part.
Nonetheless this expected compliance of the causee is not entirely due to good will: there is an assumption of dependence…
(Wierzbicka 1988: 241-2)
These comments allow us to understand why have could be substituted for get in (176) but not in (177):(176) The teacher got us to write our names on a sheet of paper.
(177) The police got him to confess to the crime.
Get evokes the infinitive's event as a result which has been achieved or obtained but does not specify by what means.
If the means used imply overcoming the causee's unwillingness (i.e. realizing a prior condition for the infinitive's event), then have is inappropriate: this is the case in (177).
If however the means used is simply the issuing of a request as in (176), then the causee can either be represented as being brought to perform some action as a result of the request (get) or as doing something under the influence or authority of the causer (have).
Indeed in all the contexts examined to date have suggests that  the disposition of the "subordinate" (denoted by its direct object) to comply can be assumed or taken for granted: a sentence such as I had him cry, for example, would sound rather strange, unless imagined in a situation where someone is disposed to cry on request (as in the context of a film director who is referring to an actor working under his orders).
This impression of the object of have being represented as completely submissive to the will of the person referred to by the subject explains moreover the use of the bare infinitive with this verb: this exercise of control by the causer over the causee can be seen as persisting throughout the realization of the infinitive event.
In this use, then, have is similar to make in (163): in both readings, the object is seen as a mere instrument so that causation is conceived merely as the production of an effect under the influence of a cause.
Indeed the best characterization of the meaning of have in this use seems to be the idea of "controlling the production of an effect" .
Since make has been shown to evoke the idea of simply producing an effect, this explains why have always suggests a disposition to comply, whereas make does not.
A curious fact which might seem at first to constitute an exception to this explanation turns out to provide further confirmation of it.
Both Poutsma (1923: 42) and Jesperson (1940: 287) point out that have is often used with the to infinitive in conditional contexts with would:(178) I'd have you to know that I don't care a penny, madam, for your paltry money.
(Thackeray 1858: 338)
(179) as some authorities would have us to believe.
(McCarthy 1880: 48)
(180)…and seek to express ourselves as we are, and not as we would have our friend to think us to be.
(Benson 1919: 19)
What is remarkable here is that have no longer evokes an effectual exercise of control.
It has shifted to the mere expression of a wish, so that would have is almost synonymous with would like.
Given this shift, the appearance of to before the infinitive is not surprising.
Usage confirms therefore the existence of two ways of conceiving causation in English.
Make and have represent it on the one hand merely as the producing of an effect (controlling the production of an effect in the case of have).
This leaves no room for the non-realization of the infinitive event since the action of producing an effect necessarily coincides in time with the appearance of the effect (concurrent causation), and so both these verbs call for the bare infinitive.
Force, oblige, cause, get and occasion, on the other hand, all evoke a succession between cause and effect, the infinitive event being felt to be the result of the previous action of the causal agent.
This we have called antecedent, a way of seeing causation which calls for the use of the to infinitive to signify the before/after relation between the cause and the effect.
Make used with the to infinitive
The infinitive evokes a state
Although rare, there are some examples of make followed by the to infinitive.
These require more detailed examination in order to determine whether they disprove the hypothesis formulated above.
The following is typical of the majority of these uses:(181) But the circumstance which, more than any other, has made Ireland to differ from Scotland, remains to be noticed.
(T.B.
Macaulay 1849: 66; in Poutsma 1926: 430)
Here, to differ is the equivalent of to be different, that is to say, the infinitive expresses its event as a state, more precisely as a resulting state, in this type of use.
This suggests that make expresses antecedent causation, since it evokes a process of causation giving rise to a state of affairs that comes into being only at the end of the process.
To test this interpretation, one might suppress the to before the infinitive; differ would then evoke, not the resulting state, but the operation leading to the result (i.e. become different), an operation whose locus in time coincides with that of make.
The  expressive effect created by the use of the to infinitive in this type of context thus provides further support for our explanatory hypothesis.
In most of the uses of this type, make is followed by to be, the verb of state par excellence:(182) So also history is full of anomalies and single events giving colouring to periods and making things to be what they are.
(Stubbs 1906: 1; in Kruisinga 1931: 240)
(183) But she admired even more what came later; how after she had ceased wanting to blot him entirely from her mind, to make him not to be, they had found that they could after all talk good sense and kindness to each other.
(Murdoch 1963: 14; in van Ek 1966: 119)
(184) She would swallow it all up, she would assimilate the evil news and make it not to be…
(Murdoch 1963: 209; in van Ek 1966: 119)
To be evokes a resulting state in these sentences as does to differ in (181) and make evokes an antecedent cause.
This is seen in (182) in that anomalies and single events are depicted as one of the factors which explain why things are what they are, that is, as underlying conditions giving rise to a certain state of affairs (and therefore corresponding to a notional "before" position).
In (183) and (184), similarly, it is clear that the effort to mentally blot something out of existence can only take place while it is still in existence, that is, before the state of non-existence into which one is trying to project it.
A very different expressive effect is evoked by the bare infinitive be in the four examples of it found so far:(185) I could feel him fighting with himself…during all those afternoons…our wonderful afternoons of happiness!…and I said nothing…
I made myself be calculating…
(O'Neill 1919: 91)
(186) He (sc.
Mussolini) cannot make his followers be orderly.
(Manchester Guardian, no further reference given; in Poutsma 1929: 810)
(187) I made him be quiet.
(Curme 1931: 124)
(188) You will make the foes of England be sorry you were born.
(Housman 1896: 33 in OED, sub make)
In the first three sentences, be obviously has its "activity" sense and one gets the impression of continuous efforts of the subject in order to make himself behave in a calculating manner, to make his followers act in an orderly way or to keep someone quiet.
(188) can be compared with (154)—(156) above: make evokes the production of an effect for which the "maker" is wholly responsible, there being no other factor but the behaviour of the agent "you" involved in bringing about this effect (contrast (182) in this respect, where room is left for other factors to intervene).
The infinitive evokes an action
A survey of usage also brings to light a few cases of a rare use — the to infinitive denoting an action after make.
One such example is:(189)…the cry which made me suddenly to re-enter the dimension of distinctness.
(Cummings 1928: 115; in Kirchner 1952: 458)
Here the bare infinitive would, of course, have been the "normal" form.
To brings in a distinctive nuance however: it reinforces the idea expressed by suddenly.
The to infinitive forces the mind to jump from the cause (cry) to the fully fledged existence of the effect (the instantaneous re-entry into the dimension of distinctness).
It is as if the speaker, in a state of semi-consciousness, was first aware of the stimulus, and then, an instant later, suddenly awoke to find himself confronted with the result provoked  by this stimulus, without being conscious of the passage from one state to the other.
The bare infinitive would blunt the sharp edge of this expressive effect.
In the following sentence, the effect introduced by the use of the to infinitive is even more striking:(190)…what he saw there made him falter and repeat himself and then suddenly to explode into a cry.
(Hughes 1961: 22; in Visser 1973: 2262)
The author of this passage has skilfully exploited the contrast between the bare and the to infinitives.
The bare infinitives are used to refer to reactions concurrent with the contemplation of the scene which the person in question has before his eyes, spontaneous reactions, leaving no room for reflection.
The to infinitive after and then, on the other hand, creates the impression of a delayed reaction; it suggests that it took a moment's reflection for the person to realize the import of what he had seen, this realization being what triggered his sudden cry.
The above contexts where make is followed by the to infinitive, far from disproving the explanation given above of why this verb is generally construed with the bare infinitive, confirm it therefore most convincingly.
In all the cases analysed, make has shifted to evoke an antecedent cause, and the to infinitive almost always evokes a state as arising at the end of a process of causation (or of coming-to-be).
In the few cases just seen where the to infinitive denotes an action, it also brings in the nuance of subsequence, of sudden movement from one instant to the next.
Like verbs of perception, make takes the to infinitive in the passive (cf Quirk et al.1985: 1206):(191) As the novels and tales lead out of the nineteenth century and into our own, we are made to feel more of the limited, contingent validity of moral claims and of collaborative endeavour.
(Ford 1961: 121; in van Ek 1966: 121)
The infinitive after make in the passive
Where verbs of perception and know, as we saw above, evoke a characteristic expressive effect in this context, it is more difficult to see any nuance characterizing make here, other than perhaps a suggestion of result.
Thus in (191), to feel evokes a new state of awareness which has arisen as a result of the combined effect on the reader's mind of novels and tales previously selected for this purpose.
Something similar might be said of the following:(192) Thus by reducing the temperature of matter in the gaseous state it can be made to pass through all three physical states.
(Isaacs 1963: 46; in van Ek 1966:121)
(193) In Bonn, the few hours of talk and the banquets with West German leaders were made to produce, by all accounts, the information he needed.
(The Observer, 30 June 1963: 9; in van Ek 1966: 121)
(194) He was very soon made to understand that he was not wanted in that corner of it where old Lingard and his own weak will placed him…
(J. Conrad 1921: 28)
In each of these examples, however, the nuance is too fugitive to provide uncontroversial basis for discussion.
As pointed out above regarding the verbs of perception, nevertheless, the passive is by its very nature resultative.
It seems logical therefore that to evoke "making" (i.e. producing an effect) from the point of view of the patient acted upon rather than from that of the agent acting is to evoke the effect produced on the patient rather than the producing of the effect on the latter by the agent.
Since the infinitive evokes the effect, to represent it as a mere result produced on the patient implies representing it as coming after the operation of producing this effect (= the making), whence the use of to to express the before/after relationship between the two events.
This hypothesis requires further analysis of the passive voice before it can be considered confirmed however.
Common though the to infinitive is after make in the passive, it is, apparently, not ubiquitous.
At least one grammarian is of the opinion that the bare infinitive can also be used in this type of context: The active voice is always followed by the infinitive without to.
This is also occasionally found after the passive voice, but the usual construction after a passive is one in which to is used.
He was made to feel ashamed.
He was made to sign the statement.
Though He was made sign the statement might pass, it would scarcely be idiomatic to say He was made give them the money.
It is difficult to lay down any rule in the matter…
(Wood 1964: 174)
This usage may be dialectal, as suggested by Kirchner (1952: 456), who gives the following examples from the twentieth century:(195) It wasn't pleasant to be made feel like a good-for-nothing little brat.
(Shaw 1901: 139)
(196) I'll not have him made suffer.
(St J. Ervine, no reference given)
(197) I was glad to be made go.
(Con O'Leary, no reference given)
He comments that "this now obsolete construction (NED 1600 sub 53) is preserved in Irish" .
The only other twentieth-century example I have found is also from an Irish-born writer:(198) I've been made scream with pain in other ways.
(Shaw 1904: 282; in Visser 1973: 2410)
Before dismissing this usage as dialectal, however, it was thought wise to examine the contexts where it occurs in order to see if there is any discernible justification for it.
(198) above, for example, is uttered by a young lady who is recounting to her horrified mother the experience she has just had of being  thrown into prison and badly treated after being arrested in a bar brawl.
Here is the immediate context: "You see, it's all real to me.
I've suffered it.
I've been shoved and bullied.
I've had my arms twisted.
I've been made scream with pain in other ways.
I've been flung into a filthy cell with a lot of other poor wretches as if I were sack of coals being emptied into a cellar."
(Shaw 1904: 282)
Sentence (195) is pronounced by Cashel Byron as he recounts what used to happen when he went home from boarding school for the holidays: "As to the holidays, they were the worst part of the year to me.
When I was left at school I was savage at not being let go home; and when I went home, my mother did nothing but find fault with my schoolboy manners.
I was getting too big to be cuddled as her darling boy, you understand.
Her treatment of me was just the old game with the affectionate part left out.
It wasn't pleasant, after being cock of the school, to be made feel like a good-for-nothing little brat tied to her apron strings."
(Shaw 1901: 139)
The contexts of the other two examples is not recoverable since Kirchner does not give complete references.
In both cases where the context is available however, the bare infinitive is used in reference to the undergoing of unpleasant treatment, where the speaker clearly wishes to stress the realization of a distasteful experience which was forced upon him.
Substitution of the to infinitive gives a somewhat different impression: the events seem to be evoked in a much more resultative fashion — as the fact of having been made to scream, the state of Byron's feelings — that is, as an object of reflection rather than a recall of actual experience.
While nothing definitive can be concluded from such meagre data, the fact that such examples do seem to suggest different impressions than the to infinitive to speakers of various dialects indicates that they deserve closer attention, especially in the light of a further examination of the passive voice.
2.8 THE INFINITIVE AFTER THANK AND BID
The last two verbs to be looked at in the field of causality are thank and bid.
They present an interesting problem of usage because both can be construed with either infinitive.
In most of its occurrences, thank is used with the to infinitive:(199) I'll thank you to pass the decanter.
(Fox 1882: 170 in Jespersen 1940: 290)
As Jespersen points out, thank expresses the idea of asking politely here and the infinitive can be paraphrased by"if you will…
".
Mair (1990: 155) adds a further observation: The most pointed example of the temporal reorientation forced by the presence of an infinitival complement clause is provided by the verb thank, which turns into its own antonym when followed by an infinitive, changing its meaning from "express gratitude for a benefit received" to "ask" — as in I'll thank you to be quiet.
The prospective meaning of to is thus perfectly clear in this use.
But thank can also be followed by the bare infinitive, as in the following examples, which Jespersen (1940: 289) qualifies as "rather vulgar" :(200) I'll thank ye hand me the salt.
(Thackeray 1850: 138)
(201) And I'll thank ye give me a glass of punch too, John.
(Thackeray 1850: 369)
The fact that the use of the bare infinitive should give rise to an impression of impoliteness or vulgarity is at first sight a bit surprising, but when considered in the light of make and have, examined above, the reason becomes clearer.
The suppression of to has the effect of leaving no distance between the request and the action requested so that the actualization of the request is represented as carrying with it the realization of what is asked.
This is like taking for granted the will of the person to whom  the request is made and leaving no room for him to say no — treating him as an instrument — whence the tone of excessive familiarity.
With the verb bid the bare infinitive is, according to Visser (1973: 2272, 2303), much the more common, both in the sense of "command" ( "which tends to become obsolete" ) and in the sense of "invite" .
The impression calling for the use of the bare form of the infinitive here is very similar to that encountered with the verb have: the compliance of the person receiving the command or invitation can be taken for granted completely.
This impression of the infinitive event's already being in the bag calls for a representation in which there is no separation between the event denoted by the infinitive and that denoted by bid, no way to conceive the bidding as existing without the infinitive's event also being actualized.
In the sense of "command" the presumption of compliance seems to be due to the fact that the bidder has the authority necessary to ensure that the action requested will be carried out.
Here are some examples:(202) He gives me a stroke on the head with his cane; bids me carry that to my master.
(Sheridan 1785: 1; in Poutsma 1923: 46)
(203) Bid Rodolph of Saxony approach!
(Lytton 1842: 192; in Poutsma 1923: 46)
(204) It was Traddles, whom Mr Mell instantly discomfitted by bidding him hold his tongue.
(Dickens 1850: 48; in Poutsma 1923: 46)
(205) I leapt out of the carriage bidding the man wait.
(Hope 1898: 96; in Jespersen 1940: 288)
In the sense of "invite" , bid + bare infinitive is used to express requests with which it is normal to comply:(206) He bade his companions enter.
(Ward 1888: 191; in Visser 1973: 2273)
(207) Morgan…squeezed my hand, bidding me…recommend myself to…
(Smollett 1748: 210; in Visser 1973: 2273)
(208) What had he thought of, to go to John, grovel and beg understanding?
To confess with a canvas chair as a prie-Dieu, gouging at his heart until a rough and stupid hand bade him rise and go?
(BUC K21 1610 14)
Or it can be used to express requests for which one can assume willingness to comply:(209)(She) took me by the hand, and bidding me be of good cheer, set off with Gus in a coach, to pay a visit to those persons.
(Thackeray 1903: 162; in Poutsma 1923: 46)
(210) But a handsome butcher, who had found a place beside her, held that she was entitled to the post of honour in the front row, and bade her not be frightened.
(Shaw 1901: 116)
With the to infinitive after bid, more room is left to the initiative of the person receiving the request.
This can be seen in:(211) Have I not bidden you never to look upon the face of woman?
(Kingsley 1857a: 3; in Poutsma 1923: 47)
Here bid approaches the sense of "command" , but the effect is not that of ushering the infinitive event into existence as with the bare infinitive: since (211) expresses a command valid for all time henceforth (cf. never), there is no way of guaranteeing compliance.
This explains why the bare infinitive would not be possible in this context.
The contrast between the bare and to infinitive constructions with bid can therefore be stated in terms of whether compliance is taken for granted or not.
When it can, no room is left for the non-realization of the infinitive event, and so the concurrent  representation evoked by the bare infinitive is appropriate.
When compliance is not taken for granted, to is used in order to "futurize" the infinitive event's actualization, i.e. to evoke it as something which the person receiving the request may or may not decide to do.
As with make, the passive of bid generally takes to (cf.
Quirk et al.1985: 1206), this being due to the more resultative view implied by this construction.
The overall picture of usage with bid tends therefore to confirm the general view of the infinitive proposed here.
2.9 THE INFINITIVE AFTER LET AND ALLOW
Both of these verbs evoke the general notion of permission, but whereas let takes only the bare infinitive, allow must be followed by to.
The only examples found of let + to infinitive are archaic.
This suggests a situation similar to that of make and cause, involving two different ways of conceiving permission in English.
It is not hard to see how permission can be conceived as something which throws the action permitted into the future: one generally gets permission first and then performs the action permitted after.
This, it will be argued, corresponds in fact to the way allow (and also permit) represent permission, a way of viewing this notion which calls for the use of to before the infinitive.
Indeed allow can even represent the existence of permission without saying whether the permitted action is carried out or not:(212) A measure passed by Congress just before adjourning softened the ruling's impacts, on prior-year returns still under review, for clay-mining companies that make brick and tile products.
The measure allows such companies in those years to apply their mineral depletion allowances to 50% of the value of the finished products rather than to the lower value of raw clay alone.
(BUC A28 1000 8)
Here the companies are now in a position to apply their mineral depletion allowance to 50 per cent of the value of their finished products — and they would be foolish not to take advantage of  this measure — but the sentence itself does not say that they actually do so.
Similar examples can be found with the verb permit:(213) The second agreement permits the authority to sell a 520-acre tract west of Stage 1.
(BUC A09 1260 2)
Permission is here conceived as existing already, even though that which is permitted might be carried out ten years from now, or never.
Antecedent permission seems therefore perfectly normal.
The problem is to understand how permission can be represented by let as concurrent with the event permitted, as suggested by our hypothesis on the bare infinitive.
Observations from the only two grammarians to comment on this aspect of the meaning of let (Cotte 1982b and Mittwoch 1990) put us on the trail of the explanation.
Cotte (pp. 71–2) distinguishes two main senses of let, the first of which is described as "the non-intervention of an agent in an action which has been initiated independently of him/her and has been going on already for a certain time" , and can be illustrated by:(214) He wouldn't even dance with her at Gavin's party.
He treats her like she was dirt.
And you stand by and let him do it…
(BUC N02 1170 10)
Since let signifies here not intervening in some event which is already under way, it is obvious that the letting must be thought of as coinciding in time with the actualization of the other event.
This would justify the fact that to is not used with this sense of let.
The second sense mentioned by Cotte is "permission given" , and can be illustrated by a sentence such as:(215) The doctor let me donate blood for my father even though I had a mild case of the flu.
Even in this sense, Cotte makes a case for analysing let as evoking  permission from the point of view of non-intervention, "permitting" being represented here in a purely negative fashion, as not intervening to stop the realization of an action which the permittee wishes to perform.
He proposes the following contexts to illustrate the contrast between the way let represents permission and the manner in which allow evokes it:(216a) I allowed him to do it, but he didn't do it.
(216b) *?
I let him do it, but he didn't do it.
(217a) I don't/didn't allow him to do it, but he does/did it.
(217b) * I don't/didn't let him do it, but he does/did it.
He concludes: L'actualisation du deuxième procès va de pair avec celle de let, mais pas avec celle de allow, qui semble surtout incident à him, l'actant qui a en dernier ressort la responsabilité d'actualiser ou non le procès.
Accorder la permission avec let, c'est se placer directement dans l'actuel: la permission est nécessairement suivie d'effet.
Let place dans l'actuel, ou y laisse, en supprimant tout obstacle sur l'actualisation…
As Cotte points out, allow and let evoke permission in different ways: the latter seems incapable of evoking the giving of permission without evoking at the same time the realization of the action permitted (cf. (216b)), whereas allow is not subject to this restriction.
Indeed it has been seen in (212) above that allow can even evoke the existence of permission as a present state and leave the realization of the action permitted in the hypothetical future.
Although Cotte does not allude to this use, it provides confirmation of his analysis, particularly since let would not be appropriate at all in such contexts: in (212), for example, it would suggest that the event apply is actually realized, whereas the import of the sentence is simply to describe the provisions included in the new law.
Mittwoch (1990: 117) feels very similar impressions to those described by Cotte: like him, she points out that a sentence  such as(218a) seems contradictory whereas (218b) does not:(218a) * She let him stay at home yesterday but he chose to go to school all the same.
(218b) She allowed him to stay at home yesterday but he chose to go to school all the same.
Her conclusion is that, unlike allow, let is not a performative and "does not even, strictly speaking, convey a report of an illocutionary act" .
We are proposing, along with Cotte, that let evokes much more than merely the speech act of giving permission: it signifies giving an event access to existence, permitting something by not intervening to obstruct its being accomplished.
This way of conceiving permission obviously makes the permitting inseparable from the realization of the action permitted, which is not the case with the verbs allow and permit.
In a third use dealt with by neither Cotte nor Mittwoch, let provides a further test for the hypothesis proposed here:(219) Let AB be equal to CD.
The coincidence between let and the infinitive is slightly obscured here by the use of let as an imperative.
Nevertheless,(219) is the equivalent of "Postulate AB = CD" , which is to say that let is an instruction to anyone reading this sentence to conceive AB as equal to CD.
Since mathematics deals with purely imaginary entities, there is theoretically nothing preventing AB from being equal to CD except the need for someone to conceive them as equal, so that the actualization of let carries with it the automatic actualization of be equal.
Thus, as above, letting can be analysed as inseparable from the realization of the event evoked by the infinitive.
This use is closely related to another, which is often characterized as a first- or third-person imperative (cf.
Quirk et al.1985: 829):(220) And God said: "Let there be light." 
And there was light.
(Genesis I, 3)
(221) Let the celebrations begin!
The impression one gets here is that of a realization almost simultaneous with the utterance of the sentence —(220) evokes the creation of light,(221) the beginning of the celebrations.
The use of let as an imperative implies that the speaker feels that the mere impinging of his will upon that of the other people involved in the situation will be enough to get the infinitive action accomplished.
A further detail which supports the view that let evokes the lifting of all obstacles to the event denoted by the infinitive and concomitant actualization of the latter is the tendency for let to form a tight unit with the infinitives of certain verbs:(222) Kreisler let fall a further heavy hint.
(Lewis 1918: 100; in Visser 1973: 2294)
(223) The living-room occupies all the stage on the ground floor.
It is well furnished, and almost aggressively expresses Mrs Harrington's personality.
We are let know by it that she is a person of Taste…
(Shaffer 1962: 171; in van Ek 1966: 115)
The group formed by let and the following infinitive is so close in these uses that it is the equivalent of a single verb: let fall corresponds to drop, let know to inform, etc.
Even the word order indicates a tight bond: let + infinitive occupies the syntactic position of the lexical verb, with the direct object being placed after, and not before, the infinitive.
In these uses, one gets the impression that let has been dematerialized to the point of almost being a mere "actualizer" of the infinitive event (cf.
Cotte 1982a: 139): the concurrence implied by let has been pushed here to the point where let simply indicates that the infinitive's event was realized.
There is thus ample evidence to support the view that let evokes permission (assumption, command, etc.) as not obstructing the realization of the action permitted.
One can even analyse the contracted form let's (as in Let's have a party) from this point of view.
Unlike the usual "permission" sense (cf.
Please, let us have a party), let here is addressed to the other members of the  group to which the speaker belongs.
Its sense may be seen as an abstract representation of permission ( "give your assent to a party" ) or even of not preventing ( "don't be indifferent to" ).
In any case, as an imperative, let suggests that the speaker feels that the impinging of his will on the others's should be enough to obtain their assent or overcome their indifference and thereby get the infinitive action under way.
This makes let very different from allow and permit, which do not necessarily imply that the infinitive event is realized: in (212) and (213) above, they even evoke a state of permission as existing before any realization of the act for which permission has been given, something which is absolutely impossible with let.
The distinction between these two ways of conceiving permission accounts for the use of either the bare or the to infinitive here.
Let represents permission as non-intervention, i.e. as not obstructing the accomplishment of the event expressed by the infinitive, and so the letting cannot be conceived as coming before the event permitted (indeed one cannot say that one has let someone do something until they have actually done it).
Since the letting cannot be conceived as existing before the event permitted gets under way, to is not used with let, just as it is not used with see because seeing cannot be conceived as taking place before the first moment of the event seen.
Allow and permit, in contrast, represent permission as a prior condition — often in the form of the illocutionary act of giving permission — making the infinitive event's accomplishment licit.
This situates the allowing or permitting before and the event permitted in the subsequence, thus calling for the use of to.
The to following allow and permit can be conceived with either an initial interception, as in (212) and (213), or a final one, as in They stood by and allowed him to steal my car.
2.10 CONCLUSION
This brings to a close the examination of contexts in which the to and bare infinitives can be directly opposed in use with full verbs.
The attention focussed on the to infinitive has led to some important generalizations.
It has been seen that the to preceding the infinitive is the sign that the event expressed by means of the infinitive is represented as posteriorized in time with respect to some point of reference.
To signifies this relation of subsequence in virtue of its potential meaning of a movement from one point in time to another and has been seen to give rise to two clearly identifiable actual meanings according to whether the speaker conceives the whole movement which to is capable of signifying or only the initial part thereof.
The whole movement is conceived in cases such as She got me to break down the door, which have been diagrammed as: In this sense, the infinitive can be said to evoke a subsequent actualization, i.e. an event which is actualized as a consequence of a previous event bringing it into being.
This meaning contrasts with that found in sentences such as She ordered me to break down the door, where only part of the movement signified by to is actualized: Here the infinitive can be described as evoking a subsequent potentiality, i.e. an event whose actualization is futurized with respect to that of the main verb.
As for the bare infinitive, a significant generalization concerning its meaning has been arrived at — the notion of coincidence in time between the infinitive and the verb to which it is incident, with the latter being inconceivable as a before-position with respect to the infinitive's event.
In all the cases examined with full verbs, the bare infinitive has evoked what could be termed a coincident actualization, and its event is not represented as beginning to exist in time before that of the main verb, as depicted by this diagram of I watched him cross the street: This does not exhaust the expressive capacity of the bare infinitive, however, as we are going to see that it can also express what we will call coincident potentiality.
This sense is only found with auxiliaries, which have not been discussed yet since no oppositions between the two versions of the infinitive are possible in most cases with these verbs.
Since to is not found with most auxiliaries, they provide a further test for the hypothesis that the bare infinitive implies the absence of a before-position with respect to the event it expresses, which will be the topic of the next chapter.
Three
The infinitive incident to auxiliary verbs
3.1 AUXILIARY DO
The notion of absence of a before/after relation between the bare infinitive and the verb to which it is incident can be applied quite readily to its use with auxiliary do, if one takes into account the peculiar nature of auxiliaries.
The latter, as Guillaume (1964: 73-86) has shown, are verbs whose lexical content is incomplete and requires a lexical supplement from another verb form in order to be usable in discourse.
An auxiliary, therefore, does not evoke a separate event from that expressed by the verb form it accompanies, but merely denotes the way the latter's event is conceived, the point of view from which the speaker regards it.
In its use as an auxiliary, do has retained from the idea of "performing an activity" signified in its use as a lexical verb only the notion of "something actually taking its place in time" : do auxiliary thus has the effect of discussing the real actualization in time of the lexical event denoted by the infinitive.
If do is used in the past tense, therefore, the infinitive's event is explicitly affirmed to have taken place in time in the past; compare:(1a) I ate my porridge.
(1b) I did eat my porridge.
In a sentence such as(1b) not only does did situate its lexical  supplement (eat) in time like any other auxiliary, but it also evokes all the time necessary to actualize the infinitive's lexeme and so produces a representation of an event seen from beginning to end as something that really takes its place in time.
If do is used in the non-past, the infinitive's event is situated in the first moment of the non-past time-sphere:(2) She does own a Porsche.
Here the resulting effect is to emphatically assert a present state.
Thus do evokes the taking place in time — in the stretch of time in the past or non-past required to realize it — of the event denoted by the infinitive.
In affirmative verb phrases therefore the event is explicitly situated in the stretch of time evoked by do, whence the expressive effect of emphasizing something really taking place.
In negative and interrogative contexts, on the other hand, the event's taking place in time is denied or questioned.
Schematically for (1b): And for (2): The point of all this is to explain why do takes the bare infinitive.
Since do evokes the very taking place in time of the infinitive's  event, it is obvious that it cannot be conceived as arising prior to the latter, i.e. as constituting a before-position with respect to this event.
3.2 THE MODAL AUXILIARIES
The only explanation proposed to date for the absence of to after the modal auxiliaries (Mittwoch 1990: 127-9) is, by the author's own admission, "entirely syntactic" : to is analysed as a modal itself, and since the grammar "must include a constraint against two modals in sequence in order to rule out examples such as *If John agreed to baby-sit, we would can go" , it follows that to and the modals cannot co-occur.
Besides the fact that Mittwoch scuttles her own argument by citing examples such as No newspaper would dare publish his denial where "dare shows modal characteristics precisely in governing the bare infinitive…, yet it is governed by another modal" (p. 128), and the fact that treating to as a modal auxiliary is in itself highly implausible, this analysis simply begs the question of whether there is a semantic motivation behind the absence of to here.
In order to address this question one must first endeavour to investigate the type of meaning expressed by to and the type of meaning expressed by the modals and then try to see why they cannot be put into relation with one another.
It will be shown below that when one does this a semantic explanation for the use of the bare infinitive after the modal auxiliaries is possible and that this use is perfectly consistent with all the other uses of the bare form in English.
This explanation is far less obvious than in the case of do auxiliary however, since in sentences such as(3), the infinitive seems to evoke an action which is future with respect to the existence of the obligation which must evokes in the present.
(3) You must leave tomorrow, Clearly, in our experience, the leaving must occur after the obligation which exists at the moment of speaking.
Hirtle (1975: 124) makes this successivity explicit when he diagrams his analysis of modal will in At one o'clock they will eat lunch: The role of will is described as that of "keeping the infinitive beyond the stretch of time containing the present of actual consciousness" and so situating its event in the future.
Similar impressions seem to arise from sentences such as I may leave tomorrow and I can finish it next week.
The impression just described is not characteristic of all uses of the modals however: there are some where the infinitive's event seems to coincide with that of the auxiliary, but in a very different way from do.
This can be illustrated by the following sentences:(4) He must like spaghetti a lot.
He eats so much of it.
(5) Don't call him now.
He'll be having supper.
(6) She may own a Porsche.
I don't know.
In these cases, the event of the infinitive is presented as something whose existence, in the present moment evoked by the modal, seems necessary (must), quite probable (will), or merely possible (may).
Such uses provide an interesting point of comparison with auxiliary do which offers a first glimpse of the explanation for the use of the bare infinitive here.
Whereas do situates the infinitive in a stretch of time in the past or non-past as something really existing or taking place in that time-stretch, the modals in (4)—(6) on the other hand situate the infinitive's event merely as something which has certain chances of existing in the stretch of time which they express.
In (6), for example, all that is affirmed is possible ownership in the present, while in (2) the meaning  expressed is that ownership is real.
This suggests that the modals differ from do auxiliary in involving a representation of the infinitive event, not as something whose real existence coincides with the present or past time-stretch expressed by the auxiliary, but as something which coincides with the modal only inasmuch as its existence as a potential is concerned.
Where do evokes the infinitive as a reality, the modals evoke it as a potentiality.
The infinitive's meaning-capacity in its "bare" use is therefore no different from that observed when it is preceded by to.
In the latter case it can express either a subsequent actualization (I managed to catch up with her) or a subsequent potentiality (I wanted to catch up with her).
Without to, it can evoke either a coincident actualization (She does own a Porsche) or a coincident potentiality (She may own a Porsche).
Further confirmation of the bare infinitive's ability to express a coincident potentiality is provided by uses in exclamations where it does not occur in relation with a modal:(7) What!
Me own a Porsche!
Here the infinitive's event is treated as a possibility that has no chance of being real — as something which is impossible, absurd — which shows that the infinitive is clearly capable of expressing a potentiality all by itself.
It must be pointed out moreover that representing the infinitive's event as a mere potentiality leaves the question of the location in time of its actualization wide open.
A sentence such as(8) below could refer to the past (How could you have expected me to know the answers to those questions which you asked me last week?), the present (Why are you asking me?
I never study), or the future (I would be really surprised if I knew the answers on the exam next week):(8) What!
Me know the answers!
This allows one to understand why in sentences with the modals, such as(3) above, the infinitive event's actualization can be future with respect to the place in time of the modal.
What is coincident with the modal's event is the infinitive event's potentiality, not its actualization.
It may seem surprising nonetheless to claim that the infinitive event is represented as a mere potentiality in uses with the modal auxiliaries in past contexts such as:(9) When he was young, he could swim across the lake and back in 10 minutes.
(10) He would concoct anecdotes and then he'd tell them to me over and over again, you know, obviously not realizing that he'd told them to me before.
(Survey of English Usage 2.7.81; in Coates 1983: 209)
There is, however, good evidence for this as well.
While (9) does imply that he actually swam across the lake on several occasions, all that it in fact expresses is the past existence of the ability to swim, so that swimming is thought of as a potential event and not as an actualization.
One can indeed use could in a positive sentence evoking a past capacity which was never even exercised:(11) Ten years ago, the super-powers could already destroy the world 1000 times over.
This shows that the actualization of the infinitive's event is not what such sentences express, an analysis supported by Coates (1983: 100), who gives a similar argument for the meaning of can in her discussion of She can swim, and Palmer (1977: 5), who has pointed out that a sentence such as(12) is impossible because can "is not used to imply actuality in the past" :(12) * I ran fast and could catch the bus, Example (13) however is quite acceptable because it implies that the event did not take place, being seen merely as a possibility in the past (i.e. a potentiality).
(13) I ran fast, but couldn't catch the bus.
As for(10), would has been analysed as evoking the infinitive event as "predictable" in such uses (Coates 1983: 209).
Representing  an action as predictable also implies seeing it as something potential, that is, as an action that has (or had) high chances of being performed, and not as an actuality.
This is confirmed with respect to another sense of would by Palmer's observation (1983: 212) that the volitional sense behaves the same way as could expressing past capacity.
Although one would not say (14), the corresponding negative sentence (15) is perfectly acceptable:(14) * I asked him and he would come.
(15) I asked him but he wouldn't come.
A final bit of evidence that the modals do not represent the bare infinitive's event as subsequent to their own event comes from certain observations about the contrast between will and be going to made by Palmer (1988: 148).
He notes further to the comments above that while the substitution of will in (16) "would merely say that it would cost him a fortune if he took them home" (idea of conditionality), the be going to construction expresses the idea of a "current orientation" towards the realization of the infinitive's event (here the speaker's intention to take the books home).
(16) I'm buying an awful lot of books here.
It's going to cost me a fortune to get them home,
This explains why the latter cannot be used when there is no reference at all to something in the present which makes the infinitive's event an impending occurrence as is the case in:(17) My babe-in-arms will be 59 on my 89th birthday.
(Palmer 1988: 148)
The implication of these observations for our discussion is that whereas with going to a movement towards the realization of the accompanying infinitive's event is represented as being under way, with will there is no idea of a movement towards this event (i.e. of something existing before it in time): the impression is merely that the potentiality for the infinitive's event already exists, and will be actualized if certain conditions are met.
Whereas Palmer focusses exclusively on the non-actual character  of the infinitive's event, we wish to draw attention here to what his observations imply about the nature of the modal auxiliaries and the relation between the latter and the bare infinitive.
If the event of the infinitive following the modals could, would and will is represented as non-actual, this entails first of all that these modals themselves must have a type of meaning which is non-actualizing.
Since we see no reason to treat the other modals or the other uses of could, would or will any differently as regards this aspect of their meaning, we propose therefore that both the modals and the infinitive which follows them express potentialities.
This implies in turn that in its use with the modal auxiliaries the bare infinitive can be analysed as expressing a potentiality coinciding in time with another potentiality (the modal's event).
The infinitive's relation to the modals is thus exactly parallel in the field of potentiality to that which it entertains with auxiliary do in the field of actuality.
The difference between them lies simply in the fact that while do situates the infinitive in time as an actualization, the modals only situate it as a potentiality.
Consequently, for She may own a Porsche, the following diagram can be proposed: The relation is the same for She may leave tomorrow except that the actualization of the infinitive's event would be future (if it is realized at all): The role of the modal auxiliaries is thus to specify the kind of potentiality which the potential event expressed by the infinitive has — possibility, probability, necessity, etc. — and the type of coincidence involved here is that between an event conceived as a potentiality and the form of potentiality which it is conceived as having, i.e. between two potentialities.
3.3 NEED AND DARE
Having examined the reasons for the use of the bare infinitive with the modals, it is now possible to deal with infinitival usage with two verbs which function both as modal auxiliaries and as lexical verbs, need and dare.
These verbs are of great interest for the present study because, unlike may, can, shall, will and must, they can shift from the bare to the to infinitive, according to the meaning they express in discourse, a fact which lends confirmation to the hypothesis that it is the meaning of the modals which explains their use with the bare infinitive.
Indeed, it will be seen that dare can express a sense very close to its meaning as a modal even while maintaining most of the syntactic characteristics of a full verb, in which case it is used with the bare form — eloquent proof that the use of one or the other version of the infinitive is conditioned by meaning and not by automatically operating syntactic rules.
The significant fact for explaining infinitival usage with dare and need is the type of context in which the modal use with the bare infinitive form is found: as Quirk et al.(1985: 138), following on Jacobsson 1974, point out, "the modal construction is restricted to non-assertive contexts, i.e. mainly negative and interrogative sentences" .
The table visualizing the essentials of the contrast between the modal and main verb uses is reproduced below.
Quirk et al.point out further to this that "non-assertive contexts" are not confined to negatives and questions, but also include semi-negatives such as hardly and only, conditional clauses, comparative clauses, putative should-clauses and restrictive relative clauses with conditional meaning.
This observation corresponds more or less to Jacobsson's list (pp. 60-2) of the ten types of context where need can be used as a modal: Type 1 Need I be present?
I wonder if I need be present.
Type 2 He needn't come.
Type 3 There is nothing you need trouble about.
No one need know.
Type 4 I need hardly say how glad I am.
Type 5 He need only state his opinion clearly.
All he need do is state his opinion clearly.
It need seldom be required of us.
Type 6 Standards are lower than they need be.
Type 7 His book covers most that need be said on the subject.
Type 8 I have half an hour to spare before I need go.
Type 9 It is embarrassing that such a truth need be stated at all.
Type 10 However much need be said, let it wait.
Jacobsson describes the common denominator underlying all of these uses in the following way (p. 62): What types (1)—(10) have in common is that they are negative or subjunctive, formally or notionally.
The existence of the necessity or obligation is not asserted but denied, questioned, conceded (in concessive clauses), or represented as a mere conception rather than as a positive fact ( "subjunctive" ).
Auxiliary need tends to occur in the same syntactic environments as at all, ever and any, which are typically found in so-called non-assertive sentences.
If it is possible at all to find a semantic common denominator for sentences containing auxiliary need, the best candidate would probably be "non-assertiveness" .
In our corpus we have attested need used as a modal in all of Jacobsson's ten types except (7),(9) and (10).
Here are examples of some of the rarer uses:(18) "Well," he said,"I don't think we need detain the doctor any longer, eh?
Thank you, Doctor."
(Christie 1937: 107)
(19) The telephone made me wonder whether I need drop this task to answer the call.
(LOB F40 36 4)
(20) Jesus said in effect,"Why should the man have this deformity one day longer than he need?
That's not what the Sabbath rest is for."
(Sheed 1962: 195)
(21) I think we have two or three hours before we need take the pose.
(Waugh 1948: 56; in Erdmann 1982: 99)
(22) Plenty of time yet — thirty miles before I need begin to feel uncomfortable.
(Sayers 1926: 80; in Erdmann 1982: 99)
The auxiliary use of need has also been found in the following type of sentence not listed by Jacobsson:(23) By co-vary, we mean that the more a language has of one of the processes, the less it need have of the other.
(Keenan 1978: 120)
The non-assertive implication associated with less is very clear here however.
A non-assertive quality can also be perceived to underlie the following use, which Jacobsson, strangely enough, feels to be a "separate category" — what he calls the "marginal use of auxiliary need in conditional clauses" (p. 62, fn 17):(24) If you need borrow money at all, borrow as little as possible.
As signalled by at all, however, this use also suggests a negative bias on the part of the speaker against the existence of any real  need to borrow money, and so does not belong in a separate category from the others at all : it is just as non-assertive as all the rest.
The use of dare as a modal auxiliary follows the same pattern as need.
The modal construction has been found in the following types of context which fall into Jacobsson's ten categories:(25) Her restlessness wakened her bedfellows more than once.
She daren't read more of Walter Lorraine: Father was at home.
[negative](Thackeray 1850: 613; in Jespersen 1931: 12)
(26) Dare she ring him at the office?
He had asked her never to do that.
[interrogative](Murdoch 1968: 223; in Visser 1969: 1439)
(27) Not one of them dare support you.
[shifted negation](Shaw 1930: 41; in Mulder 1937: 32)
(28) I just sat there and it seemed I hardly dare breathe for a minute or two.
[semi-negative](Naughton 1970: 280; in Erdmann 1982: 97)
(29) She was silent; for to rouse her tyrant was more than she dare do.
[comparative clause](Kingsley 1857b: 214; in OED, sub "dare" )
(30) But launching a new cigarette in today's climate of disapproval requires finesse.
The company is advertising its Premiers as "a cleaner smoke" , the furthest it dare go.
[superlative](The Economist, 17 September 1988: 33)
It has also been found in the following four contexts:(31) "The living have never used that road since the coming of the Roherrim," said Aragorn,"for it is closed to them.
But in this dark hour the heir of Isildur may use it, if he dare."
(Tolkien 1968: 812)
(32) It was true that he himself was ignored by the countess as much as she dare ignore him…
(Johnson 1959: 100; in Erdmann 1982: 99)
(33) How dare he take the native's part against her!
(Lessing 1950: 82; in Erdmann 1982: 99)
(34) But she had forgiven the pot man.
They were friends.
She dare now finger his pots.
So she was happy.
(Lawrence 1913: 96; in Visser 1969: 1438)
The non-assertive character of the first three is quite obvious: the conditional clause leaves the actualization of dare up in the air in (31);(32) implies "she didn't dare ignore him any more than that" ;(33) is a sort of indignant rhetorical question implying that he shouldn't have dared take the native's part against her.
(34) shows that the word now can, astonishingly enough, sometimes carry a negative implication: in this sentence it implies "not before" , the import here being "She hadn't dared finger his pots before the present moment" .
All the uses of need and dare as full modal auxiliaries involve therefore a non-assertive quality whereby the needing or daring are not asserted but denied, questioned, conceded, represented as mere possibilities rather than as real events.
The significance of this for the way the daring and needing are put into relation with the infinitive's event should be obvious.
If dare and need are not asserted as realities, then they must be conceived as mere potentialities, and since the infinitive also expresses a non-actual event in these uses, it must also be represented as a potentiality.
This produces a representation of a potential event (that of the infinitive) coinciding in time with another potentiality (non-asserted dare or need), on which it is dependent for its actualization.
Since both need/dare and the infinitive evoke potentialities, no before/after relation is felt to pertain between them and so to is not necessary for the same reason as it is not used with the modal auxiliaries.
Indeed, need and dare allow us to see even more clearly how it is that the modals fail to constitute a before-position with respect to the event expressed by the infinitive.
Comparison of the  modal use of these two verbs with what occurs in affirmative contexts shows that when need and dare are positively asserted, the needing and daring are necessarily felt to represent before- positions relative to the infinitive's event.
This explains why it is strictly impossible to omit to in:(35) He needs to do more exercise.
(36) Carefully, cunningly, he was daring to turn the whole situation round to his advantage.
(Sands 1975: 164; in Erdman 1982: 102)
Here the needing and the daring are situated in time as realities, and as such they must necessarily be conceived as occupying a before-position with respect to do and turn, as a need calling for action and an exercising of audacity leading to the achieving of a result.
When, however, need and dare are used non-assertively, it is possible for the speaker to feel that there is nothing real (no real need or daring) situated in time to constitute a before-position in relation to the event evoked by the infinitive, and so to use the bare infinitive after these verbs as with the modals.
The difference between need and dare and the modals is simply that the latter are by the very nature of their lexical meaning incapable of evoking a reality, while the former can evoke potentialities only in non-assertive use.
Convincing confirmation of this analysis is provided by the interrogative adverbs how and why in their use with the infinitive.
How evokes lexically the idea of "means" , i.e. that which allows the achievement of an end, without specifying the precise nature of these means.
Given the fact that the temporal relation between means and end is clearly one of before to after, and the fact that when used with an infinitive how denotes the means and the infinitive the end, our hypothesis leads us to predict that to should be found after how.
This is indeed the case in most uses:(37) How to be Happy though Married (Jespersen 1940: 324)
(38) They taught me how to use a word-processor.
However, the bare infinitive is also found after how, and although this construction is far less frequent than the one with to, it cannot be dismissed as nonce usage since fifteen cases have come to light thus far.
Moreover the meaning is not at all the same as with to + infinitive, as can be seen from the sample sentences below:(39) For years she had been driving illegally with a licence obtained in Italy where her brother had sent the examiner a case of wine — not necessary, but she had felt bolstered.
Here, how give a bribe?
Coming from a woman might not a case of wine be misconstrued?
(O'Faolain 1983, in Chuquet 1986: VI)
(40) She explained that she had worked as a volunteer in the parish and had felt that in doing this she was sharing his ministry — how ask him to give it up?
She apologized if this sounded abysmally stupid.
(O'Faolain 1983, in Chuquet 1986: VI)
(41) The question that focusses the problem most sharply is: "how handle sets of data manifesting a superficial identity of patterning, some sets of which have a psychological reality for a society as a rule-generated scheme, but others not?" 
(Language Sciences 1969, 7: 15)
(42) If he was small enough to sell his Lord for so little, how account for the remorse which led him to suicide when he realized that Christ was to be slain?
The truth is that there is too much about Judas…that we do not know.
(Sheed 1962: 347)
(43) To the Jews listening, it seemed an assertion of two Gods, himself being one of them, blasphemy therefore and by Jewish law meriting death.
Later (Mk 12: 29) they would hear him affirm the oneness of God, but how reconcile that with this?
(Sheed 1962: 243)
(44) How then explain the peculiar animus with which Eymeric and some of his Dominican successors attacked the opinions and works of Ramon Lull?
(Walsh 1940: 127)
(45) How express Nature, its translucence and mysterious unities…
Beauty!
What use — how express it?
(Galsworthy 1923: 360)
What is important for explaining the occurrence of the bare infinitive here is the way the means are viewed by the speaker: all the uses of how + bare infinitive involve a clear negative bias as to the existence of any means of realizing the event denoted by the infinitive.
This makes how + bare infinitive the equivalent of how can or how could, a paraphrase which is applicable to all of the uses attested thus far.
The implications of this for the relation between how and the infinitive are exactly the same as with need and dare: if the means of realizing the infinitive's event are not felt to exist, then there is felt to be nothing real occupying the before-position which real means always occupy with respect to the end pursued, and therefore no to preceding the infinitive.
If, on the other hand, the means are conceived as really or probably existing, then the speaker feels that there is something real occupying a before-position with respect to the infinitive's event, and so uses to, as in (37) and (38) above.
As for why, this interrogative adverb evokes the reasons calling for an action and, like how, leaves their precise nature undefined.
(In passing this is why how and why can function as interrogative adverbs to request identification of the means required to achieve some end or the reason for something.)
As with how, the temporal relation between the reasons and the action they call for is one of "before" to "after" .
Why functions in almost opposite fashion to how, however, in that whereas the most common use with the latter involves taking for granted the existence of the means (how to), the former is used with the infinitive exclusively in cases where the speaker is questioning the existence of any good reason to perform the event denoted by the infinitive:(46) Why bother to reply?
(Quirk et al.1985: 820)
(47) Why make so much fuss?
(Quirk et al.1985: 820)
As Quirk et al.point out, such uses have a "negative orientation" : the speaker does not think that any good reasons exist at all for performing the event which the infinitive denotes.
This recalls the auxiliary use of need in questions, and indeed (46) and (47) above are equivalent to Why need we bother? and Why need you make so much fuss?, with all four sentences implying "for no good reason" (cf. de Cornulier 1978: 130).
This negative bias entails however that in the speaker's eyes there are no real reasons which can be conceived as occupying the before-position which a reason normally occupies with respect to the action it calls for; and since there is consequently nothing which can be situated in time before this action, the meaning of to does not apply in this use.
Infinitival usage after how and why thus confirms our analysis of the way the modals are put into relation with the infinitive.
Yet further confirmation of this analysis is to be found in the explanation of the bare infinitive's use after dare in what Quirk et al.(1985: 138) call "blends between the auxiliary and the main verb construction" .
All of the uses found of such blends which contain the bare infinitive are also in some way non-assertive, although this non-assertiveness can take on some very subtle forms.
The non-assertive quality is of course obvious in all the uses of blend dare which parallel those of the full modal:(48) And when I saw he was attracted by someone else, the fear and the jealousy that seized me!
You see, I didn't dare make a scene as I should have done if I'd been married.
I had to pretend not to notice.
(Maugham 1933: 86; in Jespersen 1940: 176)
(49) Did he dare set himself up to be finer clay than the common soldier?
(Locke 1917: 100; in Poutsma 1923: 22)
(50) We shall see whether you dare keep your word.
(Shaw 1906: 92; in Mulder 1937: 33)
(The speaker thinks that the unpleasant consequences which can be foreseen if the listener keeps his word will dissuade him from doing so.)
(51) And one would hardly dare suggest that her musical life conforms…
(LOB E22 14 85)
(52) Only doctors dare do it.
(Arlen 1924: 165; in Mulder 1937: 31)( "No one else dares." )
(53) I told you all I dared tell.
(Hichens 1904: 411; in Mulder 1937: 34)( "I dared tell you no more." )
(54)…and then your looks and movements will offer more vivacity and variety than they dare offer now.
(C. Brontë 1848: 275)( "They dare offer no more than that now." )
(55) I found a bottle with which I made numerous marks on the ground surrounding our tents and a few yards into the jungle, as far as I dared venture.
(LOB M03 50 12)( "I dared venture no further." )
(56)…the nearest he dared go with the set of the sea rolling both ships towards each other at the same instant.
(MacLean 1972: 199; in Erdmann 1982: 99)( "He dared go no nearer than that." )
(57) By God, if he dares come here again, I'll make him damned sorry he did.
(O'Neill 1919: 75)( "He daren't come here again or I'll make him damned sorry he did." )
(58) Mrs Thatcher realizes that there is a great deal to be done before she dares launch an all-out offensive in the House of Commons.
(The Spectator, 29 March 1975: 366.1; in Erdmann 1982: 104)( "She doesn't dare launch an all-out offensive until the groundwork has been laid for it" )
In addition to these, blend dare has also been found with the bare infinitive in a number of other categorizable contexts, all of which can also be shown to be somehow non-assertive:(59) I only wish I dared write to him.
(Le Queux 1921: 143; in Mulder 1937: 34)
(60) It may be said that few middle-class couples dare marry without this admirable handbook.
(Lessing 1965: 250; in Erdmann 1982: 97)
(61) That may be the first time in my life that a man has dared insult me.
(King Humperdinck speaking to Wesley in the film Princess Bride)
(62) I was not quite sure whether they had locked the door; and when I dared move, I got up and went to see.
Alas! yes: no jail was ever more secure.
(C. Brontë 1848: 17)
(63) Two months ago, I should have scouted as mad or drunk the man who had dared tell me the like.
(Kipling 1888: 9; in Poutsma 1923: 31)
(64) Let me hear now who dares call him profligate.
(Sheridan 1778: 406; in Poutsma 1923: 28)
(65) "I shall now select my Empress!" he said, looking down on the cowering people.
 "Let the first woman who dares rise to her feet claim her mate and her throne." 
(Vonnegut 1961; in Escholz and Rosa 1988: 556)
With the verb wish in (59), the non-existence of what is wished (= dare) is clearly entailed.
In (60), a negative idea is expressed by few meaning "not many" .
Reflection on (61) reveals that the ordinal adjective first implies that there were none before that  time: the meaning of this sentence is therefore that "no one had ever dared insult me before" .
When implies something similar in (62), where one understands that the speaker felt she didn't dare move before the moment evoked by when.
(63)—(65) are examples of restrictive relative clauses which have conditional, and consequently non-assertive meaning (cf.
Quirk et al.1985: 784).
They could be paraphrased by:(63–) If anyone had dared tell me the like two months ago, I would have scouted him as mad or drunk.
(64–) Let me hear now whether anyone dares call him profligate.
(65–) If any one of you women dares rise to her feet, she can claim her mate and her throne.
Such uses fall therefore into characterizable types of non-assertive use.
Other cases of blend dare are not so easy to categorize.
In some of these the non-assertive quality of the utterance is fairly easy to perceive nevertheless:(66) He dared as much have opposed his wife's whims as he dare have committed high treason.
(Trafford 1861: 294; in Swaen 1897: 220)
(67) I should like to see them dare say a word against me.
(Shaw 1906: 49; in Mulder 1937: 37)
(68) Look at me, Sir, and dare tell me there is any reason why I should take your word.
(Harper's Magazine 7: 182; in Poutsma 1923: 28)
Thus (66) implies "He didn't dare oppose his wife's whims any more than he dared commit high treason" ,(67) that the speaker is of the opinion that they wouldn't dare say a word against him, and in (68) the speaker very clearly believes that the addressee doesn't have the cheek to look him in the eye and tell such an obvious lie.
In other uses however the non-assertiveness takes on considerably more subtle forms.
Such is the case, for instance, in (69) below, where the phrase the notion that suggests surprise at someone having done such a thing as was done, thereby implying that the speaker would not have thought such audacity possible if the occurrence of the event referred to had not come to his knowledge:(69)…one of those heroes, the air ace Billy Bishop, was recently the focus of a bitter wrangle between the National Film Board and the Senate.
The notion that senators would dare criticize even so minor a branch of the media as the NFB guaranteed the outcome.
(United Church Observer, 1986)
Although the speaker is obviously not denying the fact that the Senate dared to criticize the National Film Board in this use, he is saying on the other hand that he would not have thought it possible for Senators to dare to do such a thing, given the sacrosanct character of the media.
This covert attitude of declaring oneself unable to conceive as possible an exercising of audacity which in fact really took place gives the impression that the speaker thinks that the persons who did the action should have known better than to try.
The significant point however is that the speaker is evoking his view of the possibility of the daring, and it is only by logical implication that we infer his opinion of its realization.
In the sentence below, the underlying attitude of the speaker is betrayed somewhat by the adverb actually (suggesting "you may not believe this" ), and one understands as in (69) that he would not have thought it possible for someone to be so audacious as the public relations officer was:(70) But Drew was as determined as any Soviet Commissar to fulfil his self-imposed quota, and the fuse to his temper began smouldering whenever anyone suggested the 15% target might be overly ambitious.
He actually fired a public relations officer who had dared argue that the real sales figures were one or two percentage points short of the goal.
(Ignatieff 1987)
Often, however, one cannot point to any specific word signalling the speaker's point of view.
In such contexts, the main clues showing that the speaker feels someone's having dared to perform a certain action to be hard to imagine is the nature of the act itself or the circumstances under which it was performed.
The former is probably the case in the following:(71) When Agamemnon dares bring his concubine, the prophetess Cassandra, home from Troy, Clytemnestra kills them both and exults in full-bodied fury unfit for prudish ears.
(Stone 1988: 38)( "When Agamemnon does the unthinkable, i.e. brings his concubine home, something which he should have known better than to do…" )
(72) Though the city was "full of idols" and he dared argue against paganism in the agora "with those who chanced to be there," he met with intellectual curiosity rather than charges of impiety.
(Stone 1988: 246)( "Though he did what one would normally find inconceivable for someone to risk doing in a city full of idols…" )
(73) A Fine and Private Place is the work of a genuine fabulist aborning.
In a haggard era which finds loud lies smothering truths in every crib and pallet and bed, and with the older authors banging their skulls against the Wailing Wall, this young poet and novelist dares deny that the great God Pan is dead.
(Gene Fowler on the book jacket of Beagle 1990)( "This young poet and novelist dares do what is practically inconceivable that he should do in that social context." )
(74) In her first song she waved away one encroaching photographer who dared approach the throne unbidden…
(Svartvik 1968: 134)
(implies "he should have known better than to…" )
(75) Socrates is apologetic that such a question was even asked the oracle and blames this on Chaerophon, the disciple who dared broach it.
(Stone 1988: 79)(implies that such a question should never even have been asked, i.e. it was practically inconceivable for Socrates that one of his disciples should ask it)
(76) Joe Louis, destroying every fistic pretender who dared cross gloves with him, was a gladiator never to be forgotten.
(Sun, 24 September 1975: 26–1; in Erdmann 1982: 99)(implies that they should have known better than to cross gloves with Joe Louis)
The circumstances, on the other hand, seem to play a greater role in:(77) It seems that publication in The Times last month of Mr Benn's report to the TUC—Labour Party Liaison Committee on the Department of Industry's current work programme has angered Mr Wilson [= the Prime Minister]…
Additionally, it is said that Mr Benn [= the Secretary of State for Industry]has dared break a rather long departmental silence with a couple of speeches (…), to tell how election pledges will be fulfilled and private industry is lining its pockets with state money with no strings attached.
(The Times, 13 June 1974: 25.4; in Erdmann 1982: 104)( "Mr Benn has dared do something he should have known better than to do, given Prime Minister Wilson's present hostility towards any statement that might upset private industry." )
In any case, all of these uses evoke the speaker's view of the possibility of someone being so audacious as to perform the event denoted by the infinitive, and all imply a negative prejudice against such a thing being possible.
This relates them to all the other uses of blend and modal dare seen above, dare  itself being conceived as a mere possibility, thereby negating or questioning its existence as a reality constituting a before-position with respect to the event performed due to the daring (that expressed by the infinitive).
Since the speaker is discussing the possibility and not the reality of daring, he feels that there is no real daring occupying the before-position that daring normally occupies with respect to the event dared, and consequently does not use to in these contexts.
3.4 OUGHT
This is also the place to deal with the occurrence of the bare infinitive after the verb ought (cf.
Quirk et al.1985: 139).
As these authors point out, to can only be dropped (optionally) in non-assertive contexts (as with dare and need), the to-less form being completely unacceptable to speakers of English in assertive uses:(78) * We ought give him another chance.
(79) They ought not (to) do that sort of thing.
As seen above with need and dare, therefore, it is only when ought is not asserted but conceived as a mere possibility that it can cease to constitute a before-position with respect to the event expressed by the infinitive and be followed by the bare infinitive.
3.5 SUMMARY
The examination of the use of the infinitive with auxiliary verbs shows that the bare infinitive can express the same meanings of actualization and potentiality observed with the to infinitive.
Just as the latter is capable of expressing both subsequent actualization and subsequent potentiality, the former can evoke coincident actualization and coincident potentiality.
These typical senses of the infinitive are summed up in the table below: The bare infinitive is therefore no less versatile than the to infinitive in being able to express a happening as real or only potential, which is not surprising given the fact that the to infinitive is composed of the preposition to + the bare infinitive.
Four
The infinitive not incident to another verb
4.1 INTRODUCTION
All the cases analysed up to this point have involved a relationship of incidence between the infinitive and some other verb.
It has been seen that the bare infinitive is used whenever the two events are represented as coinciding in time, either as two actualities (after full verbs and auxiliary do) or as two potentialities (after the modal auxiliaries).
To is used when the infinitive event is conceived as coming after that of the other verb.
This analysis must however be extended if it is to cover all the uses of the infinitive since there are also cases in which the latter is not in relation with another verb, as in the following exclamations:(1) Oh to be in England now that April's there!
(Browning 1896: 272; in Jespersen 1940: 330)
(2) You unmanly fellow! to treat a woman so who took you off the street.
(Thackeray 1850: 901; in Jespersen 1940: 329)
(3) Not fire until the bombs came down?
He thought of the tons and tons of flammable liquid beneath his feet and shook his head.
(BUC F02 0950 8)
To take sentence (1) above as an example, if one follows the hypothesis developed here, to signifies that the infinitive event is  conceived as coming after something else.
The problem in this case however is: What is it that it comes after?
The use of the to infinitive as subject poses the same problem: What can the infinitive event be situated after in To visit the sick is a Christian obligation (B. Conrad 1982: 119)?
The attempt to answer this question leads us into a hitherto little-explored region of English grammar since it poses the problem of the relation between the infinitive and the category of person, and takes us back to a use not yet analysed satisfactorily, the so-called "infinitive of reaction" .
4.2 THE TO INFINITIVE IN EXCLAMATIONS DENOTING A NON-REALIZED EVENT
The easiest uses to come to grips with are exclamations such as(1) above, because they give a very clear impression of somehow looking at the infinitive event from a position before: they express a desire or longing to realize the infinitive event, so that (1) might be paraphrased"I would love to be in England…
".
The use of I in the paraphrase suggests moreover that it is the speaker who somehow sees himself before the infinitive event because it implies that he has not yet realized his desire.
Other examples show however that the person of which the infinitive event is predicated is not always the speaker:(4)…but he was differently designed, full of desires and aspirations, itching at the fingers, lusting with the eyes, whom the whole variegated world could not satisfy with aspects.
The true life, the true bright sunshine, lay far out upon the plain.
And O! to see this sunlight once before he died! to move with a jocund spirit in a golden land!
(Stevenson 1887: 79; in Jespersen 1940: 330)
Here the paraphrase would be "how he longed to see this sunlight once before he died!" , but the fact remains that the person designated by he in this example is felt as not yet having attained the realization of "seeing the sunlight once more" , i.e. as being before this event in time.
In this first type of exclamation, the impression then is that the person who would have been evoked as the subject if the verb were in a finite form is represented as  somehow before the infinitive event.
The realization of this event is thus felt to be prospective, an object of the longing or desire of this person, hence the need for to.
The second type of exclamation, as in (2), poses a somewhat different problem.
Like the first type, it always implies incidence to an actualizer of the infinitive event, someone or something which would have been explicitly expressed as the subject had the verb been finite.
Thus in (2) this implied "subject" can be identified as the person who is being addressed.
In (5) the support of predication is also the listener:(5) "But to leave Pa!" 
Emmy's bewildered mind went back to what was the real difficulty.
Jenny protested.
"He was in bed.
I thought he'd be safe…
"
(Swinnerton 1917: 251; in Kruisinga and Erades 1960: 362)
In (6), however, the infinitive is imputed to the person referred to by he:(6) Sir Jee was taken aback.
He, the chairman of the borough Bench, and the leading philanthropist in the county, to be so spoken to!
(Bennett 1907: 145; in Jespersen 1940: 329)
This second type of exclamation cannot be analysed in exactly the same terms as the first type, however, since the infinitive refers to an event which has already occurred and not to one whose occurrence is an object of someone's longing or desire.
Nevertheless, both types do imply incidence to an actualizer of the infinitive's event, a fact which poses the problem of the relation between the infinitive and the category of person, which must be explored in order to analyse (2)— and other uses, such as that in subject function — adequately.
4.3 THE VERB AND THE CATEGORY OF PERSON
The presence of person is directly observable in the finite forms of the verb, either in grammatical endings or in a preceding  noun or pronoun denoting the subject:(7) What does he do?
Runs away.
(Halliday and Hasan 1976: 199)
(8) He ran away.
Furthermore, traditional grammar sees in the finite verb a word which predicates something about its subject: The grammatical function of a finite verb is to serve as a predicate word, that is, in an ordinary affirmative sentence to state something about the subject of the sentence…
(Sweet 1898: 93)
In this connection, the above observations on the exclamatory use of the infinitive raise an important question: does the infinitive also have a predicative function?
As a means of answering this question, the predicative function of the verb can be situated in the much more general framework of a mechanism which seems fundamental to all words that evoke a lexical content.
Guillaume (1984: 120ff) shows that all substantives, adjectives, adverbs and verbs are inherently predicative because they bring to mind a lexical notion which has to be said about something in order for the word to perform its function in discourse.
Indeed, as Valin (1981: 6–7) points out, any act of language must fulfil the basic condition of saying something about someone or something.
The "something" which is said is called by Guillaume an "import of meaning" (1984: 120–2) and corresponds on the linguistic level to the lexeme or non-grammatical part of the word's meaning.
The "something" about which the lexeme is said, that to which the lexeme is "incident" , is called by Guillaume the "support" ; it forms part of the grammatical make-up of certain words, corresponding on the formal level to the category of person.
Thus the substantive apple contains the lexical idea of a kind of fruit: this is its material significate, or lexeme, the import of meaning which is said of some object in the speaker's experience.
In the case of the substantive apple, it is obvious that the lexeme evoked by this word can only be applied to objects of our experience  which are by nature apples: it cannot be said of a pen or an eraser.
The support of the lexeme of apple can therefore be discovered simply by confronting our experience with the notion itself.
This is what Guillaume (1984: 121–2) calls "internal incidence" : what the lexeme can be applied to is determined in advance since its nature is defined by the lexical notion contained in the word.
Internal incidence is characteristic of all substantives.
Since the notional content of adjectives, on the other hand, does not define the nature of their support but only a quality thereof they can be said to have external incidence.
One cannot know what an adjective is being applied to just by considering its lexical meaning: the support of an adjective is defined by something outside the adjective's own lexical content.
The adjective beautiful, for example, denotes a quality which can be found in many different objects and therefore does not by itself indicate the nature of that about which it is said.
To designate the support of the notion "beautiful" one must make the adjective incident to another word, normally a substantive, as in a beautiful painting, because the notion of "beautiful" itself can be said of anything that strikes the speaker as having this quality: a beautiful sunset, a beautiful house, a beautiful stallion, a beautiful thought, etc.
Like adjectives, verbs also have external incidence: their lexical content evokes a state or process which does not of itself define what it is said of.
Thus a given verbal lexeme such as "exist" can be said of an infinite number of different supports: I exist, you exist, this chair exists, etc.
As with the adjective, the finite verb must be put into relation with another word, in the case of the finite verb its subject, in order to define the support to which the lexeme is applied.
The subject expresses the lexical nature, if it is a substantive, and the ordinal person (first, second, third), if it is a pronoun, of the support to which the verbal lexeme is made incident.
The definition of the support's ordinal rank involves situating the support (= the person spoken about) with respect to the speaking relationship: the verb can be predicated of the speaker (person spoken of = speaker), of the person to whom he is speaking (person spoken of = the one spoken to), of someone or something not participating in the act of speech (person spoken of = neither speaker nor person spoken to), etc.
That the verb should require a subject to define the person of its support does not mean however that the category of person is not represented in the verb itself.
In languages such as Latin or Spanish, where the finite verb has distinctive endings for each ordinal person and can even dispense with expressing the subject outside the verb, person quite obviously finds representation within the verbal system.
This is less obvious in English, where all that remains of personal endings is the -s of the non-past.
This ending is nevertheless an indication that ordinal person is still present in the interior make-up of the English finite verb.
While such views are common doctrine in grammars as far as finite forms are concerned, it will be proposed here that a support or person is also present in the infinitival form of the verb, even though the latter can neither be predicated grammatically of a subject nor take any personal endings.
There are several indications of the presence of this support however.
Harris (1982: 52) points out, for instance, that the occurrence of self with the infinitive reveals the existence of what he calls a "subject" , so that , in transformational terms, "To hate oneself is unwise can only come from For one to hate oneself is unwise" .
Dolbec and Le Flem's (1980: 310ff) argument from the use of a predicate adjunct with the French infinitive can also be applied to English.
If the predicate adjunct to the subject is felt to qualify the support of the verb in She was alone, it would seem plausible that in (9) alone is also incident to the support of the verb (used here in the infinitival form), even though there is no subject pronoun to identify this support's ordinal rank.
(9) To be alone was a welcome change.
On the semantic level, thirdly, it has been observed that even though infinitives have no endings for person or number, they do have "a reference to some subject…; though their grammatical dependence connects them frequently with some other term" (Brown 1884: 337).
Unlike the support of finite forms, however, the support of the infinitive can be left completely unspecified as to its ordinal rank.
This can be seen from (10), where one feels that seeing and loving are potentially predicated of any support capable of realizing these actions ( "you" , "him" , "anyone" ).
(10) To see her is to love her.
This is why this account will follow Guillaume (1990: 99) in postulating that the support of the infinitive is a "generalized person" not yet defined explicitly as either first, second or third, nor even necessarily calling for ordinal definition (cf. (10) above).
An interesting bit of supporting evidence for this view of person in the infinitive is provided by weather verbs, which can only have a third person support (it) because of their notional import.
The infinitives of such verbs are found only where the person of their support is specified (We want it to snow), but not when the support is left undefined, as in certain exclamations, and not in the function of subject (*To snow is pleasant).
This is quite understandable if the non-specified version of the infinitive's support corresponds to a "generalized person" : since this person is the virtual sum of all persons (first, second or third), if to snow is not explicitly referred to it, the infinitive is felt as having a possible reference to "me" or "you" , which corresponds exactly to the impression produced by the sentence above and explains why it does not make sense.
Of more immediate interest for this study is the fact that this way of regarding the infinitive throws new light on uses such as(1) discussed above.
We can now not only see why in such sentences one feels an implicit predication with respect to a support but also get a clearer view of why to is used before the infinitive: its role here seems to be simply that of indicating that the infinitive's support is situated in time before the actualization of the infinitive's event.
In (1) above this gives rise to an impression of a prospective event, of a desire or longing on the part of the speaker to realize the action denoted by the infinitive, so that the to infinitive produces basically the same sort of impression in this first type of exclamation as in He struggled to get free: it evokes a prospective non-realized event.
In (2), on the other hand, we would seem to have the equivalent of He managed to get free, that is, a use where the to infinitive evokes a subsequent actualization (i.e. a realized event).
This latter use raises the question however of describing what is implied as leading up to the realization of the infinitive event, that is, of justifying why the speaker should want to represent the infinitive incident to a support conceived as occupying a before-position  with respect to the infinitive's event.
In order to answer that question, however, we must first take a look at the so-called "infinitive of reaction" and at the use of the infinitive as subject of a sentence.
4.4 THE INFINITIVE OF REACTION
The use which has received this appellation from Jespersen (1940: 259–60) can be illustrated by sentences such as:(11) I am glad (happy, delighted, pleased, proud, sorry, angry, ashamed, disappointed, surprised, astonished) to see you here.
(12) He rejoiced (His joy) to find her in good health.
(13) He delighted (His delight) to prove me wrong.
(14) He smiled (frowned) to see her joy.
The difficulty presented by this use is that, to take (11) as an example, the seeing already exists at the moment of speech, at the moment of being glad, and, in fact, is apparently what brought about the gladness, hence Jespersen's term.
(In passing, as has been noted by Poldauf (1968: 8), this is a misnomer, since it is the main verb, not the infinitive, which denotes the reaction.)
As Jespersen points out, "here we have a reference to an event that is past, or at any rate contemporaneous, in relation to the time of the main verb" , that is, just the opposite sequence of events to that which our hypothesis should have led us to expect.
Comparison with another related construction — that containing a subordinate clause — brings the meaning of the infinitive into clearer focus however and shows the reason for the use of to:(15a) I am glad to know that he is safe.
(15b) I am glad I know that he is safe.
Putting these sentences into a broader situation reveals that they do not presuppose the same thing and that, in spite of Jespersen's claim that the infinitive event is represented as occurring before the existence of the gladness, exactly the opposite is the case in the way the speaker represents the situation.
Thus (15a) presupposes that the person referred to by I has been waiting for news about someone whom he thought to be in danger, whereas (15b) does not, and might be said rather by someone who is comparing himself with other people who do not know this fact.
Consequently, while it is true to say that the sentence with the to infinitive evokes a realized event, this is only part of the story: it also evokes the dispositions of the support previous to the realization of the happening denoted by the infinitive.
This is perhaps even clearer in a past context.
Compare, for example:(16a) I was glad to see the police car come around the corner.
(16b) I was glad I saw the police car come around the corner.
Although in both cases it can be argued that the sight of the police car is what caused the speaker to be glad, the way in which these notions are put into relation is not the same.
While in (16b) the speaker is not represented as having any kind of expectations at all, in (16a) he is: the sentence with the infinitive means that the speaker was hoping for someone to come to his assistance even before this happened.
The police car can be said to be represented as a "welcome sight" , and there is therefore a reference to the time before its appearance which is not present in the sentence with the subordinate clause.
This reference to a mental prehistory of the infinitive event has also been observed by other authors.
Poldauf (1968: 8), for instance, completes Jespersen's description of the infinitive of reaction by pointing out that: Jespersen…overlooked the fact that only "reaction" implying evaluation can be construed with the infinitive.
Thus She smiled to hear me talk like that/He shuddered to hear of it are grammatical, *He jumped aside to see the car approaching at high speed/She was silent to be told she was wrong are not.
Poldauf even refers to the "evaluative prehistory" of a verb such as smile as being that which makes the use of the infinitive possible (1972: 88).
Wierzbicka (1988: 103ff), following on Bolinger 1984, points out likewise that "if my attitude to an event is such that I am glad or sorry about it, this means that in advance of this event I could have predicted my emotional reaction to it" .
She proposes consequently the following paraphrase of I was sorry to fail: If I had known this: this will happen to me (I will fail) I would have thought this: this will be bad, I will feel sorry when I thought this: I know this now: it happened to me I felt it (sorry)
What is significant for understanding why to is used with the infinitive of reaction is that the notion of "evaluation" implies a judgement as to whether the event was opportune or not, and this judgement involves an implicit reference to the situation as it existed before the infinitive event occurred, i.e. to the factors making its occurrence either opportune or inopportune.
In other words, to is used here to evoke:(a) the situation as it was before the infinitive's event was realized, and (b) the movement of the support of the infinitive's event from position (a) to the realization of this event.
The main clause, for its part, expresses a judgement about or a reaction to the fact of the infinitive event's having acceded to existence.
To is consequently used in the infinitive of reaction to evoke the support of the infinitive as characterized by a disposition arising prior to the time of realization of what the infinitive denotes.
What distinguishes the infinitive of reaction from uses such as I am ready to leave, where ready also attributes a prior disposition to the support, is simply that the characteristic denoted by the adjective of reaction evokes both a prior and a contemporaneous disposition towards the occurrence of an event.
In this type of use, to is intercepted at the final moment of the movement it denotes, so that the adjective or main verb evokes not only how the person designated as the support of the infinitive was predisposed towards the realization of the latter's event, but also his feelings at the time of its occurrence.
4.5 THE TO INFINITIVE AS SUBJECT
So far we have not examined the use of the to infinitive as subject.
Many examples pose no problem in the light of the notion of a prior position of the support:(17) To visit the poor is a Christian obligation.
(B. Conrad 1982: 119)
(18) To be understood in Alexandria and tolerated in Athens was the extent of his ambition.
(B. Conrad 1982: 122)
The notions of "obligation" and "ambition" both imply that the place in time where the support is affected by the obligation or the ambition is prior to the realization of the infinitive's action.
Similarly in (19) the conditional would signifies that not building is being envisaged as a hypothesis, as something which might be done in the future, but which is unadvisable in the eyes of the speaker.
(19) Not to build because we are short of doctors or staff would be a counsel of despair.
(B. Conrad 1982: 143)
The prospective element is somewhat more subtle in:(20) To fall was to die.
(Weekly Times, 7 March 1884: 4; in Visser 1963: 258)
This sentence can nevertheless be paraphrased by "If someone were to fall, he would unquestionably die" : the to infinitive evokes a hypothetical action here as well, i.e. an action to be avoided.
Such examples confirm the view of the infinitive proposed here because they evoke its lexical content as something prospective.
On the other hand, the following example implies that the support — here the speaker — has actually realized the action denoted by the infinitive:(21) Nor could I foresee how much pleasure I was to derive "putting some style" into those fatuous concoctions titled PROGRESS REPORT ON BEET…
To read Gideon on Beet was a new literary experience.
(B. Conrad 1982: 137)
As in the case of the infinitive of reaction, this use seems apparently to contradict the hypothesis that the support of the to infinitive is always situated before the place in time (to be) occupied by its event; however, when compared with the use of the -ing form here, the contrasting expressive effects suggest another interpretation:(21a) Reading Gideon on Beet was a new literary experience.
(21b) To read Gideon on Beet was a new literary experience.
Reading here simply evokes the realization of the event and no more.
The to infinitive, however, has a decidedly more ironic effect, as if the occurrence of the event read Gideon on Beet was something very special, an unexpected bit of luck or special privilege.
It might be paraphrased as "having the opportunity to read Gideon on Beet" or "being able (allowed) to read Gideon on Beet" .
This impression of "specialness" , of contingency, of the event's occurrence being something which could not have been taken for granted, disappears in the sentence with -ing.
Similar impressions are obtained from other examples of this type:(22) He did not want to be alone, and had expected to find some of his friends at the bar.
To be alone seemed a continuation of his drugged life at the lathe.
(B. Conrad 1982: 135)
Here the person referred to did not expect to be alone at the bar.
The to infinitive thus evokes the occurrence of an event as contingent, as something which might not have happened and which in fact was not expected to happen: the closest paraphrase is "that he should find himself alone" .
The -ing form would have referred more to the mere experience of being alone at that moment than to the unexpectedness of finding himself alone.
The to infinitive has much the same expressive effect in:(23) Certainly I looked for no such friendship as you have shown.
To have found it turns evil to great good.
(Tolkien 1968: 799)
Here again it denotes an event whose occurrence was unexpected.
Likewise, example (24) suggests that the event was unforeseen and therefore all the more outrageous:(24) To lose his bargain through the obstinacy of a fool, to have his patronage overlooked by a subordinate, choked him with rage.
(B. Conrad 1982: 140)
All this points to the to infinitive as an expression of a contingent occurrence.
It lends the infinitive event, in contrast with the -ing form, an aura of "iffiness" which brings to mind the possibility that this event might well not have occurred.
The following unusual use of to provides further confirmation of this:(25) She waited, Kate Croy, for her father to come in, but he kept her unconscionably, and there were moments at which she showed herself, in the glass over the mantel, a face positively pale with the irritation that had brought her to the point of going away without sight of him.
If she continued to wait it was really, in a manner, that she might not add the shame of fear, of individual, personal collapse, to all the other shames.
To feel the street, to feel the room, to feel the table-cloth and the centerpiece and the lamp, gave her a small, salutary sense, at least, of neither shirking nor lying.
(James 1902: 9)
I believe it is possible to propose an explanation for the intuitive feeling one gets that the -ing form would be somewhat inappropriate here: the author is describing a person who is groping for anything which will reassure her before she meets her angry father and the mere fact that she is able to perceive objects which are familiar to her — when she feels so disoriented that she  can take nothing for granted — is what gives her the sense that she is neither shirking nor lying.
These perceptions are thus conceived as contingent, as open to non-occurrence, since they are not being treated as normal, as being taken for granted, even though they did take place in actual fact.
This type of impression reminds one once again of the "infinitive of result" :(26) He managed to get free.
Here also the infinitive evokes an event which actually occurred but which very well might not have.
It has been seen that the impression of "subsequent actualization" arising here results from intercepting the movement signified by to at its final instant, at the point where the infinitive event is actualized.
The to infinitive in sentences such as(21)—(25) above seems to involve the same mechanism of representation.
There is one major difference however between the above sentences and the infinitive of result.
In (26), the main verb manage denotes what led up to the realization of the infinitive or, better, what put the support in a position to realize it.
Manage thus expresses notionally the movement of approach signified by to from a position before the event up to the point where its realization begins.
This is not the case however when the to infinitive is subject: although one still understands that the infinitive event is realized, there is nothing in such uses which specifies what leads up to its realization.
The expressive effects noted in (21)—(25) involve impressions of contingency, unexpectedness, good or bad luck — in short, notions suggesting unforeseen events.
To represent a happening as unforeseeable, however — and herein lies the explanation for the use of the infinitive with to — one must necessarily evoke a position before its occurrence: the stretch of time leading up to it must be evoked as containing no prior indication that it was going to occur.
This use appears therefore to depict the support of the infinitive as entering into the actualization phase of an event from a prior position in time when nothing seemed to be militating in favour of its occurrence.
The resulting impression is consequently that the occurrence was unexpected, happened fortuitously.
The type of use under discussion is therefore exactly parallel to the infinitive of result, except that what has brought the support to realize the happening denoted by the infinitive's lexeme is left undefined.
As with the infinitive of result, the infinitive with to evokes the actualization of an event, but one which appears fortuitous, contingent.
This "actualization" sense of the infinitive arises in both uses from a late interception of the movement signified by to, at the instant where its movement of approach reaches its term, the starting point of the event represented by means of the infinitive.
Thanks to this way of analysing the movement of to, the expressive effects of unexpectedness, good or bad luck and the like produced by the to infinitive in these cases can be accounted for.
Moreover, the same basis of explanation — analysing the movement of to — can also explain the difference between this use of the infinitive as subject and that discussed above in examples (17)—(20).
In these sentences, it will be recalled, the event is seen as prospective, as a subsequent potential, a meaning that arises from intercepting the movement of to before it reaches the infinitival lexeme's place in time.
That is to say, as subject, the to infinitive can denote two types of contingent events corresponding to two different interceptions of to: PROSPECTIVE (POTENTIAL) CONTINGENT EVENT: To be understood in Alexandria and tolerated in Athens was the height of his ambition.
ACTUALIZATION OF A CONTINGENT EVENT: To read Gideon on Beet was a new literary experience.
The expression of a prospective contingent event is the product of an early interception, and that of an actualized contingent event is produced by a final interception.
The difference in meaning between the two coincides therefore with the distinction already made between to infinitives evoking their event as a "subsequent potentiality" and those evoking it as a "subsequent actualization" .
This is, for example, the distinction between the infinitive of purpose and the infinitive of result.
English is not alone in being able to evoke a mental position before an event which has actually occurred moreover.
In (27) the verb in the subjunctive (the mood of the non-real) also  denotes a happening which in actual fact has already taken place:(27) Je regrette qu'il soit venu.
However, as with the English infinitive, the speaker is not merely accepting this happening as a fact but is passing judgement on the appropriateness of its occurrence: the verb regretter here expresses a "critical idea" through which the happening être venu is "viewed" (Guillaume 1971a: 218).
In such uses, therefore, the speaker mentally situates a real event in the field of the merely possible so that he can express a judgement, not on the reality of the happening, but on the appropriateness of its occurrence (p. 219): judging whether something real is appropriate for existence or not involves imagining what things would be like without its existence, and so leads to taking a mental position before its existence where both existence and non-existence are seen as possible.
The subjunctive in French allows the speaker to adopt this purely imaginary position from which he can give a verdict on whether a happening should have occurred or not.
English seems to obtain much the same effect with the to infinitive as subject.
In the type of sentence under consideration there is always an element of critical appreciation of the appropriateness of the infinitive event.
In (21) this critical idea is expressed by a new literary experience, which expresses a (feigned) favourable posture with respect to "reading Gideon on Beet" .
In (22) the suggestion is that the occurrence of being alone at the bar was not only unexpected but undesirable.
(23) above expresses a favourable reaction to the fact that the speaker happened to find friendship where he was not seeking it.
And so on with all the other examples of this construction which have been found.
Before moving on to the next section, it is perhaps worth pointing out that the analysis just presented also allows us to handle certain uses related to the infinitive of reaction where the nexus between the infinitive and the main clause is much looser than in the canonical cases discussed above in (11)—(16):(28) I was stunned, to see him lose.
(29) John was embarrassed, to be in a place like that.
(Bolinger 1984: 55, 52)
Bolinger distinguishes these uses from those such as I was glad to see her there, where there is no comma pause, by calling the latter "projective" and the former "reactive" —(28), for example, is paraphrased by "I was stunned by his losing" .
In both projective and reactive uses, however, the infinitive expresses an actualized contingent event and the impression of contingency implies a reference to a position in time when the infinitive's event was not a reality (i.e. before its actualization), so that the term "reactive" is no more appropriate here than in the canonical uses of the "infinitive of reaction" as a description of the meaning of the to infinitive.
The difference between these two senses lies simply in the fact that loosening the nexus allows the main clause to be interpreted more as a consequence of the actualization of the contingent event expressed by the infinitive than as a judgement on the appropriateness of its occurrence.
4.6 THE TO INFINITIVE IN EXCLAMATIONS DENOTING A REALIZED EVENT
The observations above also provide a means of analysing uses such as(2),(5) and (6), which have not yet been treated explicitly.
Exclamatory sentences such as these express a critical judgement of the occurrence of the happening which the infinitive denotes, and so present it as something which should or could have been avoided.
The exact nature of the beforeness evoked by to varies however according to the context.
In (2), for instance, the idea of unmanly seems to correspond to what caused the person represented as the support of the infinitive to perform the action of treating a woman badly, and the sentence suggests that the speaker did not expect such unmanly behaviour from the person he is addressing.
(5), on the other hand, seems to call into question the existence of any conditions which could have led to someone leaving Pa unattended: the speaker cannot understand how anyone could have done such a thing.
(6) is very similar: given the opinion that Sir Jee had of himself, he could not understand what could lead someone to speak to him in such a way.
The constant element underlying this type of exclamation is therefore the expression of surprise, indignation, etc. at the happening  denoted by the infinitive having been realized.
In many contexts the impression one gets is that this happening is not something the speaker would have expected, but all such uses express a critical judgement on the person represented as the infinitive's support having gone ahead and done something when, in the speaker's opinion, he should not have.
To is required with the infinitive in order to represent this movement from a before-position when the event was not yet realized — at which point, according to the speaker, it could and perhaps should have been prevented from occurring — to an after-position corresponding to its actual realization.
The to infinitive expresses therefore a subsequent actualization in this use.
What leads up to this actualization is not specified, the very fact of something having led to it constituting that which is judged negatively by the speaker.
4.7 THE BARE INFINITIVE IN EXCLAMATIONS
The bare infinitive is used to produce a very different effect from that of the to infinitive in exclamations, as can be seen in (3) above and in:(30) I say anything disrespectful of Dr Keen?
Heaven forbid!
(Dickens 1861; in Jespersen 1940: 328)
(31) Colonel Brandon give me a living!
Can it be possible?
(Austen 1811: 284; in Jespersen 1940: 328)
Regarding this use, Jespersen observes that the bare infinitive occurs only in exclamations "in which an idea is brushed aside as impossible by means of an (exaggerated) interrogative intonation…" (p. 328).
Kruisinga and Erades (1960: 363) note something very similar: It is evident that the plain stem serves to express that the idea of the activity suggested by the verb is rejected by the speaker as incredible, an outrage, an impossibility, or an absurdity.
There is an obvious parallel, therefore, between the bare infinitive's use in exclamations and that after need and dare.
In both  cases, the realization of the infinitive event is "rejected" or "brushed aside" , i.e. viewed from the point of view of factors favouring its non-occurrence rather than its occurrence.
Even more significant is the impression alluded to by both grammarians that the infinitive evokes a mere possibility here — something which is brushed aside as "impossible" , something which the speaker cannot conceive as actually existing.
Independently of any other verb, the bare infinitive here expresses an event as a possibility, a rejected possibility.
With the modals, the effect of representing the support in its place in time (past or non-past) as receiving the incidence of the potential event is to evoke actualization as dependent on the conditions of possibility, probability, etc., expressed by the modal.
Here, on the other hand, no place in time with its conditions governing the potential actualization is represented because the infinitive is not dependent on a modal auxiliary.
As a consequence, representing the support as receiving the incidence of a purely potential event necessarily evokes the latter as non-actual, but specifies no conditions governing its actualization, simply suggesting that it is "impossible" or "brushing it aside" .
Of course, this leaves the expressive movement of the sentence and other elements in the context free play to imply various reasons for rejecting the event as actualizable.
The bare infinitive in exclamations evokes therefore an incidence of the infinitive's event to its support which can only be represented as potential since the speaker feels it has little or no chance of being real, of finding a place in real time.
The to infinitive is not used because one is not situating the incidence of the infinitive's event to its support as coming after some other position in time at which the support is also represented, as was the case in (1) above.
In the use with the bare infinitive, the speaker simply wishes to represent the attributing of the infinitive's event to a support in time as outside the field of possibility (hence necessarily non-actual).
4.8 THE BARE INFINITIVE AFTER RATHER THAN AND SOONER THAN
The use just discussed bears a relation to the occurrence of the  bare infinitive after the expressions rather than and sooner than:(32) He paid the fine rather than appeal to a higher court.
(Quirk et al.1985: 1003)
Quirk et al.point out quite rightly that the matrix clause "expresses the subject's preference" here but they fail to see the implications of this for the infinitive.
If the matrix clause expresses the course of action preferred by the subject of the verb, however, then the infinitive must express a possibility which is rejected, as in the exclamative sentences treated above.
This is very much in keeping moreover with the nature of comparative clauses, since, as has been seen in the discussion of need and dare, they contain an inherent non-assertiveness.
This negative element can be felt in (32) above in the fact that this sentence implies that he did not appeal to a higher court even though he could have.
The bare infinitive expresses a possibility which was not realized in this use and is therefore conceived in the same way as it is with the modal auxiliaries, as a mere potential, except for the fact that no particular form of potentiality is attributed to it.
4.9 THE INFINITIVE AND THE CATEGORY OF PERSON
The role of generalized person in the infinitive thus allows a deeper understanding of those uses of the infinitive where it is not in syntactic relation with another verb and of the reasons why to is used in certain of these uses but not in others.
It leads us moreover to draw a further important distinction, which makes the analysis of the infinitive's relation to person even more precise.
The distinction in question is that between two representations of person which appear to be involved in all of the uses of the infinitive: the virtual, generalized intra-verbal person of the infinitive, on the one hand, and the actual, often rank-specified extra-verbal person evoked by the context, on the other.
In a case such as(1) above, the place in time of the extra-verbal person I is prior to that of the representation of person contained within the infinitive be.
This calls for the use of to.
In What!
Me know the answer!, in contrast, both the  extra-verbal person evoked by me and the generalized person incorporated within the infinitive know as the support of a merely potential knowing are situated in the present, which explains the absence of to and the fact that this sentence can be used to call into question the possibility that the speaker has the knowledge at the present moment.
This way of regarding the infinitive's relation to person can be applied moreover to the uses already examined in Chapters Two and Three, where this form is related to another verb in the sentence and thus provides a coherent explanation covering all the uses of both versions of the infinitive by means of a single principle of analysis.
For example, in I want to go, it has been argued that because the wanting is conceived as preceding the going, to is required to situate the latter event beyond the former.
Now, however, we can propose that the infinitive event with its internal spatial support (intra-verbal person) must be conceived as situated at a point in time beyond that at which its explicit actual support is located.
This is indeed the case here, where the support of the infinitive is made explicit by the pronoun I. The fact that I is the subject of the verb want automatically situates it in time before the event go: the first person is involved in the actualization phase of want in the present but he is not yet represented as involved in going.
The same thing is true of I want him to go.
Here the support of the infinitive (specified by him) is involved in the wanting not as its subject but as its direct object.
However this still situates "him" in the present with respect to want — he is the object of a desire right now — whereas he is not yet involved as the agent of the event go.
Here, then, not only is there no contradiction between the former analysis and the more complete view of the infinitive taking into account its generalized person, but the latter actually gives a fuller understanding of the posteriorizing movement of to by specifying its starting point and its end-point: the positions occupied by the two representations of person involved.
The principle just formulated can quite obviously be applied to the infinitive of purpose:(33) He struggled to get free.
Here also the support of the infinitive is identified with that of  the finite verb and so is depicted as having realized the action of struggling with the intention of performing the infinitive event.
Since his involvement in struggling does not necessarily imply that he will actually get free, it simply places him before the getting free which he aims to realize.
From the point of view of its spatial support, we can understand as well the use of the to infinitive as what Jespersen calls the "infinitive of specification" (1940: 262ff).
Thus one can say the sentence in (34) even if the person referred to never gets to handle the case:(34) He is qualified to handle this case.
The same is true of free, fit, apt, able, etc., all of which denote a quality in the person designated as the support which predisposes him to realize the action referred to by the infinitive in a certain way.
That is, the support of the finite verb is seen at a point in time from which the realization of the infinitive event by the person of the infinitive is viewed as a subsequent potential.
The type of substantive which occurs with the infinitive of specification also gives a clear view of the relation between the person outside and inside the infinitive event, for example:(35) A chance to put them into practice.
(Scheurweghs 1959: 215)
Friedrich (1961: 34–7) gives the following list of substantives followed by the infinitive with to: attempt, decision, right, willingness, inclination, need, request, permission, promise, order, wish, petition, desire, goodness, impudence, cheek, impulse, endeavour, inspiration, ability, possibility, chance, occasion, obligation, determination, aim, propensity, the wit, tendency, temptation, hesitation, refusal, reluctance, failure.
These various substantives evoke a state or quality which disposes the support to perform an action (willingness, desire, impudence, ability, etc.), an action he performs which prevents or could prevent him from realizing it (hesitation, refusal, reluctance, etc.), something he needs in order to realize it (right, permission), a circumstance in which he finds himself which favours something's occurrence (chance, occasion), etc. — all of which evoke a situation existing before the infinitive event, and so imply a reference to a prior position of the support.
Indeed, for all cases where the to infinitive evokes "subsequent potentiality" the support is necessarily seen or implied to be situated in time prior to the event.
The "subsequent actualization" sense of the to infinitive also involves this double position of the support: person as support of the event of the finite verb is represented as prior in time to person as support of the infinitive's event.
Thus in (36), a typical example of the infinitive of result, managed evokes all the efforts which the subject had to make in order to attain the result and so situates the third-person support in time before — and all the way up to— the point at which "getting free" is actualized.
(36) He managed to get free.
Much the same thing can be said of the to infinitive denoting something which is actualized as a consequence of causation (cause, force, occasion, get, order, tell), assistance (help), discovery (find), daring, etc.
In all cases, then, whether the infinitive evokes the possible or the real actualization of its event, the person of the to infinitive is referred to two positions in time, one before, one coinciding with this event's place in time.
As for the bare infinitive, it can be shown that in all of its uses it implies — as it does in exclamations — that the extra-verbal support's place in time cannot be conceived as a before-position with respect to the infinitive's event.
In cases where the bare infinitive evokes the actualization of its event, as in (37), the use of the bare infinitive incident directly to the finite verb implies that the agent who realizes the latter is directly and simultaneously involved in the action of the infinitive.
(37) Mrs Arthur Goldberg…paints professionally and helps sponsor the Associated Artists' Gallery in the District of Columbia.
Thus, as we saw above, the only way to help sponsor something is to sponsor it in part by contributing money oneself.
In (38) below one understands that the support of the finite verb carried out his helping at the same time as the support of the infinitive was addressing the letters, whence the meaning of being instrumental in the realization of this action.
(38) I helped him address the letters.
In I made him eat his potatoes, similarly, where the realizer of eat is "him" only, the person referred to by the direct object is represented as being involved in eating at the same time during which he is the object of the causation denoted by make: since make evokes the idea of "producing an effect" , it is impossible to conceive the making as being under way before the effect has started coming into existence.
Whereas the uses just cited all represent cases in which the extra-verbal support's place in time coincides with that of the intra-infinitival support involved in the actual realization of what the infinitive denotes, what has been called "coincident actualization" , with the modals however the extra-infinitival support is represented as receiving the incidence of the infinitive's potentiality in time ( "coincident potentiality" ).
Thus in He can sing the incidence of "sing" to "he" exists as a potential in the present: the person referred to possesses at the present moment the capacity of realizing this action.
In He will sing tomorrow, "singing tomorrow" is in relation with the subject in the present, but only as a probable potential: "he" is represented as subject to certain conditions in the present (his time-table, his own will) which make his singing tomorrow predictable: in a way, one could say that right now he is represented as a "probable tomorrow-singer" .
The view that the infinitive involves a generalized representation of person as the support necessary to conceive the lexical content as an event thus in no way contradicts anything said previously.
On the contrary, the expressive effects observed in the uses examined in Chapters Two and Three appear as necessary consequences of the incidence of the infinitive's event, with its intra-verbal "general person" , to its extra-verbal spatial support in time.
4.10 CONCLUSION
Guillaume's notion of a representation of person as a support within the infinitive has proven to be extremely fruitful for explaining the uses of this form discussed above.
This hypothesis is a consequence of his search for the inherent necessities of human  thought, following his dictum that "a theory, the ultimate in understanding, must satisfy the following formal conditions: it must confront the facts from the position of an antagonist, of course, but it must itself be based not on fact but on some absolute and inevitable exigency" (1984: 23).
The necessity of representing both the time contained in an event (event time) and the time containing the event (universe time, its temporal support) has long been recognized, at least implicitly, in the distinction between aspect and time-sphere.
It is proposed here that the need to represent a spatial support in order to get a mental representation of an event is another such requirement: how can one conceive an event as something taking place in time without also conceiving at least virtually someone or something realizing it (or undergoing its realization, as in the passive)?
From this postulate about the general nature of the verb based on our experience of happenings, one can deduce the necessary presence of a spatial support in the mental representation signified by the infinitive.
The morphological and syntactic characteristics of the infinitive (no personal endings, no subject) lead one to conclude that this support has the form of a generalized person which does not vary in rank but which encompasses all possible ordinal persons.
This in turn explains why the infinitive can evoke both the wide range of all possible realizers (as in To visit the poor is a Christian obligation) and the narrowing down of this range to one particular spatial support (for instance, to the speaker as in Oh to be in England…).
Postulating the presence of a generalized person in the infinitive whose position in time as support of the infinitive's event is either coincident or subsequent to another position of this same person, at which it is often represented as support of some other event, thus leads to a more profound comprehension of the motives underlying the use of to.
Five
The infinitive in the English verb system
5.1 THE BARE INFINITIVE'S PLACE IN THE SYSTEM AND THE ROLE OF TO
In previous psychomechanical studies, the infinitive has been defined as a quasi-nominal form of the verb evoking its event as not yet realized (cf.
Hirtle 1975: 20–1).
Its place in the system of the quasi-nominal forms and its relation to the present and past participles is diagrammed as: This diagram can now be made more precise insofar as the infinitive is concerned.
The first point to be made is that to is not, strictly speaking, part of the infinitive: the latter is a verb, whereas to is a dematerialized preposition whose use is called for in certain contexts because of the meaning it expresses.
The infinitive as such in English, that whose grammatical meaning is generated by the mental mechanisms involved in the system of the verb, corresponds to the so-called "bare infinitive" .
As for the grammatical meaning of the bare infinitive, the following remarks can be made.
First of all, unlike the -ing form, the infinitive always produces a representation of an event seen as a whole, i.e. either as a single instant of a state-like event or as a movement from the beginning limit to the end of an action-like one (cf.
Hirtle 1988).
As can be observed from the contrast between I saw him swim/swimming across the river, the infinitive refuses a partial view of an action-like event as intercepted midway between the beginning and the end.
This does not entail however, as Hirtle 1975 seems to suggest, that the infinitive must represent an event as referred to some point in time prior to its realization: if such were the case, it would be impossible to explain why to is needed in some contexts but not in others.
Taking into account the notion of support, the most satisfactory definition that can be given of the English bare infinitive in the present state of our knowledge is therefore as follows: the bare infinitive is a non-finite verb form that provides for the incidence of its event to a support through all the instants of time required to actualize the complete lexical content of this event.
Since the intra-verbal support of the infinitive is a general virtual person, the speaker must also conceive the actual support to which the infinitive's event is incident and the relation in time between the virtual and actual persons whenever he wants to use this verb form.
The conditions under which the potential significate of the infinitive is exploited in discourse have been seen to vary according to certain parameters, such as use with lexical verb vs use with auxiliary and use with do vs use with the modal auxiliaries.
With lexical verbs, the infinitive evokes its event as incident to a support which receives the incidence of the lexical verb's event in the same time-stretch as that required to represent the infinitive's actualization.
This produces the effect of a "coincident actualization" observed in sentences such as I saw him swim across the river, which can be depicted as: With auxiliaries, the connection between the infinitive and the verb with which it is in syntactic relation is much more intimate: the auxiliaries used with the infinitive do not merely evoke some other event whose support coincides in time with that of the infinitive — they qualify the very incidence of the infinitive's event to its extra-verbal support, as actual (do auxiliary) or potential (the modals).
The way do does this is to represent its support as receiving the incidence of the actualization of the infinitive event in the time-stretch expressed by the auxiliary.
For He did swim across the river: This involves the virtual person of the infinitive occupying the same position(s) in time as the actual person which specifies its rank in the auxiliary, and so to is not necessary.
As for the modals, they represent their support as receiving the incidence of the potentiality of the infinitive's event in the time-stretch which they express.
For He could swim across the river: This also involves the intra-infinitival virtual person occupying the same position in time as the actual person which specifies its rank contained in the auxiliary, but here the virtual person is conceived as the support of a potentiality and not of an actualization.
The coincidence between the two representations of  person (in passing, both are representations of the same extra-linguistic entity) is what calls for the use of the bare infinitive.
The bare infinitive no longer suffices, however, when its actual spatial support is represented as somehow before the time corresponding to the actualization of the infinitive's event.
In this case to is required in order to represent the relation in time between the two positions of person involved here, one before the time of the infinitive's event, the other at the beginning of its actualization.
The to used before the infinitive was very clearly a preposition when first employed in this function; in fact, it governed the dative case of the infinitive.
Indeed, it is not surprising that a member of this particular grammatical category should have been brought into play here.
The role of the preposition has been described in the following way: The preposition can therefore be quite accurately defined as the type of word which is already predestined in tongue to intervene in discourse between two words separated by an interval which is not covered by a mechanism of incidence in operation…
It is the type of word that comes into play whenever the mechanism of incidence between two parts of the sentence is left in abeyance.
As long as the mechanism of incidence of one word to the other works, there is no need for a preposition.
The latter comes in only when this mechanism is no longer operative, when it fails to apply, and the role of the preposition is then to make up for the inoperative movement of incidence…
(Guillaume 1971b: 154–5)
Thus whereas the bare infinitive allows for the incidence of its event to a support situated within the confines of event time, the mechanism of incidence provided for by the verb form itself is inoperative when called upon express an incidence to a support situated prior to the time contained in the event.
This explains why English has recourse to a preposition, a word whose function is to establish a relation between two words when no mechanism of incidence is provided for by the words themselves, in order to make the infinitive incident to a support situated outside its event time.
What is more, the use of to with the infinitive seems to  betoken, as with prepositional to, a relation involving a spatial entity: a preposition relates an element conceived as a spatial entity (a substantive or pronoun) to something else.
In He drove from Toronto to New York, for example, the spatial entity New York is related to the process of driving as the term of the movement involved in this process.
As for to in its use with the infinitive, it signifies a relation between two spatial entities in time — the non-ordinalized general person incorporated in the infinitive and the often-ordinalized extra-verbal person of which the infinitive is predicated in a particular use.
Through its lexical meaning of a movement from point A to point B, to allows one to represent two positions of the infinitive event's spatial support in time — one before, and one at the beginning of the infinitive's event — which correspond to the two representations of person — extra- and intra-infinitival — involved in any use of the infinitive.
Thus to is used with the infinitive both for the lexical and grammatical meaning it brings into the context: its lexical meaning of an approach to the infinitive event from a position before is called for by the relative position in time of the extra-infinitival spatial support with respect to the position occupied by non-ordinalized person at the beginning of the infinitive's event; its grammatical meaning as an establisher of a relation where the inherent mechanism of incidence is inoperative is called for by the fact that the event cannot otherwise be represented as incident to the extra-infinitival support since the latter is not already situated at the beginning of the event, i.e. is not within the confines of event time.
The view of to proposed here allows one, furthermore, to account for the two major uses of the to infinitive.
As has been shown above, the movement denoted by to can be intercepted at some point before its term to evoke a support at some remove from the position occupied by the representation of person at the beginning of the infinitive's event, thus giving rise to the impression which we have called "subsequent potentiality" (He struggled to get free).
On the other hand, it can also be allowed to run its course, carrying the support up to the point of actualization of the infinitive's event, which produces the "subsequent actualization" sense (He managed to get free).
Consequently the two uses of the to infinitive arise from representing the extra-verbal support either as separated from the actualization of what  the verb denotes by a lapse of time or as attaining the place in time where this actualization takes place.
This can be diagrammed in the following way for the early interception: and as follows for the final one: The to infinitive, therefore, is not strictly speaking a verb but rather a syntactic construction: it involves two parts, the infinitive, a verbal form which evokes a representation of an event produced by means of the verb system, and to, a preposition which indicates a relationship between the place in time where the support has to be situated to begin actualizing the infinitive's event (occupied by the representation of non-ordinalized person incorporated within the infinitive) and some other prior place in time which the support is also represented as occupying or having occupied previous to the realization of this event.
Thus only the infinitive is part of the verbal system, and to is an element brought in from outside this system to provide for incidence to a support seen as occupying a place in time before the beginning of the event.
5.2 GENERALIZED PERSON
Besides contributing to a deeper comprehension of the function of to, this study has also led to a fuller understanding of the role of the category of person in the infinitive.
It is proposed here that the infinitive is not totally devoid of a representation of  person but contains a "generalized person" which represents a support that has not yet been defined ordinally with respect to the speech situation as first, second or third.
This, as we have seen, explains the impossibility of the infinitive in *To snow would be pleasant as against its possible use in I want it to snow: if the generalized person of the infinitive of weather verbs is not specified as referring to the only support with which the notion denoted by these verbs is conceivable, namely it, then one feels a possible reference to any of the ordinal persons which can be referred to by the infinitive's generalized person ( "you" , "me" , etc.), and so the sentence does not make sense.
The presence of generalized person in the infinitive also explains how this verb form can be "without person or number" and yet have "a reference to some subject" (Brown 1884: 336–7): the fact that the infinitive does contain a support gives rise to the impression that the event is referred to a "potential subject" , that is, to what would have been the subject had the verb been finite.
On the other hand, no personal endings are found here simply because no ordinal rank has yet been represented at this early stage of verb formation, a fact which gives us some insight into the reality underlying the term "non-finite" .
Finally, all these remarks tend to confirm the view that the infinitive is the most virtual form in the system of the verb (cf.
Guillaume 1964: 267).
Like the other quasi-nominal forms of the verb, it has as a support a representation of person not yet differentiated ordinally, as we have just seen.
Unlike the past participle and the -ing form, however, the infinitive does not evoke its event as partially or completely realized at the point in time where it is referred to its support, and so the incidence of the event to the support can itself be seen as a mere possibility.
Granted the abstractness of the representations involved here, it is small wonder that some grammarians doubt the existence of an infinitive in English (cf.
Erades 1956).
5.3 PROSPECTS
This study has of course raised new problems, and thereby opened up avenues for further investigation.
Most immediate among these is that of the relation between the representation of  time in the bare infinitive and in the non-past indicative.
The synapsis of sign has already been pointed out by Hirtle (1967: 21), but the reason suggested for it — namely, that the infinitive has the meaning "event time not yet actualized" and the non-past indicative implies "event in the not yet stretch of universe time" — will have to be re-examined.
The findings of the present study, as well as those of Gordon (1982: 55-6) and Novara-Curat (1983: 161–2), suggest that the notion of "not yet time" will have to be reinterpreted.
Indeed, it is reassuring to note that although these studies involve different problems within the verb, they all seem to be converging in so far as the view of the relation between event time and universe time (time containing the event) is concerned.
All this may throw light as well on the diachronic evolution both of the non-past indicative and of the infinitive.
Historical evidence shows that the so-called "present" tense could formerly be used much more freely to refer to the future than is now the case.
According to Visser (1966: 669), it is around the time of the passage from Old to Middle English that one witnesses the beginning of this "shrinkage" of the non-past, which loses more and more ground to the constructions with will and shall.
At the same time as the non-past is undergoing this shift, the use of to with the infinitive is being extended beyond its concrete directional sense to cover all cases of subsequent potentiality and subsequent actualization, for which the bare infinitive had formerly been adequate: "…the use of the to infinitive in the place of the bare or plain infinitive increased rapidly during the late Old English and early Middle English periods" (Visser 1966: 948).
The bare infinitive thus seems to have shifted out of the field of the future or the subsequent in a similar way to, and at the same time as, the present-tense form.
A clearer knowledge of this remarkable coincidence will perhaps explain why the signs for these two grammatical forms fall into synapsis later on.
Even more important, it may throw light on certain differences between English and other Germanic languages (e.g. German and Dutch).
Besides the question of the history of the infinitive, the present study renews the long-standing problem of the relation between the infinitive and the -ing form.
Indeed, it is perhaps not overly optimistic to think that the view of the relation between  an event and its support put forward here may be applicable, mutatis mutandis, to the -ing form and may even throw light on the vexed question of gerund vs participle.
Granted the systematic nature of language, the results of such a study as this cannot but reflect on the quasi-nominal forms of the verb as a whole.