

The Single European Market — Frank McDonald
The Treaty of Rome and the SEM
The concept of the Single European Market (SEM) has become one of the most studied and debated topics of recent years.
It is known by many names: the SEM, the Internal Market, the 1992 Programme.
It might be thought that the concept is a new one.
However, all of these terms are simply alternative names for a Common Market.
The concept of a Common Market is not new, the term arose in the 1950s, to describe an area where there exists free movement of goods, services, capital and labour.
A Common Market is therefore an area with a Customs Union, plus free movement of factors of production.
The move to establish an SEM is simply a programme to enable the EC to create a Common Market.
The EC has been committed to establishing a Common Market since the Treaty of Rome was signed in 1957.
Article 3 of the Treaty of Rome contains the following provisions: "the elimination, as between member states, of customs duties and quantitative restrictions on the import and export of goods, and all other measures having equivalent effect; the abolition, as between member states, of obstacles to freedom of movement for persons, services and capital" .
Article 8 calls for the Common Market to be progressively established over a period of 12 years.
That is to say the Common Market should have been established between the original six members by 1969.
Obviously this did not happen according to plan.
The CU was achieved by the original six members in 1968.
The creation of the Common Market has proved to be a more difficult objective to achieve.
Before agreement was reached to establish the SEM by the end of 1992, there had been very little progress towards establishing the Common Market.
The main problem was the difficulty of reaching agreement about eliminating the many non-tariff barriers (NTBs) which hindered free movement.
A range of NTBs based on diverse national rules, regulations, taxation, and subsidies frameworks governed the movement of goods, services, capital, and labour.
Consequently, frontier controls were necessary to ensure that cross-frontier trade in goods adhered to the various national requirements.
Cross-frontier trade in some service sectors was basically rendered impossible by different national rules and regulations.
Capital movements were restricted by the use of capital and exchange controls imposed by some member states.
Labour mobility was hampered by differences in professional qualifications, and by labour and social security laws and regulations.
Prior to the agreement on the SEA, the EC had attempted to eliminate these NTBs by creating a set of European laws and regulations  to govern all aspects of economic activity.
This resulted in attempts to determine European standards for a large range of products.
Member states could however veto any proposal which they thought was detrimental to their economies, therefore very little progress to harmonise to common European standards took place.
This tendency to protect national interests meant that little progress was made to eliminate the barriers to the free movement of services, capital and labour.
Hence the EC did not take any significant steps towards establishing the Common Market, despite the fact that the Treaty of Rome clearly committed the member states to achieving this objective.
The origins of the SEM programme
In the 1980s a process was begun which greatly accelerated the progress towards creating a Common Market.
In this period the member states were experiencing lower growth rates, and higher unemployment than the USA and Japan.
The Japanese were successfully entering into many of the most sensitive markets in the EC (e.g. cars, consumer electronic equipment, computing equipment), and the NICs were becoming an increasing threat to many of the industries of the member states.
The leading high technology companies tended to be American or Japanese, and many European companies were unable to maintain a presence in these markets.
Within the EC continuing conflict over the CAP and associated budgetary problems (see Chapter 4), had diverted the EC from making progress on establishing the Common Market.
A view emerged that the EC was stuck in a rut, and was losing its vision and direction.
In spite of these problems there were also signs of the EC making some progress.
The EMS, founded in 1979, had not collapsed as had been predicted in many quarters, rather it had achieved some success in stabilising exchange rate fluctuations, and in helping to promote convergence of inflation rates.
Greece joined the EC in 1981, and Spain and Portugal joined in 1986 creating a potential market of 320 million consumers.
An ECJ ruling in 1978 — the Cassis de Dijon case — established the principle of mutual recognition.
In this case the ECJ ruled that Germany could not ban the importing of Cassis de Dijon (a French alcoholic beverage), on the grounds that it did not conform to German rules and regulations governing the sale of alcoholic beverages.
The ECJ established that goods which adhered to the national rules and regulations in the member state in which they were produced, should be able to be sold in any member state without need to adhere to the rules and regulations governing the production and sale of the good in the importing member state.
This principle provided an escape route from the long process of establishing common European rules and regulations for all goods.
This process could be replaced by the mutual recognition of each other 's rules and regulations.
The use of mutual recognition was accepted by the EC when the "New approach to technical harmonisation" was adopted in 1985.
The acceptance of the concept of mutual recognition was a major step in the process of removing NTBs caused by differences in rules and regulations.
Harmonisation could be limited to essential requirements in order for health and public safety considerations to be accounted for, and to ensure technical compatibility of products.
The combination of these factors contributed to the idea that the EC still had potential to be a dynamic body in the European and world economy.
In 1983, at the Stuttgart summit, there was an acknowledgement of the need to take new initiatives to restore some dynamism into the activities of the EC.
This took the form of a  Solemn Declaration of European Union.
There was a growing feeling that the failure to establish the Common Market (now called the Internal Market) within the EC resulted in major handicaps for EC companies.
There was a strong opinion that EC firms faced considerable disadvantages compared to American and Japanese firms.
It was noted that American firms had a domestic market of over 200 million consumers, and Japanese firms had a market of 100 million.
If the EC were to become a single market it would have a domestic market of 320 million consumers, making it the largest market in the world.
In 1984 the European Parliament issued a draft treaty on European Union.
This called for political and economic change, in particular the creation of an internal market and the reform of decision-making procedures of the EC to make them more democratic, or at least more accountable to the European Parliament.
At the Fontainbleau summit of 1984, two committees, the Adonnino and the Dooge, were set up.
Both of these committees called for institutional change, and the Dooge called for the creation of an Internal Market.
In 1985 there was published the White Paper, "Completing the Internal Market" , which called for a programme of legislation to be implemented to create an Internal Market by the end of 1992.
At the Milan summit of 1985, all of these moves came to a head, and an Inter-governmental Conference was set up to discuss European Union.
This resulted in agreement on the SEA which was approved by all member states in 1986, and implemented in 1987.
The SEA was a compromise between those countries such as France and Germany who wanted a new Treaty on European Union, and the UK and Denmark who did not want a new Treaty, but simply the implementation of the White Paper in order to create an SEM.
The SEA is basically a limited set of changes to the Treaty of Rome which allows for majority voting in the Council of Ministers in areas connected to establishing the Internal Market, and also has some rather vague references to EMU, Political Union and other policy areas such as the environment.
The main thrust of the SEA was to establish the SEM by 31 December 1992.
When the SEA was approved it was considered to be a poor substitute for a new Treaty on European Union, but given the opposition of the UK and Denmark it was the best that could be achieved.
However, the SEA has resulted in a dramatic increase in the activities of the EC, and it has led to a chain of events which have focused attention on the EC as being one of the most successful and dynamic economic agencies in the world.
At the heart of the 1992 programme lies Article 13 of the SEA: "The internal market shall comprise an area without internal frontiers in which the free movement of goods, persons, services and capital is ensured in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty" .
This was simply a reformulation of the original commitment, in the Treaty of Rome, to establish a Common Market.
The major difference was that there was the political will, and a detailed programme with a practical method of implementation, to achieve this objective.
The EC had finally adopted a comprehensive programme to establish a Common Market.
Basically this programme involves the removal of all legal barriers to the free movement of goods, services, capital and labour.
The theoretical basis for this rests on economic models which predict that there are net welfare gains available from removing these barriers.
The theory of free movement
Traditional economic theory suggests that there are benefits to be reaped from creating free movement.
Using simple partial equilibrium analysis, and assuming perfectly competitive  markets, it can be shown that there are net welfare gains to be had from eliminating NTBs and thereby allow free movement to take place.
Much of the analysis which follows is based on the models used in Emerson et al.(1988).
In Figure 2.1 the case of reaping comparative advantage is examined.
This analysis may be used to investigate trade in both goods and services.
In Figure 2.1(a) the demand and supply conditions of a good in the UK are depicted; Figure 2.1(b) shows market conditions in Germany.
The lower equilibrium price in Germany shows that it has a comparative advantage in producing this good.
Suppose that trade is prevented by the imposition of an NTB such as rules and regulations which prevent the selling of this German good in the UK.
When the NTB is removed the UK would import the good from Germany.
This would result in the price increasing in Germany and falling in the UK.
When the price reached the level where imports into the UK were equal to exports from Germany, a new equilibrium price would have been established, i.e. at P3 where UK imports (AB) = German exports (CD).
This results in a rise in consumer surplus in the UK equal to the areas 1 + 2.
The area 1 is a transfer of producer surplus to consumers; it is not a net welfare gain as it is transferred from producers in the UK to consumers in the UK.
The remaining consumer surplus gain of area 2 represents the net welfare gain to the UK.
The areas 3 + 4 represent the gain in producer surplus in Germany.
Area 3 is a transfer of consumer surplus to German producers from German consumers.
The net gain in Germany is therefore represented by area 4.
There is a net gain to both countries equivalent to areas 2 + 4.
These gains in producer and consumer surpluses can be considered as increases in real incomes to consumers and  producers.
However, this involves a change in the distribution of income.
Consumers in the UK gain real incomes via lower prices, while consumers in Germany suffer a decline in real income.
Similarly, producers in the UK suffer a loss of real income due to lower prices, but producers in Germany experience a gain.
This highlights an important implication of establishing the SEM although there might be net gains to be reaped this does not mean that all participants in the process experience benefits.
The analysis also indicates that a good deal of income redistribution is likely to occur in the process of creating the SEM.
However, the net welfare gains represent increases in real incomes in the EC, and it is these real income increases which lie at the heart of the benefits of creating the SEM.
Benefits can also accrue from removing NTBs even if there is no comparative advantage to be reaped.
This can occur when the market environment is not competitive and when the removal of NTBs results in an increase in competition.
The extreme case would be when the removal of NTBs led to a domestic monopoly becoming a perfectly competitive market.
This would result in a net gain equal to the deadweight loss of the monopoly (see Chapter 5, for an analytical exposition of this deadweight loss).
Such an outcome is most unlikely in any real world situation.
What is more likely is some increase in competition within an imperfectly competitive market.
This will result in downward pressure on prices as domestic firms face foreign competition.
This is examined in Figure 2.2.
If the UK has a domestic monopolist totally protected by a NTB, then price would be P2 and output Q2 if the monopolist faced the marginal cost curve shown by MC1.
Assuming a  perfectly elastic supply of this good from Germany, the ruling market price in the absence of the NTB would be P1 and the total demand in the UK would be Q3.
If the NTB were removed the price in the UK would fall to P1, and the monopolist would be constrained to this price.
The monopolist would have to adjust output to Q1 and the gap in satisfying market demand in the UK at this price would be met by imports from Germany of Q1—Q3.
There would be benefits in the UK from a lower price and higher output provided that the domestic monopolists' marginal cost curve lay above MC2.
A paper by Jacquemin (1982), shows that this disciplinary effect from foreign competition can also work in oligopolistic markets.
Hence, the creation of the SEM could lead to benefits from increasing the competitive structure of the EC economy.
This disciplinary effect of free movement can also set in motion factors which reduce production costs and stimulate improvements in the non-price characteristics of goods and services.
This argument rests on increased competition reducing X-inefficiency, and stimulating research and development (R and D) and innovation to reduce production costs and improve non-price characteristics.
A possible scenario is depicted in Figure 2.3.
This situation is similar to Figure 2.2, i.e. a UK monopolist constrained to the price P1 because of imports from Germany.
If this increase in competition is also accompanied by R & D and innovation to improve the non-price characteristics of this good, the demand curve shifts to DUK1.
Consumer surplus is increased from P1AB before the improvements in non-price facters, to P1AC after the improvements.
Initially, the increase in demand in the UK is met  by increased imports from Germany, that is, imports rise from q1—q3, to q1—q4.
If however, the UK firm responds by reducing X-inefficiency, this could shift the marginal cost to MC2 and allow the UK firm to increase its share of the market from q1 to q2.
If the UK firm reduced X-inefficiency without any increase in the non-price characteristics of the good, the result would be that the UK firm would increase market share and its producer surplus.
There would be no benefit in terms of increased consumer surplus.
This implies that reductions in X- inefficiency do not necessarily lead to net welfare improvements for consumers.
Only if the lowering of production costs results in lower prices will there be any benefits to consumers.
A further benefit from eliminating NTBs may arise if it is possible to reap economies of scale.
This is illustrated in Figure 2.4.
This assumes that firms always set price equal to average costs because they are constrained by the level of competition to making only normal profits.
If the NTBs mean that firms face restriction on exports, they can be constrained from reaping economies of scale because they cannot expand their output beyond the limits imposed by their domestic market.
The level of output constrained by the NTB is Q1, and this results in a price of P1.
If the NTB is removed, the firm could increase exports and thereby expand output to Q2 which would reduce price to P2.
This outcome is dependent upon the level of competition being sufficient to ensure that firms are constrained to making normal profits, and that they are therefore forced to reduce price when costs are lowered.
Such an outcome is possible if there exist contestable markets, so that firms can easily enter an industry when profits rise, and exit when they fall (see McDonald 1987).
It is also necessary for the firm to be operating at above minimum  efficiency scale (MES), the low point of the average cost curve.
If the firm is operating at MES, the opportunity to expand output will not result in lower costs.
Learning effects may also help to reduce costs and thereby prices.
These effects arise when expansion of output allows firms to learn how to produce more output using the same inputs.
Establishing free movement of capital and labour can also be shown to lead to net welfare gains.
In Figure 2.5, the effects of barriers to free movement of labour are examined, assuming perfect mobility of labour, i.e. no transaction costs, or cultural barriers to movement, and that the only barrier is a legal prohibition on UK workers migrating to Germany.
The situation prior to the establishing of free movement of labour would be a wage of W1 and employment at E in the UK.
In Germany the wage would be W2 and employment at B. When the barrier is lifted a new equilibrium wage would emerge of W3.
At this wage the number of migrant workers from the UK is equal to the inflow to Germany.
Employment in the UK would fall to D, with DF of migrant workers.
This reduces the supply of labour in the UK to SUK-m, the supply of labour in the UK minus migrants.
Employment of German workers would fall to A, with AC of migrant workers from the UK.
This leads to gains and losses of economic rent (area above the supply curve of labour, and below the wage line), for labour.
Workers in Germany lose an amount equal to area 1, while workers who remain in the UK gain higher wages leading to economic rent equal to area 3.
Migrant workers from the UK would gain the areas 4 + 5.
Employers also make gains and losses (the areas below the demand for labour and above the wage line).
In Germany employers gain area 2 from the employment of migrant workers, while in the UK employers lose an amount equivalent to the areas 3 + 4.
The areas 1 + 3 + 4 are transfers, area 1 from German workers to German employers, and areas 3 + 4 from UK employers to UK workers.
This leaves areas 2 and 5 as net welfare gains of allowing free movement of labour.
Removal of barriers to capital mobility can also lead to net welfare gains.
In a perfectly competitive market system, with a fixed stock of capital, and no capital mobility the situation is as depicted in Figure 2.6.
The stock of capital in the UK is given by K2 and in Germany by K3.
The marginal productivity of capital is shown by MUK and MG.
The marginal productivity of capital in Germany is higher than in the UK, therefore the rate of return to capital in Germany is higher than in the UK.
In the UK capital receives a total reward equal to the areas 4 + 5, while labour receives 1 + 2 + 3.
In Germany the total return to capital is shown by areas 9 + 10, and areas 6 + 7 + 8 are the payments to labour.
If the barriers to capital mobility are removed, capital will flow from the UK to obtain the higher rate of return available in Germany.
This will continue until the rate of return is equal in both countries.
This results in an export of capital from the UK of K1-K2, corresponding to the capital stock increase in Germany of K3-K4.
This reduces total product in the UK to an amount equal to areas 1 + 2 + 4.
However, the exported capital results in a transfer of profits to the UK from Germany, equal to area 10.
In Germany national product is increased by areas 8 + 10, leading to a net welfare gain to Germany equivalent to area 8.
The shaded part of area 10 is equal to the higher return to UK capital from being invested in Germany.
In Figure 2.6 this area is twice the size of area 3.
Hence the loss of areas 3 + 5 to the UK is more than compensated for by the remittance of profits from Germany, as area 10 is greater than areas 3 + 5.
So the net welfare gains of allowing free movement of capital are equal to area 8 plus half the shaded area.
There are however, distribution effects to labour resulting from capital mobility.
Labour's share in the UK falls by area 3, while in the Germany it rises by area 8.
The above analysis assumes that capital movements only arise from differences in productivity.
However, capital movements may result as a by-product of companies transferring technology and know-how.
This results not only in a shift along the marginal productivity of labour curves, but in shifts in the positions of the curves.
Capital flows are also influenced by uncertainty, and the influence of different monetary and exchange rate policies.
The establishment of EMU would eliminate many of the distortions to capital movements caused by differences in the macro-economic policies of the member states.
Hence, the creation of a single capital market in the EC would seem to require EMU, if capital mobility is to be driven by reasons of efficiency in the allocation of resources.
The theory of free movement implies that the removal of NTBs offers the potential for reaping net welfare gains.
These arise from comparative advantage opportunities, increasing competition (including X-inefficiency and non-price effects), reaping economies of scale and from increased returns to capital and labour.
These gains cannot however be acquired without changing the distribution of income.
The removal of NTBs implies that some consumers, workers and companies will gain, while others will lose.
The overall effect is deemed to be beneficial as net gains are reaped, and the efficiency of the allocation of resources is improved.
The theory also indicates that reconstruction of the economy will occur as free movement results in changes in the location of capital and labour, and in methods of production.
It is normally assumed that this reconstruction will not result in long-term unemployment of resources, or worse, permanent under-utilisation of resources in some sectors.
We will return to question this assumption after an examination of the programme to create the SEM.
A major study — The Costs of Non-Europe — was established to try and estimate the benefits of creating the SEM.
Forms of analysis somewhat similar to those above were used to estimate the net gains.
This study has come to be known as the Cecchini Report (see Cecchini (1988), and Emerson et al.(1988), for summaries of this report).
The Cecchini Report
The Cecchini Report established the main barriers which were to be removed by implementing Article 13 of the SEA.
These barriers were identified by references to those outlined in the 1985 White Paper, "Completing the Internal Market" , and by a series of surveys of businesses in the EC.
The White Paper lists three main types of barriers to be eliminated.
1.
Physical barriers — frontier controls, and customs formalities.
2.
Technical barriers — restriction on economic activities resulting from national rules and regulations.
These include technical specifications which hinder or prevent trade in goods; rules and regulations governing services which hinder non-domestic companies from trading across frontiers; discriminatory public procurement rules which limit tendering for government contracts to domestic companies, and legal obstacles faced by foreign companies seeking to set up subsidiaries in other member states.
3.
Fiscal barriers — the need to adjust VAT and excise duties as goods cross EC frontiers.
This is necessary as member states operate different coverage, and levy different rates of VAT and excise duties.
The Cecchini Report reclassifies these barriers in order to estimate the benefits of removing these NTBs.
Hence five main barriers are defined by Cecchini: tariffs, quotas, cost-increasing barriers, market-entry restrictions, and market-distorting activities practised by governments.
Tariffs and quotas have largely been eliminated by the CU, but some remain, in particular VERs relating to cars and electronic equipment, and quotas on textiles connected to the MFA.
These are national quotas and must be removed or harmonised once frontier controls are eliminated.
The bulk of the benefits arise from eliminating the remaining barriers.
Cost-increasing barriers include customs formalities like VAT and excise duty assessments, verification of technical regulations, and also costs incurred by companies in adhering to different technical regulations.
These can include modification to products, changes to packaging, etc.
Market-entry restrictions include prohibiting or restricting access by foreign companies to the services sector, and rules and regulations which prevent foreign firms from bidding for public procurement contracts.
Market-distorting activities arise from state aids such as subsidies, tax concessions, and other financial help given to domestic companies.
Using this taxonomy of barriers, estimates of the benefits of removing them were made.
This was generally done for the EC as a whole, and few attempts were made to estimate the  redistribution effects of removing these trade barriers.
These estimates were based on a four-stage assessment of the effects of creating free movement.
Stage 1 is connected to the benefits from removing barriers affecting trade, i.e. frontier controls.
Stage II benefits arise from the removal of technical and regulatory rules which increase the costs of companies.
The reaping of economies of scale provide the benefits in Stage III.
Finally, Stage IV estimates gains from increased competition leading to reductions in X-inefficiency and monopoly rents.
The magnitude of these gains is outlined in Table 2.1.
These benefits result from large-scale changes affecting a wide variety of industries (see Table 2.2).
These benefits are held to stem from three separate but connected effects of removing the barriers to free movement.
These are the effects of:(a) reducing frontier controls;(b) reducing market entry barriers;(c) reducing cost-increasing barriers.
Effects (a) would result from reductions in the cost of frontier formalities, that is delays at frontiers and administration costs of dealing with customs forms.
The removal of these would have a small but direct effect by increasing trade between EC countries and would lead to secondary effects of lower prices and incentives to increase investment.
The effects of (b) arise when barriers are of such a high level as to prevent any entry into the market.
Such barriers are common in public procurement where standards and rules and regulations can prevent entry by non-national firms.
They are also common obstacles to the free movement of labour and capital.
The removal of such barriers would increase market entry which would directly lead to an increase in competition, and thereby to reductions in X-inefficiency and monopoly pricing practices.
There would also be stimulation of investment to reap economies of scale, and to rationalise production and distribution systems.
Effects (c) would bring benefits by reducing costs incurred by different technical standards for goods, and by removing the barriers caused by the variety of rules and regulations governing key business and consumer services like financial, legal, accounting, and transport services.
The removal of these barriers would lead to a direct lowering of costs by reducing the price of imported goods and services.
There would also be secondary effects which would increase the degree of competition and the level of investment.
The combined effects of these changes would be to increase the GDP of the EC as illustrated in Diagram 1.
The bulk of the benefits are seen to derive from the effects of increased competition and lower costs which lead to lower prices, and also stimulate investment.
New market opportunities allow for increased economies of scale, and the rationalisation of artificially segmented markets.
The increase in competition allows for considerable improvements in the effective use of inputs, and reductions in the anti-competitive practices of companies.
This process is further aided by reductions in the costs of business and consumer services made possible by the liberalisation of the service sector.
The creation of the SEM is seen by Cecchini as a programme which boosts the effectiveness of the supply-side of the economy.
This improvement in the supply-side leads to an increase in aggregate demand by increasing real purchasing power, increasing investment, and improving the competitiveness of the EC relative to the rest of the world.
These changes to the supply-side also lead to improvements in public sector budgetary positions, because of reductions in the costs of public procurement, and the growth of GDP which increases taxation revenues.
This could allow for the consideration of a policy of expansion of the economy led by government expenditure.
Such an expansion could help with temporary unemployment problems associated with the reconstruction of the economy, which will be induced by the creation of the SEM.
These supply-side changes would improve the productive potential of the economy and should  enhance the ability to reach higher levels of non-inflationary growth.
Such government-led expansion of aggregate demand would need to be co-ordinated to avoid problems of inconsistent growth levels.
The Cecchini Report does not have much to say on this issue, but the implication of such a policy is that monetary policies would need to be co-ordinated to prevent the growth of monetary instability.
Cecchini estimated these accompanying macro-economic policies to have very significant effects on the overall benefits of creating the SEM (see Table 2.3)
Criticism of the Cecchini Report
This rather rosy picture has been subjected to a great deal of criticism.
This criticism may be classified under three main headings: 1.
the assumption that the legislative programme will be completed by 1992; 2. inadequacies in the legislative programme; 3. the view that NTBs are the main obstacles to free movement.
The Cecchini Report estimates assume that all the necessary legislation will be approved and implemented by 1 January 1993.
This is generally held to be wildly optimistic, and in some quarters, an impossible timescale.
Although progress has been made in many areas, especially in removing technical barriers to the free movement of goods, and in the liberalisation of financial services, much remains to be done.
Agreements to end capital restrictions have been reached and largely implemented.
Steps towards free movement of labour have been taken by use of mutual recognition of many vocational qualifications.
However, the implementation of existing directives into national law is not keeping pace with the 1992 programme.
The removal of frontier controls is being held up by failure to harmonise VAT and excise duties.
An agreement was reached in July 1991 to collect VAT at the country of origin rather than in the country of destination.
This will mean that goods will cross borders at the rate of VAT levied by the exporting country, and then become subject to the VAT rate of the importing country.
This is likely to require a clearing house system to cater for the complex rebates of VAT to intermediate suppliers (i.e. to exporting countries).
The system will be based on a harmonised lower limit to the rate of VAT but no upper limit.
This system is not due to be in operation until 1996, and the details of the system have not been agreed.
There has been little progress in reaching agreement on harmonising excise duties, and serious negotiations on this issue are not due to commence until early in 1992.
Given the large differences in the rates of excise duties in the member states, it is likely that reaching agreement to harmonise these rates will prove to be extremely difficult.
The deadline of 1992 for the removal of frontier controls is therefore unlikely to be met.
It is also probable that the necessary legislation for the liberalisation of the service sector will not be agreed and implemented by 1992.
Criticism has also been levelled at the inadequacies of the legislative programme.
In many sectors worries exist over the sufficiency of the mutual recognition approach.
This was recently highlighted by the BSE (mad cow disease) scare where mutual recognition of health standards for food was called into question by some EC members.
This resulted in the imposition of controls on the import of British beef by some member states, although this was contrary to EC law on free movement.
Worries also exist over mutual recognition of testing and certification procedures, as there is concern that some member states may not have adequate facilities and experience to ensure that these procedures are carried out with appropriate attention to important details.
Similar concerns exist over the regulatory systems of control for financial services.
A strong case is being made for expanding the scope of selective harmonisation of essential requirements to ensure that minimum standards apply in these areas.
Problems relating to the policing of legislation are also considered to be inadequately dealt with.
For example, the leglisation to open up public procurement systems is making good progress.
However, policing this legislation and investigating breaches of tendering rules is an enormous task, as there exist thousands of government agencies in the EC with the power to issue and process procurement tenders.
The record of some EC members in implementing existing Community legislation is not good (see Butt Philip 1989).
The extension of Community legislation brought about by the creation of the SEM is likely to intensify conflicts between member states on these issues.
In the past such conflicts have often led to implicit, and sometimes explicit, breaking of Community law relating to free  movement.
It seems clear that the Commission needs more staff and more powers to police the 1992 legislation successfully, and the ECJ may require increased powers to ensure that failure to comply with Community law leads to punishment sufficient to deter countries and companies from breaking the laws on free movement.
The previous criticisms revolve around the adequacy of the programme in terms of the ability to meet the timetable for the legislative programme, and of the effective scope and implementation of legislation.
The third criticism is more fundamental.
It brings into question whether NTBs are a significant barrier in many sectors of the economy.
The reaping of benefits from removing NTBs is crucially dependent upon fundamental reconstruction in many industries.
This largely depends on achieving economies of scale, and integrating activities by firms to overcome fragmented markets.
This implies that many European firms are too small.
There is according to Neuburger (1989), no strong evidence to suggest that this is the case.
Some industries do seem to be rather small relative to the size of the EC market, thus there are ten manufacturers of electricity-generating equipment in the EC and only two in the USA (Curzon-Price 1988).
Many of these industries seem to be heavily involved in the public procurement sector, and the benefits of increased size could be limited to companies with large interests in this area.
Strong criticisms are also voiced about the benefits to be reaped from economies of scale.
The Cecchini Report finds evidence that many plants in Europe operate at less than MES.
The benefits of reaping economies of scale depend upon how far costs fall as output levels are increased.
This is determined by the gradient of the average cost curve, and by the degree to which plants are operating at less than MES.
In Figure 2.7 two alternative average cost curves are shown.
The figure shows that the cost disadvantage of operating at half MES depends upon the gradient of the average cost curve.
A study using engineering estimates of costs was made by Pratten for the Cecchini Report, and this finds evidence of cost advantages from increasing output levels in some industries (see Table 2.4).
This evidence is disputed by many economists.
Neuburger (1989), and Cutler et al.(1989), point out that the concept of MES is based on traditional engineering methods of estimating cost conditions.
However, these normally assume production processes based on a single plant producing one good, whereas in modern production methods, output is often manufactured in  a complex set of multi-plant, and multi-product operations and some of these plants are quite small.
Evidence from successful Japanese companies has suggested that production costs are often closely connected to management practices and operations, rather than the scale of operations within plants.
Consequently, there is a need for considerable caution about using concepts such as MES as a firm guide to assess potential economies of scale.
In spite of this the Cecchini Report does use MES calculations to estimate the benefits of removing NTBs, and these scale benefits form a very large part of the benefits of creating the SEM.
There is also a view (Davis et al.1989) that market segmentation is often caused by cultural and regional factors leading to different qualities and specifications being demanded for goods and services.
Such differences could mean that homogeneous products could not be effectively marketed on a Pan-European basis.
There are also trading barriers such as a lack of detailed marketing and distribution and other sorts of business information, which could restrict the ability of companies to conduct cross-frontier operations.
Therefore, simply to remove NTBs does not mean that increased trade and the rationalisation of production processes will necessarily follow.
Many of the industries which are most able to operate on a European-wide basis, are probably already doing so.
In industries such as car production many companies such as Ford, General Motors, and Volkswagen, are already Pan-European in their operations; this is also true in areas such as food processing, and many types of consumer durables.
It is unlikely that these sorts of companies will be able to benefit greatly from increased economies of scale/size as a result of the creation of the SEM.
The main benefits for such companies are likely to arise from reductions in costs caused by the emergence of common European standards.
The major sector to be affected by the removal of NTBs could well be small to medium-sized companies.
The reduction of trading costs which will result from the creation of the SEM could lead to many such companies expanding into cross-frontier trading activities.
Many of these companies may also benefit from economies of scale as they expand into such activities.
In the service sector there is also evidence that the removal of NTBs will not, at least in the near future, have significant effects upon the bulk of retail financial services (Bank of England 1989).
This follows from the goodwill and experience which existing national firms possess.
In financial services there is also an issue of customer credibility for unknown foreign firms seeking business in other EC countries.
Free movement of labour is likely to be hindered by cultural, linguistic, and social security differences (see Turner 1989).
Generally, economic factors such as unemployment rates, trade and capital flows, seem to be the main determinants of labour mobility.
These factors along with demographic trends and recent events in Eastern Europe are likely to have more influence on labour mobility than the legislation programme to allow for free movement of labour.
The case for the removing of NTBs leading to a fundamental reconstruction of the economy of the EC may have been overestimated by the Cecchini Report.
There probably will be significant changes in some sectors particularly those connected to public procurement, and for small to medium-sized firms where economies of scale can be reaped.
In many sectors, large-scale reconstruction may be limited by failure to reach agreement on the necessary legislation, or by the problems of implementing such legislation.
Cultural and trading barriers to free movement will also restrict this reconstruction process.
The initial effects of creating the SEM are likely to be relatively small for much of the economic base of the EC.
The main effect of the 1992 programme may well turn out to be psychological, that is to turn the attention of producers from the EC, and other developed economies, towards the European  market and to encourage them to gather information on the markets of Europe.
This effect may also induce a European sense of identity among the citizens of the member states, and this could have implications for some of the cultural barriers to free movement.
The 1992 programme has achieved a measure of success in this area as there has been a pronounced shift in attitudes towards Europe.
This could do much to remove many of the cultural and trading barriers to free movement.
In this scenario the reconstruction of the economic base of the EC is effectively driven by changes in attitudes.
Learning about the cultural, marketing and distribution characteristics of such a diverse market as the EC is likely to involve considerable use of the resources and effort of companies, consequently this process is likely to take a long time.
Changes in the attitudes of the citizens of the EC are likely to be an even longer process.
However the implications of any such change could be quite large.
It is possible that some of the biggest changes from the creation of the SEM could arise from placing companies, institutions, and citizens on learning curves.
The Cecchini Report has also been criticised because certain key factors are said to have been omitted.
Four main factors may be identified; 1.
the effects on member states; 2. the effects caused by the redistribution of income; 3. the importance of institutional arrangements; 4. the external effects of creating the SEM.
Although the Cecchini Report provided some estimates of the likely changes in prices in the member states, there has not been much investigation of these issues.
It has been argued that lower productivity countries such as the Southern European states, Ireland and the UK could suffer from the creation of the SEM.
This would occur as more efficient companies in the rest of the EC displaced domestic companies in these countries.
Some commentators consider that this is likely in the UK because of long-run problems with the manufacturing sector (Burkitt and Baimbridge 1989, and Cutler et al.1989).
It is thought that the UK could not cope with the increase in price and non-price competition which the SEM would bring about.
This would lead to balance of payments problems, or in the event of the establishment of EMU, the progressive impoverishment of the UK until it became a poor region of the EC.
However, Pelkmans and Winters (1988), thought that the UK was likely to experience net gains from the creation of the SEM, especially in high-tech industries and in many service sectors.
The publication of a study (Commission 1990a) has extended the Cecchini Report by investigating the effects of the creation of the SEM on specific industries in the member states.
This study finds evidence for net benefits for all the member states.
Many of these benefits depend upon the growth of intra-industry between the developed countries of the EC, and a progressive shift towards such trade in the developing member states like Spain, Portugal and Greece.
With regard to these countries, the study finds that it is important that they do not attempt to keep their existing inter-industry specialisation as many of them are in low value added and labour-intensive sectors, and therefore face strong competition from the LDCs.
The Commission is reluctant to grant protection to these industries as it would harm the LDCs (see Chapter 11), and would not help in the attempts to improve the productivity of the EC economy.
The growth of intra-industry is deemed to require a considerable amount of  Europeanisation of the activities of companies by merger and acquisition, and DFI.
This would induce"…true European firms with regard to such factors as capitalisation, operational management or in terms of the nationality of their directors.
Efforts to enhance labour mobility and to remove legal and fiscal obstacles are necessary conditions for the success of this scenario."
To help the less developed member states to adjust to this process the study recommends greater use of the structural Funds.
The methodological problems of this study to assess the impact of the SEM, are basically the same as those which seek to estimate the effects of the creation of the CU (see Chapter 1).
The redistribution effects of creating the SEM are also largely ignored by the Cecchini Report.
The Report does imply that the reconstruction process will give rise to a temporary increase in unemployment.
This follows from the redistribution effects, which are outlined above, of allowing free movement.
However, the temporary nature of this unemployment is disputed by Cutler et al.(1989), and Grahl and Teague (1990), who lay some stress on the effects that increased competition has on labour.
These include not only downward pressure on wages, but also on employment conditions.
Hence, the development of "Social Europe" by imposing high minimum employment standards, is crucial if large sections of labour are not to suffer losses from the creation of the SEM.
Free movement of capital may well reinforce these effects because capital movements are deemed to be mainly determined by technological and market operation reasons, rather than by simple rate of return calculations.
In this scenario, capital flows tend towards areas with high technology and high productivity.
Such movements could add to the downward spiral which the poorer productivity countries would experience from the SEM programme.
To avoid such effects it is considered necessary for the EC to engage in co-ordinated macro-economic policy of a Keynesian type.
This policy would be used to stimulate aggregate demand to reduce the unemployment caused by these structural changes.
The use of regional, social, and technology policies is also advocated to aid in the restructuring process.
The Cecchini Report did highlight potential benefits from co-ordinated expansion of aggregate demand, but this was rather vague and was not envisaged at the kind of level being advocated by the supporters of such Keynesian policies.
For economists who regard the pursuit of price and monetary stability as the key economic objective, Keynesian type expansion of aggregate demand would not be acceptable.
The growing integration in monetary matters (see Chapter 3), places greater emphasis on member states pursuing consistent macro-economic policy.
The power of Germany in the EMS, and in any future moves towards EMU, would probably allow the Germans to veto any EC moves to adopt Keynesian type expansion of the economy.
However, increasing use of the structural Funds and institutional arrangements to aid the market process may be more likely to be acceptable to all the member states, as the success of Germany and Japan (who practise considerable intervention in their economies), has indicated the benefits of using such policies.
There are theoretical models which suggest that effective markets depend on legal and institutional factors as well as the operation of the price mechanism.
In Pelkmans and Winters (1988), and Padoa-Schioppa (1987), there is discussion of the importance of appropriate institutional and legal frameworks in the areas of competition, regional, social, and technology policies if the European market is to be beneficial to all parties.
The importance of information and transaction costs to the working of modern economies is highlighted by Grahl and Teague (1990).
They maintain that these factors require markets to be backed by a set of institutional and cultural frameworks to correct for the inadequacies of the market, in particular the need for non-market based contracts and arrangements between economic agents.
Such  arrangements are important in long-term exchanges where information and transaction costs are high.
There are examples of these arrangements in relations between highly skilled workers and employers, where it is quite common for wage and employment levels to be determined not by current market conditions, but by mutual agreement between the parties.
In product markets characterised by complex production processes long-term supply contracts or sub-contracts are commonly used to try and lower these costs.
Indeed, many vertical mergers are justified on the basis of internalising such information and transaction costs with the hope of reducing such costs.
These factors imply that not only the setting-up of institutions' arrangements, but also the growth of common cultural attitudes to the conducting of business activities, are a necessary component in the establishing of an effective SEM.
The neglect of the external effects of creating the SEM is a pronounced feature not only of the Cecchini Report, but also of most of the literature on the SEM.
Some of the American literature on the SEM does concern itself with this issue, e.g. Belous and Hartley (1990), and Brainard and Perry (1989).
Belous and Hartley are concerned that the growth of regional trading blocs, such as the EC, is harming the growth of free trade in the world as a whole.
This results from the trade diversion effects (see Chapter 1) of eliminating trade barriers within a subset of the world, rather than from use of the multilateral methods of the GATT.
These harmful effects can also be exacerbated by the adoption of increased protectionist measures by trading blocs against non-bloc countries.
While Belous and Hartley are reasonably satisfied that the creation of the SEM will not result in high levels of trade diversion, at least for the USA, they are less sure about the possibility of the growth of protectionist policies connected to the SEM (see chapters 10 and 13).
In the study by Brainard and Perry, this fear is also expressed by Dornbusch, who argues that the increased pressures of competition induced by the SEM will lead to calls by the lower productivity member states to increase the levels of external protection to allow them to maintain their threatened industrial structures.
These pressures could be increased if the creation of the SEM is accompanied by the imposition of high minimum standards in the social and environmental fields as this would put further competitive pressures on the low productivity member states.
However, Dornbusch also considers that the creation of the SEM will stimulate world trade.
This would be caused by the expansionary effect on the GDP of the EC which would follow from the implementation of the SEM, and would lead to an increase in the imports of the EC.
It is possible that this expansionary effect could be stronger than the contractionary effect on world trade caused by the trade diversionary effects of the SEM.
Given that the first best solution of achieving SEM type trade liberalisation on a global basis is not possible because of very large economic and political problems, the second best SEM programme may not be harmful to world trade providing that an expansion in world trade takes place as a result of this programme.
Conclusions
The creation of the SEM has without doubt major economic and political implications.
It is possible that the Cecchini Report has overestimated some of these benefits.
However, if fundamental changes in business attitudes and government policies are induced by the creation of the SEM, these could lead to larger changes in the economy of the EC than are suggested by Cecchini.
The spill-over effects of creating the SEM in areas such as EMU and external  economic relations also greatly enhance the implications of the SEM.
The linkages of the SEM to competition, regional, agricultural, and environmental policies also have significant implications.
These spill-over effects of creating the SEM are examined in the following chapters.