

Social Policy — Stephen Dearden
In this chapter we will be outlining the evolution of the Communities' social policy beginning with the "social clauses" of the Treaty of Rome, which included the establishment of the European Social Fund.
Although a number of Directives were adopted in the 1970s on various aspects of employees' rights, it is the passage of the Single European Act which has given new impetus to the evolution of EC social policies.
However, central to this development has been the debate as to whether action should extend beyond the immediate needs of the establishment of the internal market.
Concern has been voiced that an unregulated internal labour market will undermine the competitive position of those member states who have relatively high wages and social security without a more comprehensive approach.
These aspirations find expression in the Social Charter, and in attempts to develop a European dimension for industrial relations.
But first we need to ask what are the major characteristics of the European labour market?
In 1986 of the 322.7 million population of the EC, 140.8 m. were economically active, either employed or unemployed.
This activity rate of 43.6 per cent has risen steadily from 41.7 per cent of the population in 1970.
However trends in the activity rates of men and women have differed significantly over the last 15 years.
While male activity rates have fallen steadily from 58.1 per cent in 1970 to 55.6 per cent in 1986, female activity rates have risen over the same period from 26.6 per cent to 32.5 per cent.
The structure of employment has also seen a steady shift out of agriculture (23 per cent 1960: 8 per cent 1987) and manufacturing (40 per cent 1960: 33 per cent 1987) towards the service sector (37 per cent 1960: 58 per cent 1987)(Fig. 6.1).
However at the same time unemployment has risen dramatically across Europe, especially after 1980.
Thus in 1970 EC12 unemployment was only 1.8 per cent, by 1986 it had reached 11.7 per cent (Fig. 6.2).
High unemployment has also been particularly concentrated among the younger age group (Fig. 6.3).
As we shall see, it was these deteriorating labour market conditions that stimulated renewed interest in the development of an active European Social Policy.
How far the EC can be regarded as a common labour market, or will develop into one in the foreseeable future, remains an open question.
Between 1980 and 1985 the number of EC workers employed in another member state remained relatively constant (2.1 m 1980: 1.9 m 1985).
The only exception to this experience was the 25 per cent fall in EC migrant employees in West Germany, from 732,000 to 520,000 (Table 6.1).
The Commission does not expect any dramatic changes in this pattern, except for an increase in the currently low activity rates of women accompanying migrant male workers.
The demographic ageing in some member states may also induce increased migration, especially with the economic difficulties of Eastern Europe and West Germany's acceptance of Eastern migrants of German origin.
However the nature of the mobile labour is likely to change, from the permanent movement of unskilled workers towards the temporary movement of skilled labour, often under the auspices of multinational employers.
Completion of the Single European Market is expected to increase this form of labour mobility by removing legal and professional qualification barriers.
The Treaty of Rome and the Single European Act
The social provisions of the Treaty of Rome (1957) are relatively limited and scattered throughout its various parts.
Nonetheless it does extend its concern beyond those conditions necessary for the creation of a common market.
This broader social commitment was reinforced by some of the Articles of the Single European Act (SEA)(1987).
Thus under the Treaty binding provisions seek to establish freedom of movement of workers (Arts 48 and 49), freedom of establishment (Arts 52–8), equal pay for men and women (Art.
119), and rights to social security of migrant workers (Art.
51).
Non-binding provisions covered paid holidays (Art.
120), commitments to improving living and working conditions (Arts 117 and 118), and the laying down of the general principles for implementing a common vocational training policy (Art.
128).
In addition it established the European Social Fund (Arts 123–8)
The European Social Fund (ESF) was originally limited to localised retraining and resettlement, to providing financial support to the temporarily unemployed, and to issues associated with migrant workers.
However in 1971 the role and operation of the Fund underwent significant reform.
Its financing was switched from levies on member states to the Community's own resources, and it was set two broad objectives: firstly, to facilitate the employment adjustment resulting from Community policies, and secondly, to help overcome the structural problems experienced by certain regions or target groups, i.e. migrant workers, young job-seekers, women and the handicapped.
To achieve these objectives 90 per cent of the Fund's resources were allocated to vocational training.
In response to the increase in unemployment in Europe, rising from 2.6 million in 1974 to 6.5 million in 1980, the ESF was quadrupled.
This rise in unemployment and the lack of a clear set of objectives led in 1983 to a simplification and concentration of its activities.
The new problem of youth unemployment was to receive 75 per cent of the ESF, and 40 per cent of the remaining general fund was to be allocated to the depressed regions of the Community — i.e. Greece, Northern Ireland, Irish Republic, Mezzogiorno.
Other employment measures adopted during the 1970s included attempts to co-ordinate national employment policies, with the exchange of information and research, and Resolutions on training schemes for the young, information technology and vocational training.
In 1975 the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training (Cedefop) was created to disseminate information on training, and to promote good practice throughout the Community.
Harmonisation of working conditions
Although the remit of the Treaty of Rome was relatively narrow in this area a number of directives were adopted covering collective redundancies (1975); employee rights in the event of company takeovers (1977) or insolvency (1980); equal pay (1975); equal access to employment, vocational training (1976) and social security (1986).
In 1974 an Advisory Committee on Safety, Hygiene and Health Protection at Work was established leading to a series of Safety at Work Directives, and in 1975 a European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions was created.
As with Cedefop it is administered by a quadripartite Board composed of representatives of the Commission, employers, workers and member governments.
Non-binding recommendations for the introduction of a 40 hour week and a minimum four weeks paid holiday (1975) were also adopted, together with a call for the examination of the potential for reorganising working time through early retirement and reduction in overtime working.
But the generally deteriorating economic situation, widening internal differences following the second enlargement of the Community and changes in government (especially in the UK), led to a period between 1981 and 1984 of inactivity in the development of a Community social policy.
With the passage of the Single European Act much broader social issues were addressed, with a commitment to the harmonisation of national provisions in regard to health, safety, environmental and consumer protection (Arts 100a and 118a), and to policies fostering "the economic and social cohesion of the Community" (Arts 130a-130e).
Article 118b also committed the Community to the encouragement of a "social dialogue" between management and labour, i.e. the creation of a European dimension to industrial relations.
This non-binding provision has, as we will see, yielded the least success, and underlines the recurring theme of this chapter, the significantly greater difficulty in achieving progress in those social areas beyond those minimum conditions essential to the completion of the single market.
The Single European Market
With the commitment to the completion of the Single European Market (SEM) by 1992, and the passage of the Single European Act, interest was rekindled in the social implications of evolving EEC policies.
The movement towards the SEM was recognised as having implications for employment throughout the Community.
Changes in costs and relative prices, stimulation of new technology and the general level of economic growth, were all factors which would determine the employment consequences of the Single Market.
Econometric studies, although based upon some heroic assumptions, suggested a positive effect upon most EC macro economic measures.
However the consequences for employment remained the most ambiguous, especially in the absence of a comprehensive external trade policy.
Nonetheless a study by DG II (Social Europe 1988) does allow us to isolate the characteristics of those industries and regions most likely to be affected by the completion of the SEM (Table 2).
Five indicators were utilised to identify the vulnerable sectors — the level of non-tariff barriers; the spread of real productivity and pre-tax prices across the Community; the proportion of member states' demand met by Community imports; and the proportion of a sector's turnover accounted for by small businesses.
These variables allowed the identification of two industrial sectors where the impact of the SEM was likely to induce considerable restructuring.
Firstly, where there currently exist high levels of intra-EC imports but significant non-tariff barriers.
It is a sector dominated by large firms and characterised by state involvement, either as owner or as principal customer, and includes telecommunication equipment, computers and office equipment.
The opening up of public procurement will profoundly affect this sector, encouraging the emergence of integrated European firms.
This will have uncertain consequences for employment, a situation reinforced by the impact of new technology.
The second vulnerable industrial sector identified in the study is that also characterised by high non-tariff barriers, but where there is currently very little intra-EC trade.
Again these industries — shipbuilding, railway equipment, iron and steel, pharmaceuticals — are usually principally suppliers to government agencies or are state owned.
The creation of these national standard-bearers has produced particularly fragmented industries, with large price and productivity differences.
Again the opening up of public procurement procedures should result in a significant increase in intra-EC trade and industry re-structuring.
In the tertiary sector, particularly financial services, the development of a single financial market may have important employment consequences.
Although banking is already internationalised, considerable variations continue to exist in charges, and insurance remains fragmented and subject to national protection, except in the United Kingdom and Netherlands.
Again the employment consequences of enhanced competition will be uncertain in a sector which is also subject to considerable technological change.
The second, and complementary element to analysing the impact of the SEM is the regional dimension (see Chapter 7).
The expected enhancement of economic growth will not benefit all regions equally, and even before the structural changes arising from enhanced economic integration, regional disparities within Europe had increased.
This resulted from both the general deterioration in employment conditions since the mid-1970s, and from the second enlargement.
A region's competitiveness is likely to be influenced by a number of factors.
Firstly, the qualifications and skill mix of the labour force, which might be undermined by outward migration.
Secondly, the infrastructure, estimated to be 40–60 per cent below the EC average standard in some regions.
Finally, labour costs; differences in labour productivity are often greater than differences in wage levels, and the levelling up of wage levels with economic integration may undermine the competitive position of some regions.
Two types of area might therefore be identified as being particularly vulnerable to structural problems; the underdeveloped mainly rural areas, and the regions where there is a concentration of declining heavy industries.
However concern has also been expressed that particular social problems will emerge from the completion of the SEM across all of the EC.
These arguments have focused upon three issues — social dumping, illicit work (moonlighting) and wage costs.
Social dumping
Social dumping expresses the concern that employment will be lost in those states whose higher social standards are reflected in higher average labour costs.
Faced with loss of market shares and firm relocation, there will be downward pressure upon social conditions (i.e. wages, social security, minimum labour standards, etc.).
This fear has led to demands for minimum wage levels, social security provisions and minimum health and safety guarantees, to avoid competitive pressures reducing standards to unacceptably low levels.
However it has been argued that concern about social dumping is misplaced.
It is pointed out that it is not a new phenomenon but predates the completion of the SEM.
Wage costs are not the only determinant of competitiveness but must be considered within the context of relative productivity, with human and physical capital allowing high wage sectors to maintain their comparative advantage.
It can be shown that high levels of social security contributions, by either employer or employee, need have no effect upon competitiveness.
Consider in Figure 6.4 the situation where all of the social security benefits are financed by payroll contributions by the employee.
With employment at L1 and wages at W1 the imposition of a payroll contribution on employees is equivalent to a reduction in the net wage offered of the vertical distance S1S2.
However this fall in the net wage also shifts the supply curves of labour from S1 to S2.
The equilibrium wage paid by employers now increases to W2 and employment falls to L2.
But if workers regard the social security benefits that they now receive as part of their total wage package, and this is fully taken into account in their labour supply decision, then the supply curve will shift back to S1; wages and employment returning to their original level.
Of course not all social security benefits may be regarded as part of the remuneration package — e.g. maternity benefits to a single man — in which case the labour supply curve will only shift part of the  way back to its original position.
But the more inelastic was the initial labour supply curve the less impact this disregard of social security benefits will have on employment and wages.
Figure 6.4 Social Security financed by employees
Turning now to a social security system financed solely by employers we begin with an equilibrium wage at W1 and employment at L1 (Fig. 6.5).
Social security contributions are now imposed upon the employer equal to the vertical distance D1D2, reducing labour demand to D1.
With labour supply at S1 equilibrium wages fall to W2 and employment to L2.
But again if employees regard the social security entitlements as part of their total wages, they will respond by raising their total supply of labour in response to the increased value of their remuneration package — i.e. labour supply increases from S1 to S2.
This returns employment to its previous level at L1, and lowers the firm's wage rate to W3.
The difference between the original wage rate W1 and the new lower wage W3 is equal to the cost to the employer of the social security contribution.
Thus the social security tax has been shifted onto the employee, and therefore the firm experiences no loss of profit, nor increase in total labour costs, and no change in its relative competitive position.
The only problem arises in a situation where wages are not flexible downwards.
Here adjustments in national price levels allow the required downward adjustment in real wages, but this will affect international competitiveness unless it is possible to undertake a devaluation of the currency.
As the Community moves towards full monetary union, with narrow band exchange rates and then the adoption of a common currency, social dumping may emerge as a real and acute problem.
Illicit work concerns work outside of the formal labour market's tax and social security   system and is most frequent among those who are already employed.
It is thought to be concentrated among the professions, domestic services, in agricultural work, vehicle repairs and among skilled manual workers in building and public works.
It is also estimated to be twice as prevalent among the southern states of the Community, reflecting differences in the structure of the local economies, levels of taxation, cultural attitudes and the effectiveness of official controls.
It is of concern within the single market since it distorts the operation of the labour market and competitiveness.
Those firms within the Community which employ labour illicitly will reduce their labour costs and gain a competitive advantage in production.
Thus they will displace those firms that finance the social security systems, and will undermine established safety regulations.
Therefore the Commission has taken a number of actions to attempt to minimise its occurrence.
It has sought effective compliance in public contracts to national and EC standards, close attention to sub-contracting arrangements and monitoring of cross-frontier activities.
The Commission has also pursued the adoption of common administrative "standards" for taxation and social security contributions across both regions and forms of employment (e.g. part-time, temporary workers).
Differences in wage costs are seen as inducing shifts in employment towards low-cost regions, creating a competitive downward pressure upon all wage levels in the Community.
This variant on the social dumping argument has however been challenged on a number of grounds.
It is argued that it is the relative unit labour costs, which also reflect variations in the productivity of labour, which are more significant.
Wage costs alone are unlikely to be the major factor in location decisions, except in the case of labour intensive industries.
It has also been pointed out that it is this very process of relocation to low wage areas that is the market  adjustment mechanism for spreading the benefits of economic growth throughout all of the Community.
Community policy
The Community's policy in the social area may be seen as seeking to fulfil three broad roles.
Firstly, harmonisation of national policies, especially in areas where it offers obvious advantages, e.g. labour mobility.
Secondly, encouraging convergence, both through its own discussions and encouragement of inter-State co-operation.
This approach is likely to be most appropriate where States are faced by similar problems, e.g. the impact of demographic changes upon social security systems.
Finally, the Commission can act as a focal point for the spreading of innovatory experience throughout the Community.
With the commitment to the completion of the SEM added urgency was given to the Commission's "watchdog" role in anticipating the social consequences of restructuring.
But the Commission is also a direct participant in fostering the necessary adaptability in the labour market.
Thus the following sections will outline the broad areas of Commission activity, ranging from the more passive information role, to its more controversial attempts at harmonisation through the Social Charter and European company laws.
Although the Treaty of Rome had laid down the fundamental freedom of movement of workers (Arts 48–51) and the right of establishment in any economic activity across all member states, a succession of secondary legislation has been required to give concrete form to these principles.
Any EC national may now reside in any member state to seek or take up employment, accompanied by his family (Directive 68/360/EC), establish firms or provide services (73/148) and remain in that territory after having been employed in that State (70/1251, 72/194).
In addition any worker and his family should receive equal treatment in respect of social security, housing, access to education and training, etc., as any domestic national.
Indeed the Community has sought co-ordination of national social security legislation to facilitate mobility through Regulations 71/1408 and 72/574.
These Regulations establish three basic principles: firstly, the application of a single body of legislation in each case; secondly, retention of all accumulated rights and entitlements (i.e. transferability); thirdly, equal treatment between domestic nationals and citizens of other member states.
But some problems remain unresolved or unaddressed.
Frontier workers, commuting from a country of residence to employment in another State, have a number of established rights, e.g. to social security benefits, but specific difficulties remain, particularly in regard to taxation.
EC nationals seeking public sector employment in other member states have faced restrictions.
Although discrimination in employment is allowed on grounds of "public policy, security or health, and exercise of public authority" this has been narrowly interpreted by the Court of Justice.
The Commission has therefore decided to take action to eliminate employment restrictions in the public utilities, health services, teaching and non-military research.
The rights so far described are focused specifically upon the needs of workers and their dependents.
Those who are not economically active continue to face residence restrictions, usually a test of "adequate means" for intending migrants.
To facilitate labour adjustment the Commission has proposed the transferability of unemployment benefit while workers seek employment in other member states.
However a proposed Directive granting a general "right of residence" throughout the Community for students and the retired, and other non-employed  people, faced substantial opposition from several member states, and has therefore been withdrawn.
The Commission is also pursuing a number of general policies aimed at enhancing worker mobility.
In particular it is seeking to establish comparability of vocational qualifications beginning with hotel and catering, motor vehicle repairs, construction, electrical, agricultural and textile trades.
Minimum skill requirements are being defined for training qualifications, with the assistance of Cedefop, but this work is unlikely to be completed until 1996.
The Commission has also been given responsibility for developing a broad Community recognised vocational training pass, but this will have to be built upon current activity in this area.
However faster progress is being achieved via the mechanism of mutual recognition.
Directives have already established mutual recognition of diplomas for doctors (1975), nurses (1977), dental practitioners (1978), veterinary surgeons (1978), pharmacists (1986), and architects (1985).
Further the Commission sought a general system of recognition of diplomas, subject to a minimum three years post secondary training.
This was finally agreed to commence in 1991, though subject to exemptions for certain professions where there are substantial national differences, e.g. lawyers and accountants, and here a test of competence will still be required.
The Community has also established Sedoc (Regulation 68/1612), a European system of employment information exchange, but this remains inadequate and little used, with only 1000 job applications processed annually.
But the Commission continues to foster a programme of exchanges and co-operation between national employment services focusing upon such topics as the frontier labour market, organisation of employment services and labour market management.
The need to establish minimum European standards for health and safety has been accepted as essential to fair competition within the SEM.
A good example of the approach now being taken is that of the proposed Machines Directive, which would cover over half of the total production of the European mechanical engineering industry.
This proposal, based upon a Council resolution of May 1985, was innovative in that it only defines basic requirements, leaving detailed specifications to the individual standardisation bodies.
The Commission also invited representatives from industry, trade unions, European standardisation bodies (CEN and Cenelec) and member governments, to be involved from the beginning.
The European Trade Union Confederation (ETUC) requested a tripartite structure of employers, trade unions and the Commission, to be created to oversee its practical implementation.
This proposal was accepted, and is likely to be followed in the drafting of other safety directives.
As part of the new working programme following from the SEA, the Commission is also preparing framework Directives to establish minimum health and safety standards at work.
Again both sides of industry are closely involved in their preparation, and in addition the Commission believes that trade unions should be "properly consulted in preparation of standardisation measures, and in the management of these Directives" .
In defining the role of the Structural Funds in facilitating the changes required by the accelerated economic integration of the SEM, the Commission follows two broad principles.
Restructuring must coincide with the broader Community objectives, and Community funds must be matched by national funds.
The structural funds — ERDF and ESF — have been supplemented by sectoral programmes aimed at restructuring the shipbuilding and steel industries.
But these ad hoc measures have created unnecessary complexity.
In response the  Commission had proposed reform of the Structural Funds in a draft regulation (COM (87) 376 final/2) adopted in June 1988, based upon four principles: 1.
Concentration upon five objectives (a) promoting the development and structural adjustment of the less developed regions;(b) converting the areas seriously affected by industrial decline;(c) combating long-term unemployment;(d) facilitating the occupational integration of young people;(e) promoting the development of rural areas.
2.
Precise definition of the tasks of the structural funds in relation to these objectives.
3.
An increase in resources.
4.
Rationalisation of both assistance and management methods.
In February 1988 the Heads of State accepted the proposed reform of the Structural Funds and doubled their appropriation, in real terms, from ECU 7 bn in 1987 to ECU 14 bn in 1993.
The ERDF will focus upon support for productive investment, modernisation of infrastructure, and studies of the potential for physical planning at the Community level (see Chapter 7).
The ESF will concentrate upon assisting young people and the long-term unemployed, expanding general employment, and providing workers with vocational skills.
Ensuring the provision of adequate training of the labour force will be essential for the structural adjustment necessary for the successful completion of the SEM.
The process of creating the SEM requires both new types of training, e.g. corporate planning for small and medium sized firms, and the general expansion of education and training to create a European pool of skilled labour.
The Commission will need to develop a strategy building upon discussions with both sides of industry, and focusing upon its three roles.
Firstly, the training of young people, building upon a Council Decision (Dec. 1987) calling for the setting-up of a system giving all young people the right to up to two years' basic training.
Secondly, the Commission may seek to improve comparability between national training systems.
Finally, the Commission can foster recognition of the importance of continuing and further training of the labour force by both industry and the State.
These general principles have been given expression in the further development of a vocational policy required by Article 128 of the Treaty of Rome.
The White Paper on the completion of the internal market built upon this, calling for comparability of qualifications (Council Resolution July 1985), a general system of recognition of higher education diplomas and the introduction of a vocational training pass.
Two programmes, Erasmus (1987) and Yes (1988) encourage increased student mobility and youth exchanges respectively, while the Lingua (1989) programme aims to foster students' knowledge of Community languages.
A Council Resolution in December 1986 recommended measures for the training of young people, the in-service training of employees and the training of women.
This was supplemented by a Council Decision in December 1987 on an action programme on vocational training for young people to commence from January 1988.
Finally, the Commission is preparing a programme of action on adult continuing training within the context of the agreed joint policy on vocational training.
With the movement towards fixed exchange rates and ultimately a single currency, differences in labour productivity between member states will have to be reflected in differing  real wage levels.
However if the SEA achieves the high degree of labour and capital mobility that is intended, then such differences in wage levels will induce shifts in employment to low wage areas, and of labour from the low to the high wage areas.
These movements of capital and labour will alter local labour market conditions, increasing the demand for labour and raising wage levels in the previously low wage areas, and increasing labour supply and reducing relative wages in the previously high wage areas.
Thus wage levels will tend to converge to a common level for a particular labour skill.
But without variations in exchange rates or labour costs it will be impossible to sustain different levels of labour productivity in different parts of the Community.
This will require a movement towards common levels of investment in both physical and human capital in each industry.
Thus, regardless of the harmonisation policies pursued by the Commission, market forces may well generate the adoption of a common level of vocational training across the EC.
A central feature of the proposals for a European company law has been the desire to encourage worker participation since the Commission believes this to be an important factor in firms' economic success.
A number of proposals addressing this issue have been considered including the "Fifth Directive" concerning company structures and the powers and duties of governing bodies.
There has also been a Regulation on the status of the European Limited Liability Company, first drafted in 1970, and the "Vredeling Directive" (1980).
This latter proposal specifically sets out to be a piece of social legislation, being concerned with information provision to, and consultation with, the workforce in large companies, especially multinational companies.
This directive has however been "frozen" in the face of opposition from employers.
In June 1988 the Commission returned to this issue and submitted a new memorandum on the creation of a European Company statute.
It proposed a simpler statute abandoning many aspects of the previous draft, and it would be optional.
Firms could choose to operate under the new statute or retain their existing national corporate existence.
In terms of worker participation three alternative options are available to a European Company; a German model with workers represented on the management bodies; the Franco–Italian system of a works council separate from the management board; and the Swedish model, under which individual firms establish an agreement on participation with the workers.
However various safeguards are proposed.
Prior agreement with the workforce on representation will be required before a European Company can be incorporated, with a "fallback" national standard model specified should there be a failure to reach an agreement.
Any member state may also restrict the choice of model available.
All three options will also require quarterly reports on the company to the employees, and prior consultation with the workforce on decisions relevant to them.
This particular issue forms one of the contentious elements in the discussions about a Social Charter.
Some concrete progress has however been made with the Regulation on the European Economic Interest Group (EEIG).
Although its scope is narrow, applying to firms employing fewer than 500 people, it is both flexible and innovative in that it allows the formation of a corporate body constituted under European, as opposed to national law.
It is intended to overcome the difficulties smaller enterprises face in co-operating across member state frontiers.
Firms from two or more member states can form an EEIG in any area where co-operation appears useful — e.g. purchasing, research and development, marketing or tendering — and registration confers full legal capacity to operate throughout the Community.
The Social Charter
The Commission's proposal for a Community Charter of Fundamental Social Rights failed to achieve unanimous support at the Strasbourg summit in December 1989.
Opposition was most apparent from the UK government, and was sustained at Maastricht two years later.
The result was the adoption of a separate Social Protocol by the eleven other member states as they renewed their commitment to the development of a social dimension to Community policy.
The Commission views the creation of a social consensus as essential to realising the benefits of an integrated European economy.
To achieve such a consensus it believes issues such as the threat of "social dumping" must be addressed.
Building upon the objective of improving the living and working conditions embodied in the Treaty of Rome, and consolidated in the SEA, both the Economic and Social Committee and the European Parliament called for an explicit political commitment to fundamental social rights.
Existing international agreements, such as the ILO Convention, have not been fully ratified by all member states, and are regarded as inadequate in providing for the needs of the successful creation of the SEM.
Thus the Social Charter addressed both the conditions necessary for the completion of the SEM, and attempts to create the social guarantees that the Commission regards as essential to maintain broad political support for these developments, i.e. "social cohesion" .
The Social Charter includes the following commitments: 1.
Improvements in living and working conditions."
The development of a single European labour market must result in an improvement in the living and working conditions of workers within the EC".
To avoid downward pressure upon these conditions a number of issues must be addressed including the form of employment contracts (e.g. temporary, seasonal, part-time) and the organisation of working hours.
There is a specific call for the establishment of a maximum working week.
In addition procedures relating to collective redundancies and bankruptcies should be addressed.
2.
The right to freedom of movement.
The establishment of the right to equal treatment with any other EC national in regard to the practice of any trade or occupation, access to training, rights to social security and residence.
3.
Employment and remuneration.
All employment must be fairly remunerated, established either through law or collective agreement, with particular attention to those workers not subject to the "normal" employment contract of indefinite duration.
Wages may not be withheld, except in conformity with national regulations, but "in no case may an employed person be deprived of the means necessary for subsistence" .
4.
The right to social protection."
Subject to the arrangements proper to each member state, any citizen of the EC is entitled to adequate social protection."
i.e. social security or a minimum wage.
5.
The right to freedom of association and collective bargaining.
 "Every employer and every worker has the right to belong freely to the professional and trade union organisation of their choice." 
This entails the right to choose whether or not to belong to a trade union and the right to strike.
Procedures for conciliation and mediation between the two sides  of industry should be encouraged, and contractual relations established at the European level if it is deemed desirable.
6.
The right to vocational training."
Every worker has the right to continue his vocational training throughout his working life."
Both public and private bodies should establish continuing and permanent training schemes and provide leave for training purposes.
7.
The right of men and women to equal treatment.
8.
The right to information, consultation and worker participation.
To be developed "along appropriate lines and in such a way as to take into account the legal provisions, contractual agreements and practices in force in the member states." 
9.
The right to health protection and safety at work.
10.
The protection of children and adolescents.
The minimum working age must be set at 16 years, and those over this age shall receive fair remuneration, and for a period of two years shall be entitled to vocational training in working hours.
11.
Elderly persons.
Shall receive an income that guarantees a decent standard of living.
12.
Disabled persons.
To ensure their fullest possible integration in working life measures must be taken in respect of training, integration and rehabilitation, complemented by action to improve accessibility, mobility, transport and housing.
It should be noted that many of the rights outlined above are qualified so as to accommodate existing national practices.
This must weaken the force of any commitment by member states to the Social Charter.
Nonetheless the Social Charter remains important in that it provides the underpinning for the implementation of an action programme of over 40 measures which will be prepared by the Commission (COM(89) 568).
These proposals will address only those areas of the Charter that require new initiatives and which fall within the competence of the Commission, as defined by the Treaty of Rome and the SEA.
However a broad interpretation of the existing health and safety Articles will allow considerable scope, overcoming UK opposition under the "qualified majority voting" rule.
It was the UK government's refusal to accept the extension of this procedure that was the cause of it's rejection of the Social Protocol.
Many of the proposed measures are merely a continuation of existing developments aimed at fostering worker mobility within the Community, enhancing training provision and establishing common health and safety requirements.
But the Commission is also preparing Directives setting minimum conditions for part-time employees and young people.
More controversially it is also proposing the introduction of a "social clause" into public contracts to prevent "social dumping" , and is preparing opinions and recommendations on the harmonisation of non-statutory social security, the establishment of a maximum working week and the introduction of a minimum wage.
The social dialogue
The action programme associated with the Social Charter also seeks the "continuation and development of dialogue with the social partners" and consideration of the need for collective  agreements at the European level.
But is there a need to establish a European framework of industrial relations?
Two conflicting views have been taken.
Those supporting the further extension of the Community's role, seeking to build upon the existing policy instruments — the social funds, health and safety at work, equal opportunities, etc…
For them the Social Charter and its accompanying action programme offer the way forward.
However, its critics point to the problems harmonisation must present across States with such varying traditions.
In particular the frameworks of industrial relations in each state vary in their emphasis upon rights embodied in legislation or acquired through collective bargaining.
Thus in the UK the existing legal framework is limited to immunities, not specific rights.
With the loss of trade union membership and consequent weakening of collective bargaining, a highly "flexible" labour market has been created.
By contrast in West Germany industrial relations have remained "corporatist" , and in Italy large firms continue to face substantial legal constraints upon their hiring and firing.
These critics prefer a decentralised approach, with the emphasis upon the establishment of only minimum health and safety requirements.
They argue for the primacy of collective bargaining at the level of the individual company.
Proponents of this laissez-faire approach have however themselves been challenged.
Their critics argue that the principle of mutual recognition of national social provisions requires a Community "yardstick" .
Rejection of harmonisation may lead to distortions of the competitive market, may fail to protect vulnerable groups, and sustain regional decline — as low prices are accompanied by low social provision and low productivity.
Politically, they argue that such an approach may undermine social progress and "social cohesion" within the Community.
But whatever the direction the Community legislative framework takes, both sides of industry have been involved in the development of Community social policy from its inception.
Thus the Economic and Social Committee was established under the Treaty of Rome.
However its influence to date has been limited as it covers perhaps too broad an area.
Since 1972 the 189 member Committee has had the right to draw up opinions on all questions relating to the Community, but it remains advisory.
Nonetheless it is able to call upon independent experts and is often therefore a source of technical expertise, and has occasionally, as in the Beretta Report on the social aspects of the SEM, made a significant contribution.
Two further groups of Committees bring together employers and employees.
The Advisory Committees deliver opinions before the Commission adopts a position.
These Committees cover vocational training, freedom of movement of workers, social security for workers, safety, hygiene and health protection, etc.
The second group are composed of Sectoral Joint Committees and informal groups, covering industries such as railways, sea fishing, road and maritime transport
However the ETUC had begun to press the need for the development of an active social policy in the late 1960s, and in response the first Quadripartite Conference, involving representatives of the Commission, Ministers of Labour, employers and employees, was held in Luxembourg in 1970.
This led in turn to the creation of the Standing Committee on Employment, composed of representatives of the Commission, Council, employers and trade unions.
From 1974 until 1978 conferences were held annually, but at the 1978 meeting the ETUC expressed its concern at the lack of evidence of any positive results from the meetings.
Although the Commission drew up proposals, adopted by the Council in June 1980, no conferences have been held since.
This failure underlines the opposition of both some member states and employers to the development of a Community role in industrial relations, and  represents the extension to the Community level of the national conflicts between trade unions and employers on many issues.
Nonetheless the Standing Committee on Employment continues to survive.
Its deliberations precede decisions by the competent institutions, and it provides a forum for consultation and discussion between the Council, Commission and the two sides of industry.
Until 1974 it focused upon reform of the ESF, but its agenda has now widened to include unemployment, reorganisation of working time and youth unemployment.
Since 1980 it has also considered new technology and long-term unemployment.
Nonetheless the Committee remains purely consultative, and it has been unable to create the initial momentum for the creation of a comprehensive social policy.
By the early 1980s the ETUC was expressing increasing dissatisfaction at this lack of progress, and the relationship between the employers and trade unions reached its lowest ebb when employers' opposition ensured the freezing by the Council of the "Vredeling Directive" on worker consultation in 1986.
This Directive had already been substantially revised in response to the comments of the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee, and had begun its fruitless journey six years before.
This inertia was broken by the new Commission under Jacques Delors, who presented an action plan, including the commitment to the completion of the SEM, at the 1984 Fontainebleau Summit.
One of the focuses for action was to be the revival of the "social dialogue" between employers and trade unions.
The first meeting in November 1985 at Val Duchesse, led to the establishment of two working parties, one examining macro-economic issues, the other micro-economic.
The micro-economic group has already produced a joint opinion on the implementation of new technologies — i.e. training, information and consultation — while the macro-economic group has produced commentaries on the Commission's 1986/7 and 1987/8 annual economic reports.
These clearly are only the beginnings of a full European social dialogue.
Although no longer a barren exchange, they do not represent outline agreements to be followed at the national level.
If those opposing the imposition of formal European Directives and Regulations are to win their case, they may have to show much greater enthusiasm for the emergence of voluntary European collective bargaining than they have shown so far.
After four years of the Val Duchesse "social dialogue" the Hanover Summit attempted to reinvigorate this process, calling a meeting of the ETUC and employers (Unice and CEEP) under the chairmanship of Delors.
At the meeting in January 1989 the focus of discussions was the social dimension of the SEM, and as a result a steering committee was established to maintain progress in the development of the "social dialogue" .
However whether this will finally create the necessary commitment in this area of European policy remains to be seen.