

2 Land as property
LAND AS A KIND OF PROPERTY
The Native American relationship to land
Within the Western world the notion that land can be conceived of as property is so deeply embedded an ideology as to have become "self-evident" .
However, as shown in the following extracts, many cultures regard land as incapable of ownership by human beings, or award them a form of tenure quite at variance with the Western tradition.
These different visions of land have often come into conflict, most strikingly shown "in the white man's inability to comprehend the indian's reverence for the land" (Donald W. Large, "This Land is Whose Land: Changing Concepts of Land as Property" (1973) 4 Wisc.
LR 1039, 1042).
T.McLuhan in Touch the Earth (Abacus: 1972)(54) quotes a chief from one of the principal bands of the northern Blackfeet upon being asked to sign a Land Treaty by white men in his region:
Our land is more valuable than your money.
It will last forever.
It will not even perish by the flames of fire.
As long as the sun shines and the waters flow, this land will be here to give life to men and animals.
We cannot sell the lives of men and animals: therefore we cannot sell this land.
It was put here for us by the Great Spirit and we cannot sell it because it does not belong to us.
You can count your money and burn it within the nod of a buffalo's head, but only the Great Spirit can count the grains of sand and the blades of grass of these plains.
As a present to you, we will give you anything we have that you can take with you; but the land, never.
Aboriginal songlines
The Native Americans are not alone in perceiving an intimate and religious connection between human life and the land.
B. Chatwin The Songlines (Picador: 1987)
White men, he began, made the common mistake of assuming that, because the Aboriginals were wanderers, they could have no system of land tenure.
This was  nonsense.
Aboriginals, it was true, could not imagine territory as a block of land hemmed in by frontiers: but rather as an interlocking network of "lines" or "ways through" .
 "All our words for"  "country"  "" , he said, "are the same as the words for"  "line"  "" .
For this there was one simple explanation.
Most of Outback Australia was arid scrub or desert where rainfall was always patchy and where one year of plenty might be followed by seven years of lean.
To move in such landscape was survival: to stay in the same place suicide.
The definition of "a man's own country" was "the place in which I do not have to ask" .
Yet to feel "at home" in that country depended on being able to leave it.
Everyone hoped to have at least four "ways out" , along which he could travel in a crisis.
Every tribe — like it or not — had to cultivate relations with its neighbour…
 "The trade route is the Songline," said Flynn.
"Because songs, not things, are the principal medium of exchange.
Trading in "" things "" is the secondary consequence of trading in song."
Before the whites came, he went on, no one in Australia was landless, since everyone inherited, as his or her private property, a stretch of the Ancestor's song and the stretch of country over which the song passed.
A man's verses were his title deeds to territory.
He could lend them to others.
He could borrow other verses in return.
The one thing he couldn't do was sell or get rid of them.
Supposing the Elders of a Carpet Snake clan decided it was time to sing their song cycle from beginning to end?
Messages would be sent out, up and down the track, summoning song-owners to assemble at the Big Place.
One after the other, each "owner" would then sing his stretch of the Ancestor's footprints.
Always in the correct sequence!
 "To sing a verse out of order" , Flynn said sombrely,"was a crime.
Usually meant the death penalty."
 "I can see that," I said.
 "It'd be the musical equivalent of an earthquake." 
 "Worse," he scowled.
 "It would be to un-create the Creation." 
Islamic ownership of land versus the Torrens system in Malaysia
The resounding clash between two different cultures and legal systems can be seen in modern Malaysia, where the Torrens system — a relic of British colonial rule (see Chapter 10, p. 261)— exists in a country where Islam is the national religion.
The Islamic concept of ownership over land is at variance with a system that confers an indefeasible title upon the registered owner.
The Qur'an does recognise a right to private property but it is subject to important limitation, as indicated in the next extract.
C.G. Weeramantry Islamic Jurisprudence — An International Perspective (Macmillan: 1988)
Since all property belongs to God, its holders are only trustees.
They must not use it selfishly without regard to the social purposes which it should serve.
Thus, while legal ownership was permitted and protected by the law, it was subject to an overall social orientation.
A landowner who neglected to cultivate his land for an  inordinate period of time might lose his right to retain his property and his neighbours might acquire the right to purchase and cultivate it.
Such concerns become important particularly in the modern age, with its emphasis on environmental concerns.
The planet was inherited not by any one generation but by mankind and all its posterity from generation to generation.
 "Do you not see that God has subjected to your use all things in the heavens and on earth and has made his bounties flow to you in exceeding measure, both seen and unseen?" 
(Qur'an, xxxi:20.)
Each generation is only the trustee.
No one generation has the right to pollute the planet or to consume all its natural resources in a manner that leaves for posterity only a polluted planet or one seriously denuded of its resources.
Therefore some Malaysian lawyers are concerned to examine the prospects for Islamisation of this field of law:
Haji Salleh Haji Buang Malaysian Torrens System (Percetekan Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka: 1989)
It is generally believed that the law of real property in Malaysia is totally devoid of Islamic content…
An in-depth study of our early land law reveal(s) the existence of a substantial body of Islamic legal principles, a historical fact which contemporary scholars find themselves in difficulty to accept, having been so engrossed with the civil law system introduced in these shores after the arrival of the English administrators towards the close of the eighteenth century.
This important point needs to be reemphasised if we are to consider seriously the possibility of re-introducing Islamic precepts into the law of property in Malaysia…
As stated earlier, indefeasibility of title has no place in Islam.
In the Quran, Allah says that everything in this universe vests absolutely in Allah (Sura al-Maidah, ayat 17) and that the State is but a mere Trustee.
The State has powers to alienate the rights of possessions to such "deserving grantees" (the deserving grantees, according to Islamic law, are the landless, the warriors and others who serve the State, those who can actually cultivate the land, and those who have just embraced Islam) who are able to put the land to productive use and to be of benefit to the society at large.
Although such possessory rights are capable of being disposed inter vivos and can devolve to one's heirs upon death, the cardinal rule in Islam is that the State can at any time repossess the land if such land is required for the public good.
Historical precedents abound in Islam…
Land as property in Anglo-American culture
As indicated in Chapter 1, the concept of land ownership which underlies English land law is essentially liberal:
John Locke Second Treatise on Government (1690)(Cambridge University Press: 1964)
32.
But the chief matter of Property being now not the Fruit of the Earth, and the Beasts that subsist on it, but the Earth itself; so that which takes in and carries with it all the rest: I think it is plain, that Property in that too is acquired as the former.
As much Land as a Man Tills, Plants, Improves, Cultivates, and can use the Product of, so much is his Property.
He by his Labour does, as it were, inclose it from the Common.
Nor will it invalidate his right to say, Every body else has an equal Title to it; and therefore he cannot appropriate, he cannot inclose, without the Consent of all his Fellow-Commoners, all Mankind.
God, when he gave the World in common to all Mankind, commanded Man also to labour, and the penury of his Condition required it of him.
God and his Reason commanded him to subdue the Earth, i.e. improve it for the benefit of Life, and therein lay out something upon it that was his own, his labour.
He that in Obedience to this Command of God, subdued, tilled and sowed any part of it, thereby annexed to it something that was his Property, which another had not Title to, nor could without injury take from him.
Alternative explanations of the relationship between human beings and land have of course been raised within Western culture, most notably in the work of Karl Marx (see Chapter 1).
In Russia, for example, only recently and haltingly have steps been taken to move towards a system of private land ownership.
ENGLISH AND WELSH LAND
The influence of climate upon the landscape
From the Ice Age onwards climate has had a dramatic effect upon the landscape, the kinds of cultivation and the uses of land for industrial and domestic purposes.
G. Manley Climate and the British Scenery (Collins: 1952)
The climate of the British Isles is such that the inhabitants enjoy, but are not subordinate to, the power of the sun.
It has accordingly been stigmatised by Latin Europe.
Tacitus left a renowned note on the subject: "The climate is objectionable with frequent rains and mists, but there is no extreme cold" .
Dumas gave vent to the views of the romantic Sturm-and(sic)-Drang period, "L'Angleterre est un pays ou le soleil rasemble à la lune" .
By contrast, more discriminating observers have often found room for praise; and Englishmen themselves, especially those who have not dwelt for long elsewhere, or have resisted the seductions of lands nearer the equator, are evidently very proud  of their climate.
As a Venetian Ambassador said in 1497, "The English are great lovers of themselves and of everything belonging to them" …
Charles [I]said that the English climate is the best in the world.
A man can enjoy outdoor exercise on all but five days in a year"[and this]has been echoed by most energetic Englishmen…
In the British Isles, structure goes far to mould the diversities of our climate.
Yet in its turn climate goes far to set limits to the use that can be made of the physical features of the country in which we live.
There are large areas in which the normal agricultural yield is thoroughly adequate for the maintenance and accumulation of energy, a fact well shown not only by doubling of our population in the eighteenth century, but also by the evidence of energy to spare for the graces of life whether in the form of meteorological recording, tours to the Lake District, walnut furniture or epistolary accomplishment.
But there are large areas in which practically no material yield is obtainable at all.
Thirty-five percent of Great Britain is mountain and moorland.
Practically all the land above 1,500 feet falls into this category and a great deal of it is so poorly drained that only the sourest peaty soils are found.
Elsewhere on the steeper slopes leaching removes enough mineral content from the thin poor soils to render them infertile and incapable of supporting more than a poor vegetation carrying very little stock.
Origins of the landscape
A.E.
Trueman Geology and Scenery in England and Wales (Pelican: 1971)
In England and Wales we are singularly placed to appreciate the relationship of scenery and structure, for few other parts of the earth's surface show in a similar small area so great a diversity of rock types and of landscape features: "Britain is a world by itself" ; its mountains are not high, nor its rivers long, but within a few hundred miles of travel from east to west one may see more varieties of scenery than are to be found in many bigger countries.
There are hill-forms of every type; smooth contoured chalk downs in a great belt encircling the London basin, the long line of the Cotswold edge, even-topped plateaux in Wales and Devon, bleak granite moorlands and craggy volcanic cliffs.
All these types reflect their underlying structure and their origin is apparent in their shape.
In many of these different regions the native stone has given character and fitness to the buildings; the wide variety of stones, together with the frequent use of wood and brick and thatch, especially in the stoneless areas, has added charm to English village and towns, and has made the dwellings, particularly the smaller cottages (for stones for churches and large houses were carried for many miles even in early times), ideally suited to their surroundings.
With the improvement of transport during the nineteenth century, building materials were more frequently carried over greater distances, and soon after the opening of railways houses began to lose that harmony with the countryside so characteristic of the older cottages.
The towns which thus sprung up at some railway centres are examples of the way in which individuality was lost, and lately the housing estate has spread a new uniformity even more widely over the country.
The combination of nature, human ingenuity and climate has indeed wrought a landscape which changes at nearly every turn.
There does exist in small pockets the "English Countryside" of Wordsworth, Constable and the mythical meadows of Blackacre and Whiteacre.
This rural idyll is, however, the privilege of the minority.
In rural areas the poor, many of whom are agricultural workers, are harnessed to their jobs through their housing, under the system of tied cottages.
Moreover, tensions exist between the rural population and the town-dwellers who buy second homes in the more accessible areas of countryside.
J.R.
Short Housing in Britain; The Post-War Experience (Methuen:1982)
Housing in rural areas differs from housing in the urban areas.
In the first place, there is a higher proportion of owner occupation and private furnished renting.
There has long been an antipathy against council housing in rural districts.
The most powerful groups in the local political scene are the farmers and landowners, to whom local authority housing is an unwarranted expense on the rates and a form of housing which reduces the potency of the tied cottage system.
The relative lack of council housing has made this system more important: in 1948 34 per cent of farmworkers lived in tied housing, but by 1976 this figure had increased to 53 per cent.
More recently, there have been the objections against council housing developments by environmentalists seeking to halt urban encroachment, and existing owner occupied rural dwellers who want to halt particular forms of residential development.
Nowadays, as a significant proportion of households can afford a second home, the pressure on the rural housing market increases.
The pressure is greatest in rural areas fringing metropolitan centres and in areas of high landscape quality.
Berkshire is an example of the former, and the Lake District of the latter.
In the fringing rural areas, existing residents seek to exclude lower income owner occupied developments.
The practice of local politics in the rural or suburban areas around metropolitan Britain is essentially the politics of exclusion.
The Lake District Planning Board has sought to limit new houses to local people, but this attempt was overturned by the Secretary of State for the Environment.
In Wales the second-home issue was charged with nationalist sentiments as many second-home owners were English.
In 1980 a series of arson attacks on English-owned cottages in Wales gave new meaning to the advertising slogan, "come home to a real fire" .
However, for most inhabitants of England and Wales, from the nineteenth century onwards, it is the town and not the field which has filled their vision.
D. Thomson England in the Nineteenth Century (Penguin: 1978)
It was during the generation after Waterloo that the balance of English economic and social life changed from being predominantly agricultural to being predominantly industrial; and with this change…came the growth of urbanization, the development of the mine and factory as the unit of production, and the  transformation of the "average" Englishman into a townsman rather than a countryman.
The normal community in England was no longer a village, but an industrial town.
The horizon of Englishmen in their daily life and work was not the open fields but the sky-line of rooftops and chimney-stacks.
The home was not for most a country house or a cottage, but a town villa or tenement.
The rapid building of cheap, poor quality housing was to provide a later generation with serious problems.
P. Malpass The Housing Crisis (Croom Helm: 1986)
The early development of Britain as an urban industrial society bequeathed to the twentieth century a huge stock of dwellings which were old, small, densely packed together, often poorly built originally and badly maintained subsequently.
Apart from problems of structural instability and dampness, lack of heating, hot water and modern sanitation made many of these dwellings unfit for human habitation.
The poor quality of nineteenth century working class housing, particularly that occupied by lower paid workers, reflected the significant gap between the cost of decent accommodation and the price that many workers could afford to pay.
The ravages of two World Wars upon the environment led the new breed of town planners in the period from 1945 to the late 1950s to build on blitzed sites and green fields outside the cities.
Thus, began the construction of so-called "new towns" .
However, with the political parties vying in their promises to build more new houses — in 1951 Harold Macmillan, then Minister of Housing, promised to build 300,000 in one year — it became necessary to begin to clear the old slum housing built in the Victorian era.
A.E.B. Leaper Health, Wealth and Housing (Basil Blackwell: 1980)
[F]rom the early 1960s the bulldozers began to bite into the inner cities: slum clearance in Britain rose from less than 35,000 houses a year in 1955 to a steady 70,000 a year from 1960.
In that year 135,000 houses were improved with the help of government grants: in 1955 there had been too little improvement to record in official statistics.
City centre redevelopment, the boom in office building, the expansion of universities, polytechnics and hospitals, and the urban motorways that carved through Glasgow, Birmingham and other great cities posed problems.
The dispersal of people to increasingly distant suburbs and the growing concentrations of service industries in city centres were bound to lead to a re-invasion by young professionals and executives of inner areas long abandoned to the working class…
 "Gentrification" , a term coined by Ruth Glass for this process, entered the vocabulary of planning debate.
Competition for space, often in nearby areas, was dramatized by the arrival of large numbers of immigrants seeking to enter the  country before the barriers imposed by the 1962 Commonwealth Immigrants Act…
The long established working class were rehoused on a massive scale, but many were stacked in tower blocks: the numbers of Council flats in England and Wales built fifteen or more storeys from the ground rose from 8 in 1955 to 17,351 in 1965.
There began to take shape a social division between middle-class people living in houses and workers living in flats — "people silos" as they were called in Sweden.
Even before one of them collapsed in a gas explosion at Ronan Point in London, the tower block became a focus of special hatred.
B. Campbell Wigan Pier Revisited (Virago:1984)
Tower blocks have become the symbol of our disaffection, monumental mistakes for which we can all justifiably blame the politicians and professionals.
But the pressure was on, with state housing subsidies inciting the architects, builders and local councils to build ever upward and experiment with barely tested materials, to cram the maximum population onto the minimum land mass, so that during the twenty-year tower block boom nearly half a million high-rise homes were built.
All over England there are relics of this reckless eldorado.
One block in the middle of the Northeast garden city, Washington New Town, now stands completely empty.
These flats, the size of a Victorian mill, were evacuated only fifteen years after being built.
People just won't live there…
What was once a landscape of banks of back-to-backs has become an asymmetrical mess of flats and maisonettes.
There's the notorious lowrise Noble Court stranded beside a highway overlooking the Tyne with "Get us out of this hell" written on the wall.
The very complexion of some of our cities has changed.
The regional shades of red brick and yellow stone which once coloured the cityscape have disappeared, replaced by the grey monotone of concrete.
On the edge of Sheffield town centre the eye confronts some long walls the colour of a storm, so forbidding that not even the kids have made their mark.
This is another monstrosity celebrated as a brilliant piece of architectural engineering.
It looks like a bunker.
THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK
Introduction
The subject-matter of traditional land law is not concerned with the whole landscape of England and Wales.
Its focus is the abstract categories of ownership, occupation and use.
The common law does not regard land as capable of being owned.
Only "estates and interests" in land are property, and carry with them the rights to exclusive use of the land and to transfer it.
Further, as Norman Ginsburg in Class, Capital and Social Policy (Macmillan: 1979) suggests, the role of land law is primarily "to facilitate the process of  realisation of surplus value for the builder and the process of exchange for the consumer" (p. 129).
The state provides "the legal framework within which this all takes place, but is not otherwise concerned in the regulation…aspects of the private housing market" (p. 129).
Great questions such as the way in which buildings may be rehabilitated, or private and council landlords forced to meet basic standards of health and safety within their properties, have been largely pushed into the field of what has been designated "Housing Law" , the latter being less concerned with providing a framework for operation than a means for intervening on behalf of the more vulnerable members in society.
Common law and equity
The framework of real property is a combination of rules derived from common law, equity and statute.
The origins of this system lie in English legal history.
(See also Chapters 8 and 9 below.)
P. Todd Textbook on Trusts (Blackstone: 1991)
The legal system divides into common law and equity: two different systems and until recently two separate jurisdictions.
Equity and trusts are found exclusively in England and in other non-Roman legal systems, and neither has any place, for example, on the Continent.
That a legal system should develop two separate concepts of ownership, both of which can apply simultaneously to the same property, and effectively two separate legal systems, is by no means self-evident.
The reason lies in historical differences between England and Continental countries, dating from the feudal era, and in particular the Norman Conquest…
Nevertheless, though the value of the services themselves diminished, important feudal incidents remained long after 1150.
For example, the lord was entitled to payment on succession of land to an heir, and to the right of escheat if a tenant died without an heir, which meant that land reverted to him.
He was also entitled to various rights when the land was held by a minor.
As long as any feudal dues remained valuable the lords desired to protect them, and rules about title to land at common law were developed to aid this process.
Many of the rights arose on the death of the tenant, especially if there was no heir or the heir was a minor, and could have been avoided by conveying the land to younger adult members of the family, or leaving the land by will.
For this reason taxes were imposed upon conveyances, and until 1540 freehold estates could not be left by will…
The rigidity of many legal systems is mitigated by discretionary executive power.
In England and Wales today, for example, there is a great deal of executive discretion in both prosecution and sentencing under a criminal law which, if rigidly enforced, could be very burdensome, even for relatively law-abiding individuals.
The medieval Chancellor (who was usually an ecclesiastic) performed an analogous function in relation to the rigidity of the common law at the time; he had the power to issue the royal writs, and this function came to be exercised in a discretionary manner, based on notions of conscience and justice.
He also had powers to act against individuals, and to enforce those orders against them by  imprisonment.
This discretionary use of power was the foundation of equity.
Eventually, probably during the 15th century, the Chancellor's office took on many of the features of a court, and the Court of Chancery was born.
The story is taken up in the next extract:
W.T. Murphy and S. Roberts Understanding Property Law (Fontana: 1987)
Military tenures were connected, both in their origin and their supposed function, with fighting.
Suppose, then, that such a tenant went off to war, from a sense of duty either to his King or to his God, or in the hope of booty, not knowing if and when he would return.
What provision could he make for his family during his absence?
One scheme was to transfer his legal estate to a relative or friend who was staying behind, who could look after it and administer it until he returned, or who, should the knight die abroad, could take care of it until the knight's son reached his majority and could take it over himself.
So the tenant transferred the estate but did not intend to allow the grantee to benefit from the land personally.
Rather, he was to look after it on behalf of the grantor's family.
The grantee was morally a custodian of the land, and not entitled to use it for his own purposes.
But if the grantor died in the Crusades, was there any way in which his family could prevent the grantee from taking the benefit for himself?
If they went to the common law courts, they would be told that the legal estate in the land was vested in the grantee, and that he was entitled to the benefit himself.
The family was not recognised by the common law as having any rights in the land…
When petitions from such families found their way into the Chancery with some frequency, the Chancellor came to recognise that the conscience of the grantee was bound…
By doing this, the Chancellor was beginning to recognise the rights of the family against the grantee as something more than personal.
They were beginning to have property rights of some kind.
And so in the course of time, we come to speak of these rights as equitable rights (because they have their origin in the protection of Equity or the Court of Chancery) or equally we refer to them as "beneficial rights" because they tell you not who has the legal title (the legal estate) but who is entitled to enjoyment or the benefit of the land.
In other words, these early inventions by the Chancellor marked the beginning of what is today a commonplace of English jurisprudence — the splitting of rights of ownership into legal rights (title) and equitable rights (the right to enjoyment).
In Tudor times Henry VIII made a valiant attempt to collect some of the revenue lost to him by the employment of the "use" .
He forced a reluctant Parliament to pass the Statute of Uses 1535, under which the use was "executed" so that the legal estate vested in the cestui que use (beneficiary) and then feudal taxes would be payable.
But by the late 1800s the trust emerged again, not just in the field of real property.
Its re-emergence put a further strain upon an already difficult relationship between the common law and equitable jurisdictions.
R.J. Walker and M.G. Walker, The English Legal System (Butterworths: 1985, 6th edn)
By the very nature of the jurisdiction it exercised the Court of Chancery was bound to come into conflict with the courts of common law.
Equity both supplemented the common law and corrected its deficiencies.
Where equity supplemented the common law, as by the recognition of uses and the grant of equitable remedies for the infringement of legal rights, it was not particularly repugnant to common lawyers because it did not countermand their authority.
However, this was not the case where equity corrected the common law.
In these instances there was a direct conflict between the common law courts and the Chancellor.
Thus the Chancellor would rescind a contract or rectify a deed where the common law courts would enforce it in accordance with its original terms.
Equity would allow a mortgagor to redeem where the common law would recognise no fetter on the mortgagee's legal estate.
In such a case equity would have to prevail or be of no effect.
Consequently, in order to assert its prevalence, the Court of Chancery began to issue common injunctions which, although directed at the litigant personally rather than the common law courts, had the effect of limiting common law jurisdiction…
The conflict…came…with the appointment of Coke as Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in 1606.
Coke, a bitter opponent of prerogative power, attacked vigorously the jurisdiction of all the courts exercising this jurisdiction.
In 1613 he was transferred to the King's Bench in which court he held in a case in 1615 (Courtney v Glanvil [1615]Cro.
Jac.
343) that where a common law court had decided a case the Court of Chancery had no power to intervene between the parties…
Lord Ellesmere, the Lord Chancellor, brought the dispute to a head in the same year by declaring, in the Earl of Oxford's case ((1615) 1 Rep.
Ch. 11) the power of the Chancery to set aside common law judgments "not for any error or defect in the judgment, but for the hard conscience of the party" .
The dispute was referred to the King, James I. James I decided in favour of the Court of Chancery and upheld the validity of the common injunction.
The supremacy of equity was established though in the next eighty years this supremacy was by no means unchallenged.
In 1873 Gladstone's government passed the Judicature Act (succeeded by further statutes over the following two years).
No longer, therefore, would common law and equity be administered in different courts but in one High Court, albeit subdivided into a variety of divisions.
In case of conflict between the rules of equity and the common law it was provided by s. 25 of the 1973 Act, now s. 49, Supreme Court Act 1981, that the rules of equity would prevail.
The Court of Chancery had become a byword for administrative delay (for example, Walsh v Lonsdale (1882)— see Chapter 4, p. 85), as famously depicted by Dickens.
(For a case involving a real "Bleak House" , see Flegg, Chapter 10, p.282.)
Charles Dickens Bleak House (1853) New York, Signet Classics: 1964)
This is the Court of Chancery: which has its decaying houses and its blighted lands in every shire; which has its worn-out lunatic in every madhouse, and its dead in every churchyard; which has its ruined suitor, with his slipshod heels and threadbare dress, borrowing and begging through the round of every man's acquaintance; which gives to monied might, the means abundantly of wearying out the right; which so exhausts finances, patience, courage, hope: so overthrows the brain and breaks the heart; that there is not an honourable man among its practitioners who would not give — who does not often give — the warning, "Suffer any wrong that can be done you, rather than come here" .
Thus the main motivating force behind the Judicature Acts was to rid the Court of Chancery of its ability to prolong cases for many years.
There has been much debate since the Judicature Acts as to whether they did something more than fuse the two systems at a procedural level, namely to change the substantive law.
R. Evershed"Reflections on the Fusion of Law and Equity after 75 Years' 70 LQR (1954) 326
The truth of the matter is, I am sure, that the so-called "fusion" of law and equity was a procedural matter and (save incidentally and because procedural matters cannot under our system sensibly be divorced from substantive law) the function of equity in relation to the common law was not thereby changed.
The 1925 legislation
The next important date in real property chronology is 1925 which saw the enactment of the Law of Property Act, the Settled Land Act, the Trustee Act, the Administration of Estates Act, the Land Registration Act and the Land Charges Act (the latter amended and re-enacted in 1972).
There has been much debate about the real underlying purposes of this legislation which has been generally vaunted, most importantly in the major textbooks, as designed to ease the buying and selling of land (see Chapter 10).
However, the next extract raises questions about the particular vision of history inherent in the popular interpretation of 1925.
S. Anderson "Land Law Texts and the Explanation of 1925" Current Legal Problems (1984) 63
The principles which are used to explain the legislation are political and economic, derived from a reading of the nineteenth century land reform movement, and in particular from its hostility to the strict settlement.
But only those parts of the  movement concerning the modern, artificial construct called "land law" are studied, and only those parts which were successful.
There is no attempt to understand the movement in its context, to appreciate the purposes of those whose words are used, to consider either the views of their antagonists or those of later researchers…by omitting these a distorted view of what was wrong with "the land laws" has been fostered.
The standard land lawyer's view of the nineteenth century heritage…is portrayed as one whose lands were fettered by the strict settlement, whose buildings were falling into ruin and whose agriculture was stagnant.
The evidence for this comes not from historians but, usually, from a lawyer, Underhill, or from the Liberal Party propagandists Joseph Kay, Brodrick, Osborne Morgan and Arthur Arnold, or their academic follower, the Cambridge Yorke Prize essayists Scrutton and de Villiers…
The structure of Liberal argument, both at the time and as it has come down to us in modern land law texts, is thus built upon two suppositions.
The first is that there was a significant correlation between the legal form of land-holding and the form and extent of commercial development of the land.
All modern research denies this.
The second supposition is ideological, that ownership ought to be individual.
But…this was an argument that was applied with the greatest selectivity; it was essentially a stick to beat the aristocracy…
The second theme to the philosophy of 1925 is to do with improving methods of conveyancing…
For those who argue that the 1925 legislation represents a series of reforms in order to facilitate conveyancing the foundation of the legislation lies in s. 1, Law of Property Act, where Parliament reduced the number of estates and interests capable of existing at law:
Law of Property Act 1925
Legal estates and equitable interests
1.
(1) The only estates in land which are capable of subsisting or of being conveyed or created at law are —(a) An estate in fee simple absolute in possession;(b) A term of years absolute.
(2) The only interests or charges in or over land which are capable of subsisting or of being conveyed or created at law are —(a) An easement, right or privilege in or over land for an interest equivalent to an estate in fee simple absolute in possession or a term of years absolute;(b) A rentcharge in possession issuing out of or charged on land being either perpetual or for a term of years absolute;(c) A charge by way of legal mortgage;(d)…any other similar charge on land which is not created by an instrument;(e) Rights of entry exercisable over or in respect of a legal term of years absolute, or annexed, for any purpose, to a legal rentcharge.
(3) All other estates, interests, and charges in or over land take effect as equitable interests;(4) The estates, interests, and charges which under this section are authorised to subsist or be conveyed or created at law are (when subsisting or conveyed or created at law) in this Act referred to as "legal estates," and have the same incidents as legal estates subsisting at the commencement of this Act; and the owner of a legal estate is referred to as "an estate owner" and his legal estate is referred to as his estate.
(5) A legal estate may subsist concurrently with or subject to any other legal estate in the same land in like manner as it could have done before the commencement of this Act.
(6) A legal estate is not capable of subsisting or of being created in an undivided share in land or of being held by an infant.
(8) Estates, interests and charges in or over land which are not legal estates are in this Act referred to as "equitable interests," and powers which by this Act are to operate only in equity are in this Act referred to as "equitable powers" .
The Lord Chancellor's Department has produced a consultation paper proposing a new estate in land — commonhold — following a preliminary study of"condominium' legislation in other parts of the world.
The basis for the proposed introduction of a new estate and its nature are made clear in the following extracts.
Lord Chancellor's Department Commonhold — A Consultation Paper Cm 1345 (HMSO: 1990)
2.1 It is widely recognised that English law is defective in failing to provide satisfactory machinery for the imposition on freehold land of positive obligations (such as obligations to repair and to contribute to communal maintenance costs) which can then be enforced against successors in title to the original owner of the land.
2.2 The law relating to leases does not suffer from the same deficiency.
For this reason, long leases have become the usual way of owning individual flats and other properties with shared facilities…
2.5 Since the publication of Law Com.
127 the problems of long-leasehold flats have attracted progressively greater public concern.
Widespread complaints of poor management and excessive service charges led to the establishment…[of]the "Nugee Committee" …at the same time there has been ever-increasing concern with the difficulties which confront leaseholders in selling leases whose outstanding periods have decreased significantly since their grant.
R.C. Armstrong "Commonhold: A Major Reform in Flat Ownership" Law Soc Gaz (1991) 17
The answer to the leasehold problem is provided by commonhold.
Commonhold is simply a system whereby the owner of the flat (the tenure can also in certain circumstances apply to houses, or even offices or other commercial developments) owns two things — first, the freehold of his individual unit and, secondly, an inalienable right to use the common parts and other services of his block.
He also has the right to participate as a member in the "commonhold association" which is the statutory body of owners.
There will be a largely standardised statutory package of rights and obligations, in relation to both the individual unit and the common parts and services — the former affecting the flat owner and the latter the commonhold association.
To have a legal estate, whether freehold or leasehold, is to enjoy quite a considerable degree of individual freedom, within the private space accorded to you by the law.
J.W. Harris "Ownership of Land in English Law" in N. MacCormick and P. Birks (eds) The Legal Mind: Essays for Tony Honore (Clarendon Press: 1986)
A legal estate is the right to possess land for a determinate or an indefinite period of time.
Granted that one has that right, what rights, privileges, powers, and immunities relating to land does one have?
Keep out the world and live as a recluse; admit what visitors one wishes; create tenancies or sub-tenancies; grow mushrooms in the cellar; sing bawdy songs in the bath; paint the front door a luminous green; sunbathe in the nude — no-one could list them all.
Their open-endedness is and can only be captured by a conception whose imprecision makes it uncongenial to real property lawyers, though it plays as important a part in legal doctrine as does the traditional tally of technical terms.
If one has the legal estate, one is empowered and privileged to do anything in relation to the land which the culture of the time, as represented and interpreted by the judiciary, accords to an "owner of land" .
Contrary to Harris's statement the definition section of the Law of Property Act 1925 legal framework does provides some indication of the "rights, privileges, powers and immunities" which the owner of the legal estate, or indeed any other estate or interest in or over land, may enjoy:
Law of Property Act 1925
205. (1)(ix) Land includes…land of any tenure, and mines and minerals, whether or not held apart from the surface, buildings or parts of buildings (whether the division is horizontal, vertical or made in any other way) and other corporeal  hereditaments; also a manor, an advowson, and a rent and other incorporeal hereditament, and an easement, right, privilege, or benefit in, over, or derived from land; but not an undivided share in land; and "mines and minerals" include any strata or seam of minerals or substances in or under any land, and powers of working and getting the same but not an undivided share thereof; and "manor" includes a lordship, and reputed manor or lordship; and "hereditament" means any real property which on an intestacy occurring before the commencement of this Act might have devolved upon an heir…
Fixtures and fittings
The owner of the freehold will also be entitled to enjoy any "fixtures" , that is anything which would generally be classified as personalty but which, by virtue of its attachment to the land, becomes a part of the land and is therefore treated as realty.
The distinction between fixtures and fittings is crucial whenever a freehold or leasehold estate is sold to another.
For the incoming purchaser will want to know what he or she is entitled to use as their own and the outgoing seller will want to know what he or she can remove.
The next case provides some useful guidance on distinguishing between fixtures and fittings.
Berkley v Poulett (1976) 241 Estates Gazette 911 (CA) Stamp, Scarman and Goff LJJ
The court had to determine whether a number of pictures, fixed by screws into the recesses of a panelled dining room in a mansion house, a white marble statue of a Greek athlete and a sundial in the garden, comprised part of the conveyance to the purchaser of the estate.
Lord Scarman:
The answer today to the question whether objects which were originally chattels have become fixtures, that is to say part of the freehold, depends upon the application of two tests:(1) the method and degree of annexation;(2) the object and purpose of the annexation.
The early law attached great importance to the first test.
It proved harsh and unjust both to limited owners who had affixed valuable chattels of their own to settled land and to tenants for years.
The second test was evolved to take care primarily of the limited owner, for example a tenant for life.
In Leigh v Taylor [1902]AC 157 the House of Lords invoked it to protect the interest of the tenant for life who had affixed large and valuable tapestries to the walls of the house for the purpose of adornment and enjoyment of them as tapestries.
As I read that decision, it was held that she had not made them fixtures.
 "They remained chattels from first to last," said Lord Lindley at p. 164 of the report…
The governing relationship with which this case is concerned is that of a beneficial owner of the  legal estate selling the freehold to a purchaser.
Such a seller can sell as much or as little of his property as he chooses.
Lord Poulett excluded certain named objects from the sale, but the contract was silent as to the objects claimed by the plaintiff…
Since Leigh v Taylor the question is really one of fact.
The two tests were explained in that case by the Lord Chancellor…who commented that not the law but our mode of life has changed over the years; that what has changed is "the degree in which certain things have seemed susceptible of being put up as mere ornaments whereas at our earlier period the mere construction rendered it impossible sometimes to sever the thing which was put up from the realty." 
In other words, a degree of annexation which in earlier times the law would have treated as conclusive may now prove nothing.
If the purpose of the annexation be for the better enjoyment of the object itself, it may remain a chattel, notwithstanding a high degree of physical annexation.
Clearly, however, it remains significant to discover the extent of physical disturbance of the building or the land involved in the removal of the object.
If an object cannot be removed without serious damage to, or destruction of, some part of the realty, the case for its having become a fixture is a strong one.
The relationship of the two tests to each other requires consideration.
If there is no physical annexation there is no fixture…
Nevertheless an object, resting on the ground by its own weight alone, can be a fixture, if it be so heavy that there is no need to tie it into a foundation, and if it were put in place to improve the realty…
Conversely, an object affixed to realty but capable of being removed without much difficulty may yet be a fixture, if, for example, the purpose of its affixing be that "of creating a beautiful room as a whole" (Neville J In Re Whaley [1908]1 Ch 615, 619)…
The 7th Earl decided in the early part of the twentieth century to install in the two rooms the panelling and so designed it that there were recesses for pictures.
It is this feature which lends plausibility to the suggestion that the pictures, fitted into the recesses left for them, were not to be enjoyed as objects for themselves but as part of the grand architectural design of the two rooms.
The Vice Chancellor rejected this view.
So do I…
The panelling was Victorian, the pictures a heterogeneous collection.
According to Sotheby's expert they were of different dates…of different styles, by different hands, the sort of set anyone could put together at any time…
The statue and sundial give rise in my judgment to no difficulty.
Neither was at the time of the sale physically attached to the realty.
The sundial was a small object and, once the Earl had detached it (as he did many years earlier) from its pedestal, it ceased to be part of the realty.
The statue was heavy.
It weighed 10 cwt and stood 5 ft 7 in high on its plinth.
There is an issue as to whether it was cemented into the plinth…
The question is not decisive, for, even if was attached by a cement bond, it was (as events proved) easily removable…
The best argument for the statue being a fixture was its careful siting in the West Lawn so as to form an integral part of the architectural design of the west elevation of the house.
The design point is a good one so far as it goes…
But what was put on the plinth was very much a matter for the taste of the occupier of the house for the time being…
Being, as I think, unattached, the statue was, prima facie, not a fixture, but even if it were attached, the application of the second test would lead to the same conclusion.
BUYING AND SELLING LAND
Introduction
Land has always been a precious kind of property.
Thus there have been — and still are — particular rules about transferring ownership of it.
Originally the rules linked the old and new owners with the land itself by the "delivery of seisin" , the handing over of a clod of earth on site.
But, as paper evidence became more significant, special documents were used — deeds — to demonstrate the importance of the transfer.
Initially, the making of a contract for the transfer of land ownership was not subject to any particular rules.
However, in the late seventeenth century, perjury became a problem, so writing was required by the Statute of Frauds 1677 to prevent the wrongful enforcement of alleged oral agreements for the sale of land (as well as for certain other contracts).
Where it seemed that this would cause injustice, equity stepped in with the doctrine of "part performance" : if the contract were partly performed, equity would not allow a statute to be used "as an engine of fraud" .
Most recently, the Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989 provided a new definition of a deed and also strengthened the rules concerning writing.
These reforms can be seen as more paternalistic, to protect people from accidentally becoming bound by contract.
The agreement
Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989
Contracts for sale etc. or land to be made by signed writing 2. (1) A contract for the sale or other disposition of an interest in land can only be made in writing and only by incorporating all the terms which the parties have expressly agreed in one document or, where contracts are exchanged, in each.
(2) The terms may be incorporated in a document either by being set out in it or by reference to some other document.
(3) The document incorporating the terms or, where contracts are exchanged, one of the documents incorporating them (but not necessarily the same one) must be signed by or on behalf of each party to the contract.
(4) Where a contact for the sale or other disposition of an interest in land satisfies the conditions of this section by reason only of the rectification of one  or more documents in pursuance of an order of the court, the contract shall come into being, or be deemed to have come into being, at such time as may be specified in the order.
(5) This section does not apply in relation to—(a) a contract to grant such lease as is mentioned in section 54(2) of the Law of Property Act 1925 (short leases);(b) a contract made in the course of a public auction; or (c) a contract regulated under the Financial Services Act 1986; and nothing in this section affects the creation or operation of resulting, implied or constructive trusts.
(6) In this section — "disposition" has the same meaning as in the Law of Property Act 1925; "interest in land" means any estate, interest or charge in or over land or in or over the proceeds of sale of land.
(7) Nothing in this section shall apply in relation to contracts made before this section comes into force.
(8) Section 40 of the Law of Property Act 1925 (which is superseded by this section) shall cease to have effect.
This section affects all land contracts made on or after 27 September 1989.
Contracts made earlier are subject to the old rules about writing and part performance contained in s. 40 Law of Property Act 1925.
It seems unlikely that many cases will occur now in relation to the old law, and therefore it is omitted from this book.
However, full details can be found in E.H.
Burn Cheshire and Burn's Modern Law of Real Property (Butterworths: 1988, 14th edn 105–33).
Two cases have been reported on the new rules.
Spiro v Glencrown Properties Ltd [1991]2 WLR 931
There was here a written agreement for an option to buy the land.
The option could be exercised by the buyer giving notice in writing.
Of course this notice would naturally not be signed by both parties as required by s. 2, which had come into effect a few weeks before.
The buyer exercised the option, but then did not complete the contract, so the seller took him to court.
The original written contract was held valid under s. 2.
Hoffman J:
Apart from authority, it seems to me plain enough that s. 2 was intended to apply to the agreement which created the option and not to the notice by which it was exercised.
Section 2, which replaces s. 40 of the Law of Property Act 1925, was intended to prevent disputes over whether the parties had entered into a binding  agreement or over what terms they had agreed.
It prescribes the formalities for recording their mutual consent.
But only the grant of the option depends upon consent.
The exercise of the option is a unilateral act.
It would destroy the very purpose of the option if the purchaser had to obtain the vendor's countersignature to the notice by which it was exercised.
Record v Bell (1991) 62 P & CR 192
The agreement here was for the sale of a London house for £1.3 million, plus furniture for a further £200,000.
The contracts satisfied s. 2, but then there was a difficulty getting proof of title from the Land Registry, so, in order to encourage the buyer to exchange contracts, the seller made an extra promise (a "collateral warranty" ) to the effect that he would guarantee the title.
This extra promise on the side was not signed by both parties.
Contracts were "exchanged" — notionally, by the solicitors speaking to one another on the telephone — at 3.31 pm on 31 May 1990.
Then the buyer lost money because of the Gulf crisis, and the price of land was falling so he chose not to go through with the contract.
The seller sued for an order of specific performance and the buyer responded with s. 2.
(The contracts for the furniture were not the subject of s. 2, since they did not concern "land" .
Nonetheless, the seller sought, and won, orders of specific performance for these contracts for personal property.)
Judge Paul Baker:
The other ground for giving leave to defend is that the contract does not comply with the terms of s. 2 of the Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989.
It is a point of some general importance arising under a new statute which has made very substantial changes in the law relating to contracts for the sale of land.
The particular area I am concerned with is where a contract in two parts has been duly signed by the respective parties and is awaiting exchange.
Then some term is orally agreed immediately prior to exchange and confirmed by the exchange of letters.
Is the statute satisfied?
That, as I see it, is a very common situation especially where there is some pressure to get contracts exchanged, as there frequently is, and one often finds that at exchange not all the loose ends are tidied up and it is necessary to have some last minute adjustment of the contract which takes the form of side letters…
I start with the defendant's first two points, that is to say, if there are to be side letters they have to be incorporated into the main agreement, and these were not incorporated.
If there has to be a last minute addition to the contract after the document has been prepared and is awaiting exchange, it could be written into the draft contract before exchange, or some reference to it could be added to the contract so long as all that was done with the authority of the parties who signed it.
I would see no difficulty in adjusting the contract before exchange in that way.
But it could not in my judgment, be done simply by a document which itself refers to the contract, and I reject Mr Ritchie's submission on this…
I return to Mr Ritchie's point that what happened here amounted to a collateral contract, that is an independent contract collateral to the main contract.
In such a case it is not caught by s. 22 unless it is by itself a contract for sale [of land]…
[M]y conclusion on this is unhesitating.
This was in my judgment, an offer of a warranty…as to the state of the title, and it was done to induce him to exchange.
That offer was accepted by exchanging contracts.
It would be unfortunate if common transactions of this nature should nevertheless cause the contracts to be avoided.
It may of course lead to a greater use of the concept of collateral warranties than has hitherto been necessary.
Thus the seller won, and the buyer had to complete the contract at the original price.
New technology
Lawyers are used to relying on paper as evidence of legal transactions but new technology may come to challenge that reliance.
For some years now, conveyancers have "exchanged contracts" by telephone (as in Record v Bell above), and the law of contract has had to come to terms with electronic mail in the form of faxes.
(For another example of the law's response to new technology, see Chapter 6, p. 170.)
Computers are now able to "talk" to one another without human control, and computer memories can be altered without trace.
The very flexibility which makes these machines attractive provides a danger to a profession which relies on unalterable evidence.
C. Reed "Authenticating Electronic Mail Messages and Some Evidential Problems" 52 MLR (1989) 649
Although electronic messages potentially offer a convenient way of negotiating and establishing contractual or other rights, their use for these purposes is evidentially hazardous.
Electronically stored documents are admissible in court, but because computer technology permits documents stored on such to be edited without leaving any trace, there is the danger that if the identity of the sender of the content of the document is disputed it will be impossible to prove to the court's satisfaction that the message is authentic.
Methods of authentication such as the use of trusted third parties can be effective, and highly specialised services such as SEADOCS have advantages in certain transactions.
However, the practical implementation of these specialised services is too cumbersome for regular use outside these fields of activity, and more general services such as Telecom Gold, whilst offering the possibility of adequate authentication, can prove expensive (and thus unattractive) if used for that purpose.
What is required is some way of authenticating these matters which does not impinge too greatly on the ease of use of electronic messaging, and the best method of authentication is undoubtedly some form of digital signature.
Digital signatures are possible using presently available technology, in particular the RSA cipher, and in spite of the technical complexity will provide sufficient information to permit proof that the document is indeed authentic.
The effect of the agreement
Once there is a contract in writing to satisfy s. 2, then equity will provide the remedy of specific performance, that is the court will order the contract to be performed.
This is an estate contract.
(Other remedies may also be available, such as rectification or damages.)
Transferring legal ownership
A contract for the sale of land or an interest in land is completed when the deed is delivered and the buyer pays the price.
The buyer only becomes the legal owner of registered land when the transfer is received by the Land Registry (see Chapter 10).
Where land is not yet registered, and for the creation or sale of interests which are not registrable (for example, leases of between three and twenty years), a deed is used.
Without a deed, there can be no change in the legal ownership of the land.
(Appendix 2 gives an example of a deed.)
Law of Property Act 1925
Conveyances to be by deed
52. (1) All conveyances of land or of any interest therein are void for the purpose of conveying or creating a legal estate unless made by deed.
(2) This section does not apply to —(a) assents by a personal representative;(b) disclaimers made in accordance with section 54 of the bankruptcy Act 1914 or not required to be evidenced in writing;(c) surrenders by operation of law, including surrenders which may, by law, be effected without writing;(d) leases or tenancies or other assurances not required by law to be made in writing;(e) receipts not required by law to be under seal;(f) vesting orders of the court or other competent authority;(g) conveyances taking effect by operation of law.
Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989
Deeds and their execution
1.
(1) Any rule of law which —(a) restricts the substances on which a deed may be written;(b) requires a seal for the valid execution of an instrument as a deed by an individual; or  (c) requires authority by one person to another to deliver an instrument as a deed on his behalf to be given by deed, is abolished.
(2) An instrument shall not be a deed unless —(a) it makes it clear on its face that it is intended to be a deed by the person making it, or, as the case may be, by the parties to it (whether by describing itself as a deed or expressing itself to be executed or signed as a deed or otherwise); and (b) it is validly executed as a deed by that person or, as the case may be, one or more of those parties.
(3) An instrument is validly executed as a deed by an individual if, and only if —(a) it is signed —(i) by him in the presence of a witness who attests the signature; or (ii) at his direction and in his presence and the presence of two witnesses who each attest the signature; and (b) it is delivered as a deed by him or a person authorised to do so on his behalf.
(4) In subsection (2) and (3) above "sign" , in relation to an instrument, includes making one's mark on the instrument and "signature" is to be construed accordingly.
(5) Where a solicitor or licensed conveyancer, or an agent or employee of a solicitor or licensed conveyancer, in the course of or in connection with a transaction involving the disposition or creation of an interest in land, purports to deliver an instrument as a deed on behalf of a party to the instrument, it shall be conclusively presumed in favour of a purchaser that he is authorised so to deliver the instrument.
(6) In subsection (5) above — "disposition" and "purchaser" have the same meanings as in the Law of Property Act 1925; and "interest in land" means any estate, interest or charge in or over land or in or over the proceeds of sale of land.
(7) Where an instrument under seal that constitutes a deed is required for the purposes of an Act passed before this section comes into force, this section shall have effect as to signing, sealing or delivery of an instrument by an individual in place of any provision of that Act as to signing, sealing or delivery.
(9) Nothing in subsection (1)(b),(2),(3),(7) or (8) above applies in relation to deeds required or authorised to be made under —(a) the seal of the county palatine of Lancaster;(b) the seal of the Duchy of Lancaster; or (c) the seal of the Duchy of Cornwall.
(10) The references in this section to the execution of a deed by an individual do not include execution by a corporation sole and the reference in subsection (7) above to signing, sealing or delivery by an individual does not include signing, sealing or delivery by such a corporation.
(11) Nothing in this section applies in relation to instruments delivered as deeds before this section comes into force.
The section came into force on 31 July 1990.
There are exceptions to the requirement for a deed; for example, short leases (see Chapter 4, p. 83).
FRENCH LAW OF CONVEYANCING
It is interesting to contrast the above strict rules regarding contracts for the sale of land with that operating in a continental system.
In French conveyancing law, writing does not play such an important part.
H. Dyson French Real Property and Succession Law (Robert Hale: 1988)
There is no requirement in French law that a binding contract for the sale of land should be in or evidenced by writing.
A verbal agreement to sell, provided it embodies such essential elements as a correct description of the property and the price, is enforceable in France, though there are obvious difficulties of proof.
A letter of instruction, for example, by one of the parties to his Notary to prepare the conveyance will be considered good evidence of the existence of such verbal contract.
Quite apart from the obvious undesirability of verbal agreements for the sale or purchase of land, no transfer of land can be validly achieved in France other than by an acte de vente, which is a notarial document prepared by a Notary and signed by all parties or their Attorneys before him…
From the practical point of view, it seems that the majority of land transactions…are based on the bilateral compromis de vente.
The vast majority of contracts are prepared in standard form by the local Estate Agent…
Such a contract comes within the provisions of Article 1589 of the Code Civil, which states that, where there is agreement as to subject matter and price, a promise to sell is equivalent to a sale.
Whilst the sale itself can be effected only by acte notarie, it is worth remembering that many of the contracts drawn by sellers' Agents are prepared without a sight of the title deeds.
It is, therefore, important to ensure that the contract contains all that it should…
The contract will normally include a date for completion.
The normal period between contract and completion is a little over a month, but the Lois Scribener rules must be taken into account in fixing a date, as…considerable delays…can occur in obtaining replies to Land Registry searches.
Completion dates tend to be on an "on or before" rather than a fixed date and frequently pass by without completion taking place…
It will be appreciated that something less than the sanctity which attaches to completion in England exists in France…to resort to the  courts to enforce a contract would be a rare and tediously long process and is hardly considered in textbooks as a remedy.
EQUITABLE INTERVENTIONS
The disappearance of part performance
Although part performance has been abolished, it is expected that equity will continue to intervene:
Law Com.
Report No. 164 "Report on Formalities for Contracts for Sale etc. of Land" "(HC2: 1987), para 5.5.
We see no cause to fear that the recommended repeal and replacement of the present section [s. 40, LPA 1925]as to the formalities for contracts for sale or other disposition of land will inhibit the courts in the exercise of the equitable discretion to do justice between parties in individual otherwise hard cases.
An increased role for the doctrine of proprietary estoppel?
Some indication of the position which the courts may take is provided by the recent, although pre-1989 Act, decision:
In Re Basham Deceased (1986) 1 WLR 1498
The plaintiff was the stepdaughter of the deceased and had a close relationship with him.
She had worked for him and her mother in a variety of businesses and was always assured that she would inherit his estate when he died.
For the same reason, when her husband considered moving to better employment elsewhere they were persuaded to stay.
After her mother died in 1976 the plaintiff looked after her stepfather and his house on an extensive scale.
However, he died intestate and she claimed that she was absolutely entitled to the deceased's house and other property.
Edward Nugee QC:
The Plaintiff relies on proprietary estoppel the principle of which, in its broadest form, may be stated as follows; where one person, A, has acted to his detriment on the faith of a belief, which was known to and encouraged by another person, B, that he either has or is going to be given a right in or over B's property, B cannot insist on his strict legal rights if to do so would be inconsistent with A's belief.
The principle is commonly known as proprietary estoppel, and since the effect of it is that B is prevented from asserting his strict legal rights it has something in common with estoppel.
But in my judgment, at all events where the belief is that A is going to be given a right in the future, it is properly to be regarded as giving rise to a  species of constructive trust, which is the concept employed by a court of equity to prevent a person from relying on his legal rights where it would be unconscionable for him to do so…
In the present case it is in my judgment clearly established by the evidence, first, that the plaintiff had a belief at all material times that she was going to receive both the cottage and the remainder of the deceased's property on his death, and secondly, that this belief was encouraged by the deceased.
I am satisfied that the deceased encouraged the plaintiff in the belief that all the property he possessed at the date of his death would pass to her, and I do not consider that the fact that he made certain gifts during his lifetime, and indicated a wish to make others, including the gift of a legacy to the plaintiff's son is inconsistent with such a belief.
The gifts of which evidence was given were in favour of the plaintiff's children and in the circumstances did not in substance conflict…with his intention to benefit the plaintiff.
The third element that the plaintiff must prove in order to raise a constructive trust in a case of proprietary estoppel is that she acted to her detriment…
There is some evidence, though not very much, of occasions when the plaintiff or husband acted or refrained from acting in a way in which they might not have done but for their expectation of inheriting the deceased's property: I refer to the occasions when the husband refrained from selling his building land, and refrained from taking a job in Lincolnshire which would have made it impossible for the plaintiff to continue caring for her mother and the deceased, and the occasions when the plaintiff instructed solicitors at her own expense in connection with the boundary dispute…and the expenditure of time and money on the house and garden and on carpeting the house, when the deceased had ample means to pay for such matters.
It may be that none of these incidents, taken by itself, would be very significant, but the cumulative effect of them supports the view that the plaintiff and her husband subordinated their own interests to the wishes of the deceased…the plaintiff's acts went well beyond what was called for by natural love and affection for someone to whom she had no blood relationship, and both she and her husband made it very clear in their evidence that there was no great love and affection between her husband and the deceased, and that he was only willing to pay for meals that the plaintiff provided for the deceased and to work as he did in the garden of the cottage because of the expectation that the deceased's estate would in due course pass to the plaintiff.
The fourth element that the plaintiff has to prove is that the acts done by her were done in reliance on or as a result of her belief that she would become entitled to the deceased's property on his death…
On the evidence in the present case I am satisfied that one reason why the plaintiff did so much for the deceased was her belief that, although she was not a blood relative of his, he would leave his estate to her on his death; but, on the authority of Greasley v Cooke [1980]1 WLR 1306, if the evidence was not sufficient to establish this positively, the plaintiff would still succeed on the fourth element in the absence of proof that she did not rely on the deceased's statements.
The plaintiff succeeded in her action and was entitled to both the house and the remainder of the deceased's net estate.
In Voyce v Voyce (1991) P & CR 290 the Court of Appeal decided that an intention to make a gift, by the legal owner of a cottage to another, albeit an imperfect gift since there was no deed, coupled with later conduct such that it would be inequitable for the legal owner to assert his rights, was sufficient to order the successor in title of the donor to transfer the freehold to the donee.
Thus proprietary estoppel may also be used to perfect an imperfect inter vivos gift.
A place for donatio mortis causa of land?
A further means, in hard cases, of avoiding the formalities required by s. 2, Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989, and s. 52(1), Law of Property Act 1925, may have been provided by a recent Court of Appeal decision on the doctrine of donatio mortis causa, which enables a person, in contemplation of their death, to make a gift without formalities.
Sen v Headley [1991]2 All ER 636 (CA) Purchas, Nourse and Leggatt LJJ
Mr Hewitt, dying of cancer in hospital, said to Mrs Sen — his close friend for thirty years, with whom he had at one time cohabited —"The house is yours, Margaret.
You have the keys.
They are in your bag.
The deeds are in the steel box".
After his death she therefore claimed that he had made her a donatio mortis causa of the house by this constructive delivery of the title deeds.
At first instance, Mummery J rejected Mrs Sen's claim on the grounds that there could not be a valid donatio mortis causa of land.
The Court of Appeal disagreed.
Nourse LJ:
Donationes mortis causa may be said to have been an anomaly in our law, both for their immunity to the Statute of Frauds 1677 and the Wills Act 1837 and as exceptions to the rule that equity will not perfect an imperfect gift.
But both Lord Hardwicke and Lord Eldon…established extensions of it beyond a simple gift of a chattel by its delivery: the former to a gift of money secured by a bond, by delivery of the bond; the latter to a gift of money secured by a mortgage of land, by delivery of the mortgage deed.
Later decisions have included gifts of other choses in action by delivery of the essential indicia of title.
What has never before been directly decided in England is whether the doctrine applies to a gift of land by delivery of the title deeds…
If the question whether the subject matter is capable of passing by way of donatio mortis causa is put on one side, the three general requirements for such a gift may be stated very much as they are stated in contemplation, although not necessarily in expectation of impending death.
Secondly, the gift must be made upon the condition that it is to be absolute and perfected only on the donor's death, being revocable until that event occurs and ineffective if it does not.
Thirdly, there must be a delivery of the subject matter of the gift, or the essential indicia of title thereto, which amounts to a parting with dominion and not mere physical possession over the subject matter of the gift.
Nourse LJ then considered the authorities and decided that, contrary to the decision of the lower court, it was possible for someone, in contemplation of death, to give up dominion over a house by parting with title deeds — the essential indicia of title.
It was a matter of fact in each individual case to decide whether such a transfer could amount to a meeting of the third condition for a donatio mortis causa.
On the facts before him Nourse LJ indicated that the deceased had parted with dominion three days before his death.
He then turned to the difficult question as to whether land is capable of passing by donatio mortis causa.
Let it be agreed that the doctrine is anomalous.
Anomalies do not justify anomalous exceptions.
If due account is taken of the present state of the law in regard to mortgages and choses in action, it is apparent that to make a distinction in the case of land would be to make just such an exception.
A donatio mortis causa of land is neither more nor less anomalous than any other.
Every such gift is a circumvention of the Wills Act 1837.
Why should the additional statutory formalities for the creation and transmission of interests in land be regarded as some larger obstacle?…
Moreover, certainty of precedent, while in general most desirable, is not of as great an importance in relation to a doctrine which is as infrequently invoked as this.
Finally, while we certainly agree that the policy of the law in regard to the formalities for the creation and transmission of interests in land should be upheld, we have to acknowledge that that policy has been substantially modified by the developments to which we have referred…
We hold that land is capable of passing by way of donatio mortis causa and that the three general requirements for such a gift were satisfied in this case.
3 Possessing land
INTRODUCTION
The two areas of land law in this chapter provide a focus on the ways in which land is capable of being possessed, and what amounts to possession in English law, although they are rarely examined together.
As indicated in Chapter 1, possession has traditionally been a basis of title.
In English land law, the concept of "seisin" (settled possession) lies behind more modern ideas of ownership or possession.
E.H.
Burn Cheshire and Burn's Modern Law of Real Property (Butterworths:1988)
It may be said at once that the doctrine of tenure, as developed in England, made it difficult, if not impossible to regard either [the tenant]or his lord as the owner of the land itself.
The land could not be owned by the tenant, since it was recoverable by the lord if the tenurial services were not faithfully performed; it could not be owned by the lord, since he had no claim to it as long as the tenant fulfilled his duties.
Quite apart from this practical difficulty, however, the truth is that English law has never applied the conception of ownership to land.
 "Ownership" is a word of many meanings, but in the present context we can take it to signify a title to a subject matter…
English law…has directed its attention not to ownership, but to possession, or, as it is called in the case of land, seisin.
Seisin is a root of title, and it may be said without undue exaggeration that so far as land is concerned there is in England no law of ownership, but only a law of possession.
A.W.B. Simpson An Introduction to the History of English Land Law (Clarendon:1961)
Seisin is the concept which connects the person…with the land itself…
Titles are better or worse according to the age of the seisin upon which they are based, and even a very recent (and perhaps transparently wrongful) seisin is to some extent protected.
Thus any person who is seised of land has a protected interest in that land, good against all but those who have a title based on an older seisin.
From this it is deduced that one who is seised must have an estate, and unless he claims through some gift which cuts down the estate then it will be a fee simple…
As already seen in Chapter 1, possession and ownership in English law are normally "exclusive" , that is, they involve "Keep off!" actions and attitudes towards the property and towards other people.
In adverse possession, the claimant must show not only actual possession for the required period together with an intention to possess the land, but also that the possession was "adverse" , which normally means "designed to keep out the real ("  "paper"  ") owner" .
Similarly, in order for occupation of land to amount to a tenancy, the courts have held that the claimant must show that he or she had the right to, and did, exclude the landlord.
The test of "a right to stay" on the land is in both cases, "Did that person possess the land in fact, while intending to use the land and to keep out the whole world?" 
In addition, both these areas of law have been the subjects of close scrutiny by the courts over the last few years.
The first has been fighting a (largely losing) battle against social condemnation of "stealing other people's homes" ; the second has been the mechanism by which to carry out government's policies to protect some short-term occupiers (tenants, with exclusive possession) but not others (licensees).
Thus, together, they demonstrate clearly some of the tensions within modern views about land and society.
ADVERSE POSSESSION
A land owner has the right to keep uninvited guests off the land and can sue for an order for possession against a trespasser.
However, if a person "adversely possesses" the land for twelve years, the paper owner cannot any longer enforce these rights against the occupier.
In this section, extracts examine the policy behind the law, the statutory rules and then the cases.
Law and policy
Adverse possession is not new to English law, although the normal period used to be much longer than twelve years.
D. Hardy and C. Ward, Arcadia For All (Mansell: 1984)
Squatting dates back as long as the process of land settlement itself, and most cultures have a traditional belief in "squatters' rights" whether these are recognised by statute or not.
Not only throughout Britain, but in many parts of Europe and in the New World, it was widely accepted that if a person succeeded in erecting a dwelling on common or waste land between sunset and sunrise and lighting a fire in it he could not lawfully be dispossessed.
There are innumerable variants on this formula and on the definition of the amount of land that might be enclosed…
An Act was passed in the reign of Elizabeth I "against the erecting and maintaining of cottages" with the aim of "avoiding the great inconveniences which are found to grow by the creating…of great numbers and multitudes of cottages" …
In 1662, after the restoration of the monarchy, a further law, the Act of Settlement, restricted the movement of those who were not freeholders or who could not afford a rent of £10 per year.
Between these two pieces of legislation directed against "cottagers" and "paupers" — in other words against squatters — there occurred the most famous of what we would now call "ideologically-inspired" squats, that of Winstanley and the Diggers at Walton-on-Thames in Surrey in 1649.
"[Mrs Kit Nash], year by year, extended the boundaries of her plot by trimming the bramble hedges always from the inside, allowing them to spread and flourish on the outside…
She had only a squatter's title to the land, but after her death this was legally registered in her name by the local authority, and it was sold so that they could recover the money which she owed them."
[K. Lloyd, Country Life, 11 October 1973]
The leader of the Digger movement had written:
G. Winstanley The New Law of Righteousness (1649), quoted in H.Girardet (ed.)
For the People (Crescent: 1976)
In the beginning of time, the Great Creator Reason, made the earth to be common treasure…
The work we are going about is this, to dig up George's Hill and the wasteland thereabouts, and to sow corn, and to eat our bread together by the sweat of our brows, and to lay the foundations of making the earth a common treasury for all, both rich and poor…
Not enclosing any part into a particular hand, but all as one man, working together and feeding together as sons of one father, members of one family…
For though you and your ancestors got your property by murder and theft, and you keep it by the same power from us that have an equal right to the land with you by the righteous law of creation, yet we shall have no occasion of quarrelling…
For the earth with all her fruits of corn, cattle and such like, was made to be a common storehouse of livelihood to all mankind, friend and foe, without exception.
Winstanley's ideas still have adherents:
Who Owns the Park?, unattributed, quoted in G. Lefcoe An Introduction to American Property Law (Bobbs Merrill: 1974)
Someday a petty official will appear with a piece of paper, called a land title, which states that the University of California owns the land of the People's Park.
Where did that piece of paper come from?
What is it worth?
A long time ago the Costanoan Indians lived in the area now called Berkeley.
They had no concept of land ownership.
They believed that the land was under the care and guardianship of the people who used it and lived on it.
Catholic missionaries took the land away from the Indians.
No agreements were made.
No papers were signed.
They ripped it off in the name of God.
The Mexican Government took the land away from the Church.
The Mexican Government had guns and an army.
God's word was not as strong.
The Mexican Government wanted to pretend that it was not the army that guaranteed them the land.
They drew up some papers which said they legally owned it.
No Indians signed those papers.
The Americans were not fooled by the papers.
They had a stronger army than the Mexicans.
They beat them in a war and took the land.
Then they wrote some papers of their own and forced the Mexicans to sign them.
The American Government sold the land to some white settlers.
The Government gave the settlers a piece of paper called a land title in exchange for some money.
All this time there were still some Indians around who claimed the land.
The American army killed most of them.
The piece of paper saying who owned the land was passed around among rich white men.
Sometimes the white men were interested in taking care of the land.
Usually they were just interested in making money.
Finally some rich men, who run the University of California, bought the land.
Immediately these men destroyed the houses that had been built on the land.
The land went the way of so much other land in America — it became a parking lot.
We are building a park on the land.
We will take care of it and guard it, in the spirit of the Costanoan Indians.
When the University comes with its land title we will tell them: "Your land title is covered with blood.
We won't touch it.
Your people ripped off the land from the Indians a long time ago.
If you want it back now, you will have to fight for it again."
[By July 1972 the People's Park had become a dusty, informal campsite for wayfarers (Los Angeles Times, 30 July 1972).]
The significance of paper title is challenged also by more established voices:
Ruoff and Roper On the Law and Practice of Registered Conveyancing 4th edn (Stevens: 1979)
Misunderstandings have sometimes arisen from an unwarrantable belief that title deeds are sacrosanct documents, whereas the truth is that neither a conveyance nor a land certificate retains its value if the landowner is so indifferent as to lose physical control of his land.
However, justifications for adverse possession go beyond "property is theft" and "stale claims" .
People who use land and invest their labour in it are benefiting society more than those real owners who neglect it to the extent of ignoring it for twelve years or more.
And the law, it is suggested, should value the attachment that comes from working on land:
Oliver Wendell Holmes
I can say that truth, friendship and the statute of limitations have a common root in time.
The true explanation of title by [adverse possession]…seems to me to be that man, like a tree in a cleft rock, gradually shapes his roots to his surroundings, and when the roots have grown to a certain size, can't be displaced without cutting at his life.
The law used to look with disfavor on the statute of limitations, but I have been in the habit of saying that it is one of the most sacred and indubitable principles that we have…
As mentioned at the start of this section, the common law is not the only legal system in which rights to land are lost by abandonment:
N. Smith Maori Land Law (A.H.
& A.W.
Reed: 1960)
If a Maori left his tribe and went to live in another district, either through marriage or otherwise, and he and his descendants remained away for three generations, they would forfeit all rights to the land so abandoned; their claims would become ahimataotao.
The meaning of this term is cold or extinguished fire and as applied to the instance just given would signify that the rights of the claimants had gone cold and their claims extinguished.
The same rule applied to voluntary migrations of a whole family group or hapu.
They may have allied themselves with some enemy and been forced to leave.
If, however, the claimants who had voluntarily abandoned the land sent some of their children back at intervals to occupy the lands, or to exercise some right of ownership, and there was no objection from the tribe, that would be sufficient to relight the flame and so keep their fires burning, and their rights alive.
In the example just given, if the Maoris remained away without exercising their rights continuously for one generation, their claims would not be materially affected, but absence for two generations would seriously weaken the claims and render them subject to some recognition by the tribe; they would not entirely cease until after an absence of three generations…
"With regard to the Native custom affecting cases of this kind, there is possibly no definite rule that can be made applicable to all cases and to all districts, but this rule appears to be applicable everywhere, that when a woman of one tribe or hapu marries into another tribe or hapu, her rights become extinguished, unless some act of ownership is exercised either by herself or her immediate descendants.
It is said that she leaves her ahi-ka (burning fire) and becomes an  ahi-tere (unstable fire).
If she or her children return before the ashes become cold, it becomes again an ahi-ka, but there is a difference of opinion whether the grandchildren can recover their rights in that way, but there is no doubt that the great grandchildren cannot do so unless they are expressly invited and welcomed by the tribe."
[Nap.
Appellate Court Minute Book, 48/78]
Against these traditional and widespread justifications for adverse possession may be compared some modern views against squatters.
For example, there was press outrage in the 1970s:
The Daily Telegraph 16 July 1975
Squatting Conspiracy
Of the many strange and frightening features of contemporary British life, none carries a more obvious and direct threat than the growing phenomenon of squatting.
Innumerable houses up and down the country are now in illegal occupation by organised gangs of thugs, layabouts and revolutionary fanatics.
Costly and irrecoverable damage is continually being done to private property from sheer malice…
In reality the motive for most of this squatting is either political — a settled purpose of subverting public order — or simple greed and aggression.
This campaign resulted in the invention of new civil procedures and five squatting crimes in ss. 6–10, Criminal Law Act 1977 ( "criminal trespass" ).
With increasing homelessness during the 1980s, the government in 1991 proposed a new crime of squatting in shops and houses attracting fines of up to £5,000 or six months imprisonment and giving police powers to enter and arrest.
The Home Office provided no statistics, but cited media estimates of approximately 50,000 squatters in England, 30,000 of them in London, in council properties.
More than half the squatters were aged under 25.
This then is the context within which statutory rules and cases on adverse possession must be seen.
The rules
P.J. Dalton Land Law 3rd edn (Pitman: 1982) 126
There is a social need for certainty of title to land.
For centuries therefore, statute has placed a limit on the time after which a claimant to an interest in land may bring an action to establish it in the face of the possession of another person holding under a later title…
The general effect of the [Limitation]Act is not to  confirm any particular claim to land but merely to extinguish stale titles to it…
A man of ninety suddenly finds himself the oldest man in the village not necessarily because he is ninety but because a man of ninety-one died yesterday.
The scythe of time creates superiority of title as it does seniority of age.
Title is never extinguished because of its age of course.
Quite the contrary.
It is only extinguished or "barred" because the claim it gives to land has been allowed to remain unpressed for a long time in face of a rival title…the effect of the Act is to eliminate.
The rules today are contained in the Limitation Act 1980 and all the references in this section are to that statute.
Limitation Act 1980
Time limit for actions to recover land
15 (1) No action shall be brought by any person to recover any land after the expiration of twelve years from the date on which the right of action accrued to him or, if it first accrued to some person through whom he claims, to that person.
Time limit for actions to recover rent
19 No action shall be brought, or distress made, to recover arrears of rent, or damages in respect of arrears of rent, after the expiration of six years from the date on which the arrears became due.
Fresh accrual of action on acknowledgment or part payment
29 (2) If the person in possession of the land…acknowledges the title of the person to whom the right of action has accrued —(a) the right shall be treated as having accrued on and not before the date of the acknowledgment…
Postponement of limitation period in case of fraud, concealment or mistake
32 (1) Subject to subsection (3) below, where in the case of any action for which a period of limitation is prescribed by this Act, either —(a) the action is based upon the fraud of the defendant; or (b) any fact relevant to the plaintiff's right of action has been deliberately concealed from him by the defendant; or (c) the action is for relief from the consequences of a mistake; the period of limitation shall not begin to run until the plaintiff has discovered the fraud, concealment or mistake (as the case may be) or could with reasonable diligence have discovered it…
(3) Nothing in this section shall enable any action —(a) to recover, or recover the value of, any property; or (b) to enforce any charge against, or set aside any transaction affecting, any property; to be brought against the purchaser of the property or any person claiming through him in any case where the property has been purchased for valuable consideration by an innocent third party since the fraud or concealment of (as the case may be) the transaction in which the mistake was made took place…
Equitable jurisdiction and remedies
36 (2) Nothing in this Act shall affect any equitable jurisdiction to refuse relief on the ground of acquiescence or otherwise.
Schedule 1
Accrual of right of action in case of present interests in land
1 Where the person bringing an action to recover land, or some person through whom he claims, has been in possession of the land, and has while entitled to the land been dispossessed or discontinued his possession, the right of action shall be treated as having accrued on the date of the dispossession or discontinuance.
8 (1) No right of action to recover land shall be treated as accruing unless the land is in the possession of some person in whose favour the period of limitation can run (referred to below in this paragraph as "adverse possession" ); and where under the preceding provisions…any such right of action is treated as accruing on a certain date and no person is in adverse possession on that date, the right of action shall not be treated as accruing unless and until adverse possession is taken of the land.
Right of action not to accrue or continue unless there is adverse possession
(2) Where a right of action to recover land has accrued and after its accrual, before the right is barred, the land ceases to be in adverse possession, the right of action shall no longer be treated as having accrued and no fresh right of action shall be treated as accruing unless and until the land is again taken into adverse possession…
(4) For the purpose of determining whether a person occupying any land is in adverse possession of the land it shall not be assumed by implication of law that his occupation is by permission of the person entitled to the land merely by virtue of the fact that his occupation is not inconsistent with the latter's present or future enjoyment of the land.
This provision shall not be taken as prejudicing a finding to the effect that a person's occupation of any land is by implied permission of the person entitled to the land in any case where such a finding is justified on the actual facts of the case…
There are special rules in relation to future interests (s. 15(2) and Schedule 1), the  Crown or spiritual corporations (30 years, Schedule 1) and children or people of unsound mind (six years from the end of the disability to a maximum of 30 years: s. 28).
Where land is registered, right gained by adverse possession amounts to an overriding interest, and defeats a purchaser even if not on the register.
Land Registration Act 1925
Acquisition of title by possession
75 (1) The Limitation Acts shall apply to registered land in the same manner and to the same extent as those Acts apply to land not registered, except that where, if the land were not registered, the estate of the person registered as proprietor would be extinguished, such estate shall not be extinguished but shall be deemed to be held by the proprietor for the time being in trust for the person who, by virtue of the said Acts, has acquired title against any proprietor, but without prejudice to the estates and interests of any other person interested in the land whose estate or interest is not extinguished by those Acts.
(2) Any person claiming to have acquired a title under the Limitation Acts to a registered estate in the land may apply to be registered as proprietor thereof.
(3) The registrar shall, on being satisfied as to the applicant's title, enter the applicant as proprietor either with absolute, good leasehold, qualified, or possessory title as the case may require…
Cases
The cases below demonstrate that adverse possession usually concerns either existing landowners who gradually add a bit on to their gardens ( "boundary cases" ) or city homeless (the "threat to law and order" cases) who resort to squatting as necessary for living as well as, perhaps, for ideological reasons.
The legal rules do not distinguish between these two groups — and neither do the ideologues on either side of the debate — but an examination of the most modern cases does suggest that it is easier to prove adverse possession of "empty" land.
In order to succeed against paper owners who seek possession, squatters must prove that, for at least twelve years, they have actually possessed the land, and have done so with the intention to possess it (animus possidendi) and adversely.
Each of the cases here demonstrates several aspects of these requirements.
Treloar v Nute [1976]1 WLR 1295 (CA) Stamp and Ormrod LJJ and Sir John Pennycuick
An old lady owned about a third of an acre of waste land, with a ten-foot wide gully across it.
In 1961 Treloar's father bought neighbouring land, and believed he had also bought this waste land.
From then his family grazed cows on the land, rode motorbikes and stored goods there.
From 1963 they filled in the gully and fenced the land.
Mrs Nute sued for possession in 1974.
Sir John Pennycuick:
The particular acts found by the judge are we think rather on the borderline of what can properly be regarded as constituting possession, always apart from the consideration of adverse possession.
Whether or not a person has taken possession of land is a question of fact depending on all the particular circumstances.
The test is well put by Lord O'Hagan in Lord Advocate v Lord Lovat (1880) 5 App Cas 273…at p. 288:
"As to possession, it must be considered in every case with reference to the particular circumstances.
The acts, implying possession in one case, may be wholly inappropriate to prove it in another.
The character and value of the property, the suitable and natural mode of using it, the course of conduct which the proprietor might reasonably be expected to follow with a due regard to his own interests — all these things, greatly varying as they must, under various  conditions, are to be taken into account in determining the sufficiency of possession."
In the present case the disputed land is extremely small, about one third of an acre and admittedly of very limited agricultural use, but would be a convenient site for a small house…
Much more important, in our view, is the change in the surface of the land by placing soil in the gully, thereby setting in train the levelling of the land upon which a bungalow could be built.
It seems to us that these acts were sufficient to support a finding of possession and indeed on the material before us we would be disposed to reach the same conclusion…
Thus Treloar won his land.
Boosey v Davis (1988) 55 P & CR 83 (CA) Mustill and Nourse LJJ
Mr and Mrs Boosey claimed a declaration that they had acquired a possessory title to a strip of registered land; the Davis family were the registered proprietors of the land.
The Booseys had, from 1963, cleared scrub so that their goats could graze there, and reinforced the fence.
The trial judge, Rice J, found in the squatters' favour: Boosey said the fence was there to keep sheep out from the land he was treating as his own…
Although this was a very limited use, bearing in mind the characteristics of the land, that the defendant's [paper owner"s]land is on the eastern side of the strip and also the defendants fenced off their land from the disputed land by means of a wire mesh fence, I am satisfied that the plaintiff's use did amount to sufficient possession…
However, in the Court of Appeal, the plaintiff squatters failed:
Nourse LJ:
The question therefore is whether there has been a dispossession.
It is a question of fact and degree.
A number of different matters must be considered, including the condition of the land, the intention of the dispossessor, and the quantity and quality of his acts of user…
The land was waste or forage land not used for any purpose other than that to which it was put by the plaintiffs.
It is said that it could not have been used for any other purpose…
Here there is no question of the land being cut off.
It abuts on to what is now a road running along the frontage of a number of houses.
Subject to planning permission, it could sensibly have been used for development and perhaps for a number of other purposes…
I…think that both the quantity and the quality of user were minimal.
Nor do I  think that the cutting down of the scrub and the erection of the secondary wire mesh fence add very much.
The cutting down of the scrub was merely to facilitate the minimal use by the goats — it was not for any wider purpose.
Moreover, although in some cases the erection of a fence can be very significant, it seems to me that that was not so here.
The fence was erected in order to reinforce a fence which had already been put there by the defendants' predecessor in title, and it did not in any event enclose the disputed land…
On a view of the facts as a whole, and making every allowance both for the finding as to the intention of the plaintiffs and for the fact that the learned judge saw and heard the witnesses, which we have not, I conclude that the facts found by him were not sufficient in law to constitute adverse possession.
Buckingham County Council v Moran [1989]2 All ER 225 (CA) Slade, Nourse and Butler-Sloss LJJ
From 1971 (following his predecessor in title, probably since 1967) Moran occupied as a part of his garden a patch of land adjoining the end of his garden.
The paper owner, the local council, had bought it for eventual use as a road, but had no immediate use for it.
In 1985, they "woke up" and sued for possession but failed at first instance.
This case is the most recent in a long line of cases involving the question whether, if the paper owner has no present use for the land, there can be any possession "adverse" to his rights.
Slade LJ:
If the law is to attribute possession of land to a person who can establish no paper title to possession, he must be shown to have both factual possession and the requisite intention to possess (animus possidendi).
A person claiming to have dispossessed another must similarly fulfil both these requirements.
However, a further requirement which the alleged dispossessor claiming the benefit of the 1980 Act must satisfy is to show that his possession has been adverse within the meaning of the Act…
Possession is never "adverse" …if it is enjoyed under a lawful title.
If, therefore, a person occupies or uses land by licence of the owner with the paper title and his licence has not been duly determined, he cannot be treated as having been in "adverse possession" …
Before the passing of the 1980 Act certain decisions of this court, in particular Wallis' Cayton Bay Holiday Camp Ltd v Shellmex and BP Ltd [1974]3 All ER 575 and Gray v Wykeham-Martin [1977]CA Transcript 10A were thought to have established a general doctrine that in one special type of case there would be implied in favour of the would-be adverse possessor, without any specific factual basis for such implication, a licence permitting him to commit the acts of possession on which he sought to rely; the effect of implying such a licence would, of course, be to prevent the squatter's possession from being "adverse" .
That special type of case was broadly one where the acts of an intruder, however continuous and far-reaching, did not substantially interfere with any plans which the owners might have for the future use of undeveloped land…
On any footing, it must, in my judgment, be too broad a proposition to suggest that an owner who retains a piece of land with a view to its utilisation for a specific purpose in the future can never be treated as dispossessed, however firm and obvious the intention and however drastic the act of dispossession of the person seeking to dispossess him may be.
Furthermore, while it may well be correct to say that the implied licence doctrine (so long as it survived) itself involved the "adaptation" of the literal application of the statutory provisions "to meet one special type of case" , I do not think it correct that the [old]decisions…authorise or justify an application of the statutory provisions otherwise than in accordance with their ordinary and natural meaning…
If in any given case the land in dispute is unbuilt land and the squatter is aware that the owner, while having no present use for it, has a purpose in mind for its use in the future, the court is likely to require very clear evidence before it can be satisfied that the squatter who claims a possessory title has not only established factual possession of the land, but also the requisite intention to exclude the world at large, including the owner with the paper title, so far as is reasonably practicable and so far as the processes of the law will allow.
In the absence of clear evidence of this nature, the court is likely to infer that the squatter neither had had nor had claimed any intention of asserting a right to the possession of the land…
In the present case, the defendant was well aware that the council had acquired the plot in order to construct a road on it at some time in the future and meantime had no present use for the land.
This factor…should make the court the more cautious before holding that the defendant had had both a factual possession and animus possidendi sufficient to confer on him a possessory title…
[E]very…type of case such as this must involve questions of fact and degree.
First…did the defendant have factual possession of the plot?
I venture to repeat what I said in Powell v McFarlane (1977) 38 P & CR 452 at 470–1: "Factual possession signifies an appropriate degree of physical control.
It must be a single and [exclusive]possession…
Thus an owner of land and a person intruding on that land without his consent cannot both be in possession of the land at the same time.
The question what acts constitute a sufficient degree of exclusive control must depend on the circumstances, in particular the nature of the land and the manner in which land of that nature is commonly used or enjoyed."
On evidence it would appear that by 28 October 1973 [twelve years before the writ]the defendant had acquired complete and exclusive physical control of the plot…
However, the more difficult question is whether the defendant had the necessary animus possidendi.
As to this, counsel for the council accepted the correctness of the following statement (so far as it went) which I made in Powell v McFarlane (at 471–2): "…the animus possidendi involves the intention, in one's own name and on one's own behalf to exclude the world at large, including the owner with the  paper title if he be not himself the possessor, so far as is reasonably practicable and so far as the processes of the law will allow." …
In my judgment…the placing of the new lock and chain and gate did amount to a final unequivocal demonstration of the defendant's intention to possess the land.
I agree with the judge in his saying: "…
I do not think that if the council, on making an inspection, had found the gate newly padlocked, they could have come to any conclusion other than that [the defendant]was intending to exclude everyone, including themselves, from the land."…
I agree with the judge that "What is required for this purpose is not an intention to own or even an intention to acquire ownership but an intention to possess," that is to say, an intention for the time being to possess the land to the exclusion of all other persons, including the owner with the paper title.
No authorities cited to us establish the contrary position…
I have already accepted that the court should be slow to make a finding of adverse possession in a case such as the present…
However, the council lost their case and their land.
East Sussex County Council v Miller 26 April 1991 (CA) Farquharson, Beldam LJJ (LEXIS)
The council bought a shop and the flat above in 1975 with a view, eventually, to demolishing it in order to extend Brighton Polytechnic.
A Mr Carey (with his girlfriend) began squatting there a few months later, and offered to pay rent which amounted to an acknowledgement of title, but this was refused.
Meanwhile, the council allowed the squatted flat to be rated (taxed) separately from the shop below, and the squatters paid the rates.
Miller moved into the flat in 1979 and remained there until the writ for possession in July 1989, more than once offering to pay rent.
The trial judge granted the possession order, holding that, although the premises had been occupied for the requisite period, there was no adverse possession here because there was an implied licence.
Farquharson LJ:
In my judgment there was evidence upon which the learned judge could conclude that Mr Carey and Miss Burrow were living in the premises with leave of the respondent and that during the period of his occupation Mr Carey was not in adverse possession.
In those circumstances it must follow, for the reasons already given, that the appellant cannot establish his defence to the present claim.
The final matter considered by the judge was whether the appellant had established the necessary animus possidendi in relation to the premises.
Inasmuch as the appellant is not able to establish the necessary twelve years adverse possession, a decision on this question is strictly obiter, but as the judge has dealt  with the point and counsel have argued it before us I will not conclude without making some reference to it.
To succeed in a claim based on adverse possession the appellant would have to show a continuing intention to exclude the whole world from the premises including the legal owner…
By way of establishing the necessary animus Mr Watkinson on behalf of the appellant pointed out that both Mr Carey and the appellant had changed the locks of the premises and carried out works of repair and maintenance inside.
Furthermore, they paid rates throughout their occupation and discharged the electricity bills in their own names.
It is true that in the case of Buckinghamshire County Council v Moran Slade LJ attached considerable significance to the fact that the land there in question had been fenced off and the gate locked, but the position it seems to me is quite different in a metropolitan context such as one finds in Brighton.
There the changing of the locks is easily to be explained by the needs of security; and the fact that they paid the rates and settled the electricity bill and tried to improve the premises really takes the matter no further.
Each of those payments would have been made even if they were not lawfully in possession…
[In discussions, at]no stage did the appellant attempt to assert a title or to exclude the representatives of the respondent from the premises…
I do not have to decide this point (that is, the question of the existence of the necessary animus) but I think I would have just decided that there was not quite sufficient animus possidendi bearing in mind all the circumstances of this case.
Thus, the squatter lost — and would have lost even had he been there for the twelve years.
The last extract in this section comes from "a truly extraordinary decision" (M.Dixon 55 Conv (1991) 235).
It links the law of adverse possession with that of estoppel (see Chapter 2 p. 48):
Colchester Borough Council v Smith [1991]2 WLR 540
The defendant squatter, Tillson, had occupied several acres of agricultural land belonging to the council since 1967, but in 1983 he had apparently acknowledged the plaintiff council's title by becoming their tenant of the land.
(There were also issues in the case relating to agricultural tenancies, licences and leases, and the issue of a lease without rent.
See below, pp. 67 et seq., and Chapter 4, pp. 79–80.)
After 26 pages of judgment, Ferris J found that Tillson had successfully possessed the land adversely before the 1983 acknowledgement of the paper owner's title.
However: What Mr Taylor [for the council]said…was…that the common assumption which lay behind the agreement was that the council was the owner of the…land and that Mr Tillson had no interest in either parcel of land beyond the tenancy which the council was to grant him by the transaction.
It is not open to Mr Tillson  subsequently to say that he had no need of a tenancy of the occupied land because he already had a possessory title which gave him a freehold interest in that land…
Thus, although the council had no rights over the land in 1983, it seems as if Tillson's agreement to become their tenant gave the land back to them.
One would hope that Mr Tillson could have afforded the appeal.
EXCLUSIVE POSSESSION
The background
Questions of possession/non-possession are not only crucial in cases of stale claims but have, since the 1985 House of Lords decision in Street v Mountford [1985]AC 809, been fundamental in decisions about whether an occupier of property is categorised as a "tenant" or a "licensee" .
The next extracts provide some explanation of the social context which gave this distinction such a high profile.
R. Cranston Legal Foundations of the Welfare State (Weidenfeld & Nicholson: 1985)
The social welfare regulation which is considered here…took shape during the first part of the twentieth century.
The history of those measures is not one of an inexorable movement towards improvement.
Along with advances were false starts, successful resistance to change, failures and reversals.
Importantly, these measures were not always or even mostly the product of consensus.
Their background was often a conflict between different interests, although in some cases the conflict was masked by an apparent consensus at the time a particular measure was enacted, or by the general approval given to a measure subsequent to its enactment.
Reformers who advocated social welfare regulation were motivated by ideals, but also by the desire to improve the productivity of the working class and to attract its support for particular political causes.
The working class had little direct input into public health and housing reform, but with the growth of collective action, in particular through the trade unions, it made a more significant contribution to later regulation such as rent control…
Opposition to the regulation considered here was to be expected from property owners…since it intruded on their interests not only directly, but also indirectly through the additional taxation necessary to finance its implementation.
The Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (War Restrictions) Act 1915 restricted the right of landlords of dwelling houses within defined values to increase the rent, except by the amount of any increase in rates or on account of expenditure incurred on improvements.
Control was also imposed on the right of  landlords to recover possession.
Although a temporary measure, it soon became apparent that rent control could not be abolished with the war's end.
Working people had new expectations as to just rents and as to the housing conditions they should enjoy (encapsulated in the political slogan "homes fit for heroes" ).
Consequently, rent control was extended by the Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (Restrictions) Act 1920.
However, the Act did not apply to new dwellings built after 1919 or to dwellings converted to flats after that date.
Also excluded from control were dwelling-houses let at a rent which included payments in respect of board, attendance or, more importantly, the use of furniture, the latter exception giving rise to "lino tenancies" (linoleum on the floor and very little more), an early avoidance of rent control approved by the courts.
Rent-control policy in the inter-war period was the product in the main of three forces: pressure by property owners for complete control; the Conservative Party belief that the Rent Acts were but a temporary measure to deal with a housing shortage; and the social reality that without the protection of the Acts many working-class people would suffer considerably.
The upshot was limited decontrol…
Shortly after the outbreak of World War II rent control was imposed on all but a small number of high-grade houses.
J.B. Cullingworth Essays on Housing Policy: The British Scene (George, Allen & Unwin: 1979)
And so it remained until the mid-1950s, by which time controls were as deficient in "moral considerations" as they were on "logical and economic grounds" .
Over 3 million dwellings were let at net weekly rents of 50 pence or less, and of these nearly 1 million were only 25 pence or less (White Paper, Rent Control: Statistical Information, Cmnd 17, 1956).
The political groundwork for change had been laid by the "realistic rents" policy applied to the public sector by the Housing Subsidies Act 1956.
This aimed "to restore sanity to housing finance" by a range of measures.
So far as the privately rented sector was concerned, the government's proposals were for the automatic decontrol of all dwellings with a rateable value over £40 in London and over £30 in the rest of England and Wales.
Furthermore, any dwelling below these "control limits" would become decontrolled when let to a new tenant.
These proposals were incorporated in the Rent Act 1957.
In retrospect the debates on the Bill had a curious air of unreality…government spokesmen often seemed to be stating simple lessons in economic theory…
Increased freedom…would restore the market situation.
The condition of rented property would be improved.
Under- occupation ( "caused by artificially low rents" ) would be reduced by the simple process of small families in large houses moving and making way for large families previously living in small houses…
Nationally the 1957 Rent Act fulfilled neither the stated objectives of the government nor the fears expressed by the opposition.
Nevertheless, it had serious repercussions on one of the housing stresses of London.
Here housing problems were aggravated by racial discrimination and the operations of a few unscrupulous landlords.
The Rachman affair brought matters to a head, and new legislation had to be brought in to control "houses in multiple occupation" …the modern equivalent of "houses let in lodgings" .
These have for long met the needs of groups of people  (from the otherwise homeless poor family to the grant aided student) for whom neither the public authorities nor the private market has been able to make adequate provision…
This demand, particularly from newly formed households, migrant newcomers, single and childless people and the aged can — and does result in abuses…
The Rent Act 1957 added to the problems.
Not only did "block decontrol" reduce the availability of unfurnished rented accommodation (because of sales to owner-occupiers and conversions to "freer" furnished lettings), but the "creeping decontrol" gave unscrupulous landlords an incentive to evict tenants and then sell or relet at uncontrolled rents.
Scandalous conditions developed in areas of acute housing pressure (particularly in London) where obsolete large houses were subdivided into multiple lettings.
In these houses there was no proper conversion, and cooking and sanitary facilities were quite inadequate.
Overcrowding further increased the squalor.
Life in a tenement property was often very hard, although, as the following description from a black woman growing up in London during the 1950s and 1960s suggests, it frequently provided a degree of protection from the wider racist society:
G. Lewis "From Deepest Kilburn" in Liz Heron (ed.)
Truth, Dare, Promise: Girls Growing Up in the Fifties (Virago: 1985)
The first home I remember was a basement flat at number 61 Granville Road, Kilburn.
We lived there until 1960…
The whole house, a big late-Victorian terrace, was let as a tenement, in a combination of bedsits and two-room flats, to black people, mostly Jamaicans.
The house itself was owned by a Polish man who lived with his wife and two sons in Clapham.
My Dad had lived there since his arrival in this country in 1950…
My Mum was the only white person who lived in the whole house, a point not unnoticed by me since I often asked her how come she lived there with us when everyone else was black…
We had two rooms and a kitchen, with our own outside toilet at the end of the air-raid shelter.
We had no bathroom at all in the whole house but there were public baths and a laundry at the end of the road so we would have our weekly bath there, and in the week have a full wash-down in the sink.
We children were always told to emphasise the "full" of the wash lest people think we were dirty, and given that most white people thought all black people were dirty it was a counter to any racialist-type thoughts that people might be harbouring.
The entire house was infested with mice which meant that everybody was in constant battle against their droppings and their smell.
Needless to say the mice won…
Still, overall we thought ourselves lucky because a lot of other houses in the street had rats as well as mice, which was much worse because at least mice don't bite or nibble at human feet…
Apart from the outside toilet there was another indoor one which was to be shared by everybody else.
This was on the first-floor landing, and opened on to the  shared first-floor kitchen.
The kitchen itself was just a part of the landing; there was a sink, a cold tap and a cooker…
On the second floor lived Pearl and Clarence and their children.
The eldest was Jimmy, who was one of my best friends.
They had two rooms in which five of them lived…
At the very top lived Aunt May and Uncle Stickey.
They were absolutely my favourites…
There was also a variety of other people who lived in the house, for shorter or longer periods.
Often it was relatives or friends of us permanents, who used it as a temporary place to stay on arrival until they found bedsits or whatever.
The emergence of the lease/licence distinction
 "Homelessness, insecurity of tenure and Rachmanism were important elements in the so-called rediscovery of poverty, which took place in the early 1960s, and the Labour Party capitalised on the upsurge by condemning the now infamous"  "Tory Rent Act"  "" (Norman Ginsburg, Class, Capital and Social Policy, Macmillan: 1979, p. 122).
Soon after Labour returned to power in 1964.
As part of the never-ending zig-zag of control and decontrol, the government introduced a "fair rent" system together with a measure of security of tenure.
Later, the Rent Act 1974 "assimilated the position of furnished and unfurnished tenancies under the fair rents system but…gave tenants with resident landlords only limited protection" (R. Cranston, Legal Foundations of the Welfare State, Weidenfeld & Nicholson: 1985, p. 116).
Thus, tenants were singled out for protection regarding rent levels and security, but mere licensees were excluded from this.
Inevitably, property owners, seeking ways to avoid Parliament's intervention, consulted their lawyers, who advised them to create "licences" rather than tenancies.
The method is described in the following extract:
R. Cranston Legal Foundations of the Welfare State (Weidenfeld & Nicholson: 1985)
Following the Rent Act 1974, once it was no longer possible to use furnished tenancies to avoid the full protection of the Rent Acts, advisers to landlords developed the idea of the "non-exclusive occupation" licence agreement".
Under the Acts, a protected tenancy is a tenancy under which a dwelling house is let as a separate dwelling, and the use of the words "tenancy" and "let" means that licences are excluded.
Since exclusive occupation is one of the indicia of a tenancy, the idea was that the non-exclusive occupation agreement would create a licence rather than a lease.
Entrepreneurs advertising "Landlords Lib" sold licence forms at 50p a time, and the legal profession organised day schools for property owners on how to use the new technique.
The agreements usually obliged the "licensees" , as they were called in the agreements, to share occupation with other persons the landlord might from time to time nominate, each to bear responsibility for part of the rent.
The landlord could also terminate the arrangements at short notice.
The initial approach of the courts to the device of the "non-exclusive agreement" involved an investigation of the "intention of the parties" as in Somma v Hazlehurst and Savelli [1978]2 All ER 1011.
This was repeated in the Court of Appeal decision, but was unanimously rejected by the House of Lords, in the next case.
Street v Mountford [1985]AC 809
Ms Wendy Mountford was living in a house belonging to Mr Roger Street, under a written agreement headed "Licence" , in which she expressly agreed she had no Rent Act protection.
She paid a regular "licence fee" .
She then sought a fair rent, which she could only do if she were a tenant, but Mr Street of course argued that she was only a licensee.
The Court of Appeal admitted that Ms Mountford did have exclusive possession of the property and that this might be important evidence in determining the intentions of the parties.
However, it was the agreement itself — evidence of the objective intentions of the parties — which the Court of Appeal viewed as the most important.
Thus, Ms Mountford had a licence because all the terms of the agreement pointed in that direction.
However, Ms Mountford took her case to the House of Lords where a dramatic reversal in judicial policy took place.
Lord Templeman:
My Lords, there is no doubt that the traditional distinction between a tenancy and a licence of land lay in the grant of land for a term at a rent with exclusive possession.
In some cases it was not clear at first sight whether exclusive possession was in fact granted.
For example, an owner of land could grant a licence to cut and remove standing timber.
Alternatively the owner could grant a tenancy of the land with the right to cut and remove standing timber during the term of the tenancy…
In the case of residential accommodation there is no difficulty in deciding whether the grant confers exclusive possession.
An occupier of residential accommodation at a rent for a term is either a lodger or a tenant.
The occupier is a lodger if the landlord provides attendance or services which require the landlord or his servants to exercise unrestricted access to and use of the premises.
A lodger is entitled to live in the premises but cannot call the place his own…
If on the other hand residential accommodation is granted for a term at a rent with exclusive possession, the landlord providing neither attendance nor services, the grant is a tenancy; any express reservation to the landlord of limited rights to enter and view the state of the premises and to repair and maintain the premises only serves to emphasise the fact that the grantee is entitled to exclusive possession and is a tenant.
In the present case it is conceded that Mrs Mountford is entitled to exclusive possession and is not a lodger.
Mr Street provided neither attendance nor services and only reserved the limited rights of inspection and maintenance and the like set forth in clause 3 of the agreement.
On the traditional view of the matter, Mrs Mountford not being a lodger must be a tenant.
There can be no tenancy unless the occupier enjoys exclusive possession; but an occupier who enjoys exclusive possession is not necessarily a tenant.
He may be owner in fee simple, a trespasser, a mortgagee in possession, an object of charity or a service occupier.
To constitute a tenancy the occupier must be granted exclusive possession for a fixed or periodic term certain in consideration of a premium or periodical payments.
The grant may be express, or may be inferred where the owner accepts weekly or other periodical payments from the occupier…
In the present case, the agreement…professed an intention by both parties to create a licence and their belief that they had in fact created a licence.
It was submitted on behalf of Mr Street that the court cannot in these circumstances decide that the agreement created a tenancy without interfering with the freedom of contract enjoyed by both parties.
My Lords, Mr Street enjoyed freedom to offer Mrs Mountford the right to occupy the rooms comprised in the agreement in such lawful terms as Mr Street pleased.
Mrs Mountford enjoyed freedom to negotiate with Mr Street to obtain different terms.
Both parties enjoyed freedom to contract or not to contract and both parties exercised that freedom by contracting on the terms set forth in the written agreement and on no other terms.
But the consequences in law of the agreement, once concluded, can only be determined by consideration of the effect of the agreement.
If the agreement satisfied all the requirements of a tenancy, then the agreement produced a tenancy and the parties cannot alter the effect of the agreement by insisting that they only created a licence.
The manufacture of a five-pronged manual implement for manual digging results in a fork even if the manufacturer, unfamiliar with the English language, insists that he intended to make and has made a spade.
It was also submitted that in deciding whether the agreement created a tenancy or a licence, the court should ignore the Rent Acts.
If Mr Street has succeeded, where owners have failed these past 70 years, in driving a coach and horses through the Rent Acts, he must be left to enjoy the benefit of his ingenuity unless and until Parliament intervenes.
I accept that the Rent Acts are irrelevant to the problem of determining the legal effect of the rights granted by the agreement.
Like the professed intention of the parties, the Rent Acts cannot alter the effect of the agreement…
My Lords, the only intention which is relevant is the intention demonstrated by the agreement to grant exclusive possession for a term at a rent.
Academic reactions to Lord Templeman's judgment were many and varied.
S. Bridge "Street v Mountford — No Hiding Place?" 50 Conv (1986) 344
The gist of Lord Templeman's words is that an occupant of residential accommodation, not obtaining exclusive possession, is a "lodger" , and lodgers are not tenants.
Enter, then, one expects, the lodging agreement in lieu of the previously favoured licence agreement.
Lord Bridge then outlined a series of cases, in particular the Court of Appeal decision in Crancour v da Silvaesa (1986) 18 HLR 265, in which landlords used a variety of devices in their "licence" agreements to avoid the rigours of Street v Mountford, for example ensuring that the "Licensee" was only allowed to occupy the premises for 22 out of 24 hours a day, or the provision of "attendance" by the "Licensor" , such as window cleaning, laundering of bed-linen, or boxes of cornflakes left at the licensee's door with a bottle of milk as "breakfast" .
Subsequent cases have demonstrated that the distinction is equally to be applied to commercial situations, for example Ashburn Anstalt v Arnold [1988]2 WLR 706 (see Chapter 11) and Colchester Borough Council v Smith (above).
P. Vincent-Jones "Exclusive Possession and Exclusive Control of Private Rented Housing: A Socio-Legal Critique of the Lease Licence Distinction" 14 Jo of Law and Soc (1987)
The source of the confusion is the poor quality of the reasoning in Street v Mountford itself; it is somewhat surprising, and not a little disturbing, that a unanimous decision by the House of Lords on such an important issue should be represented in a single judgment notable for its ambiguity…
An undoubted improvement in the legal position of many occupiers, as a consequence of Street v Mountford, has not been translated into socio-economic reality.
Landlords are continuing to issue occupiers of their property with "licence agreements" ; only a very small proportion will appreciate that they are not bound by the agreement they have signed, and realise that they have the right to a fair rent and security of tenure.
Moreover, the fundamental problem remains that of the housing shortage.
The desperation of many homeless families and single people means that they are prepared to accept poor accommodation at high prices because of the absence of any reasonable alternative, even if they are aware of their legal rights.
Successive decisions of the Court of Appeal, such as Brooker Settled Estates v Ayers [1987]EGLR 50 and Hadjiloucas v Crean [1988]1 WLR 1006, showed a slide away from the rigours of Street v Mountford.
Particular difficulties had arisen with respect to the application of the test to shared accommodation and multi-occupation.
Such factual situations had not been considered by Lord Templeman who had been dealing with only one occupant.
The result was a rapid return to the House of Lords.
AG Securities v Vaughan; Antoniades v Villiers [1988]3 WLR 1205 (HL) Lord Bridge of Harwich, Lord Templeman, Lord Ackner, Lord Oliver of Aylmerton and Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle
The first of these two cases, ultimately decided together, involved a large flat whose occupants had four separate agreements made at different dates between 1982 and 1985.
In return for an individual monthly payment each occupant had <pb n=74 the right to use the four-bedroom flat along with three other occupants.
The payments differed in amount.
The Court of Appeal had decided that the occupants had "exclusive possession" and were tenants.
By contrast the second of the appeals concerned a young couple who had signed separate, but identical, agreements with respect to a flat which stipulated that they were not to have exclusive possession.
Their agreement also stated that the landlord could at any time use the rooms or permit other persons to use the rooms together with the "licensee" .
The Court of Appeal, having reviewed the nature of the flat and the number of beds within it, stated that it would be possible for the landlord to use the flat concurrently with the occupiers and therefore they had only licences.
In the House of Lords:
Lord Templeman:
My Lords, ever since 1915 the Rent Acts have protected some tenants of residential accommodation with security of tenure and maximum rents…
Landlords dislike the Rent Acts and wish to enjoy the benefits of letting property without the burden of the restrictions imposed by the Acts.
Landlords believe that the Rent Acts unfairly interfere with freedom of contract and exacerbate the housing shortage.
Tenants on the other hand believe that the Acts are a necessary protection against the exploitation of people who do not own the freehold or long leases of their homes.
The court lacks the knowledge and the power to form any judgment on these arguments which fall to be considered and determined by Parliament.
The duty of the court is to enforce the Acts and in so doing to observe one principle which is inherent in the Acts and has been long recognised, the principle that parties cannot contract out of the Acts…
Where residential accommodation is occupied by two or more persons the occupiers may be licensees or tenants of the whole or each occupier may be a separate tenant of part.
In the present appeals the only question raised is whether the occupiers are licensees or tenants of the whole.
In the first appeal under consideration the company entered into four separate agreements with four separate persons between 1982 and 1985.
The agreements were in the same form save that the periodical sums payable under one agreement did not correspond to the sum payable pursuant to any other agreement.
The company was not bound to make agreements in the same form or to require any payment.
The agreement signed by Mr Vaughan in 1982 did not and could not entitle or compel Mr Vaughan to become a joint tenant of the whole of the flat with Mr Cook in 1985…
In 1985 Mr Vaughan did not agree to become a joint tenant of the flat with Mr Cook or anybody else…
The Court of Appeal…concluded that the four respondents were jointly entitled to exclusive occupation of the flat.
I am unable to agree.
If a landlord who owns a three-bedroom flat enters into three separate independent tenancies with three independent tenants each of whom is entitled to one bedroom and to share the common parts, then the three do not enjoy exclusive occupation of the flat jointly under the terms of their tenancies.
In the present case, if the four respondents had been jointly entitled to exclusive occupation of the flat then, on the death of one of the respondents, the remaining  three would be entitled to joint and exclusive occupation.
But, in fact, on the death of one respondent the remaining three would not be entitled to joint and exclusive occupation of the flat.
They could not exclude a fourth person nominated by the company.
I would allow the appeal.
In the first appeal the four agreements were independent of one another.
In the second appeal the two agreements were interdependent.
Both would have been signed or neither.
The two agreements must therefore be read together.
Mr Villiers and Miss Bridger applied to rent the flat jointly and sought and enjoyed joint and exclusive occupation of the whole of the flat.
They shared the rights and the obligations imposed by the terms of their occupation.
They acquired joint and exclusive occupation of the flat in consideration of periodical payments and they therefore acquired a tenancy jointly.
Mr Antoniades required each of them, Mr Villiers and Miss Bridger, to agree to pay one half of each aggregate periodical payment, but this circumstance cannot convert a tenancy into a licence.
A tenancy remains a tenancy even though the landlord may choose to require each of two joint tenants to agree expressly to pay one half of the rent.
The tenancy conferred on Mr Villiers and Miss Bridger the right to occupy the whole flat as their dwelling.
Clause 16 reserved to Mr Antoniades the power at any time to go into occupation of the flat jointly with Mr Villiers and Miss Bridger.
It is clear from the negotiations, and from subsequent events, that Mr Antoniades did not intend in February 1985, immediately or contemporaneously, to share occupation or to authorise any other person to deprive Mr Villiers and Miss Bridger of exclusive occupation of the flat.
Clause 16, if genuine, was a reservation by a landlord of a power at some time…to share occupation with the tenant.
The exclusive occupation of the tenant coupled with the payment of rent created a tenancy which at common law could be terminated and converted into a licence as soon as the landlord exercised his power to share occupation.
But under the Rent Acts, if a contractual tenancy is terminated, the Acts protect the occupiers from eviction…
There is a separate and alternative reason why Clause 16 must be ignored.
Clause 16 was not a genuine reservation to Mr Antoniades of a power to share the flat…
Mr Antoniades did not genuinely intend to exercise the powers save possibly to bring pressure to bear to obtain possession…
The occupiers were obliged to acquiesce with this pretence in order to obtain the accommodation…
The facilities in the flat were not suitable for sharing between strangers.
The flat, situated in an attic with a sloping roof, was too small for sharing between strangers…
[T]here was, in my opinion, the grant of a joint tenancy for the following reasons.
(1) The applicants for the flat applied to rent the flat jointly and to enjoy exclusive occupation.
(2) The landlord allowed the applicants jointly to enjoy exclusive occupation and accepted rent.
A tenancy was created.
(3) The power reserved to the landlord to deprive the applicants of exclusive occupation was inconsistent with the provisions of the Rent Acts.
(4) Moreover in all the circumstances the power which the landlord insisted upon to deprive the applicants of exclusive occupation was a pretence only intended to deprive the applicants of the protection of the Rent Acts.
This House of Lords decision still did not achieve a clear distinction between leases and licences.
The Court of Appeal has continued to make decisions according to a fine and technical discourse in both residential and commercial  situations.
(See also the extract from Dewar, Chapter 11, p. 316).
An example of the former follows.
Mikeover v Brady [1989]3 All ER 618 (CA) Slade LJ and Anthony Lincoln J
Mr Brady and Ms Guile approached the landlord together and expressed an interest in taking up six months occupation of a two-roomed flat.
A few days later they signed identical "non-exclusive occupation" agreements which provided that each of them had to pay equal monthly payments.
Prima facie the facts were similar to those in Antoniades v Villiers but the Court of Appeal found a licence.
Slade LJ agreed that the couple had joint exclusive possession of the flat, but continued: The decision in Street v Mountford…establishes that the enjoyment by one person of exclusive occupation of premises for a term in consideration of periodical payments creates a tenancy save in exceptional circumstances not relevant to this appeal…
It is, however, well settled that four unities must be present for the creation of a joint tenancy, namely the unities of possession, interest, title and time…
In the present case there is no dispute that the two agreements of 6 June 1984 operated to confer on the defendant and Miss Guile unity of possession and title.
Likewise, there was unity of time in that each of their interests arose simultaneously and was expressed to endure for six months.
The dispute concerns unity of interest…
"
Interest"in this context must, in our judgment, include the bundle of rights and obligations representing that interest.
The difficulty, from the defendant's point of view, is that the two agreements, instead of imposing a joint liability on him and Miss Guile to pay a deposit of £80 and monthly payments of £73.32, on their face imposed on each of them individual and separate obligations to pay only a deposit of £40 and monthly payments of only £86.66.
On the face of it, the absence of joint obligations of payment was inconsistent with the existence of a joint tenancy.
Counsel for the defendant…contended that the two agreements were, as he put it, "interdependent" and must be read together…
However, it seems to us quite impossible to rewrite the two agreements in this matter as a matter of construction…
Next counsel for the defendant, as we understood him, contended that, in so far as the two agreements purported to render each of the defendant and Miss Guile merely individually liable for the payment[s], they were "shams" .
The true intention of the parties…was that they should be jointly liable to make…payments.
[T]he onus of proving a sham falls on the defendant and, in our judgment, the parties' subsequent conduct affords…no sufficient support to his case in this respect…
As to the monthly payments, we have already said that we see no sufficient grounds for disturbing the judge's findings that the receipts of sums by the plaintiffs from the defendant after Miss Guile left the flat represented  no more than was due from him on the footing that he was liable only for monthly payments of £86.66.
During the period of joint occupation, monthly payments had been in the sum of £173.32…
In agreement with the judge we thus conclude that as a matter of substance and reality each of the two parties to the agreements placed himself or herself under merely individual obligations…
What then is the effect…
[I]t appears to us that unity of interest imports the existence of joint rights and obligations.
We therefore conclude that the provisions for payments contained in these two agreements…were incapable in law of creating a joint tenancy, because the monetary obligations of the two parties were not joint obligations and there was accordingly no complete unity of interest.
It follows that there was no joint tenancy.
They were therefore merely licensees.
Most problematic for the courts have been the cases involving flats given by local authorities to persons in the course of pursuing their duties under the Housing Acts towards homeless persons.
Such persons have usually been given "licence" agreements although they have often been granted factual exclusive possession of the property.
In Ogwr Borough Council v Dykes [1989]2 All ER 880 the Court of Appeal stated that exclusive possession, although important, was not decisive and the terms on which exclusive possession had been granted negatived the inference of a tenancy.
However, in Family Housing Association v Jones [1990]1 WLR 779 it was held that occupants of property granted to them as homeless persons were secure tenants.
Consequently, the House of Lords has been required, yet again, to decide upon the lease/licence distinction (see Appendix 4).
The future of the lease/licence distinction
The cases so far decided do not exhaust the possible factual permutations which give the courts such difficulty in distinguishing between leases and licences.
However, the courts may gradually have fewer and fewer decisions to make on this issue because the pendulum, swinging between control and decontrol since 1915, has swung once again in favour of the landlord.
P. Vincent-Jones "Exclusive Possession and Exclusive Control of Private Rented Housing: A Socio-Legal Critique of the Lease Licence Distinction" 14 Jo of Law and Soc (1987)
The present [Thatcher]government is committed to the policy that housing should be provided as far as possible by the unregulated private market, according to the economic laws of supply and demand which require that owners have maximum control over private property backed ultimately by unhampered exclusive right.
The common law concept of "exclusive possession" is thus losing its significance as the foundation of the security of tenure of the residential occupier.
The winning of  "possession" in 1985 after a long struggle in the courts will prove to have been a shallow victory if the protection attaches [sic]to this status is to be further undermined, leaving absolute control once again in the hands of the "greater possessors" , the owners.
The expected changes came in the form of the Housing Act 1988 which contained "a radical reform of the relationship between the private sector landlord and his tenant" (P.H. Kenny & A.M. Kenny, Law Soc Gazette, No. 28, 19 July 1989, 25).
As Kenny and Kenny suggest, the "position of the landlord is now very much strengthened" and the "question is whether licences have anything at all to offer to the landlord looking for an income from his residential property." 
Nevertheless, deregulation only applies to occupation agreements made after 15 January 1989, and many potential cases are still in the pipeline.
Moreover the Housing Act 1988 only applies to residential occupation and has no effect upon lease—licence cases with respect to business or office premises.
CONCLUSION
As currently employed, the tests for adverse possession — actual and intended exclusive occupation of land — are an adequate litmus test to distinguish between the trespasser and the adverse possessor despite the pressures on the law from homelessness.
However, the so-called Street v Mountford test fails to cope with the demands placed upon it by its own social context.
Exclusive possession as a concept for identifying tenancies does not drive a coach and horses through the Rent Acts but rather puts the cart before the horse: a phrase used to describe the collective rights of the tenant is inappropriate as a test of whether a tenancy has in fact been created.
However, the common thread running through these two areas arouses interest.
They have occupied much of the time of the higher courts but are on the margins of land law, which traditionally focuses on the market-place and the importance of documentation as the root of title.
Equally, they are on the margins of land law conceptually, since both rely on the archaic significance, in common law culture, of possession as the basis of property rights.
Ironically, they may, however, go hand in hand with visions of a new property (see Chapter 11).
4 Leases
INTRODUCTION
Exclusive possession and rent
It is the very essence of a lease that a tenant should be given the right to "exclusive possession" — the right to exclude all other persons, including the landlord, from the premises.
However, as discussed in Chapter 3, this concept has become more than a description of a right accruing to all tenants.
It has become the means for distinguishing between leases and licences, the latter being the means by which lawyers sought to find a way around statutory controls regarding the levels of rent and security for the tenant.
The payment of rent, in terms of money or money's worth, would seem to be the very crux of the relationship around which all the other secondary promises by tenant and landlord are built.
Indeed, in Street v Mountford [1985]AC 809, Lord Templeman stated that "(t) o constitute a tenancy the occupier must be granted exclusive possession for a fixed or periodic term certain in consideration of a premium or fixed periodical payments" (818).
This could be interpreted to mean that rent is an integral part of a lease.
However, there have always been leases without rent (for example, mortgages) and the statutory definition of a term of years absolute is clear on this point:
Law of Property Act 1925
General definitions
205(1) (xxvii) "Term of years absolute" means a term of years (taking effect either in possession or in reversion whether or not at a rent) with or without impeachment for waste, subject or not to another legal estate, and either certain or liable to determination by notice, re-entry, operation of law, or by a provision for cesser on redemption, or in any other event (other than the dropping of a life, or the determination of a determinable life interest); but does not include any term of years determinable with life or lives or with the cesser of a determinable life interest, nor, if created after the commencement of this Act, a term of years which is not expressed to take <pb n=80 effect in possession within twenty-one years after the creation thereof where required by this Act to take effect within that period; and in this definition the expression "term of years" includes a term for less than a year, or for a year or years and a fraction of a year or from year to year…
In a recent case the Court of Appeal has held that there certainly may be a lease without rent: Ashburn Anstalt v Arnold (1988) 2 WLR 706 (see Chapter 11).
A brief history
W.T. Murphy and S. Roberts Understanding Property Law (Fontana: 1987)
In this century, a substantial body of functionally differentiated statute law has grown up around the landlord–tenant relationship, such that today the nineteenth-century rules have limited — though still very important — practical application.
But to get the subject as a whole into perspective, it is necessary to look back to the past…
The principal contextual difference is between the rural and urban sectors, or, slightly differently as we shall see, between agricultural land — farms — and housing.
The rural context: farms
The "broad acres" of a landed estate were in fact composed of a number of farms, each yielding a rent paid by the tenant farmer who worked the farm.
Until changes which came in the wake of the First World War, in which the scions of landed families fell alongside the sons of tenant farmers in the trenches by the Somme, such tenancies, to judge from the evidence, commonly remained in one farming family over several generations.
But such tenancies were very often extremely informal, as those devoted to the cause of improving the state of agriculture in England emphasised with growing intensity from the middle of the nineteenth century.
Why?
People of the time called these farming tenancies "tenancies at will" , as do today's historians.
Strictly, lawyers call them yearly periodic tenancies.
But the same thing is meant by both, for a simple reason: the legal conceptualisation of these relationships was largely a matter of clothing fact with right.
The landowner could terminate the tenancy at his pleasure, but, given the nature of farming, at pleasure would normally mean giving notice on certain days of the year, and allowing the tenant six months, principally in order to gather such crops as he may have planted.
At one level this meant that the exiguous legal structure of this relationship afforded much social power to the landowner, whose ability to terminate the tenancy at pleasure might hang like a sword of Damocles over the heads of his tenant farmers.
But the legal relationship was for the most part enveloped in a broader normative framework…
The landowner, in many cases, was principally interested in his rental income.
In a time of severe agricultural depression, for example, the landlord might do better to allow his tenant farmers to go into arrears rather than exercise his legal rights, in the hope that over time things would balance out.
The modern regulatory scheme springs principally from the problems of Ireland.
It is interesting to note that legislation was required, because, as said above, mid-nineteenth-century reformers thought that most of what was needed could be achieved by formalising the relationship by means of a lease.
Let us return to why they thought this to be so…
People interested in agricultural improvement in the nineteenth century — in improving farming methods, in increasing the potential yield of land and in methods of improving the manner of storage of its produce — saw the formal lease as a mechanism for spelling out in advance precisely who was responsible for what, and for enshrining in legal terms how the land was to be utilised.
Those who advocated the adoption of leases hoped, by formalising all this, to focus the minds of the parties at the time of entering into the transaction.
The traditional tenancy, because of its informal character, was seen as an obstacle to improvement in these respects…what incentive was there for the tenant farmer to engage in agricultural improvement?
Why should he build barns, drain land, clear wasteland and so on, if his landlord could turn him out at any time and reap the benefit of the improvement himself?
These questions, which were posed with most intensity in the Irish context, because, on the whole, absentee landlords behaved that much worse, shaped the form taken by legislative interventions…
The urban context: housing
It is even harder to generalise with any accuracy about the legal forms through which the occupation of houses was arranged…
Whatever the position in remoter times, when most people lived in the country, the urbanisation of England in the nineteenth century meant, among other things, that farmland adjacent to what were once small towns became the target of urban development.
People who owned such land at the time that pressure for development came upon it — whether industrial or residential; indeed obviously, the two went together — were faced with two choices.
They could sell their land to a developer.
But such a course of action would involve the problem of alternative safe places for the proceeds of sale.
So the course which was widely adopted was not to sell up entirely but to grant leases of land wanted for development.
Such leases would draw upon all the expertise of lawyers, and contain detailed plans for how the land let to the builder should be built upon.
Lawyers called these leases "building leases" , which were typically of sixty or ninety years' duration.
Under such leases, the builder/developer would be responsible for erecting a building or a number of buildings upon a particular site, and detailed provision might be made for the manner of their construction and continuing maintenance, even down to the type of subsequent letting of the buildings which was to be permitted.
The lease would reserve a "ground rent" for the landowner…
The speculative, "capitalist" builder was faced with a choice of his own.
He could sell on the term (as lawyers say, "assign" it).
Or he could rent out the property…
So  in the urban context we encounter two rental incomes generated from the same physical entity: the ground rent and the house or occupancy rent…
The complexity of tenancies and sub-tenancies relating to just one house or building in the urban context, together with a flavour of the experiences of working class tenants at the turn of the century, can be gained from the following extract.
This originally appeared as part of a Fabian Women's Group report based upon research from 1909–13 into the daily lives of families living in Lambeth.
M.P.
Reeves Round About A Pound A Week (Virago: 1979)
The kind of dwelling to be had for 7s or 8s a week varies in several ways.
If it be light, dry and free from bugs, if it be central in position, and if it contain three rooms, it will be eagerly sought for and hard to find.
Such places exist in some blocks of workmen's dwellings, and applications for them are waiting long before a vacancy occurs, provided, of course, that they are in a convenient district.
Perhaps the next best bargain after such rooms in blocks of workmen's dwellings is a portion of a small house.
These small houses are let at rents varying from 10s to 15s, according to size, condition and position.
They are let to a tenant who is responsible to the landlord for the whole rent, and who sublets such rooms as she can do without in order to get enough money for the rent-collector.
She is often a woman with five or six children, who would not, on account of her large family, be an acceptable sub-tenant.
If she is a good woman of business, it is sometimes possible for her to let her rooms advantageously…
But there is always a serious risk attached to the taking of a whole house — the risk of not being able to sub-let, or, if there are tenants, of being unable to make them pay…
The question of vermin is a very pressing one in all the small houses.
No woman, however clean, can cope with it.
Before their confinements some women go to the trouble of having the room they are to lie in fumigated.
In spite of such precautions, bugs have dropped on to the pillow of the sick woman before the visitor's eyes…
The fault is not entirely that of the sanitary authorities or of the immediate landlords…
The sanitary standard is…deplorably low.
That is simply because it has to be that low if some of these houses are to be considered habitable at all, and if others are to be inhabited by two, or often by three, families at the same time.
THE 1925 RATIONALISATION
Legal leases
Since 1925 a lease cannot be a legal estate unless it is made by a deed.
This is a consequence of s. 52(1), Law of Property Act 1925 (Chapter 2).
However, there is a statutory exception:
Law of Property Act 1925
Creation of interests in land by parol
54 (2) Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part of this Act shall affect the creation by parol of leases taking effect in possession for a term not exceeding three years (whether or not the lessee is given power to extend the term) at the best rent which can be reasonably obtained without taking a fine.
Thus, a lease for less than three years may be validly created on an informal basis, provided that it is for a market, as opposed to a "peppercorn" , rent.
Periodic tenancies, although they may ultimately exceed three years, are also covered by this section and may take effect orally: Kushner v Law Society [1952]1 KB 264.
In order to be legal a lease must also be for a term of years absolute, according to s. 1(1) (b), Law of Property Act 1925.
As made clear in s. 205(1) (xxvii)(above) this means that a valid legal lease must be for a fixed and certain period of time.
However, as the statutory definition indicates, there are no restrictions as to the minimum or maximum length of the lease.
Nor must the period of time in question be continuous.
Woolf J, in Cottage Holiday Associates Ltd v Customs and Excise Commissioners [1983]QB 735, accepted that time-share arrangements could be legal leases.
The most frequently quoted cases on "certainty of duration" are Lace v Chantler (1944) KB 368 and Re Midland Railway Company's Agreement [1971]Ch 725, as discussed in the following judgment.
Ashburn Anstalt v Arnold [1988]2 WLR 706 (CA) Fox, Neill, Bingham LJJ
For the facts see Chapter 11, p. 314.
Fox LJ:
There remains the question of the existence of a term.
It is the plaintiff's case that [the agreement]created no term sufficiently identifiable to be capable of recognition by the law, and that accordingly no tenancy was created.
For that, the plaintiff relies upon Lace v Chantler.
In that case a house was let "for the duration of the war" .
The Court of Appeal held that a leasehold interest was not created.
The basis of that decision was stated by Lord Greene MR, at p. 370: "A term created by a leasehold tenancy agreement must be expressed either with certainty and specifically or by reference to something which can, at the time when the lease takes effect be looked to as a certain ascertainment of what the term is meant to be.
In the present case, when this tenancy agreement took effect the term was completely uncertain.
It was impossible to say how long the tenancy would last."
The ambit of the decision in Lace v Chantler was limited by the further decision of this court, In re Midland Railway Co's Agreement…
The court observed that, in the ordinary case of a periodic tenancy, for example, a yearly tenancy, it was plain that, in one sense at least , it was uncertain at the outset what would be the maximum length of the tenancy; the term would grow from year to year as a single term springing from the original grant.
Accordingly, the simple statement of the law that the maximum duration of a term must be certainly known in advance of its taking effect could not have direct reference to periodic tenancies…
In Lace v Chantler the duration of the war could not be predicted and there was no provision for either party to bring the tenancy to an end before the war ended, and that event might itself be very hard to pinpoint.
In the present case…the arrangement could be brought to an end by both parties in circumstances which were free from uncertainty in the sense that there would be no doubt whether the determining event had occurred.
The vice of uncertainty in relation to the duration of a term is that the parties do not know where they stand.
Put another way, the court does not know what to enforce.
This is not the position here.
The concept of "certainty of duration" also means that a lease granted for the period of someone's life is incapable of being legal, as stated in s. 205(1) (xxvii) above.
The 1925 legislation made special provision for such leases.
Statute further ensured that reversionary leases (i.e. leases to take effect in the future), although capable of being legal, must take effect not more than 21 years from the date of their creation:
Law of Property Act 1925
Abolition of interesse termini, and as to reversionary leases and leases for lives
149 (3) A term, at a rent or granted in consideration of a fine, limited after the commencement of this Act to take effect more than twenty-one years from the date of the instrument purporting to create it, shall be void, and any contract made after such commencement to create such a term shall likewise be void; but this subsection does not apply to any term taking effect in equity under a settlement, or created out of an equitable interest under a settlement, or under an equitable power for mortgage, indemnity or other like purposes.
(6) Any lease or underlease, at a rent, or in consideration of a fine, for life or lives or for any term of years determinable with life or lives, or on the marriage of the lessee, or any contract therefor, made before or after the commencement of this Act, or created by virtue of Part V of the Law of Property Act 1922, shall take effect as a lease, underlease or contract therefor, for a term of ninety years determinable after the death or marriage (as the case may be) of the original lessee, or of the survivor of the original lessees, by at least one month's notice in writing given to determine the same on one of the quarter days applicable to the tenancy, either by the lessor or the persons deriving title under him, to the person entitled to the leasehold interest, or if no such person is in existence by affixing the same to  the premises, or by the lessee or other persons in whom the leasehold interest is vested to the lessor or the persons deriving title under him…
Equitable leases
Equitable leases may be created in four different ways: 1.
Expressly — when a settlor declares a trust in favour of beneficiaries of a property in which the settlor owns a legal term of years.
The beneficiaries will acquire an equitable interest and, therefore, an equitable lease.
2.
Impliedly — when a leasehold property is conveyed into the name of one party, but purchased with the funds of two.
This will give rise to a resulting trust in favour of both in equity with the same result as in (1).
(See Chapter 9.)
3.
It is a legal rule that no one can transfer a better title than the one which they own.
This means that the owner of an equitable lease can only grant an equitable sub-lease, not a legal lease, irrespective of the mode of the sub-tenancy's creation.
4.
Even if there is no deed, as necessary under s. 52 LPA 1925 above, provided the requirements of s. 2, Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989, have been fulfilled there may be a specifically enforceable contract to create a lease.
This will take effect in equity.
This fourth method for the creation of an equitable lease, prima facie, presents a problem.
If, for instance, X enters into Y's property with Y's consent, X becomes a tenant at will.
If X starts to pay a regular sum of money to Y, X may become a periodic tenant.
This periodic tenancy could also be a legal tenancy if X and Y's rental relationship complies with the three conditions for informal legal leases (see s. 54(2) LPA 1925 above).
However, equity may also recognise X's rights on the basis of the agreement with Y if there is sufficient writing as required by s. 2 of the 1989 Act.
Thus, in theory, X could, simultaneously, have both a legal and an equitable lease.
In practice, however, this problem is resolved by what is known as the doctrine in Walsh v Lonsdale.
Walsh v Lonsdale (1882) Ch 9 (CA) Sir George Jessell MR, Cotton and Lindley LJJ
The case involved a lease on a mill which was capable, on the facts, of taking effect as an equitable seven year lease, subject to specific express covenants, or a legal periodic tenancy, without any such terms.
Jessell MR:
There is an agreement for a lease under which possession was given.
Now since the Judicature Acts the possession is held under the agreement.
There are not two <pb n=86 estates as there were formerly, one estate at common law by reason of the payment of the rent from year to year, and an estate in equity under the agreement.
There is only one Court and the equity rules prevail in it.
The tenant holds under an agreement for a lease.
He holds, therefore, under the same terms in equity as if a lease has been granted…
Assignment of leases
The assignment of a legal lease must be in the form of a deed to be effective: s.52(1), Law of Property Act 1925.
Thus as was reaffirmed recently in Crago v Julian [1992]1 WLR 373 CA leases for a term of less than three years, although they may be created orally, can only be assigned by deed.
However, it is possible to have an equitable assignment of a legal lease, provided that the terms of s. 2 of the 1989 Act for the creation of an enforceable contract are complied with by the parties.
A lease originally created in equity must be assigned in writing:
Law of Property Act 1925
Instruments required to be in writing
53 (1)(c)[A]disposition of an equitable interest or trust subsisting at the time of the disposition, must be in writing signed by the person disposing of the same, or by his agent thereunto lawfully authorised in writing or by will.
COVENANTS IN LEASES
A regime of private law
Leases are contracts and both parties, landlord and tenant, will be bound by any express terms in that agreement.
These terms involve promises either to do, or refrain from doing something, made by either party.
They are known as covenants because these promises are generally made in the form of a deed.
A deed was traditionally a contract under seal or covenant.
These covenants may be carefully drawn up by lawyers seeking to create a system which will match the requirements of the particular landlord/tenant relationship.
Unlike many other contracts, the courts have not exercised a strong influence over the framework of this relationship and the common law only imposes a few terms upon leasehold parties.
However, the small number of implied covenants have a part to play in contributing towards the comfort of tenants and some have attracted the attention of Parliament.
Those terms which are commonly found in leases, both express and implied, are detailed below.
Covenant for quiet enjoyment
Kenny v Preen [1963]1 QB 499 (CA) Ormrod, Donovan and Pearson LJJ
Pearson LJ:
The implied covenant for quiet enjoyment is not an absolute covenant protecting a tenant against eviction or interference by anybody, but is a qualified covenant protecting the tenant against interference with the tenant's quiet and peaceful possession and enjoyment of the premises by the landlord or persons claiming through or under the landlord.
The basis of it is that the landlord, by letting the premises, confers on the tenant the right of possession during the term and impliedly promises not to interfere with the tenant's exercise and use of the right of possession during the term.
I think the word "enjoy" used in this connection is a translation of the Latin word "fruor" and refers to the exercise and use of the right and having the full benefit of it, rather than to deriving pleasure from it…
I would decide on two grounds in favour of the tenant's contention that there was, in this case, a breach of covenant for quiet enjoyment.
First, there was a deliberate and persistent attempt by the landlord to drive the tenant out of her possession of the premises by persecution and intimidation, and intimidation included threats of physical eviction of the tenant and removal of her belongings.
In my view that course of conduct by the landlord seriously interfered with the tenant's proper freedom of action in exercising her right of possession, and tended to deprive her of the full benefit of it, and was an invasion of her rights as tenant to remain in possession undisturbed, and so would in itself constitute a breach of covenant, even if there were no direct physical interference with the tenant's possession and enjoyment.
No case of this kind has ever been considered by the courts before, and I do not think the dicta in the previous cases should be read as excluding a case of this kind where a landlord seeks, by a course of intimidation, to "annul his own deed" , to contradict his own demise, by ousting the tenant from possession which the landlord has conferred upon her.
Secondly, if direct physical interference is a necessary element in the breach of covenant that element can be found in this case to a substantial extent…
A breach of a covenant of quiet enjoyment may also amount to a criminal offence.
Protection From Eviction Act 1977 (as amended by s. 29, Housing Act 1988)
Unlawful eviction and harassment of occupier
1 (1) In this section "residential occupier" , in relation to any premises, means a person occupying the premises as a residence, whether under a contract or by virtue of any enactment or rule of law giving him the right to remain in occupation or restricting the right of any other person to recover possession of the premises.
(2) If any person unlawfully deprives the residential occupier of any premises of his occupation of the premises or any part thereof, or attempts to do so, he shall be guilty of an offence unless he proves that he believed, and had reasonable cause to believe, that the residential occupier had ceased to reside in the premises.
(3) If any person with intent to cause the residential occupier of any premises —(a) to give up the occupation of the premises or any part thereof; or
(b) to refrain from exercising any right or pursuing any remedy in respect of the premises or part thereof; does acts likely to interfere with the peace or comfort of the residential occupier or members of his household, or persistently withdraws or withholds services reasonably required for the occupation of the premises as a residence, he shall be guilty of an offence.
(3A) Subject to subsection 3B (below) the landlord of a residential occupier or an agent of the landlord shall be guilty of an offence if —(a) he does acts likely to interfere with the peace or comfort of the residential occupier or members of his household, or
(b) he persistently withdraws or withholds services reasonably required for the occupation of the premises in question as a residence, and (in either case) he knows, or has reasonable cause to believe, that the conduct is likely to cause the residential occupier to give up the occupation of the whole or part of the premises or to refrain from exercising any right or pursuing any remedy in respect of the whole or part of the premises.
(3B) A person shall not be guilty of an offence under subsection (3A) above if he proves that he had reasonable grounds for doing the acts or withdrawing or withholding the services in question.
(3C) In subsection 3A (above) "landlord" , in relation to a residential occupier of any premises, means the person who, but for —(a) the residential occupier's right to remain in occupation of the premises, or
(b) a restriction on the person's right to recover possession of the premises,
would be entitled to occupation of the premises and any superior landlord under whom that person derives title.
(4) A person guilty of an offence under this section shall be liable —(a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding £1,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or to both;(b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years or to both.
(5) Nothing in this section shall be taken to prejudice any liability or remedy to which a person guilty of an offence thereunder may be subject in civil proceedings.
(6) Where an offence under this section committed by a body corporate is proved to have been committed with the consent or connivance of, or to be  attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager or secretary or other similar officer of the body corporate or any person who was purporting to act in any such capacity, he as well as the body corporate shall be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Historically, successful convictions under the 1977 Act were rare, largely because it was necessary to prove that the landlord subjectively intended, through his or her actions, to force the "residential occupier" to leave the property in question.
As a disincentive to landlords wishing to rid themselves of "sitting tenants" , Parliament inserted into the Housing Act 1988 a strengthening of harassment remedies.
Section 1, Protection From Eviction Act 1977, was amended to enable more prosecutions and at the same time introduced a new criminal offence.
As a recent Shelter report, analysing information drawn from local authorities all over England and Wales, suggests, there are a number of specific factors which encourage landlords to "harass" their tenants.
These include changes in government policy realised in the same Housing Act.
L. Burrows and N. Hunter Forced Out (Shelter: 1990)
The 1988 Housing Act brought considerable changes to the private letting market.
Where landlords are not resident [absentee landlords]there is now a rights divide between tenancies which began before 15 January 1989 and those which began on or after that date.
The…
Act…set out an entirely new regime for new lettings where they involved absentee landlords.
While keeping the same kind of security of tenure structure…it was made far weaker from the tenant's point of view than under the 1977 Rent Act.
As for rent, the new lettings regime allows only the barest semblance of a rent fixing machinery…
This radical reduction in tenancy rights clearly places pre-1988 Housing Act tenants in a vulnerable position.
Burrows and Hunter's research indicates that many landlords are trying to force pre-1988 tenants out of their properties so that they can either move in new tenants, sell with vacant possession or sell on to other landlords.
Several other causes, according to their findings, often lie at the root of violence against tenants.
In particular, administrative delays over the payment by local authorities of housing benefit may influence landlords seeking to evict their tenants.
Other forms of prejudice also appear important, on grounds of race, against the elderly and often against people with HIV infection or Aids.
There is also evidence of sexual harassment.
In addition, a new statutory tort, providing tenants with civil compensation for unlawful eviction was introduced:
Housing Act 1988
Damages for unlawful eviction
27 (1) This section applies if, at any time after 9th June l988, a landlord (in this section referred to as "the landlord in default" ) or any person acting on behalf of the landlord in default unlawfully deprives the residential occupier of any premises of his occupation of the whole or part of the premises.
@YELLOWLIST 2 =
(2) This section also applies if, at any time after 9th June 1988, a landlord (in this section referred to as "the landlord in default" ) or any person acting on behalf of the landlord in default —(a) attempts unlawfully to deprive the residential occupier of any premises of his occupation of the whole or part of the premises, or (b) knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the conduct is likely to cause the residential occupier of any premises —(i) to give up his occupation of the premises or any part thereof, or (ii) to refrain from exercising any right or pursuing any remedy in respect of the premises or any part thereof, does acts likely to interfere with the peace or comfort of the residential occupier or members of his household, or persistently withdraws or withholds services reasonably required for the occupation of the premises as a residence, and, as a result, the residential occupier gives up his occupation of the premises as a residence.
(3) Subject to the following provisions of this section, where this section applies, the landlord in default shall, by virtue of this section, be liable to pay to the former residential occupier, in respect of his loss of the right to occupy the premises in question as his residence, damages assessed on the basis set out in section 28 below.
(6) No liability shall arise by virtue of subsection (3) above if —(a) before the date on which proceedings to enforce the liability are finally disposed of, the former residential occupier is reinstated in the premises in question in such circumstances that he becomes again the residential occupier of them; or (b) at the request of the former residential occupier, a court makes an order (whether in the nature of an injunction or otherwise) as a result of which he is reinstated as mentioned in paragraph (a) above…
(8) In proceedings to enforce a liability arising by virtue of subsection (3) above, it shall be a defence for the defendant to prove that he believed, and had reasonable cause to believe —(a) that the residential occupier had ceased to reside in the premises in question at the time when he was deprived of occupation as mentioned in subsection (1) above or, as the case may be, when the attempt was made or the acts were done as a result of which he gave up his occupation of those premises; or (b) that, where the liability would otherwise arise by virtue only of the doing of  acts or the withdrawal or withholding of services, he had reasonable grounds for doing the acts or withdrawing or withholding the services in question.
The measure of damages
28 (1) The basis for the assessment of damages referred to in section 27(3) is the difference in value, determined as at the time immediately before the residential occupier ceased to occupy the premises in question as his residence, between —(a) the value of the interest if the landlord in default determined on the assumption that the residential occupier continues to have the same right to occupy the premises as before that time; and (b) the value of that interest determined on the assumption that the residential occupier has ceased to have that right.
(3) For the purposes of the valuation referred to in subsection (1) above, it shall be assumed —(a) that the landlord in default is selling his interest on the open market to a willing buyer;(b) that neither the residential occupier nor any member of his family wishes to buy; and (c) that it is unlawful to carry out any substantial development of any of the land in which the landlord's interest subsists or to demolish the whole or part of any building on that land.
At this stage it is hard to analyse the effectiveness of the new legislation, both in terms of punishing unscrupulous landlords and in discouraging others who might seek to utilise "extra-legal" means for the removal of their tenants.
Burrows and Hunter's general conclusion is that "from the views given us by local authorities the 1988 Housing Act's strengthening of the anti-harassment laws have made prosecutions slightly easier for local authorities but, in practice, there is often a failure to prosecute for a range of non-legal reasons" (p. 41).
The next extract reviews a number of decisions regarding the civil remedies, with particular reference to the Court of Appeal decision in Tagro v Cafane (1991) 2 AER 235:
C. Rodgers "Unlawful Evictions — Testing the Water" Conv (1991) 297:
Tagro v Cafane gave the Court of Appeal its first opportunity to examine the scope of liability under the 1988 Act, and to resolve some perceived difficulties in the new provisions.
The landlord in Tagro v Cafane had adopted the time-honoured tactic of changing the locks to the plaintiff's bedsit in order to effect an eviction.
Finding herself unable to gain entry the plaintiff obtained an ex parte injunction to readmit her to the premises.
The landlord then relented in part and gave her back the keys to the bedsit.
On seeking readmittance, however, she found that the front door had been smashed and that the flat had been ransacked.
Many of her clothes and  personal belongings had been stolen.
Faced with this scenario, the plaintiff gave evidence that she was too frightened to sleep at the premises and had not done so since her initial eviction.
For this conduct, the landlord was, on November 24, 1989, ordered to pay £31,000 damages by Lambeth County Court.
The landlord appealed on the ground that he had reinstated the tenant in the flat, thus affording himself a defence under the 1988 Act, and that the award was too high.
This raised two issues for consideration in the Court of Appeal.
(i) Scope of liability and defences…
Tagro v Cafane gives valuable guidance on the scope of the "reinstatement" defences…
Both defences depend upon reinstatement being offered or obtained.
What does "reinstatement" require, as a matter of law?
Regrettably, no definition is offered by the 1988 Act itself, and this makes the Court of Appeal's observations in Tagro the more valuable.
It was here held that giving the tenant the keys, and readmitting her to the premises, did not suffice.
There was, according to Lord Donaldson MR "no suggestion that the room was put in proper order, the locks repaired or any offer made to Miss Tagro to allow her to resume occupation in any realistic sense of the word" (241).
Any suggestion that reinstatement consists in merely handing the tenant the key to a lock which does not work, and inviting her to resume occupation of a room which has been completely wrecked "is an argument which simply does not run" (239).
The facts here being admittedly extreme, the Court of Appeal could dismiss this suggestion without difficulty.
Regrettably, however, having given clear guidance as to what is not reinstatement, no help is to be found in Tagro as to what will suffice for this purpose…
(ii) Quantum of damages…
The general tenor of Lord Donaldson's observations in Tagro indicates that the courts will be loath to lay down strict requirements as to how th[e] valuation should be conducted, preferring instead to leave valuation matters to the skill and expertise of qualified surveyors employed by the parties.
Two points were, however, resolved in the Court of Appeal.
The relevant date for valuation purposes is the time immediately before the occupier ceases to be in residence, with the inevitable consequence that changes in market conditions between that date and the hearing are inadmissible.
Secondly, the valuer is directed to make his valuation on the assumption that the landlord in default is selling his interest on the open market to a willing buyer.
According to the Court of Appeal in Tagro v Cafane this requires the valuer to assume that he can sell it on the open market to a willing buyer, and in so doing to ignore any covenant against assignment which restricts alienation of the landlord's interest.
Non-derogation from grant
The nature of this covenant, implied into every lease, together with an appreciation of the narrow judicial interpretation placed upon it, can be understood from the following extract.
Browne v Flower [1911]1 Ch 219
The tenant of a first-floor flat, having subdivided the apartment with the lessor's consent, erected an external staircase which provided access to one part of the first floor.
The staircase stood in a garden overlooked by both the first floor and a ground-floor flat let to the plaintiffs.
It ran up between the windows of two rooms used as bedrooms by the plaintiffs, thus allowing anyone using the staircase to see directly into the ground-floor flat.
In the plaintiffs' opinion this seriously affected their privacy and thus breached the covenant of "non-derogation from grant" , since the ground-floor had been let as a dwelling house.
Parker J:
The plaintiffs…relied on the maxim that no one can be allowed to derogate from his own grant.
This maxim is generally quoted as explaining certain implications which may arise from the fact that, or the circumstances under which, an owner of land grants or demises part of it, retaining the remainder in his own hands.
The real difficulty is in each case to ascertain how far such implications extend.
It is well settled that such a grant or demise will…impliedly confer on the grantee or lessee…easements over the land retained corresponding to the continuous or apparent quasi-easements enjoyed at the time of the grant or demise by the property granted or demised over the property retained…
But the implications usually explained by the maxim…do not stop short with easements…
Thus, if the grant or demise be made for a particular purpose, the grantor or lessor comes under an obligation not to use the land retained by him in such a way as to render the land granted or demised unfit or materially less fit for the particular purpose for which the grant or demise was made…
It is quite reasonable for a purchaser to assume that a vendor who sells land for a particular purpose will not do anything to prevent its being used for that purpose, but it would be utterly unreasonable to assume that the vendor was undertaking restrictive obligations which would prevent his using land retained by him for any lawful purpose whatsoever…
Under these circumstances the question is whether the existence of this staircase renders the plaintiff's premises unfit or materially less fit to be used for the purposes for which they were demised, that is, for the purpose of a residential flat.
In my opinion it does not.
The two rooms in question can be and are still in fact used for the same purpose for which they were used prior to the erection of the staircase.
It is only the comfort of the persons so using the rooms that is interfered with by what has been done…
Much as I sympathise with the plaintiffs, it would, in my opinion, be extending the implications based on the maxim…to an unreasonable extent if it were held that what has been done in this case was a breach of an implied obligation.
Covenants to repair
Covenants connected with the repair and upkeep of buildings are obviously, given  the British climate, amongst the most important contained in leases.
(See Chapter 2, p. 27.)
Disrepair, as indicated by the following extract, is a key problem within the private rented sector.
J. Luba Repairs: Tenant's Rights 2nd edn (LAG: 1991)
The latest survey of national housing conditions was undertaken in 1985/86.
It embraced all housing tenures by sample but focused mainly on older housing rather than new-build.
The results…confirm a dire state of disrepair in the housing stock with virtually no improvement achieved since the earlier survey conducted in 1982…
The figures reveal:(a) 5% of the total housing stock is unfit for human habitation;(b) a further 2.4 million dwellings are in poor repair;(c) 15% of the total housing stock is in poor condition; and (d) 543,000 dwellings lack basic amenities.
The scale of disrepair disclosed by the survey affects all tenure sectors although, as usual, the condition in the private rented sector is worse than elsewhere; for example , one in six dwellings in the private sector was found to be unfit for human habitation…
In London, figures collected by the London Research Centre with the help of the London boroughs revealed not only the rapid decay of inner city housing as suggested by the national survey, but also the extent to which chronic disrepair is now prevalent even in suburban areas.
In London as a whole, 370,000 houses are seriously unsatisfactory (many of them "unfit" ).
In outer London 200,000 homes required repairs costing more than £4,200 in each case…
Converting this sort of projection into figures for the amount of necessary new-build and rehabilitation is not an exact science.
However, it has been suggested that on the present basis it would take 46 years to clear the backlog in housing disrepair…
Given the importance of repairs it is perhaps surprising that English law in this area is an uncoordinated, disorganised confusion of common law, statute and express terms.
At common law, if a house is let furnished, there is an implied term that the premises are at the commencement of the tenancy fit for human habitation.
The courts have found breaches of this covenant in situations where homes were in such a poor condition when let that they represented a serious danger to health or safety.
Examples include premises infested with bugs — Smith v Marrable (1843) 11 M & W 52 — and one having a defective sewerage system — Harrison v Malet (1886) 3 TLR 58.
Most of the decisions on this covenant are rather old, due to the restrictive interpretation placed on it by the courts.
Collins v Hopkins [1923]2 KB 617
McCardie J:
This case before me definitely raises the question of the contractual duty of a person who lets a furnished house lately occupied by one suffering from an infectious disease.
It is not, of course, enough for the landlord to say that he honestly believes that the house is fit and proper for safe habitation.
It must in fact be fit and safe…
Nor on the other hand, can a tenant renounce his contract because of a mere apprehension of risk or through mere dislike of the premises through the fact e.g. that a person has died upon the premises of smallpox…
In my view the question in such a case…is this: Was there any actual and appreciable risk to the tenant, his family or household, by entering and occupying the house…
If the risk be serious, no one, I think could doubt that the tenant may renounce.
But in dealing with bacilli which may mean illness and death, I think further that an appreciable measure of actual risk justifies the tenant in throwing up his contract…
Amongst the matters to be considered are the nature of the disease; the degree and persistence of its infectivity; the date when the sufferer resided in the house; the steps taken to prevent risk of infection and the like.
On the particular facts McCardie J found that the house and its contents were not free of tuberculosis bacilli and it was not fit for human habitation.
There are also statutory covenants requiring landlords, of properties let at a low rent, to ensure that they are both fit for human habitation at the start of the tenancy and are kept fit for habitation throughout the lease:
Landlord and Tenant Act 1985
Implied terms as to fitness for human habitation
8 (1) In a contract to which this section applies for the letting of a house for human habitation there is implied, notwithstanding any stipulation to the contrary —(a) a condition that the house is fit for human habitation at the commencement of the tenancy, and (b) an undertaking that the house will be kept by the landlord fit for human habitation during the tenancy.
(3) This section applies to a contract if —(a) the rent does not exceed the figure applicable in accordance with subsection (4), and (b) the letting is not on such terms as to the tenant's responsibility as are mentioned in subsection (5)…(5) This section does not apply where a house is let for a term of three years or more (the lease not being determinable at the option of either party before the expiration of three years) upon terms that the tenant puts the premises into a condition reasonably fit for human habitation.
Fitness for human habitation
10 In determining for the purposes of this Act whether a house is unfit for human habitation, regard shall be had to its condition in respect of the following matters — repair, stability, freedom from damp, internal arrangement, natural lighting, ventilation, water supply, drainage and sanitary conveniences, facilities for preparation and cooking of food and for the disposal of waste water; and the house shall be regarded as unfit for human habitation if, and only if, it is so far defective in one or more of those matters that it is not reasonably suitable for occupation in that condition.
Further, there is an obligation upon landlords, of premises let for a term of less than seven years, to maintain in a state of repair the basic structure and services of the property:
Landlord and Tenant Act 1985
Repairing obligations in short leases
11 (1) In a lease to which this section applies (as to which, see sections 13 and 14) there is implied a covenant by the lessor —(a) to keep in repair the structure and exterior of the dwelling-house (including drains, gutters and external pipes),(b) to keep in repair and proper working order the installations in the dwelling-house for the supply of water, gas and electricity and for sanitation (including basins, sinks, baths and sanitary conveniences, but not other  fixtures, fittings and appliances for making use of the supply of water, gas or electricity), and (c) to keep in repair and proper working order the installations in the dwelling-house for space heating and heating water…
(2) The covenant implied by subsection (1)( "the lessor's repairing covenant" ) shall not be construed as requiring the lessor —(a) to carry out works or repairs for which the lessee is liable by virtue of his duty to use the premises in a tenant-like manner [below], or would be so liable but for an express covenant on his part,(b) to rebuild or reinstate the premises in the case of destruction or damage by fire, or by tempest, flood or other inevitable accident, or (c) to keep in repair or maintain anything which the lessee is entitled to remove from the dwelling-house.
(3) In determining the standard of repair required by the lessor's repairing covenant, regard shall be had to the age, character and prospective life of the dwelling-house and the locality in which it is situated…
(4) A covenant by the lessee for the repair of the premises is of no effect so far as it relates to the matters mentioned in subsection (l)(a) to (c), except so far as it imposes on the lessee any of the requirements mentioned in subsection (2)(a) or (c).
Leases to which s. 11 applies: general rule
13 (1) Section 11 (repairing obligations) applies to a lease of a dwelling house granted on or after 24th October 1961 for a term of less than seven years.
(2) In determining whether a lease is one to which section 11 applies —(b) a lease which is determinable at the option of the lessor before the expiration of seven years from the commencement of the term shall be treated as a lease for a term of less than seven years, and (c) a lease (other than a lease to which paragraph (b) applies) shall not be treated as a lease for a term of less than seven years if it confers on the lessee an option for renewal for a term which, together with the original term, amounts to seven years or more.
The niceties of judicial pronouncements concerning the interpretation of these sections are clearly apparent from a decision in the Court of Appeal on s. 32(1), Housing Act 1961, which was the predecessor to s. 11(1), Landlord and Tenant Act 1985.
Hopwood v Cannock Chase District Council (1975) 1 WLR 373 (CA) Cairns, Stephenson LJJ and Brightman J
Cairns LJ:
At the [material]time the plaintiff had come from the back door of the house and had walked diagonally across the first concrete area; she was intending to go and  have a chat with her neighbour at the next house.
But when she came to one edge of the paving slabs…she tripped and fell; and it was common ground that there was a difference in height between the concrete and the paving slab of an inch and a half…
The judge found that the defendants, by their servants, well knew of this condition.
The judge had however to consider whether there was any obligation on the defendants to keep this part of the premises in repair.
He held that there was no such obligation…
In reaching his decision he founded himself on the only reported case as far as we know that has been decided under this provision; it is the decision of the Court of Appeal in Brown v Liverpool Corporation [1969]3 AER 1345.
That was a case in which the house had a path running to the steps which went up to the road, the house being at a lower level than the road, and the plaintiff met with an accident on those steps…
Danckwerts LJ, giving the first judgment, first easily reached the conclusion that they did not form part of the structure and then went on…
"In the end, however, I have come to the conclusion that the learned county court judge adopted the right approach and did treat this question as one of degree and fact.
He referred specifically to the point that this concrete path was only "" seven feet long "" , and it seems to me that on the evidence he was entitled to come to the conclusion which he reached on the question of fact, i.e. that in all the circumstances the steps formed part of the building."
One matter on which all three members of the court founded their judgments was that in that case the path and steps formed an essential part of the means of access to the house, in that it was the only way in.
In this case that certainly was not so; the ordinary means of access to the house was from the front of the house and to my mind it is very doubtful whether this yard could be regarded as a means of access to the house at all…in my view the section cannot be extended beyond what was held in Brown's case so as to include a yard of this kind.
In two cases, Smith v Bradford MC (1982) 4 HLR 86 and McCauley v Bristol City Council [1991]3 WLR 968, it has been held in similar circumstances that a landlord was liable in tort under s. 4 Defective Premises Act 1972.
There is also an implied covenant imposed upon the landlords of high rise blocks to keep the lifts, stairs and corridors reasonably fit and safe for use: Liverpool City Council v Irwin [1976]AC 39 (see Chapter 6, p. 167).
Obligations concerned with the day-to-day upkeep of leasehold property have also been placed upon tenants, although this implied covenant "to act in a tenant-like manner" , does not amount to a requirement to make repairs.
Warren v Kean (1954) 1 QB 15 (CA) Somervell, Denning and Romer LJJ
Lord Denning:
Apart from express contract, a tenant owes no duty to the landlord to keep the premises in repair.
The only duty of the tenant is to use the premises in a husbandlike, or what is the same thing, a tenantlike manner…
It can, I think, best  be shown by some illustrations.
The tenant must take proper care of the place.
He must, if he is going away for the winter, turn off the water and empty the boiler.
He must clean the chimneys, when necessary, and also the windows.
He must mend the electric light when it fuses.
He must unstop the sink when it is blocked by his waste.
In short, he must do the little jobs about the place which a reasonable tenant would do.
In addition, he must, of course , not damage the house, wilfully or negligently; and he must see that his family and guests do not damage it: and if they do, he must repair it.
But apart from such things, if the house falls into disrepair through fair wear and tear or lapse of time, or for any reason not caused by him, then the tenant is not liable to repair it…
Further, tenancy agreements frequently contain express contractual covenants to repair imposing considerable obligations upon tenants.
Perhaps because of the often unequal bargaining positions of landlord and tenant, at least with respect to residential leases, it is rare to find an express covenant to repair placing the duty to repair upon the landlord.
Landlords are, however, subject to the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 and cannot include unreasonable covenants in leases which seek to relieve them of their own common law or statutory obligations.
Moreover, it has long been accepted that repairing covenants do not require the covenantor to renew the whole property or modernise an elderly and decaying building.
A repairing covenant must be interpreted within the context of the condition and age of the property at the beginning of the tenancy: Pembery v Lamdin [1940]2 AER 434; Calthorpe v McOscar (1924) 1 KB 716.
Reform of the law relating to housing repairs
D. Hughes "Housing Repairs — A Suitable Case for Reform" Journal of Social Welfare Law (1984) 137
The way forward
It is obvious that the law relating to housing repairs is in urgent need of reform and codification.
So far as the common law rules are concerned…they are anachronistic and an over technical mass of exceptions and nice distinctions.
The statute based side of the law is equally tangled and displays the sort of confusion that is the inevitable consequence of shifts in policy and the national failure to decide upon, and adhere to, an agreed housing repairs, maintenance and rehabilitation policy…
It is most important to include the widest possible range of matters to be considered when deciding whether or not a given house is below acceptable standards.
Any sort of housing standard to be effective must be given the force of law, but the sad lesson of history is that specific words of the law, while intended in spirit to be a minimum statement of what is acceptable, are usually interpreted and followed as the maximum of what has to be achieved in practice.
Hence it would  be necessary to draft a new housing repair code in terms specific enough to be clearly understandable…but also containing a wide enough range of topics to be considered so as to ensure that the law is sufficiently flexible to cover the greatest number of housing repair problems…
However, the consequences of implementing such a…code have to be faced…
There are many houses which simply could not be brought up to standard…
There are other houses…where the owners, be they owner-occupiers or private landlords, would be unwilling or unable to undertake the necessary work.
In such cases the local authorities should be placed under an obligation to do the work…
At the heart of the new code must be the realisation that every house or flat is someone's home.
To a landlord a dwelling may be a unit of accommodation or an item of investment: to a lawyer the dwelling may be a "house" or a "flat" or a set of "premises" , in other words only a legal concept; but to the occupier the dwelling is his home…
As such it must be able to satisfy human needs for shelter, space and facilities for the occupants.
A home is established by the social, cultural and economic structures of the occupants of a house.
Of course, it is a well known tag that…the law cannot turn a house into a home…
Nevertheless, the condition of a house can prevent the occupants from being able to turn it into a home, and can affect their health and the stability of their relationships.
The law should intervene to prevent the deficiencies of a house from severely impairing the ability of the occupants to make a home…
Covenants not to assign or sublet
Leases frequently include express covenants restricting the right of the tenant to assign or sublet the property.
These covenants may be:(a) absolute — where the tenant agrees not to assign or sublet at all; or (b) qualified — where the tenant may only assign or sublet with the consent of the landlord; or (c) fully qualified — as in (b) but the landlord may not withhold consent unreasonably.
A further requirement governing consent has been imposed by statute.
Landlord and Tenant Act 1927
Provisions as to covenants not to assign, etc., without licence or consent
19 (1) In all leases whether made before or after the commencement of this Act containing a covenant condition or agreement against assigning, under- letting, charging or party with the possession of a demised premises or any part thereof without licence or consent, such covenant condition or agreement shall, notwithstanding any express provision to the contrary, be deemed to be subject —(a) to a proviso to the effect that such licence or consent is not to be unreasonably withheld, but this proviso does not preclude the right of the landlord to require payment of a reasonable sum in respect of any legal or other expenses incurred in connection with such licence or consent;…
The Law Commission Report (1985) on Covenants Restricting Dispositions, Alterations and Change of User.
No. 141 made a number of recommendations with respect to covenants in leases which place restrictions upon a tenant's ability to assign or sublet.
These included the abolition of absolute covenants by translating them into fully qualified covenants; the elimination of qualified covenants such that they would take effect as a fully qualified covenant; and the placing of the burden of proof for proving "reasonableness" where consent has been withheld, together with a restriction upon landlords seeking to delay their decisions regarding consent.
Some of their suggestions, albeit relatively minor in nature, were implemented by Parliament:
Landlord and Tenant Act 1988
Qualified duty to consent to assigning, underletting etc. of premises
1 (1) This section applies in any case where —(a) a tenancy includes a covenant on the part of the tenant not to enter into one or more of the following transactions, that is —(i) assigning,(ii) underletting,(iii) charging, or (iv) parting with the possession of, the premises comprised in the tenancy or any part of the premises without the consent of the landlord or some other person, but (b) the covenant is subject to the qualification that the consent is not to be unreasonably withheld (whether or not it is also subject to any other qualification).
(3) Where there is served on the person who may consent to a proposed transaction a written application by the tenant for consent to the transaction, he owes a duty to the tenant within a reasonable time —(a) to give consent, except in a case where it is reasonable not to give consent,(b) to serve on the tenant written notice of his decision whether or not to give consent specifying in addition—(i) if the consent is given subject to conditions, the conditions,(ii) if the consent is withheld, the reasons for withholding it.
(6) It is for the person who owed any duty under subsection (3) above —(a) if he gave consent and the question arises whether he gave it within a reasonable time, to show that he did,(b) if he gave consent subject to any condition and the question arises whether the condition was a reasonable condition, to show that it was,(c) if he did not give consent and the question arises whether it was reasonable for him not to do so, to show that it was reasonable, and, if the question arises whether he served notice under that subsection within a reasonable time, to show that he did.
However, there remains much confusion in this area about the means by which the courts test whether the refusal of an individual landlord is reasonable or unreasonable:
G. Kodilinye "Refusal of Consent to Assign: The Unreasonable Landlord" 52 Conv (1988) 45
It is now clear that the courts have developed three different tests for determining the question of reasonableness.
They are to the effect that a refusal is reasonable if:(i) it is based upon the personality of the proposed assignee or upon the proposed use or occupation of the premises; or (ii) it is based on the contract between lessor and lessee and it safeguards the interests granted or reserved to the lessor by the lease; or (iii) it is reasonable in a general sense, taking into account the surrounding circumstances, the commercial realities of the market-place and the economic impact of an assignment on the landlord.
Landlords cannot refuse their consent on grounds of either race or sex — Race Relations Act 1976, s. 21(1) (b), s. 21(3); Sex Discrimination Act 1975, s. 30(1) (b), s. 30(3).
Usual covenants
A lease may be granted subject to the "usual covenants" .
These include in addition to the above:(a) a covenant by the tenant to keep the premises in repair;(b) an implied covenant giving a right of re-entry to the landlord where there is non-payment of rent, and (c) an undertaking by the tenant to pay rent.
In the absence of any express agreement to the contrary, the "usual covenants" are implied into every equitable lease.
ENFORCEABILITY OF COVENANTS
Introduction
A covenant in a lease is, prima , a contract binding only on the lessor and lessee.On the basis of the strict principles of privity of contract, therefore, only the original parties to the lease would be able to enforce those covenants.
However, many landlords and tenants possess very valuable transmissible interests.
Indeed, the value of those interests may depend to a large degree upon the obligations that each has assumed in the lease.
Thus, even medieval land law, although conscious of the principle that third parties to a contract cannot sue or be   sued upon it, recognised that the covenants in leases might have a wider operation than in ordinary contracts.
It is therefore necessary to ask the question: in what circumstances can persons, other than the original landlord or landlady (L) and the original tenant (T), sue or be sued upon the covenants in the lease?
Or, to put it another way, when will the covenants contained in a lease run with the land?
Covenants touching and concerning the land
Only those leasehold covenants which "touch and concern the land" or, in its statutory form (see ss. 141 and 142, Law of Property Act 1925, below, p. 108), which have "reference to the subject matter" of that lease, may be enforced by, or against, assignees of either the lease (T2) or of the reversion (L2).
The meaning of the phrase "touch and concern the land" , which derives from a decision in Spencer's Case (1583) 5 Co Rep 15a, has been the subject of much academic and judicial debate.
In 1948 Scott LJ attempted to elucidate a modern formula for ascertaining whether a covenant was capable of running with the land:
Breams Property Investment Co Ltd v Stroulger (1948) 2 KB 1 (CA) Bucknell and Scott LJJ
Scott LJ:
The phrase "subject-matter of the lease" was, as we know, substituted for the ancient expression "touching and concerning the land." 
Professor Cheshire's elucidation of its meaning on pp. 214–15 of the 5th edn of his book on Modern Real Property, in my respectful opinion, supplies the true test.
"If a simple test…is desired for ascertaining into which category a covenant falls, it is suggested that the proper inquiry should be whether the covenant affects either the landlord qua landlord or the tenant qua tenant.
A covenant may very well have reference to the land, but, unless it is reasonably incidental to the relation of landlord and tenant, it cannot be said to touch and concern the land so as to be capable of running therewith or with the reversion.
Tested by this principle the following covenants  have been held to touch and concern the land."
Of the covenants by the tenant running with the land that "to pay rent or taxes" and "not to assign or underlet," and by the landlord running with the reversion, "to renew the lease" are the most apposite of the instances which he quotes from decided cases.
Although the case of a limitation upon, or condition precedent to a right to serve a notice to quit, does not appear to have been the subject of judicial decision, his principle that, if a covenant affects a landlord qua landlord, it must necessarily run with the reversion, appears to me a sound criterion…
In spite of Scott LJ's efforts the prevalent view of textbook writers is that "It can be said that any covenant which affects the landlord qua landlord or the tenant qua tenant will probably be with the class of covenants which [run], but this is not very helpful, and it is better to note examples from decided cases" (P.F. Smith, Evans: The Law of Landlord and Tenant (Butterworths: 1985) 75).
In addition to those covenants mentioned by Scott LJ above examples of those which have been deemed to touch and concern the land include: a covenant for quiet enjoyment; a covenant by the landlord agreeing to supply a housekeeper to clean a block of flats; a covenant in which a landlord agreed not to open a public house within half a mile of the tenanted premises; a covenant placing an obligation on the tenant to repair; and a covenant in which the tenant agreed not to carry on a particular trade at the premises.
There are particular difficulties on the question of whether a covenant is purely personal or runs with the land where the obligation in question, whether on the part of the lessor, lessee, or third party guarantor, involves the payment of money other than rent.
A direct challenge to the orthodox test arose in two cases decided in 1987.
Hua Chiao Commercial Bank Ltd v Chiaphua Industries Ltd [1987]1 AC 99 (PC) Lord Bridge of Harwich, Lord Brandon of Oakbrook, Lord Oliver of Aylmerton, Lord Goff of Chievely and Sir Ivor Richardson
This case involved an appeal to the Privy Council from Hong Kong.
A lease was granted for a period of five years in which the tenant agreed to pay the landlord a sum equivalent to two months rent as a security deposit.
The landlord agreed that, provided there were no breaches by the tenant of any of the terms in the agreement, the deposit would be returned to the tenant at the end of the five years.
The tenant paid the deposit and moved in.
Subsequently, the landlord entered into a mortgage agreement in which it assigned the reversion to Hua Chiao Bank, with provision for reassignment upon redemption.
When the landlord defaulted the bank went into possession.
The tenant had committed no breach of any term in the lease and, since the original lessor was now in liquidation, instituted proceedings  for "return" of the deposit from the bank.
The Court of Appeal of Hong Kong held that the bank was under an obligation to return the deposit and the bank appealed:
Lord Oliver:
There is, of course, no doubt that the mere fact that a covenant, whether on the part of the landlord or of a tenant, involves an obligation to pay a liquidated sum of money does not of itself demonstrate that the covenant is not one which touches and concerns the land…
The tenant argues…that, inasmuch as the tenant's obligation to pay over the deposit on the execution of the lease was an obligation to secure the performance of covenants which touched and concerned the land, it was an obligation inextricably associated with covenants whose benefit and burden would pass with the reversion in the lease respectively.
The landlord's obligation to repay if those covenants are observed is, it is argued, inseparable from that associated obligation and must therefore possess the same characteristics as the covenants whose performance is secured by the associated obligation.
To put it another way the obligation to deposit is an obligation of the tenant assumed by him qua tenant and it follows that the correlative obligation of the landlord is an obligation assumed by him qua landlord…
That the original tenant's obligation to make the deposit is "bound up" with his obligation to perform the tenant's covenants in the lease is undeniable, but the former is, of course, a once-for-all contractual obligation between the original parties as regards which no question of transfer with the term or with the reversion can arise.
The sum deposited is to be paid on or before the execution of the lease.
What this appeal is concerned with, however, is only the landlord's obligation to repay once the lease has expired without breach of covenant, there being neither any obligation on the original landlord to pay over the amount of the deposit to an assignee of the reversion nor any obligation on the original tenant to assign to an assignee of the term his contractual right to receive back the amount of the deposit when and if the condition for its repayment is fulfilled…
To say that the obligation to "return" the amount of the deposit is "inextricably bound up with" covenants which touch and concern the land…does not, in their Lordships' view answer the critical question of whether it itself touches and concerns the land.
It certainly does not per se affect the nature, quality or value of the land either during or at the end of the term.
It does not per se affect the mode of using or enjoying that which is demised.
And to ask whether it affects the landlord qua landlord or the tenant qua tenant is an exercise which begs the question…
Whilst it is true that the deposit is paid to the original payee because it is security for the performance of contractual obligations assumed throughout the term by the payer and because the payee is the party to whom the contract is entered into, it is, in their Lordships' view, more realistic to regard the obligation as one entered into with the landlord qua payee rather than qua landlord…
The nature of the obligation is simply that of an obligation to repay money which has been received and it is neither necessary nor logical, simply because the conditions of repayment relate to the performance of covenants in a lease, that the transfer of the reversion should create in the transferee an additional and co-extensive obligation to pay money which he has never received and in which he never had  any interest or that the assignment of the term should vest in the assignee the right to receive a sum which he has never paid…
Kumar v Dunning [1987]2 All ER 801 (CA) Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson VC, Croom-Johnson and Neill LJJ
This case raised the question of whether an assignee of a reversion on a lease could enforce the payment of rent against someone who had entered into surety covenants as a guarantee of the tenant's obligations in the lease.
Sir Nicholas Browne-Wilkinson VC:
I will first state how the matter strikes me as a matter of impression.
The surety covenant is given as a support or buttress to covenants given by a tenant to a landlord.
The covenants by the tenant relate not only to the payment of rent, but also to repair, insurance and user of the premises.
All such covenants by a tenant in favour of the landlord touch and concern the land, i.e. the reversion of the landlord…
As it seems to me, in principle a covenant by a third party guaranteeing the performance by the tenant of his obligations should touch and concern the reversion as much as do the tenants' covenants themselves.
This view accords with what, to my mind, is the commercial common sense and justice of the case.
When, as in the present case, the lease has been assigned on the terms that the sureties will guarantee performance by the assignee of the lease, justice and common sense ought to require the sureties, not the original tenant, to be primarily liable in the event of default by the assignee.
So long as the reversion is not assigned, that will be the position.
Why should the position between the original tenant and the sureties be rendered completely different just because the reversion has been assigned, a transaction wholly outside the control of the original tenant and the sureties?
Yet in all save one of the cases decided at first instance, the court has held that the surety covenant does not touch and concern the land…
From these authorities I collect two things.
Firstly, that the acid test whether or not benefit is collateral is that laid down by Best J, namely "Is the covenant beneficial to the owner for the time being of the covenantee's land, and to no one else?" 
Secondly, a covenant simply to pay a sum of money, whether by way of insurance premium, compensation or damages, is a covenant capable of touching and concerning the land provided that the existence of the covenant, and the right to payment thereunder, affects the value of the land in whomsoever it is vested for the time being…
Applying the test laid down by Best J, a covenant by a surety securing the performance of a tenant's covenants in a lease satisfies it.
The surety covenant increases the value of the reversion in that the landlord can look not only to the tenant but also to the sureties for the payment of a sum equal to the rent and for damages for failure to comply with the other tenant's covenants.
Such surety covenant is of value to no one other than the owner for the time being of the reversion…
Counsel for the second defendant…relied on Hua Chiao Commercial  Bank Ltd v Chiaphua Industries Ltd…
The liability to repay the deposit at the end of the term remained throughout on the original landlord and was an obligation to repay to the original tenant.
So viewed, the decision is entirely consistent with the test laid down by Best J. The benefit of the covenant to repay could not touch and concern the land because someone other than the owner for the time being of the term could take the benefit of it…
A year later the House of Lords approved the statements of the Vice-Chancellor in Kumar v Dunning with a brief addition of its own.
Swift Investments v C.E.S.G. plc [1988]3 WLR 311 (HL) Lord Keith of Kinkel, Lord Roskill, Lord Templeman, Lord Ackner, Lord Oliver of Aylmerton
Lord Oliver:
It has been said that the surety's obligation is simply that of paying money and, of course, in a sense that is true if one looks only at the remedy which the landlord has against him in the event of default by the tenant.
But for my part I do not think that this is a complete analysis.
The tenant covenants that he will do or refrain from doing certain things which undoubtedly touch and concern the land.
A surety covenants that those things shall be done or not done as the case may be.
Now it is true that the remedy for breach will sound in damages only, but the primary obligation is the same, namely that that which is covenanted to be done will be done.
Take for instance the tenant's covenant to repair.
There is nothing here requiring personal performance by the tenant.
The effect of the covenant is that the tenant must procure the premises to be kept in repair.
Equally, a guarantee by the surety of the repairing covenant is no more than a covenant or warranty that the guarantor will procure that the tenant, in turn, procures the premises to be kept in repair.
The content of the primary obligation is, as it seems to me, exactly the same and if that of the tenant touches and concerns the land that of the surety must, as it seems to me, equally do so.
Formulations of definitive tests are always dangerous, but it seems to me that, without claiming to expound an exhaustive guide, the following provides a satisfactory working test for whether, in any given case, a covenant touches and concerns the land:(1) the covenant benefits only the reversioner for the time being, and if separated from the reversion ceases to be of benefit to the covenantee;(2) the covenant affects the nature, quality, mode of user or value of the land of the reversioner;(3) the covenant is not expressed to be personal (that is to say neither being given only to a specific reversioner nor in respect of the obligations only of a specific tenant);(4) the fact that a covenant is to pay a sum of money will not prevent it from touching and concerning the land so long as the three foregoing conditions are satisfied and the covenant is connected with something to be done on, or to in relation to the land.
Enforcement following assignment of the reversion
Liability of T towards L2 and vice-versa rests upon a statutory basis.
Law of Property Act 1925
Rent and benefit of lessee's covenants to run with the reversion [see Law Commission No. 174 below]
141 (1) Rent reserved by a lease, and the benefit of every covenant or provision therein contained, having reference to the subject-matter thereof, and on the lessee's part to be observed or performed, and every condition of re-entry and other condition therein contained, shall be annexed and incident to and shall go with the reversionary estate in the land, or in any part thereof, immediately expectant on the term granted by the lease, notwithstanding severance of that reversionary estate, and without prejudice to any liability affecting a covenantor or his estate.
Obligation of lessor's covenants to run with the reversion
142 (2) The obligation under a condition or of a covenant entered into by a lessor with reference to the subject-matter of the lease shall, if and as far as the lessor has power to bind the reversionary estate immediately expectant on the term granted by the lease, be annexed and incident to and shall go with that reversionary estate, or the several parts thereof, notwithstanding severance of that reversionary estate, and may be taken advantage of and enforced by the person in whom the term is from time to time vested by conveyance, devolution in law, or otherwise; and, if and as far as the lessor has power to bind the person from time to time entitled to that reversionary estate, the obligation aforesaid may be taken advantage of and enforced against any person so entitled.
Enforcement following assignment of the lease
Once one goes beyond the relationships which are governed by privity of contract and its statutory extension, the rules governing the enforceability of leasehold obligations are simply stated: 1.
Only those leasehold covenants which touch and concern the land are capable of enforcement; and 2.
No covenant can be enforced unless "privity of estate" exists between the plaintiff and defendant.
The meaning of "privity of estate" has been described in the following way:
Sir Robert Megarry and H.W.R. Wade The Law of Real Property (Stevens: 1984)
Privity of estate means that there is tenure between the parties, i.e. that the relationship of landlord and tenant exists between them; cases in this category are thus confined to leases and tenancies.
If L grants a lease to T and then T assigns it to A, there is no privity of contract between L and A since there has been no direct transaction between them; but there is privity of estate, for A has become L's tenant by acquiring the estate which L created and which is held of L as the immediate landlord.
Similarly, if L assigns his reversion to X, there is privity of estate between X and A. In such cases any covenants in the lease which "touch and concern" the land, e.g. repairing covenants, are enforceable both at law and in equity.
Can covenants in a head lease be enforced by, or against, a subtenant?
As shown in Fig. 4.2, it is quite clear that there is no privity of estate between S and either L or L2.
Thus, even those covenants which "touch and concern the land" are incapable of enforcement by direct action between L or L2 and S. However, there are two possible ways around this difficulty: 1.
Under the general law in Tulk v Moxhay (1848) 2 PH 774 (see Chapter 7); 2.
An express proviso for re-entry contained in the head lease.
The right of re-entry is one of the legal interests listed in s. 1(2), Law of Property Act 1925, and therefore binds the whole world irrespective of notice.
This enables the landlord to seek forfeiture against any occupier of the leased premises.
A right of re-entry may therefore be exercised by L or L2 against S. 
Enforceability by, or against, other strangers to the lease
Note the provisions of s. 56 and s. 78(1), Law of Property Act 1925, discussed in Chapter 7.
Continuing liability of the original landlord and tenant after assignment
L and T have promised to keep to their obligations, the covenants, for the whole period of their lease — which may of course be for the next thousand years.
They or their heirs can enforce this contract against one another for the whole period.
However, traditionally, it was generally believed that, as a consequence of the wording of ss. 141 and 142, once landlords assigned their reversionary interest they could only sue or be sued by the original tenant.
Recent judicial decisions have thrown doubt upon this point, as indicated in the following hypothetical discussion.
D. Gordon, The Burden and Benefit of the Rules of Assignment Conv (1987) 103
This case is based on an example considered by Scott J in Celsteel v Alton House Holdings Ltd (No. 2)(1986) 1 WLR 666 at 672 to 673.
L1 demised Sevenoaks Farm to B and Greenland to C. L1 granted B a right of way over Greenland, and C was entitled to the benefit of a covenant granted by L1 for the quiet enjoyment of Greenland.
L1 then assigned the reversion to L2, and C assigned Greenland to D. There were no express terms limiting the assignment of the benefit of the covenant for quiet enjoyment, or the liability of L1 or L2.
Scott J concluded that if D's enjoyment of Greenland was interrupted by B exercising a right of way over Greenland, D could enforce the covenant for quiet enjoyment against L1, even though there was neither privity of contract nor privity of estate between D and L1.
"The language of section 142(1) of the Law of Property Act 1925 seems to me wide enough to enable an action to be brought by [D]against [L].
[It may be]…that the purpose of section 142 and its statutory predecessors was to cause the burden of the lessor's covenants to run with the reversion…
But I do not see why its language should not be taken advantage of by an assignee of the lease who desires to sue the original lessor on his covenants in the lease."
Thus, Scott J concluded that not only does an original landlord remain liable to an original tenant throughout the lease, but he remains liable to a later assignee of the lease, despite the absence of any privity, thus achieving mutuality between the liability of an original landlord and that of an original tenant…
Scott J did not hint at the reason for such a conclusion, leaving one to speculate as to whether the continued liability of L1 derives from the fact that he is an original party to the lease and therefore subject to the continued liability imposed by the doctrine of privity of contract, or if the important fact is that it was L1 who granted the right of way (to B) the exercise of which amounted to a breach of covenant.
Scott J further concluded that in the above example, D could sue L2 as well as L1.
L2 held the reversion at the time of the breach and therefore was liable, under section 142, for any breach of the landlord's covenant occurring at that time.
It appears to be of no importance that the covenant is broken by the exercise of a right granted by L2's predecessor in title…
The Law Commission, commenting on Scott J's interpretation of section 142, concluded that, if correct, it would be a considerable extension of liability under the privity of contract principle as it has been generally understood.
The original tenant of a lease carries even greater burdens.
For, in the absence of a contrary agreement with the original lessor, the original tenant remains liable throughout the entire term of the lease irrespective of the fact that he or she may have assigned or sold the tenancy to another.
Centrovincial Estates plc v Bulk Storage Ltd (1983) 46 P & CR393
Harman J:
These two actions each claim £10,000, being a quarter's rent due…
The problem raised in both actions is, however, by no means limited to a question of money unpaid.
The real question is a point of law, of some interest and general application.
In broad terms it may be stated as being whether an original tenant under a lease containing a rent review clause is bound by privity of contract to pay the landlord for the time being of the premises a rent agreed or otherwise determined with a subsequent assignee of the term.
That obligation, it was contended, arose although the original tenant never authorised, or knew of, or had any connection whatever with, the agreement or other process whereby the amount of the new rent was determined.
No suggestion was made during the argument that the landlord's position could be different depending upon whether it was the original landlord or, as here, a successor in title to the reversion.
I have therefore not attempted to consider that point, but have assumed it for the purposes of this judgment…
In my judgment the basic answer which any real property lawyer would give to a question about an assignee's power to deal with a tenancy interest is that each assignee is the owner of the whole estate and can deal with it so as to alter it or its terms.
The estate as so altered then binds the original tenant, because the assignee has been put into the shoes of the original tenant and can do all such acts as the original tenant could have done.
However, if the original tenant is sued, the common law provides that he or she can claim an indemnity, providing reimbursement, from the current tenant.
Further, s. 77, Law of Property Act 1925, now implies an indemnity between the  parties to any assignment for value made after 1925.
Thus, where a lease has been assigned on several occasions a series, or chain, of indemnities will be built up.
Such a chain will be broken, however, if the current tenant or an earlier assignee is insolvent.
Law Commission Working Paper Landlord and Tenant: Privity of Contract and Estate No. 174 1988)
4.1 Our proposals for reform recognise the importance of two principles: First, a landlord or a tenant of property should not continue to enjoy rights nor be under any obligation arising from a lease once he has parted with all interest in the property.
Secondly, all the terms of the lease should be regarded as a single bargain for letting the property.
When the interest of one of the parties changes hands the successor should fully take his predecessor's place as landlord or tenant, without distinguishing between different categories of covenant.
4.3 We propose a general rule that the liability of the original tenant, and his entitlement to benefits under the lease, should not survive an assignment of the lease.
For this purpose, we propose that all the covenants in a lease should be treated in the same way, whether or not at present they touch and concern the land.
Nevertheless, it would be possible for the landlord, when granting consent to the assignment, to impose a condition that the tenant will be liable to guarantee the performance of some or all of the lease covenants by his immediate successor.
4.5 For landlords, we propose a rule that when they part with their interest in the property let by a lease they will escape further responsibility for the lease obligations if, but only if, they comply with prescribed conditions.
These will involve their giving notice to the tenant and his being able to withhold consent if it is reasonable for him to do so.
Again, the benefits of being landlord, so far as they can enure to an owner who has parted with the property, would only continue for a former landlord who had continuing liability.
Enforceability of covenants in equitable leases
As between L and T, and indeed L2 and T, there is no difference on questions of enforceability between equitable leases and legal leases.
The terms of ss. 141 and 142 are applicable to equitable leases.
The differences between the two different estates and the limitations over the running of covenants in equitable leases are revealed, as indicated below, once T assigns his interest to T2:
R.J. Smith"The Running of Covenants in Equitable Leases and Equitable Assignments of Legal Leases' CLJ (1978) 98
The traditional view is that privity of estate requires a legal lease.
This limits the running of covenants in equitable leases…
The principle that an equitable lease does not give rise to privity of estate has several important exceptions.
Before these are considered, however, it is expedient to examine the general principle.
In recent years the principle has come under attack.
The source of the attack emanates from the celebrated dicta of Jessel MR in Walsh v Lonsdale describing the effect of the Judicature Act 1873…
The only case to apply this approach to the running of covenants is Boyer v Warbey [1953]1 QB 234, in which Denning LJ stated: "I know that before the Judicature Act 1873, it was said that the doctrine of covenants running with the land only applied to covenants under seal and not to agreements under hand…
But since the fusion of law and equity, the position is different.
The distinction between agreements under hand and covenants under seal has been largely obliterated.
There is no valid reason nowadays why the doctrine of covenants running with the land — or with the reversion — should not apply equally to agreements under hand as to covenants under seal."
In the light of these dicta, it appears that the traditional view referred to above has been overthrown.
However, before one can reach this conclusion — one that is refreshingly straightforward and easy to apply — it is necessary to consider the material in rather more detail…
The fourth and most convincing case is Purchase v Lichfield Brewery Co (1915) 1 KB 184.
The facts were quite straightforward.
The plaintiff agreed to lease a property to Lunnis, who assigned this equitable lease by way of mortgage.
It was quite clear under the earlier law that the assignee of a legal lease by way of mortgage was just as liable as any other assignee.
But was an assignee of an equitable lease liable?
Counsel urged that, following Walsh v Lonsdale, the situation was as if there were a legal lease.
In the Divisional Court, Horridge J rejected this argument on the basis that an assignee who had neither taken possession nor attorned tenant could not claim specific performance in his own right…
Lush J took a more accurate approach, it is submitted, in stressing that specific performance would not be granted "against mere mortgagees who only took an assignment by way of security" and that "It is impossible that specific performance of a contract can be decreed against a person with whom there is neither privity of contract nor privity of estate." 
Thus the action failed and the case is authority for the immunity of an assignee of an equitable lease from liability on the covenants.
It is not, however, conclusive authority…
It may be conceded that these cases do not put the point beyond argument, although they clearly point towards non-liability in the assignee.
Further, in the context of equitable assignments of legal leases…it has been held that covenants cannot run under privity of estate.
The firm refusal of the courts to equate legal and equitable assignments is strong authority in favour of distinguishing assignments of legal and equitable leases.
LEASES AND REMEDIES
When a covenant in a lease is breached the general contractual remedies — injunction, specific performance and damages — are available to whichever party suffers as a consequence.
However, there are also remedies specific to leases.
The rights of the lessor: distress and re-entry
In addition to the general remedies, the lessor may use either: 1.
distress (for non-payment of rent); or 2. forfeiture (a "right of re-entry" — i.e. ending the lease).
Distress
Distress is an anachronistic remedy surviving from the earliest days in the history of the lease.
It allows the landlord, where a tenant has fallen into arrears with rent, to enter the premises and take possession of sufficient of the tenant's belongings up to the value of the rent owed.
After five days, if the tenant does not pay the rent, the goods may be sold.
Over the past two hundred years a degree of protection has been accorded to the tenant against the distraining landlord.
However, in the words of the Law Commission it is "difficult and distasteful" and "at least questionable in an age when self-help remedies generally are not regarded with favour" .
Forfeiture
Forfeiture, that is the right to end a lease before it determines naturally, is the landlord's security over the property.
Indeed, it is one of the interests capable of being legal under s. 1(2) (e), Law of Property Act 1925.
Such a right of re-entry, which is an express proviso in most legal leases and is implied into all equitable leases, gives the landlord the right literally to take possession of the land.
However, under the terms of Protection From Eviction Act 1977 the landlord must enter peacefully upon the land and may not use the right of re-entry at all if the premises are used for residential purposes.
The inherent difficulties in taking possession away from a tenant, who may in any event be inclined to resist, are displayed in the following extract:
Ashton v Sobelman [1987]1 WLR 177
The plaintiffs were tenants of a lock-up shop which they had sublet.
Unfortunately, the plaintiffs fell into arrears with their rent and the landlords — "Twogates" — wanted to forfeit the lease.
However, the landlords sought to come to an arrangement with the sub-tenant, a Mr Clayton, under which they would peaceably re-enter the premises and change the locks.
The sub-tenant agreed and when the locks were changed, on 19 October 1984, his wife was given keys, together with a letter requesting that, in future, he should pay rent directly to "Twogates" .
The latter then sold the reversion to the defendant at an auction.
The plaintiffs, upon discovering the sale, offered the defendants the arrears of rent.
The  money was not accepted and the plaintiffs brought an action for a declaration that the lease had not been forfeited.
John Chadwick QC:
In the present case, it appears to me apt to describe the changing of the lock at 195, Burnt Oak Broadway as "an idle ceremony." 
This is, I think, illustrated by the fact that, when told by Mr Clayton that the new lock was unsatisfactory, Twogates through their solicitors were content that the lock should be replaced by Mr Clayton himself.
There was never any intention on the part of the landlords to exclude the subtenant from possession.
There is, to my mind, no doubt that Mr Bloch and his locksmith would not have been permitted by Mr Clayton to interfere with the existing lock if Mr Clayton had been told that that act was intended in any way to interfere with his rights under his existing sub-lease.
Mr Clayton was not told this.
On the contrary he was assured, by Mr Bloch in person and by the first of the letters dated 19 October 1984 that Twogates were not in any way challenging his right to remain in occupation of the premises…under the provisions of his existing underlease.
If there was a re-entry in the present case, it was not effected by the changing of the lock.
The real question on this part of the case, as it appears to me, is whether the landlords effected a re-entry, constructively, by obtaining Mr Clayton's consent to their actions upon the terms of the first letter of 19 October 1984.
In my judgment even if it could be said that Mr Clayton attorned tenant to Twogates by tacitly accepting the terms of that letter, such an attornment would not be evidence of an unequivocal intention on the part of the landlords to re-enter under the provisions of the…lease…
In these circumstances, it is, in my judgment, impossible to regard the arrangements which Twogates made on 19 October 1984 as amounting to a re-entry under the…lease.
However, in Billson v Residential Apartments Ltd [1991]3 WLR 264 the Court of Appeal accepted peaceable re-entry had taken place although factual possession lasted only a few hours.
The landlords' agents went into the leased premises at 6a.m., when it was vacant, and changed the locks.
At 10 a.m. of the same day workmen, employed by the tenants, retook factual possession and started work.
Nevertheless, there can be no peaceable re-entry where the tenant is a company subject to an Administration Order — s. 11(3) (c), Insolvency Act 1986, as interpreted in Exchange Agency Ltd (In Administration) v Triton Property Trust plc [1991]LSG 27 March, 33.
A more likely recourse for a landlord seeking to re-enter premises is through a court order for possession, which if necessary will be enforced by a bailiff.
Forfeiture for non-payment of rent follows a different procedure from that of forfeiture for breach of any other covenant in the lease.
Rights of the lessor: forfeiture for non-payment of rent
In theory the first step in the procedure is a formal application for payment of arrears by either the landlord or someone acting as an agent.
In practice, many leases expressly exclude this requirement on the part of the landlord and statute dispenses with this part of the procedure in many cases:
Common Law Procedure Act 1852
Proceedings in ejectment by landlord for non-payment of rent
210 In all cases between landlord and tenant, as often as it shall happen that one half year's rent shall be in arrear, and the landlord or lessor, to whom the same is due, hath right by law to re-enter for the non-payment thereof, such landlord or lessor shall and may, without any formal demand or re-entry, serve a writ in ejectment for the recovery of the demised premises, which service shall stand in the place and stead of a demand and re-entry; and in case of judgment against the defendant for non-appearance, if it shall be made appear to the court where the said action is depending, by affidavit, or be proved upon the trial in case the defendant appears, that half a year's rent was due before the said writ was served, and that no sufficient distress was to be found on the demised premises, countervailing the arrears then due, and that the lessor had power to re-enter, then and in every such case the lessor shall recover judgment and execution, in the same manner as if the rent in arrear had been legally demanded, and a re-entry made; and in case the lessee or his assignee, or other person claiming or deriving under the said lease, shall permit and suffer judgment to be had and recovered on such trial in ejectment, and execution to be executed thereon, without paying the rent and arrears, together with full costs, and without proceeding for relief in equity within six months after such execution executed, then and in such case the said lessee, his assignee, and all other persons claiming and deriving under the said lease, shall be barred and foreclosed from all relief or remedy in law or equity, other than by bringing error for reversal of such judgment, in case the same shall be erroneous, and the said landlord or lessor shall from thenceforth hold the said demised premises discharged from such lease; provided that nothing herein contained shall extend to bar the right of any mortgagee of such lease, or any part thereof, who shall not be in possession, so as such mortgagee shall and do, within six months after such judgment obtained and execution executed pay all rent in arrear, and all costs and damages sustained by such lessor or person entitled to the remainder or reversion as aforesaid, and perform all the covenants and agreements which, on the part and behalf of the first lessee, are and ought to be performed.
The next step is for the lessor to make a court application to obtain an order for possession.
At this stage, however, the tenant can also apply for relief from forfeiture.
Proceedings may be brought by the landlord in the County Court or the High Court and the rules on relief within each court vary slightly.
The rights of the tenant in the High Court are governed by the same Act:
Common Law Procedure Act 1852
Tenant paying all rent with costs, proceedings to cease
212 If the tenant or his assignee do or shall, at any time before the trial in such ejectment, pay or tender to the lessor or landlord, his executors or administrators, or his or their attorney in that cause, or pay into the court where the same cause is depending, all the rent and arrears, together with the costs, then and in such case all further proceedings on the said ejectment shall cease and be discontinued; and if such lessee, his executors, administrators, or assigns, shall, upon such proceedings as aforesaid, be relieved in equity, he and they shall have, hold, and enjoy the demised lands, according to the lease thereof made, without any new lease.
The framework for relief from forfeiture in the county court is provided by the County Courts Act 1984.
County Courts Act 1984
Provisions as to forfeiture for non-payment of rent
138 (1) This section has effect where a lessor is proceeding by action in a county court to enforce against a lessee a right of re-entry or forfeiture in respect of any land for non-payment of rent.
(2) If the lessee pays into court not less than 5 clear days before the return day all the rent in arrear and the costs of the action, the action shall cease, and the lessee shall hold the land according to the lease without any new lease.
(3) If —(a) the action does not cease under subsection (2); and (b) the court at the trial is satisfied that the lessor is entitled to enforce the right of re-entry or forfeiture, the court shall order possession of the land to be given to the lessor at the expiration of such period, not being less than 4 weeks from the date of the order, as the court thinks fit, unless within that period the lessee pays into court all the rent in arrear and the costs of the action.
(4) The court may extend the period specified under subsection (3) at any time before possession of the land is recovered in pursuance of the order under that subsection…
Rights of the lessor: forfeiture for breach of other covenants
The Law of Property Act 1925 provides the basis for forfeiture actions and for relief against forfeiture for both tenants and sub-tenants where the breach is for other than non-payment of rent:
Law of Property Act 1925
Restrictions on and relief against forfeiture of leases and under-leases
146 (1) A right of re-entry or forfeiture under any proviso or stipulation in a lease for a breach of any covenant or condition in the lease shall not be enforceable, by action or otherwise, unless and until the lessor serves on the lessee a notice —(a) specifying the particular breach complained of; and (b) if the breach is capable of remedy, requiring the lessee to remedy the breach; and (c) in any case, requiring the lessee to make compensation in money for the breach; and the lessee fails, within a reasonable time thereafter, to remedy the breach, if it is capable of remedy, and to make reasonable compensation in money, to the satisfaction of the lessor, for the breach.
(2) Where a lessor is proceeding, by action or otherwise, to enforce such a right of re-entry or forfeiture, the lessee may, in the lessor's action, if any, or in any action brought by himself, apply to the court for relief, and the court may grant or refuse relief, as the court, having regard to the proceedings and conduct of the parties under the foregoing provisions of this section, and to all the other circumstances, thinks fit; and in case of relief may grant it on such terms, if any, as to costs, expenses, damages, compensation, penalty, or otherwise, including the granting of an injunction to restrain any like breach in the future, as the court, in the circumstances of each case, thinks fit.
(4) Where a lessor is proceeding by action or otherwise to enforce a right of re-entry or forfeiture under any covenant, proviso, or stipulation in a lease, or for non-payment of rent, the court may, on application by any person claiming as an under-lessee any estate or interest in the property comprised in the lease or any part thereof, either in the lessor's action (if any) or in any action brought by such person for that purpose, make an order vesting, for the whole term of the lease or any less term, the property comprised in the lease, or any part thereof in any person entitled as under-lessee to any estate or interest in such property upon such conditions as to execution of any deed or other document, payment of rent, costs, expenses, damages, compensation, giving security, or otherwise, as the court in the circumstances of each case may think fit, but in no case shall any such under-lessee be entitled to require a lease to be granted to him for any longer term than he had his original sub-lease.
Section 146 distinguishes between remediable and irremediable breaches of covenant.
In the case of the former, the tenant may avoid forfeiture by compliance with the covenant and payment of any financial compensation, if requested by the landlord.
In the case of an irremediable breach the landlord need only give notice of the nature of that breach and then proceed to forfeiture.
It is vital therefore to distinguish between the two kinds of breach of covenant.
Decisions in the first half of this century concentrated upon the tenants' use of property in a manner which could cast a stigma upon "the address" .
Rugby School (Governors) v Tannahill (1935) 1 KB 87 (CA) Greer, Maugham and Roche LJJ
Greer LJ:
The material facts are that, some time before the notice was served, the defendant had been knowingly and actively permitting the house to be used as a brothel…
The covenant, the breach of which is complained of, expressly forbids the tenant to permit the premises to be used for such a purpose…
In those circumstances the plaintiffs were entitled to obtain possession of the premises unless they failed to comply with the terms of s.146 of the Law of Property Act 1925.
It is conceded that in the notice given by the plaintiffs the defendant was not required to remedy the breach, nor was she required to make compensation in money in respect thereof.
[Counsel for the defendant]…contends that in view of these omissions the proceedings to recover possession fail ab initio.
The first point is, whether this particular breach is capable of remedy…
This particular breach…conducting the premises, or permitting them to be conducted, as a house of ill-fame…is one which in my judgment was not remedied by merely stopping the user.
I cannot conceive how a breach of this kind can be remedied.
The result of committing the breach would be known all over the neighbourhood and seriously affect the value of the premises.
Even a money payment together with cessation of the improper use of the house could not be a remedy.
Taking the view as I do that this breach was incapable of remedy, it was unnecessary to require in the notice that the defendant should remedy the breach.
The further question is whether the absence of any statement in the notice requiring compensation in money in respect of the breach is fatal to the validity of the notice…the statute requires notice to be given specifying the breach complained of, as the first thing, and, if the breach is capable of remedy, requiring the lessee to remedy it, and "in any case requiring the lessee to make compensation in money for the breach." 
Supposing the lessor does not want compensation, is the notice to be held bad because he does not ask for it?
There is no sense in that…
More recently, it has been made clear that breach of a covenant not to assign or sublet is similarly irremediable.
Scala House & District Property Co Ltd v Forbes [1974]1 QB 575 (CA) Russell, James LJJ and Plowman J
Russell LJ:
I stress again that where there has been unlawful subletting which has determined (and which has not been waived) there has been a breach which at common law  entitles the lessor to re-enter: nothing can be done to remedy that breach: the expiry of the subterm has not been annulled or remedied the breach: in such a case the lessor plainly need not, in his section 146 notice, call upon the lessee to remedy the breach which is not capable of remedy, and is free to issue his writ for possession, the possibility of relief remaining.
Can it possibly be that, while there is the situation in such a case, it is otherwise if the lessee has failed to get rid of the subterm until after a notice is served?
Is the lessee then in a stronger position and the lessor in a weaker position?
In my judgment not so.
These problems and questions arise only if such a breach is capable of remedy, which in my judgment it is not.
As a consequence of the above cases, it had often been implied that breach of any restrictive covenant would be irremediable.
However, this argument was rejected by the Court of Appeal.
Expert Clothing Service & Sales Ltd v Hillgate House Ltd [1985]3 WLR 359 (CA) O'Connor, Slade LJJ, Bristow J
The tenants had breached covenants requiring them to reconstruct the premises by a certain date and to notify the landlords of any changes related to the premises.
Slade LJ:
In a case where the breach is "capable of remedy" within the meaning of the section, the principal object of the notice procedure provided for by section 146(1), as I read it, is to afford the lessee two opportunities before the lessor actually proceeds to enforce his right of re-entry, namely (1) the opportunity to remedy the breach within a reasonable time after service of the notice, and (2) the opportunity to apply to the court for relief from forfeiture.
In a case where the breach is not "capable of remedy" , there is clearly no point in affording the first of these two opportunities; the object of the notice procedure is thus simply to give the lessee the opportunity to apply for relief.
Unfortunately the authorities give only limited guidance as to what breaches are "capable of remedy" …
Slade LJ continued by pointing out that, although the breach of a positive covenant is not always capable of remedy: Nevertheless, I would, for my part, accept…submission that the breach of a positive covenant (whether it be a continuing breach or a once and for all breach) will ordinarily be capable of remedy…the concept of capability of remedy for the purpose of section 146 must surely be directed to the question whether the harm that has been done to the landlord by the relevant breach is for practicable purposes capable of being retrieved.
In the ordinary case, the breach of a promise to do something by a certain time can for practical purposes be remedied by the thing being done, even out of time…
However, this did not mean that negative covenants are always irremediable covenants.
He continued:[T]he ultimate question for the court was this: if the section 146 notice had required the lessee to remedy the breach and the lessors had then allowed a reasonable time to elapse to enable the lessee fully to comply with the relevant covenant, would such compliance, coupled with the payment of any appropriate monetary compensation, have effectively remedied the harm which the lessors had suffered or were likely to suffer from the breach?
If, but only if, the answer to this question was "No," would the failure of the section 146 notice to require remedy of the breach have been justifiable…
In the present case, however…
I think the answer to it must have been "Yes." 
My conclusion, therefore, is that the breach of the covenant to reconstruct, no less than the breach of the covenant to give notice of charges, was "capable of remedy" .
If a breach is remediable the landlord must allow the tenant reasonable time in which to remedy the breach, after the service of a s. 146 notice.
Relief may be granted by the court, subject to the court imposing whatever conditions it may think fit — s. 146(2) (see above).
Sub-tenants may, of course, suffer if a head lease is forfeited for a breach of covenant by the tenant, however, they may apply for relief under s. 146(4) (see above).