

DENMARK, ENGLAND AND THE CONQUEST OF 1016
THE DANES
Danish kings emerge from a period of obscurity in the middle of the tenth century, when a dynasty based on Jelling in Jutland, and represented by Gorm the Old and his son Harald Bluetooth, seems to have extended its authority over the whole country, which then included the province of Skåne in modern Sweden.
Harald was probably also recognised for a time as ruler of part of Norway.
He accepted Christianity when the missionary Poppo proved the efficacy of the Christian god by undergoing the ordeal of carrying hot iron, and may have entered into a subordinate relationship with the German emperor Otto I. However, he rebelled after Otto's death in 973, and the following year was defeated at the Danevirke, a Danish defensive rampart in southern Jutland connected to the east with the important town of Hedeby.
The Germans then built a defensive fortress (urbs) in the border area, which in 983 was captured and burnt by the Danes, an action almost certainly connected with the great Slav rising which followed the death of the emperor Otto II.
The Slavs on Germany's eastern frontier were obvious allies for the Jelling dynasty, and Harald had probably taken as his wife the daughter of  Mistivoj, of the tribe of the Abodrites.
A little later he was wounded in battle during a dispute with his son Swegen, and fled to the Slavs, among whom he died.
This is almost all that can be gleaned from broadly contemporary written sources about the Danish monarchy between c.950 and the accession c.987 of Swegen Forkbeard, who conquered England in 1013, and whose son Cnut ruled it for nineteen years.
The evidence is meagre, comprising stones in Denmark bearing inscriptions in the runic alphabet, the German chroniclers Widukind of Corvey, Thietmar of Merseburg and Adam of Bremen, and the work known as the Encomium Emmae, written in praise of Cnut's queen Emma in St Omer in the early 1040s.
Of the two famous rune stones which stand outside the church at Jelling, the smaller states that "King Gorm made these memorials to Thyre his wife, Denmark's ornament" ; the larger that"King Harald commanded these memorials made to Gorm his father and Thyre his mother.
That Harald who won for himself all Denmark and Norway and made the Danes Christian".
In the last sixty years, however, this scanty material has been substantially augmented by archaeology.
The site at Jelling now consists of two turf mounds, and between them stand a stone church and the rune stones, the larger of which weighs nearly ten tons.
The diameter of the north mound is about seventy yards and that of its southern fellow some eighty-four yards.
The former is a burial mound, containing in its centre a timber chamber which proved upon examination in 1820–1 to be empty of the body originally placed there.
This was to be expected, as there were also signs that after the construction of the mound someone had dug down and entered the chamber through its roof, but it was not until the late 1970s that excavations in the church revealed their likely motives.
Beneath the present stone building were found traces of three earlier structures, all of timber, and all interpreted as churches.
Concurrent with the building of the earliest, a timber grave chamber was constructed beneath its floor to receive the decomposed remains of a middle-aged man.
This is plausibly believed to be Gorm, Harald's father, originally interred in pagan fashion in the north mound, and later moved to the church built by his Christian son.
The purpose of the south mound, which excavation has shown not to be burial, is unclear, but dendrochronology, a method which dates timber according to the pattern of its tree-rings, indicates that it was built between c.960 and c.970.
As the north mound contained wood felled no earlier than 958, not more than twenty or thirty years at the most seem likely to have separated the construction of the mounds and the earliest church, and the positioning of the larger of the two rune stones exactly between the mounds.
All this work, in fact, was evidently carried out by Harald Bluetooth.
It was almost certainly Harald too who reconstructed and extended the Danevirke, a linear earthwork dating originally from c.737 which protected Jutland's southern frontier.
Excavation has provided dendrochronological dates of c.951-61 and 968 for part of the small section known as the Double Wall, which lies at the junction of the central section and the rampart which connects with Hedeby to the east.
Although the excavators have warned that these dates are only a broad indication of that of the complex and segmented line which is this phase of the Danevirke as a whole, they nevertheless believe that in a period of danger from Germany Harald rebuilt the central section, and was also responsible for the first phases of the flanking lines to east and west.
The result, stretching west from Hedeby, whose semicircular defences also seem to have been renewed at this time, was a rampart over eight miles long, about thirteen yards wide, and nearly ten feet high, not counting the wooden palisade with which it was presumably crowned.
A large bridge near Ravning, about six miles from Jelling, was seemingly also built by Harald, perhaps for a military purpose.
This too was a major piece of engineering, some half a mile long and eighteen feet wide, and making use of an estimated 4,000 oak trees.
Dendrochronology suggests construction c.979, very close to the date now assigned to the most famous of all the revelations of Danish archaeology, the four camps of Fyrkat and Aggersborg in Jutland, Nonnebakken on the island of Fyn, and Trelleborg on Zealand.
Discovered and excavated in the last sixty years, they have often been described.
All were circular and closely similar in plan, although differing slightly in dimensions and details.
Aggersborg, the largest, contained forty-eight houses, arranged in blocks of four grouped in threes in each of the quadrants formed by two internal roads intersecting at right angles.
The others had only one such group in each quadrant, although Trelleborg also had fifteen houses outside the circular rampart but within an outer defence work.
The ramparts themselves were of earth, but were timber-faced and had an internal wooden framework to give additional strength.
All were pierced by four gates which gave access to the internal roads.
The geometrical plan of these structures, and the accuracy of their laying-out, caused astonishment upon their discovery, but otherwise the more that has emerged about them the more difficult in some ways they have become to understand.
An early interpretation saw them as barracks for troops used by Swegen Forkbeard to conquer England, with each house containing a ship's crew.
However, wood from Trelleborg now implies a construction date of c.980, and if the other camps are of the same period this would seem to be too early for a connection with Danish raids on England, which are not known to have begun until a decade later (but see pages 20-2).
Furthermore, it is now clear that some of the houses were used as workshops not dwellings, and that others were occupied by women and children as well as men.
Also, habitation only seems to  have lasted for a short time, and Aggersborg may never have been finished.
Perhaps these camps still have surprises in store.
Certainly the recent discovery of what is believed to be a fifth example, at Trelleborg in Skåne, may add significantly to our knowledge.
Initial excavations indicate that it was related in some way to the others, but had no buildings within the rampart.
At present, the most plausible interpretation is probably that these forts were centres of royal power intended to enable Harald to control the areas which the Jelling rune stone suggests he had won for himself.
The fact that none are so far known in the vicinity of Jelling itself seems to support this idea.
But from the current point of view their significance is no less important than their purpose.
The argument that structures of such scale and uniformity must be the work of the Danish monarchy is difficult to resist, and so they have to be added to the features at Jelling, the renewal of the Danevirke, and the bridge at Ravning, as evidence of a burst of building activity under Harald Bluetooth all the more remarkable because quite without parallel in the history of the Danish monarchy in the Viking Age.
Clearly, Harald was a highly-efficient organiser of labour and materials: the felling and transportation of the large quantities of timber used in the camps and at Ravning, for example, must have been major operations in themselves.
Moreover, this raises other questions about Cnut's predecessors, questions without definite answers, but worth air-ing nonetheless, because relevant not only to the issue of how Swegen conquered England but also that of whether Cnut was already familiar with administrative institutions of an English type when he became its king.
This is a matter upon which no contemporary written evidence survives, and has been much disputed.
The large unit known as the syssel, a subdivision of the country broadly similar to the English shire, is in Jutland believed to be pre-Christian, although its function is something of an open question, as it is now best known in connection with later ecclesiastical organisation.
Maybe more interesting is whether a smaller  unit, the herred, dates from the Viking period.
Some historians remain sceptical about this, while others are convinced that it does, and that an early form of military organisation was based upon the herred system; that it appears in southern Norway and Västergötland in Sweden too has led to the contention that it was introduced there in Viking times, perhaps by Swegen or Cnut.
Certainly the obligation to perform military service for the king existed in Skåne in 1085, for it is mentioned (as expeditio) in St Cnut's donation to a church in Lund in that year, the only surviving Danish royal charter from before 1100.
There is also the question of whether a national ship levy, the leding, goes back to the Viking period.
Again, this is uncertain, although some recent opinion has been favourable to the idea.
In fact, if the problem is set within the context of an evidently powerful late-tenth-century Danish monarchy, it is difficult to believe that Harald Bluetooth or his son could not have introduced a naval system had they wished, and when the concern about the country's southern land defences is remembered, along with the importance that must also have been attached to protection from sea-borne attack, it might seem more likely than not that they did wish.
Also, the way in which the Encomium Emmae describes the assembly of the forces with which Swegen invaded England in 1013 certainly suggests that both men and ships were raised on the country, while the Norman William of Jumièges, writing probably in the late 1050s, has Swegen both commanding his countrymen to take part in the expedition and sending messengers to other kingdoms to attract men eager for loot.
Both may be guessing, although the Encomiast is reasonably well-informed on the campaigns late in Æthelred II's reign, and William's report of mixed methods need not be far wrong, even if it is a guess; the armies which troubled  England over the long period between c.985 and 1016 do often seem to have comprised the warbands of a number of men, are unlikely to have been organised and commanded solely by Danish kings, did not consist entirely of Danes, and frequently appear to have been motivated mainly by a desire for booty.
Three leaders are mentioned in the treaty which Æthelred made with one group probably in 994 — Justin, Guthmund, and Olaf (Tryggvason), who shortly afterwards became king of Norway.
Another, Tosti, although absent from contemporary documentary sources, appears on a Swedish rune stone as having secured tribute for his followers, while Florence of Worcester, writing c.1100, says that a force which appeared in 1009 was led by Thorkell, and was almost immediately joined by a second group under Hemming and Eglaf.
Olaf Haraldsson (St Olaf), also a future king of Norway, is known to have been present too.
The army with which Cnut eventually conquered England in 1016 also included a number of these largely independent warlords.
Thorkell was there, having in the interval been in English service, and so was the Norwegian Earl Eric of Lade, and, if we can trust Thietmar of Merseburg, one Thorgut.
These men and their followers were mainly attracted by the prospect of plunder and tribute, and expeditions to England were probably popular throughout Scandinavia, as rune stones from the province of Uppland in Sweden tend to confirm.
Ulf, commemorated at Yttergärde, served with Tosti, Thorketil (almost certainly Thorkell) and Cnut, and received payments from all three.
Alli, from Väsby, also "took Cnut's geld in England" , while Ulfric, mentioned on a stone at Lingsberg, was paid two gelds, although we are not told by whom.
Bjor, from Galteland in southern Norway, was less fortunate.
He went with Cnut to England, but died there.
Given the certainty that freebooters were among the raiding armies, it is clearly possible that the contingents contributed  by Swegen and Cnut were wholly or partly comprised of such men too, rather than exclusively of Danish levies.
We do not know.
In fact, for all its interest and importance, the nature of Danish government, and the extent to which it provided the forces which conquered England, must be left ill-defined.
Cnut may have been familiar with institutions of an English type.
At the least, Swegen's victories are likely to have owed something not only to his doubtless considerable abilities as a commander, but also to an administration capable of utilising resources effectively and controlling the country in his absence.
Harald's building works imply the existence of a system for organising labour, and it would be surprising if his achievements bore no relation to those of his son and grandson.
Much is uncertain, but the triumphs of Swegen and Cnut are not, and the ability to organise men and materials suggested by works such as the Trelleborg camps would have been vital in orchestrating campaigns against the English, who had considerable administrative resources of their own.
THE CONQUEST OF 1016: 1
Their country can seldom have been free from the threat of sea-borne attack in the tenth and eleventh centuries, when piracy and coastal harrying were seemingly endemic.
The will of King Eadred (946–55) left £1,600 so that his people could redeem themselves from famine or a heathen army, Cnut defeated thirty ships of pirates early in his reign, and Domesday Book says that under Edward the Confessor (1042–66) the hidage (broadly, tax) assessment of Fareham in Hampshire was reduced "on account of the Vikings, because it is on the sea" .
Times were troubled, and England a rich source of plunder.
Nor can it be assumed that all its invaders came directly from Scandinavia.
Professor Dolley argued that raids on western England in the 980s were partly the responsibility of Scandinavians who had settled in Ireland, and that Æthelred's expedition into Cumberland in 1000, and the activities of his fleet in  the Irish Sea, were in all likelihood the result of provocation in that area.
As we shall see, there seems to have been provocation from Normandy too.
Much of our most detailed source on the raids of c.980-1016 was written early in Cnut's reign and survives in three of the sets of annals (now denoted C, D and E) known collectively as the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle (see Chapter 2).
Its author, who may have written most of every entry between 991 and 1016, has a distinctive and somewhat dramatic style, and knew a great deal.
Even so, his work has its limitations.
It seems at times to dwell excessively and inaccurately on the ineffectiveness of the English resistance (see below), and is likely for the 990s at least to be at best a partial record.
The original entries for 995 and 996 may have been lost, and it says nothing of the hostile relations which probably existed with Normandy for a time, and only hints at the troubles in the Irish Sea mentioned above.
Also, one of the sums said to have been paid to the enemy in either 991 (£10,000) or 994 (£16,000) may be wrong, as a surviving treaty which almost certainly belongs to one of these years (and most likely to 994) gives a figure of £22,000.
Furthermore, although the chronicler was well informed, and has something to offer on events in Mercia and Northumbria, he seems to have known most, or perhaps merely wished to say most, about what happened in southern England and East Anglia.
Therefore, despite the extent of his knowledge, the further we recede from the date at which he wrote, and the geographical area on which he is most forthcoming, the less it is possible to be confident that important events were not omitted from his work.
Even the detailed entries on 1015 and 1016 can be supplemented by the Encomium Emmae, Thietmar of Merseburg, Icelandic poetry, and later English sources.
The Chronicle C text puts the first attacks on Æthelred's England under 980, when Thanet and Cheshire were harried, and Southampton ravaged and most of its citizens killed or captured.
Further coastal assaults followed, apparently  initially of a fairly intermittent kind, with raids on Devon and Cornwall in 981, Dorset in 982, and Watchet (Somerset) in 988.
Goda, a Devonshire thegn, was evidently killed in a fierce battle resisting the latter attack, and 991 saw the defeat of an army under Ealdorman Brihtnoth of Essex at Maldon, and the first known payment of tribute — £10,000.
No harrying is recorded for 992, although a victory over part of the English navy is, and in 993 there were raids around the mouth of the Humber, and Bamburgh on the Northumbrian coast was sacked.
994 saw the most serious campaign so far, with Swegen of Denmark and Olaf Tryggvason assaulting London unsuccessfully and then apparently plundering inland, as they are said to have obtained horses and ridden far and wide, before being bought off with £16,000.
Subsequent years saw further visitations on coastal shires, extending from Somerset in the west to Kent and Essex in the east, and a tribute of £24,000 was paid in 1002, but the situation seems to have worsened between 1003 and 1006, when an army led by Swegen burnt Exeter, Wilton, Norwich, Thetford and Wallingford.
This force, unlike its predecessors, captured sizeable towns, and in reaching Wilton and Wallingford penetrated a considerable distance inland.
It was finally given £36,000 to leave the country in 1007, and the following year, when Æthelred ordered the construction of a fleet, seems to have been peaceful.
Unfortunately, in 1009 a particularly large force of Scandinavians appeared.
Active for three years, they too penetrated into the heart of England, capturing Oxford late in 1009, Thetford, Cambridge and Northampton in 1010, and Canterbury in 1011.
Among the captives from the latter was Archbishop Ælfheah, who refused to be ransomed and was murdered at Greenwich in April 1012, shortly before his killers received a tribute of £48,000.
It is clear from the Chronicle account that the English were by now in considerable disarray and incapable of offering serious resistance, so it is hardly surprising that when Swegen arrived with his son Cnut and a further army in 1013 the whole nation submitted to him, and Æthelred went into exile with his brother-in-law, Duke Richard II of Normandy.
This exile might have been permanent had Swegen not died in February 1014. Æthelred was invited back, and wasted little time in expelling Cnut and his army from their Lincolnshire base.
Before returning to Denmark, he touched at Sandwich to put ashore hostages given to his father, having first cut off their hands, ears and noses.
But in September 1015 he appeared off Sandwich again, to initiate fourteen months of campaigning, largely against Æthelred's son Edmund Ironside, and of an intensity not seen since the days of Alfred.
Wessex, long ruled by the dynasty to which both Alfred and Æthelred belonged, submitted to Cnut late in 1015, as it had to his father two years earlier.
He was also joined by Ealdorman Eadric of Mercia and forty Scandinavian ships probably under Thorkell, who had entered Æthelred's service in 1012.
Early in 1016 Cnut crossed the Thames into Mercia and harried Warwickshire.
Edmund's early attempts at opposition seem to have come to nothing.
The chronicler says that when the men summoned for military service appeared they soon disbanded because the king and the citizens of London were not present.
A further summons assembled another army, which this time was joined by the king, but when they all met "it came to nothing as so often before" , and Æthelred returned to London on hearing that some intended to betray him.
Edmund then went north to join Earl Uhtred of Northumbria, and together they harried Staffordshire, Shrewsbury and Cheshire, possibly because these areas were identified with Cnut's ally Eadric of Mercia.
Cnut countered by occupying Northumbria, whereupon Uhtred submitted and was executed.
London remained unsubdued, and elected Edmund as king when Æthelred died on 23 April.
At this point the Danes evidently divided, some besieging London while others fought Edmund, who seems by now to have succeeded in raising forces in Wessex.
The battles of Penselwood and Sherston were apparently inconclusive, although hard-fought in the case of the latter, but Edmund was able to relieve London, driving the enemy away and defeating them after crossing the Thames  at Brentford.
He then returned to Wessex to raise more men, whereupon there was another unsuccessful assault on the city, which ended with the Scandinavians being pursued into Kent, where Ealdorman Eadric went over to Edmund; Cnut used his fleet to cross the Thames estuary to Essex, and proceeded from there to ravage Mercia.
He seems to have been retiring to his ships again when Edmund overtook him at the hill called Assandun (probably Ashdon in north-west or Ashingdon in south-east Essex).
Here, on 18 October 1016, he defeated the English in a struggle in which the chronicler says that all their best men fell.
This is likely to have been followed by another battle near the Forest of Dean, for Edmund had an alliance with some of the Welsh, but by now both sides were doubtless exhausted, and winter was approaching.
Also, Edmund may already have been suffering from the illness, or possibly wound, of which he was soon to die.
However that may be, peace was made, Cnut taking Mercia and probably Northumbria, and Edmund Wessex.
They also agreed that the Scandinavian army would be given tribute, and it at last occupied London, thus gaining in peace what it had never gained in war.
On 30 November Edmund died, Cnut had little difficulty persuading the English to ignore the claims of his relatives, and the country was re-united under his rule.
In 1018 the English paid the very large sum of £82,500, and came to an agreement with the Danes at Oxford which may have marked the formal end of hostilities; the same year part of Cnut's fleet sailed to Denmark.
The conquest was complete.
THE DANISH MONARCHY AND THE CONQUEST
After 1013 the Scandinavian forces were obviously led by Danish kings.
This is unlikely to have always been so, but assessing the precise extent and purpose of their involvement in England at this time entails the use of some difficult source material.
Adam of Bremen's history of the archbishopric of Hamburg-Bremen, which claimed ecclesiastical primacy over Scandinavia, was written in the 1070s.
Adam had spoken to the Danish king Swegen Estrithsson, Cnut's nephew, and cannot be dismissed out of hand, although nor can he be regarded as infallible.
He reports that Harald (Bluetooth) established his authority over both the English (Angli) and the Norwegians, having sent an army to England under his son Hiring, who subdued the island but was at length betrayed and killed by the Northumbrians.
Swegen is also said to have invaded England later to avenge his brother.
Adam is known to be broadly correct in stating that Harald exercised some kind of power in Norway, but obviously errs in having Hiring rule all England.
Moreover, his tale might be a wild distortion of the fate of the Norwegian Eric Bloodaxe, whose father was called Harald, and who was killed just after being expelled from his Northumbrian kingdom in 954.
Nevertheless, the story merits further consideration, as other evidence can be connected with it.
The poem on the battle fought in 991 at Maldon, where an army led by Ealdorman Brihtnoth of Essex was defeated by Scandinavian raiders, says that the native forces included a Northumbrian hostage, Æscferth.
If Hiring did invade England, he perhaps occupied the north, like Swegen in 1013 and Harald of Norway in 1066, and was betrayed and killed by the Northumbrians when Æthelred's forces appeared on the scene.
They may then have been required to give hostages as a guarantee of future good behaviour.
Another reflection of this could be the twelfth-century belief in the abbey of Ely, where Brihtnoth was buried, that he had been earl of Northumbria.
Conceivably connected too is the possibility that Æthelred took as a consort the daughter of a Northumbrian earl, Thored, maybe to mollify such of the northerners as had supported him.
Finally, there is the primarily southern distribution of his Second Hand coin type of c.985-c.991.
Only one penny of this issue has survived from the York mint, and none from Lincoln, suggesting that very few of the dies used to strike it ever reached the north; the  reason could have been some sort of political crisis.
This body of evidence is not strong, for Adam was capable of error and there may have been other reasons why the Maldon army had a Northumbrian hostage (even assuming that the poem is reliable) and Æthelred a Northumbrian wife, quite unconnected with the absence of Second Hand dies from northern mints.
But that English sources are silent about Hiring and trouble in the north in the 980s is not particularly significant: there is much silence in the early history of Northumbria.
Danish interest in conquering England, if indulged by Harald at all, must have lapsed during the fatal quarrel with his son Swegen.
This may have been quickly followed by the capture and ransom of the latter, by Northmen if we believe Thietmar of Merseburg, by Slavs according to Adam.
Once free of these troubles he wasted little time in turning his attention to England.
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle first refers to his presence under 994, but this may not have been his first visit.
Æthelred's confirmation of the will of Æthelric of Bocking, which is from no later than 999, says that there was a plan to receive Swegen in Essex when he first came there with a fleet, and that Æthelred was told of Æthelric's involvement in it many years before he died.
Although conceivably not before 994, this was probably earlier, for the greatest possible length of time that could have elapsed between 994 and Æthelric's death is five years — assuming that he died in the last year that the will could have been confirmed — and whether even this justifies the description "many years" seems questionable.
Also, the way we are told that the plan was connected with Swegen's first visit to Essex suggests that he had been there again since this occasion and the drawing up of the confirmation.
His harrying of Essex in 994 could well have been this second occasion, and if so the first may have been the Maldon  campaign in 991.
Whatever the truth of this, in 994 he and Olaf Tryggvason, possibly also his ally in 991, made an unsuccessful attack on London, and then ravaged Essex, Kent, Sussex and Hampshire before taking winter quarters in Southampton and receiving a payment of £16,000.
It therefore looks as though Swegen wintered in England, and in the following spring perhaps went plundering in the Irish Sea, for one of the versions of the Welsh chronicle known as the Annales Cambriæ records the harrying of the Isle of Man by a Swegen son of Harald in a year which is likely to be 995.
His history in the next few years is obscure.
According to Adam, he was at some time expelled from Denmark by King Eric of Sweden, unsuccessfully sought help in Norway and England, and was eventually welcomed by a rex Scothorum, with whom he lived in exile for fourteen years until Eric's death.
He then returned to marry Eric's widow, but was again expelled by his stepson, the new Swedish king Olaf, who later, for his mother's sake, restored him to his kingdom.
Adam later added that Eric was allied with Boleslav of Poland, having married his sister or daughter, and that the Danes were attacked by Slavs and Swedes.
This  tale about Swegen's Slavonic wife may fit with Thietmar's statement that he had Cnut and his brother Harald by a sister of Boleslav whom he later abandoned, which may in turn tie in with the Encomiast's story that after their father's death Cnut and Harald brought their mother back from among the Slavs.
It therefore seems fairly certain that Swegen did have a Slavonic consort, probably for political reasons.
Whether he was expelled by Eric of Sweden is another matter.
Lauritz Weibull suggested that Adam drew inspiration from the biblical story of the capture of Manasseh, pagan king of Judah, by the Assyrians, and thought it a distortion of Swegen's expeditions to the British Isles.
Even so, a verse attributed to the contemporary poet Stefnir Thorgilsson, which refers to a man with a crooked nose who betrayed Swegen out of his land, indicates that there may be something in the exile story after all.
This is the kind of matter upon which historians will forever disagree, but it may be that Swegen did have his position in Denmark threatened by Swedes and Slavs at some time in the 990s.
His union with Boleslav's sister may have both removed any danger from the Poles and secured their assistance against other tribes, and he subsequently turned his attention, in alliance with Olaf of Sweden and the Norwegian Earl Eric of Lade, to the destruction of Olaf  Tryggvason, king of Norway.
This he accomplished at the sea-battle of Svold, on 9 September 999.
Olaf was killed, and Swegen and Earl Eric subsequently controlled Norway together.
In 1003 Swegen appears in England again, not returning home until 1005.
The wording of the Chronicle implies that the same force returned in mid-1006, and Swegen may have accompanied it and remained until the payment of tribute in 1007; the twelfth-century chronicler Henry of Huntingdon associates him with the ravaging at this time.
This brings us to the raiders of 1009–12.
In the late eleventh century, Osbern, the precentor of Christ Church Canterbury, wrote both a life of St Ælfheah, the archbishop killed by the Scandinavians in 1012, and an account of the removal of his relics from London to Canterbury in 1023.
As proof of his sanctity, the latter describes various miracles after the saint's death, one of which concerns the Danish leaders who were among his murderers.
They put to sea in an attempt to escape the martyr's wrath, and were shipwrecked, with 160 of their vessels sinking and another 65 being driven to distant and unknown regions, where their occupants were slaughtered.
Now Osbern's account of the circumstances surrounding Ælfheah's martyrdom contains some spectacular blunders, and if this account of a shipwreck stood alone it would be worthless, because saints' lives frequently contain miracles about distress at sea.
Nevertheless, according to a version of the Annales Cambriæ, Swegen the father of Cnut was shipwrecked in a year which was almost certainly 1012.
The annal concerned cannot in its present form be strictly contemporary, for nobody would have identified Swegen by referring to him as Cnut's father at this date, but this is not an adequate reason for rejecting its information.
There is a coincidence with Osbern's story, and it may be that Swegen was present in England when tribute was paid in 1012, and  then set off for the Irish Sea (thus repeating the possible pattern of 994–5) only to be shipwrecked, perhaps off the Welsh coast.
It is not inconceivable that his son Cnut was with him.
Other evidence may support his connection with the army of 1009–12.
Among those responsible for Ælfheah's death, if Osbern can be relied on, was Hakon, son of Earl Eric of Lade, and called dux by the Canterbury writer because he was later an earl under Cnut.
With him may have been his father.
Two verses in Thord Kolbeinsson's poem Eiríksdrápa describe Earl Eric as fighting west of London and at the battle of Ringmere.
They were assumed by the Icelandic author of the mid-thirteenth-century Knytlinga Saga, the only source in which they appear, to refer to Cnut's conquest of 1015–16, but this is likely to be an error, for attacks were made on London in 1009 too, and Ringmere was certainly fought in 1010.
If Earl Eric was in England at this time, it may increase the likelihood that Swegen was also, for the two had collaborated in the defeat of Olaf Tryggvason, and Eric later fought for Cnut and was given the earldom of Northumbria.
What is evident, apart from the fact that Swegen on any reckoning spent much time in England between c.990 and his death in 1014, is that our knowledge of his activities is patchy, and that English sources may omit important matters.
We owe much to the Annales Cambriæ, for example, and would gladly know more of whatever lay behind the Norman chronicler William of Jumièges' statement that shortly before his conquest of England Swegen visited Rouen and agreed with Duke Richard II that booty taken by the Danes was to be sold through the Normans, who would provide a refuge where wounded men could recuperate.
This may have been Swegen's response to the attempts by Æthelred to get Norman help reported by Henry of Huntingdon under 1009.
When the thought of conquering England first entered his mind is unknown.
It is unfortunate that the confirmation of Æthelric of Bocking's will, with its reference to a plan to receive him in Essex perhaps as early as 991, gives no further details.
The plan  may have envisaged no more than provisioning the Danish fleet when it was already on the scene.
If, alternatively, it originated before Swegen's arrival, it could have been concerned with some kind of political submission.
But perhaps he was long content for the profitable plundering of England to continue indefinitely.
His absence from Denmark must have been easy to justify.
It had no national coinage and possibly no taxation system.
England had both (see below), and Swegen forced it to disgorge large amounts of coin and precious metal, while also taking plunder and gaining a reputation as a successful commander which must have both drawn further contingents to his banners and strengthened his position in Scandinavia.
Also, his experience of the frequently inept English resistance doubtless caused him to guess that it would eventually weaken to the point where he would be accepted as king.
By 1013, when his arrival in the Danelaw implies a change of tactic consequent upon a change of purpose, this had happened.
Why?
THE ENGLISH
At first glance, late Anglo-Saxon political history portrays a state riven by internal discord and highly vulnerable to external enemies: only fifty years after the Danish conquest it was subjugated again by the Normans.
The notion of a country united under Alfred's West Saxon successors gained ground but slowly in the tenth century.
Northumbria's last Scandinavian king, Eric Bloodaxe, was not expelled until 954, and only three years later Eadwig's brother Edgar formed it and Mercia into a separate kingdom, a division terminated by Eadwig's early death in 959.
It was revived in the exceptional circumstances of late 1016, and perhaps also envisaged in 1035, during the succession dispute which followed Cnut's death, when Mercians were ranged against West Saxons.
But no blows were struck then, or in the similar crises of 1051 and 1052, when Edward the Confessor first secured the expulsion and then accepted the return of the powerful Godwin family.
The idea of fighting against men of their own race was hateful to them, says the Chronicle C text under 1052, because there were few but Englishmen on each side.
In 1065 the Northumbrians were in a less conciliatory mood when they expelled their earl, Tostig Godwinsson, marched south with men from the Danelaw, and demanded Morcar, brother of Earl Edwin of Mercia, as his replacement.
This was a shrewd move, which brought Edwin in on their side, and the demand was conceded.
More remarkable, as it now seems, while awaiting the king's decision at Northampton they ravaged the surrounding countryside, and are said to have eventually returned home with hundreds of captives and much livestock.
Early in 1066 they were reluctant to accept Harold Godwinsson as their new king, and he and Bishop Wulfstan II of Worcester had to visit York to conciliate them, whereupon the Northumbrians overcame their reluctance to be associated with southern softness — an attitude not uncommon in the north even today.
There is little doubt, as these events hint, that the loyalty of the Danelaw and Northumbria to southern kings could be suspect.
Edgar thanked the Danes for their support and allowed them to live under such laws as they might choose, and it must be significant that Swegen landed in Lincolnshire when he made his bid for the kingship in 1013, and that in 1066 King Harald of Norway made for York, where he had hopes that the citizens would assist him in his endeavours.
Yet if narrative sources can imply that late Anglo-Saxon government was ineffective, other evidence indicates beyond reasonable doubt that it was not.
The most important is Domesday Book, the great survey compiled for William the Conqueror in 1086.
The administrative system that Domesday reveals is English.
The country was divided into shires, themselves composed of units known as hundreds (or wapentakes in some areas).
At regular shire and hundred meetings royal orders were implemented and local affairs, including the administration of justice, transacted.
Most estates were assessed in numbers of hides (roughly 70,000–80,000 in all), units used in the allocation of public burdens which might be military, as in 1008, when every 300 hides provided a ship and every eight a helmet and byrnie (mail-coat) for the navy, or financial, with each hide taxed at a particular rate.
In the early twelfth century it was two shillings; a century earlier it must often have been considerably more.
To run this system the king had not only his ealdormen (later, earls) but also reeves, some of them in charge of shires, who looked after royal estates and aspects of the judicial system, and sometimes led armies.
Indeed, it has recently been convincingly argued that there was an extensive network of minor officials, not all necessarily employed in the king's service full-time, but all involved in some way, and to their own financial advantage.
Such men operated in the Danelaw and Northumbria just as in Wessex.
Domesday mentions the activities of the reeve of West Derby hundred, between Ribble and Mersey, and the riding divisions of Yorkshire and Lincolnshire may all have had reeves of their own.
However lukewarm the feelings of the citizens of York towards their southern overlord, his officers were there to be obeyed.
Domesday shows that they provided Edward the Confessor with a revenue of £53 a year and the three works of the king — probably the maintenance of fortresses and bridges, and service in the army.
Recent work on Domesday and associated documents implies that late Anglo-Saxon government kept extensive written records.
Recent work on the silver coinage has revealed a complex system of which even Domesday contains little trace.
After c.973 all the pennies struck at numerous mints throughout the country (including York) bore the king's name and portrait, and were produced from iron dies distributed by the government, so that all looked alike.
They also carried the names of mint and moneyer, which made those responsible for sub-standard specimens easier to trace.
At intervals, initially of roughly  six or seven years, but more frequently after 1035, a new design was issued.
The previous type may then have become invalid, and coin users presumably had to replace it with the new one, a troublesome process, as the volume of some types ran into millions of coins.
The main purpose of this elaborate system was almost certainly profit for the king.
Thus it may be that the exchange of old pennies for new was at a rate favourable to king and moneyers — for example, for every six old coins handed in, only five new ones might be issued.
Certainly the king made a profit out of supplying the new dies which a different type necessitated: the moneyers at Worcester each paid £1 for them.
This coinage system is discussed in more detail in Chapter 5.
Recently described as "surely the most sophisticated and complex western coinage of the early Middle Ages" , it looks like the product of an administrative system regularly able to ensure that its will was done.
Nor is this likely to have been a novel feature of the tenth and eleventh centuries, whose rulers were building on traditions of public authority already old.
Their most remarkable expression is the earthwork which an eighth- century king of Mercia constructed on his western frontier.
Offa's Dyke, covering lines some 150 miles long, although at points perhaps relying on rivers rather than ramparts for defence, is a work which reveals a tremendous ability to organise labour: the Danish Danevirke is child's play compared with it.
Yet if Mercian royal government was unable to fend off Viking invasion a century later — a warning of weaknesses to be discussed shortly — that of the West Saxons was.
King Alfred's successes may well have owed a great deal to his predecessors, but in the construction of his network of defensive fortresses we see an ability to command similar to Offa's, and perpetuated by his son Edward the Elder and grandson Æthelstan, who conquered all England for the West Saxon dynasty.
Of course, the capacity of societies with little technology but plentiful manpower to erect impressive structures can be widely illustrated.
Stone-henge is an obvious example from this country, the remarkable road-network and buildings of the Inca empire, which possessed neither writing nor the wheel, one from elsewhere.
Nevertheless, that we are often surprised by works such as Offa's Dyke and Alfred's fortress system indicates a poor understanding of the world which produced them.
One factor to be remembered here is that the bounds of political action could be surprisingly wide.
For example, one of the techniques of persuasion available to late Anglo-Saxon kings was that of harrying. 1041 saw a pretty example.
The people of Worcestershire, displeased by royal taxation, rioted and killed two of the collectors, who had attempted to hide in a church tower.
King Harthacnut, Cnut's son, thereupon despatched an army with instructions to burn Worcester itself, devastate the entire shire, and kill all the men.
These orders were partly implemented.
Worcester was burnt, and the shire ravaged, but few people killed: they had fled in all directions.
After four days peace was restored, the royal anger appeased, and the ravagers returned home loaded with booty.
That Harthacnut was a Dane is less relevant to this than one might think.
Not only is the avenging army said to have included all the English earls, including Leofric of Mercia, within whose territory Worcestershire lay, but other English kings acted similarly.
Edgar ravaged the Isle of Thanet in 969, and Æthelred the estates of the bishopric of Rochester in 986, while it was Earl Godwin's refusal to obey Edward the Confessor's order to attack Dover which precipitated the crisis of 1051.
When Bishop Asser says that Alfred severely chastised those who disobeyed his orders, he may be referring to action of a similar sort.
It is a reminder that his achievements, and those of others, were partly based on the threat of large-scale violence.
Extensive as the network of government may have been, kings delegated much power to the handful of men holding the office of ealdorman (or earl), who often came from families rich in land.
For example, the will of Wulfric Spott, brother of Ælfhelm, an ealdorman of Northumbria under Æthelred, has survived, and shows that he possessed estates in Staffordshire, Derbyshire, Shropshire, Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire, Warwickshire, Gloucestershire, Lincolnshire and Yorkshire.
How many held land on this kind of scale is unknown.
Professor Sawyer has argued that many of the small pre-Conquest landowners who appear from Domesday Book to be independent were in fact tenants of lords not named, and thus that lordship may have been more extensive than has sometimes been realised.
However that may be, there certainly were great men, who wielded considerable political power.
Probably neither kings nor anyone else could have imagined society without them.
Carefully used, they were an instrument which enhanced and profited from royal authority.
Earls often took a share of the fines levied in the courts, and gained from their role in the royal exploitation of towns.
Edward the Confessor received £10 a year from Worcester, Earl Edwin of Mercia £8.
A strong ruler used not only a complex administrative system inherited from his predecessors, but also an ability to keep a significant number of his chief men moderately well-rewarded, or charmed, or cowed.
Otherwise their existence might be a source of danger, for they had followings of their own which were likely to support them against the king in a political crisis.
But this is not to say that the great were the only people who mattered politically; and they could not always rely on their followers.
A major cause of Godwin's banishment in 1051 was almost certainly the unwillingness of his men to fight the king when the time came.
The network of shires and hundreds brought royal government to all landowners of any substance, and must have acted as some kind of counter-weight to the influence of local lords and feelings of local separatism.
It must also have provided opportunities for men to meet regularly to discuss politics, and such discussions, and the attitude of those in the shires in times of crisis, may often have centred on how far they thought the king and his officials were living up to what was expected of them.
Kings, for all their power, had duties to their people.
They are known largely from the writings of churchmen.
By the late tenth century the coronation service included a royal promise to provide peace for the nation, to forbid wrongdoing, and to guarantee just judgements, all matters referred to elsewhere in the service too.
By the early eleventh century Archbishop Wulfstan of York was outlining the king's duty in his Institutes of Polity.
It included, not surprisingly, the protection of the church and promotion of Christianity, and the suppression of evildoers.
Wulfstan also repeatedly stressed the importance of justice.
One of the eight virtues of a well-ruled kingdom was just judgement, one of the seven things befitting a righteous king the provision of just judgement for friend and stranger alike.
The views of laymen are not likely to have differed significantly, at least on the importance of peace and justice.
The former was desirable for obvious reasons, the latter scarcely less so.
Much has been said above about what the king demanded of his people: justice was among the things they demanded of him.
The shire and hundred meetings did not simply serve the royal will.
They also enforced the law and judged local disputes, especially over land, the principal source of wealth.
Surviving records show that land disputes were common, and mattered.
Widespread dissatisfaction over the quality of justice might eventually be to the king's loss, although rulers may often have been able to manipulate the legal system to their advantage with relative impunity.
Indeed, the fact that serious crime was often punished by confiscation of all the malefactor's possessions must have been a sore temptation, and doubtless tended to prejudice kings towards verdicts of guilty.
Similarly, royal officials profited from their duties, and there was inevitably corruption.
The shire and hundred meetings may have been able to exercise some kind of control over this, although a king who allowed himself and his servants too much leeway would have been difficult to oppose directly.
Nevertheless, he was also building up a store of resentment which might be inconvenient in a crisis.
Crisis was most likely in certain circumstances.
Failure to deal with external attack was one, strife within the royal family another.
The accession of a child-king was also a dangerous time, especially if he, or indeed a mature monarch, was dominated by one group at the expense of others.
Some of the forces from which a strong ruler forged powerful government were then likely to contribute to disorder.
Moreover, the frequent mention of the king in this context highlights the greatest single weakness of this political system, as of most others in the Middle Ages.
For all its elaboration, it depended heavily on the capacity of one individual, and if he was incapable trouble of some sort was likely.
This the subjects of King Æthelred II doubtless knew all too well.
THE CONQUEST OF 1016: 2
An attempt to explain what went wrong in Æthelred's reign must begin with the sources.
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle is the most important, but needs to be treated with care.
Its author dispensed with the laconic and often uninformative methods adopted by many medieval annalists, writing at length and in a distinctive style not unlike that of homilists of the period, and with the same purpose — heightened effect.
Among the devices he used were puns.
A play on words involving the verb feran (to go) and the noun fyrd (army) occurs several times.
Thus, when in 1010 the English should have been engaging the enemy, ferde seo fyrde ham — the army went home.
It is evident from this and other comments, several describing treachery, that he often thought little of the English resistance, and on at least one occasion he did it injustice, saying under 1001 that an immense levy from Somerset and Devon met the raiders at Pinhoe, but fled immediately battle was joined, whereas an independent entry in the A text reports that the English fought with such forces as they could gather, which gives a rather different impression.
It seems that the main annalist's fondness for tales of woe in this case led him to distort the facts, or that he was misled by sources which did so.
All the same, characterising him is not easy.
He records stout English resistance too, and while his work was undoubtedly intended to be dramatic, it is difficult to discern any purpose beyond that.
This should increase faith in its general reliability.
Unfortunately, it deals mainly with the fighting, and says little about internal politics or the king, although what it does say is very interesting.
Also useful are land charters, law codes, some the work of Archbishop Wulfstan of York, and Wulfstan's other writings, together with those of the scholar Ælfric, monk of Cerne in Dorset, and from 1005 abbot of Eynsham.
The final picture, as so often, is incomplete.
Æthelred can be known little better than Cnut or most other early medieval kings.
He was important for all that, because his reign does much to reveal the strengths and weaknesses of the late Anglo-Saxon state, and because the political situation which Cnut inherited late in 1016 was partly his creation.
Some features of the Chronicle account of the fighting need emphasis.
One is that there seem to have been many years when there was little or no nationally-coordinated resistance.
At Maldon in 991 it was the local Essex levy which was defeated, as were the northerners in 992, the men of Kent in 999, those of Hampshire and of Devon and Somerset in 1001, of Wiltshire and Hampshire in 1003, of East Anglia in 1004, and of East Anglia and Cambridgeshire in 1010.
Similarly, the treaty which Æthelred made with Olaf Tryggvason shows that different localities were also sometimes allowed to buy peace for themselves separately.
All this would be understandable, of course, if these local forces had merely been dealing with minor coastal raiding, and one cannot always be sure that their enemies were very numerous.
The deaths of only eighty-one men of Hampshire at the battle of Æthelingadene in 1001 does not suggest fighting on a large scale, and it is noticeable that the same raiders shortly afterwards attacked Exeter and were repulsed.
But elsewhere this argument will not work.
The host led by Swegen and Olaf in 994 comprised ninety-four ships, was strong enough to assault London, and threatened to attack Canterbury.
In 1003 and 1004 Swegen penetrated inland and captured towns, as did the raiders of 1006 and of 1009–12.
Whatever their size, these armies were being more than a minor nuisance, and in any case the frequent defeats of local levies imply that they were often outnumbered or outclassed or both.
Why did they not receive greater support?
Why could not Æthelred have  brought the enemy to battle with a national army at his back, as Alfred did many times, as Æthelstan did to gain his great victory at Brunanburh in 937, as King Harold Godwinsson did in 1066, and, most significantly of all, as Æthelred's own son did in 1016?
Obviously, there were alternatives.
One was paying the enemy to go away, an expedient which Æthelred adopted on several occasions, and which was also used by Alfred and envisaged by Eadred.
On occasion it worked.
The payment made to Olaf Tryggvason in 994, for example, seems to have been part of a deal in which Olaf agreed to be confirmed (with Æthelred standing sponsor), and promised that he would never return to England.
This may have been a conscious effort on Æthelred's part to divide Olaf from Swegen, with the intention that he should then conquer Norway (as he did) and be a thorn in Swegen's flesh (as he was, until Swegen defeated and killed him).
Similarly, the payment of 1007 gained two years' respite, but then the enemy returned, apparently in greater numbers.
This is not surprising, and is unlikely to have surprised contemporaries, or in 1008 Æthelred would hardly have issued orders for the raising of a fleet.
Of course, some may in the early years have argued plausibly that the payments would rid England of the raiders for good , for it need not have been evident in the 990s that the problem would intensify as it did.
Nevertheless, the policy of buying off the enemy was a long-term failure, and as time passed was surely increasingly viewed as such.
Yet Æthelred was not always militarily inactive, reluctant to see himself in a military light, or unwilling to make military preparations.
Nor, as the successful defence of some towns, especially London, demonstrates, did such preparations invariably fail.
When the raiders left England for Normandy in 1000 the king led an army which harried Cumberland, and his fleet operated in the Irish Sea.
At some time he may also have sent an expedition against Normandy which was defeated, and his Helmet coin type, perhaps current from 1003 to 1009, depicts him in armour; according to the surviving verse on him by the Icelandic  poet Gunnlaug Serpent's Tongue, the army feared Æthel-red no less than God, and N.P. Brooks has shown that he increased the military burdens on his people by requiring more of his soldiers to wear helmets and byrnies.
As the will of Archbishop Ælfric of Canterbury (d.1005) bequeaths to the king a ship together with sixty helmets and byrnies this must have happened at a fairly early date.
Certainly, the fleet raised in 1009 was not the first.
The Chronicle refers to fleets in 992, 999 and 1000: that of 992 was defeated, those of 999 and 1009 never saw action.
Æthelred did organise resistance, then, but apparently only sporadically, and with little discernible effect.
Why?
Firstly, it should be remembered that raising well-equipped military forces may sometimes have been no less expensive than paying the enemy to go away.
In 992 the navy was seemingly formed from vessels already in existence, but in 1008 the Chronicle says that they were built.
This was doubtless a windfall for shipwrights, if expensive for others.
The cost of warships is unknown, but something can be done with the byrnies which every eight hides were ordered to provide in the same year.
A national assessment of about 70,000–80,000 hides should have produced something like 9,000–10,000 of them, and if this figure seems high, it might be remembered that Thietmar of Merseburg heard that there were 24,000 byrnies in London in 1016.
The cost of such an item in eleventh-century England is not known, but in Normandy in the 1040s it could be £7.
Thus, the byrnies of 1008 might alone have been worth £50,000—£60,000, a greater sum than any hitherto paid to the raiders.
Archbishop Ælfric's bequest to the king of a ship and sixty helmets and byrnies was a gift indeed, and when he gave a ship each to the men of Kent and Wiltshire he was perhaps being no less generous than in forgiving the people of Middlesex and Surrey the money which he had paid on their behalf, possibly as tribute.
Of course, these statistics are crude, but they strongly suggest a world  in which war may often have seemed prohibitively expensive, especially once it came to be realised that Æthelred's military operations tended to be unsuccessful.
The decision to fight or pay cannot therefore have been easy, not least because the Mercians and Northumbrians, who apparently saw considerably less of the enemy than the south and east, may often have been disinclined to do either.
Even in Wessex and East Anglia the ravaged territories were not always particularly extensive at any one time, and much of the population may have reckoned that they had a good chance of escaping.
Also, the raids may frequently, and especially at first, have appeared to pose little threat to Æthelred's position as king, and so his circumstances were arguably not comparable with those faced by Alfred, Æthelstan, Edmund Ironside and Harold Godwinsson.
Discretion may have tended to appear the better part of valour, and certainly better than defeat and its resultant loss of prestige.
Ultimately, of course, Æthelred's inactivity did cost him his throne, but the point at which this could reasonably have been foreseen may have been little clearer to contemporaries than it is today.
Furthermore, the collection of the payments may itself have provided some with opportunities for profit which they were loth to abandon, and which prejudiced them against fighting.
Unfortunately, little is known about how Æthelred raised tributes: the charter S 943 of 1006x11 shows that he sometimes sold land for the purpose, but as the national council (the witan) usually participated in the decision to pay, the main burden almost certainly fell on the people.
In Cnut's reign those unable to meet their taxes were liable to forfeit their estates to whoever could provide the money due on them.
If this was a practice inherited from his predecessor, it may be that those of Æthelred's followers well able to afford the levies could also acquire fairly cheaply the estates of those who were not.
Of his ealdormen, a certain amount is known about Eadric of Mercia, who according to the late eleventh-century Worcester monk Hemming was nicknamed Streona — the Acquisitor.
The Chronicle says that in 1009 an opportunity  to fall on the enemy was let slip on account of Eadric, "as it always was" .
This statement needs treating with care, as it was written after 1016, by an annalist rather free with allegations of treachery, who was aware of Eadric's defection to Cnut in 1015.
If, nevertheless, it is accurate, and Eadric was known as someone unwilling to oppose the Scandinavians, one can speculate that it was because he profited from the raising of tribute by acquiring the lands of defaulters.
This might throw light on his uncomplimentary nickname too, and on how, as the charter S 933 of 1014 reveals, "the attacks and plunderings of the evil Danes" gave him possession of a Dorset estate of the church of Sherborne, which he eventually sold for a great price in gold and silver to a friend of the monks, who returned it to them.
Correct or not, this hypothesis does at least hint at the complexities which could have been involved when Æthelred's counsellors sat down to decide whether to pay or fight, and offers one of a range of reasons why individual self-interest may have resulted in less fighting than might have been expected.
Explaining why the national forces which were raised did little good is not easy.
They apparently brought the enemy to battle only in 992, when part of the fleet was defeated, and 1014, which saw Æthelred drive Cnut out of Lincolnshire after taking the Scandinavians unprepared.
This seems to have been the only time that the English king led his men to victory: had the negotiations which preceded his return from exile the same year included a stipulation by those who complained about his previous behaviour (see below) that henceforth there should be more determination in dealing with the enemy?
We do not know, for this is an area where the chronicler is at his most unhelpful.
In 999 he speaks of delay in getting the fleet into action, and suggests that delay occurred on other occasions, but without explaining why.
Similarly, the English levies attempting to cope with the raiders of 1009–12 are criticised for never being in the right place, but again without further explanation.
Moreover, the failure of national forces to intercept the enemy is especially remarkable when one remembers that local ones often had no problem.
It is true that the early coastal attacks may have been difficult to counter because of uncertainty about where they would occur, and  that interception at sea depended on the availability of reliable intelligence.
In 992 it was the ships of London and East Anglia alone which met the Scandinavians and were defeated, and this implies that the fleet may have been dispersed around the coast.
Yet this argument will not work with the later forces which struck deep inland.
They were running a great risk of being intercepted and possibly destroyed, unless they knew what we are bound to suspect: that the English leadership was incompetent, and perhaps divided.
Æthelred gained his throne in difficult circumstances.
The death of his father Edgar was followed by a dispute between the magnates over whether Æthelred, still a child, or his older half-brother Edward, should succeed.
The latter prevailed, but on 18 March 978 was assassinated by his rival's followers at Corfe in Dorset.
Later tradition accused Ælfthryth, Æthelred's mother, of plotting the murder.
She may have done: it is surprising, and must have struck contemporaries as highly suspicious, that vengeance was not taken on the murderers.
The most interesting aspect of the affair, however, is the very swift growth of the cult of St Edward, something which his assassins may have foreseen, if Archbishop Wulfstan is correct in saying that they burnt the corpse, presumably in an attempt to destroy remains which might become relics.
Even so, in 979 a body was moved from Wareham to the nunnery at Shaftesbury, and in 1001 transferred again from the churchyard to inside the abbey.
It is extremely difficult to believe that this cult did not have political overtones.
Edward's supporters are hardly likely to have welcomed his death.
Making him into a saint must have been highly embarrassing for the opposition, and some of the satisfaction derived thereby is hinted at in a probably contemporary poem in the Chronicle.
Those who would not bow to him in life, it says, now go down on their knees to his bones.
Æthelred's own interest in the cult seems to have been considerable, and can be interpreted as an attempt to disarm the opposition, to  dissociate himself from the murder, and to enhance the prestige of kingship.
It is impossible to prove that the rivalries thus engendered endured, or that the king subsequently failed to impose himself on his major followers, favouring some individuals at the expense of others, and allowing his officials to get out of hand, all at the expense of national unity.
Nevertheless, this, or something similar, is very likely to be what happened.
In the 980s he had followers who took church lands, some of which he returned a decade later, blaming previous actions on bad influence during his youth.
Maybe he was a tool for any strong hand, including that of Eadric Streona, who became ealdorman of Mercia in 1007 after what S.D. Keynes has described as a palace revolution.
In 1006 the Chronicle says that "Wulfgeat was deprived of all his property, and Wulfheah and Ufegeat were blinded, and Ealdorman Ælfhelm was slain." 
These men were related.
Ælfhelm, ealdorman of Northumbria, was from a Mercian family, and Wulfheah and Ufegeat were probably his sons, while Wulfgeat may have been their associate.
The fall of Ælfhelm's party coincided with the rise of Eadric's.
Keynes has shown that he and his brothers, six of them according to Florence of Worcester, appear in the witness lists of royal charters for some time before 1006; but it was in 1007 that Eadric received his ealdormanry, and Florence says that it was Eadric who had Ælfhelm murdered and the king who blinded his sons.
This certainly looks like "the exposed tip of an iceberg of  intrigue" , in which the king connived at the removal of Ælfhelm and his associates to please Eadric, who was thereafter a major influence on the reign.
He does not seem to have been one universally approved, for a man known as the Acquisitor, and who may have acquired the estates of tax defaulters, probably had enemies, and Dr Keynes has suggested that the retirement from court of the king's uncle Ordulf and the prominent West Saxon Æthelmær occurred because they could not countenance his growing influence.
We meet Æthelmær again in 1013, leading the West Saxon submission to Swegen.
Aristocratic rivalries might go a long way to explain the ineffectiveness of English armies, as one of the chronicler's few detailed descriptions of internal affairs indicates.
In 1009 Æthelred assembled a fleet off Sandwich, and Eadric's brother Brihtric made an accusation to him against a nobleman of Sussex, Wulfnoth.
The latter fled, taking twenty ships with him, and harried along the south coast.
Brihtric pursued him with eighty vessels, which were driven ashore by a storm, and then burnt by Wulfnoth.
Whether the original charge against him was justified is unknown, but the incident cost the English 100 ships, and the remainder returned to London shortly before the arrival of a fresh force of raiders; in the chronicler's words, the effort of the whole nation came to nothing.
Similar divisions among the nobility, and the confusion into which it seems to have thrown the English leaders, might well explain why national armies were raised infrequently and achieved little, especially if there was dispute over the best policy to adopt, for reasons of the sort outlined above.
The fall of Wulfgeat in 1006 is also interesting from another angle.
Florence says that Æthelred had esteemed him greatly, and that he was deprived of his property for unjust judgements and proud deeds, while charter evidence speaks of most serious crime and treachery, leading to the loss of all that he had unjustly acquired.
These references  to injustice are of considerable value.
Again and again in his work, Archbishop Wulfstan condemns injustice and urges justice.
There are several such comments in the sermon which he preached to a national council apparently in 1008, and which became the law codes V and VI Æthelred.
His Institutes of Polity also repeatedly refers to the need for justice, saying that of the reeves since Edgar's death more have been robbers than righteous men, and his Sermon of the Wolf, probably written in 1014, complains of many injustices (unrihta) and shameful laws.
Ælfric wrote on much the same lines.
His Homily for the Sunday after Ascension Day, which may date from soon after 1000, says that a king should protect his people against an attacking army and rule with love and justice, and on the advice of his counsellors. Ælfric seems to have been much influenced by the contemporary continental churchman Abbo of Fleury, who had spent two years at Ramsey in the 980s, for he translated into English not only his Passio of St Edmund of East Anglia, but also the treatise De duodecim abusivis sæculi, written in seventh-century Ireland, and used by Abbo in his Collectio canonum, addressed to the French monarchs Hugh Capet and Robert the Pious.
The ninth of the twelve abuses of the age was an unjust king.
It is true that Wulfstan and Ælfric were preachers, intent on demonstrating that disasters are the wages of sin, and that their work may contain a degree of exaggeration.
Nevertheless, their statements suggest that injustice on a considerable scale was a feature of Æthelred's reign, and this is confirmed by a passage of crucial importance in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle.
In describing the negotiations for Æthelred's return from exile in 1014, this says that the king was informed that no lord was dearer to them than their native lord, if  he would govern them more justly (rihtlicor) than before, and that he then promised to remedy the things that they all hated.
This is not one of the chronicler's purple passages, but seems to be a sober report of the negotiations, and it matters a great deal.
It does much to explain Wulfstan's preoccupation with injustice, and coincides with what we are told of Wulfgeat and can suspect of Eadric the Acquisitor.
The great twelfth-century historian William of Malmesbury says that Æthelred deprived his people of their possessions without proper reason, and as the late Anglo-Saxon legal system is known to have confiscated property for a wide range of misdemeanours it would certainly have been open to abuse of this sort.
Moreover, this may be why Æthelred's charters sometimes take care to describe the legitimacy of the way the King had acquired the land being granted away.
How far he promoted injustice personally, or simply tolerated it excessively in his followers, is unknown.
One of Wulfstan's legal texts says that the king has stopped one kind of injustice and hopes that he will do more.
It may have been a vain hope.
Although a degree of corruption was inevitable, it seems in Æthelred's reign to have gone so far beyond what many of his subjects considered acceptable that it was their main preoccupation when they considered having him back.
Nor was it the only way in which he was inadequate as a Christian ruler.
He also failed to protect his people: if anything is clear it is that, and it cannot have increased his popularity.
The policy of buying off the raiders may often have seemed sensible, and it should not be assumed that he was always criticised for it, even by those who provided the money.
Yet there must have been a point at which it had clearly failed as a general expedient, and some may always have  considered it shameful.
The chronicler does not seem to have been among them, although he does say that in 1006 the king and his councillors thought offering tribute distasteful.
Other writers are more forthright.
Wulfstan's Sermon of the Wolf refers to English powerlessness against the enemy as shameful; Ælfric to the heathen army holding them to scorn and of days when English kings had been strong and theirs the only fleet around.
This was hardly a comparison to Æthelred's advantage, and must have occurred to many, who would doubtless have further agreed with Ælfric that a just war was one "against the cruel seamen or against other nations who desire to destroy our homeland" .
Another of his works is a piece on the defence of the kingdom, known today (from its first word) as Wyrdwriteras, which has only survived in part.
It begins by showing that some of the most successful rulers delegated their military responsibilities to effective generals, to lighten their burdens, avoid depriving their people of leadership through sudden death, and gain time for other business, and then moves to the theme that the kingdom's well-being depends on God.
Wyrdwriteras may have been produced in response to attacks on Æthelred for not leading his troops personally, and although Ælfric seems (in the extant portion, at least) to defend this policy, there could be implied criticism of the king's choice of commanders who were often less successful than those in the examples cited.
It is worth remembering that one of Ælfric's patrons, and the founder of his abbeys of Cerne and Eynsham, was the nobleman Ætheær who may have retired from court rather than face the growing influence of Eadric Streona.
It is hardly surprising that there are signs of disenchantment with Æthelred's government.
Open opposition is strongly implied by his offer in 1014 to forgive all the things that had been said against him.
There is also his nickname Unræd, a sarcastic play on his name, which thus became "Noble Counsel, No Counsel" .
Although it only appears in the sources c.1200 this may not be significant, for the chronicler does not refer to Eadric as Streona or to Edmund as Ironside, but there is eleventh-century evidence for both names.
That one of Æthelred's chief ministers received an uncomplimentary name increases the likelihood that the king did so too, and there is possibly a reference to it in the chronicler's sarcastic or despairing comment on Edmund's reconciliation with Eadric in 1016, "there was never worse unræd counselled than that" ; J.C.
Pope has commented that it is hard not to detect in Ælfric's statement in Wyrdwriteras that we sceolon secan æt Gode sylfum urne ræd mid anrædum mode (we should seek our counsel from God himself with unanimous spirit) "an allusion to the unræd so unhappily associated with Ethelred" .
A passage in Wulfstan's Institutes of Polity is also relevant: "Through an unwise king, the people will be made wretched not once but very often, because of his misdirection (misræd).
Through the king's wisdom the people will become prosperous and successful and victorious."
Ælfric wrote similarly.
It is almost impossible to believe that they did not have contemporary events in mind, and as Æthelred was certainly not victorious, the implication is that he was unwise.
Some of his opponents evidently went beyond words.
He also offered in 1014 to forgive all the things that had been done against him, providing that the English returned to their allegiance without treachery.
The existence of treachery finds confirmation elsewhere.
Whatever the nature of the plan to receive Swegen in Essex c.991 it was certainly treacherous; suspicion of treachery led Æthelred to order the killing of Danes in England in 1002, and in his sermon of 1008 Wulfstan warns that plotting against the king is punishable by death.
In 1016 Æthelred left his levies  because he was informed that betrayal was afoot.
A king not universally popular, who owed his throne to assassination, must have been sensitive on such an issue, and maybe sometimes nervous of joining large assemblies of armed men.
Mention of treachery is a reminder that the fighting saw no clear division between Danes and English.
The Anglo-Scandinavian background outlined in the Introduction fuses here with Æthelred's inability to keep the loyalty of all his subjects and use of Scandinavians as soldiers.
Among them were Pallig, who joined the enemy in 1001, and, later in the reign, Olaf Haraldsson and Thorkell.
Conversely, some influential Englishmen fought for the Danes.
Eadric was one, along with a considerable number of his Mercian subordinates, but there were doubtless others.
Cnut at an early stage took as his consort Ælfgifu of Northampton, daughter of the ealdorman Ælfhelm murdered in 1006.
This is very likely to signify an alliance with her family, and nothing illustrates better how discontent among the English provided political opportunities for the Scandinavians.
It is significant, too, that one of Cnut's major English supporters after 1016 was Godwin, who may have been a son of the Wulfnoth accused by Eadric's brother in 1009.
Æthelred must have had his friends, few kings had not, but as a king he was a failure.
Apart from the alienation of some of his followers, the loyalty of many others was so tried that by 1013 they submitted to Swegen with little resistance.
By then southern and eastern England had been extensively ravaged, and £137,000 paid in attempts to rid it of the enemy.
Yet, well organised and commanded as that enemy may have been, they were not invincible, as Edmund Ironside showed in 1016.
That his own son could achieve a measure of success so late in the day is the greatest single indication of Æthelred's incapacity, and hints at the resilience of English government.
Edmund was able to raise effective armies, and as late as 1012 Æthelred had levied a tribute of £48,000 and instituted a new tax, the heregeld (army-payment), to reward Scandinavians in his service.
His coinage system seems to have been in good  order for most of the reign, although its development and exploitation for the king's benefit may have been another cause of popular unrest.
Æthelred's henchmen were perhaps able to stifle or ignore discontent for much of the time, but even so it had its price.
The resultant political disunity, probably exacerbated by quarrels over the best methods to adopt against the Scandinavians, and coupled with the king's apparent inability to provide the necessary leadership, made it impossible to assemble successful armies.
Such forces are seldom the product of the ill-feeling which can be generated by a powerful but badly-led and manned administrative system.
It was the thoroughness of English government which to some extent caused its defeat.
At no period are the strengths and weaknesses of the late Anglo-Saxon state as obvious as in the reign of Æthel-red Unræd.
Late in 1016, Cnut succeeded to a kingdom not only politically divided, and therefore containing important men eager to serve him, but exhausted and ready for peace.
Yet it was also wealthy and powerfully organised, a strong weapon given a strong hand.
This was the fruit of victory.
THE SOURCES
The reign of Cnut has tended to attract relatively little attention from historians largely because of the scarcity of the sources.
Yet, few as they are, it is necessary to establish what they can and cannot be expected to reveal.
This chapter discusses all the important written material, including the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, the Encomium Emmae, the laws, the charters, the poetry of the Icelandic skalds, and (more briefly) the difficult but occasionally very useful works produced within a century and a half of Cnut's death.
The coinage evidence is no less significant, but its nature will become sufficiently apparent when we examine what it has to offer in Chapter 5.
THE ANGLO-SAXON CHRONICLE
The sets of annals known collectively as the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle are major texts for pre-Conquest history, and it is particularly unfortunate that their entries for Cnut's reign are both uninformative and (after 1023) increasingly sparse.
All the same, three of them provide the best available narrative and chronology, and their reliability must be examined in some detail.
The one usually denoted C (B ends in 977 and A is of little use for this period) survives in British Library (BL) MS Cotton Tiberius B i, which contains Alfred's translation of Orosius' Histories against the Pagans, and three further items also in Old English: a metrical calendar, some gnomic verses, and the Chronicle.
The  Orosius is in four hands dated by N.R. Ker to the early eleventh century.
A fifth, mid-century, scribe wrote the calendar, the verses and the Chronicle entries down to 490, and a sixth the annals probably to the end of 1048; those to 1044 seem to have been written at one time, while changes in the appearance of the script suggest that subsequent entries were made year by year.
In other words, C is a contemporary chronicle in the 1040s, when, as comments on local monastic affairs show, it was fairly clearly in Abingdon Abbey.
D, which now forms part of British Library (BL) MS Cotton Tiberius B iv, and is usually thought to have been produced in either Worcester or York, may date from little if at all before 1100.
The annals for Cnut's reign are contained in quire 9 (1016–51), and Ker thought that the scribe responsible for this also wrote the entries for 1071–9.
If so, it would seem to be a replacement, dating from no earlier than the 1070s or 1080s, for material which had been lost.
E is more straightforward: Bodleian MS Laud 636 ends in 1154, but was written by a single hand to 1131, in Peterborough, as local material indicates.
The history of these texts is considerably more complex than this bare recital might imply.
Theoretically, for example, none of the entries in E need be older than the twelfth century.
However, sets of annals were over the years repeatedly copied, added to, and recopied, and E was demonstrably derived from earlier manuscripts which no longer survive, but whose entries were mostly unchanged by later scribes.
One, as Charles Plummer showed, was probably in the abbey of St Augustine's Canterbury in the mid-eleventh century, and it fathered not only the immediate precursor of E, but also F, a Canterbury version of the Chronicle in English and Latin which ends damaged in 1058.
Furthermore, this St Augustine's manuscript was also connected in some way with C and D, and C and D with each other, for the eleventh-century entries contain much material common to two of the texts, or all three.
Plummer argued that D was partly derived from a predecessor of the St Augustine's chronicle, and that this was itself descended  from an Abingdon manuscript which also lies behind C. He thus explained the presence in E of various entries on abbots of Abingdon which are also in C. Possibly an Abingdon version of the Chronicle was taken to Canterbury in 1044 when its abbot, Siward, replaced Archbishop Eadsige, who had resigned because of ill-health, or was subsequently sent there at Siward's request.
Siward himself fell ill, and returned to Abingdon in 1048, and it may be significant that at about this point close resemblances between C and E cease.
Of course, if this is correct the chronicle presumably reached St Augustine's by way of the Cathedral, Christ Church.
It contained an account of Æthelred's reign and entries on Cnut which are common to all three texts.
The latter extended at least as far as 1022, and maybe to 1028, when all record Cnut's journey to Norway in similar words, or even to 1030 or 1034, which give the deaths of King Olaf of Norway and Bishop Æthelric of Dorchester.
But this was only the beginning of the process which resulted in the C, D and E of today.
The second scribe of C wrote initially down to 1044, the year of Siward's appointment to Canterbury, and what he wrote differed slightly from the chronicle taken there.
Either the C scribe or one of his predecessors added to the 1017 entry that the ætheling Eadwig was afterwards killed, and (perhaps inadvertently) omitted from it the expulsion of Eadwig king of the ceorls, which appears under 1020; the information in 1030 that Olaf "was afterwards holy" (i.e. regarded as a saint) must also have been included at a fairly late stage in C's composition.
Moreover, under 1020 the death of Archbishop Lyfing is given first, although it occurred on 12 June, after Cnut's return to England and the Easter meeting at Cirencester.
E places it after these events, and so is here more likely to preserve the original form of the annal.
The dislocation in C may be because its scribe entered Lyfing's death under 1020 from another record, and only after this turned to the entry in the main Cnut chronicle, from which he then omitted it.
Further indications of the use of other material in C are the addition to  the 1030 annal of the death of Earl Hakon, and the 1023 entry on Cnut's reconciliation with Thorkell; but maybe this stood in the common original and a precursor of D and E left it out.
The E text, despite surviving in a manuscript eighty years younger than that of C, may sometimes preserve better readings.
Not only does it apparently have the oldest version of the entry for 1020 (see above), but under 1018 it has the death of an Abingdon abbot which is not in C. Other material now in D and E was probably only added after the Abingdon chronicle reached Canterbury.
D is of considerable interest here.
It seems to err in moving the death of Archbishop Lyfing to 1019 (C and E together speak strongly for 1020), but D adds that his other name was Ælfstan and that he was very firm in counsel whether in matters of church or state.
Under 1021 D alone has the death of Bishop Ælfgar of Elmham, a former monk of Christ Church Canterbury, and under 1022 it has together with E a fulsome entry on Archbishop Æthelnoth's journey to Rome.
However, only D gives 7 October as the date of his consecration by the pope, and in 1023 D alone gives a lengthy, detailed and enthusiastic account of the translation of the relics of St Ælfheah from London to Canterbury; it also adds material to E's entry on Æthelnoth's death in 1038.
It looks as though there lies behind D a chronicle which received additions in Christ Church Canterbury, and at least one of those additions, on Æthelnoth's journey to Rome, was possibly present in a version which reached St Augustine's, where it was copied in a slightly modified form into the predecessor of E. St Augustine's may also have received the 1023 entry in D, but abbreviated it to the single sentence which E now contains.
They did not have Ælfheah's relics, and no doubt lacked Christ Church's enthusiasm for them.
Other material common to D and E may also have been added to the Cnut entries in Canterbury in the 1040s or 1050s, perhaps from existing annals.
This includes the comment under 1028 that Cnut drove Olaf from Norway and took that country, the entry on his return to England in 1029, and that on Olaf's death at the hands of his countrymen in 1030.
The 1031 annal on Cnut's visits to Rome and Scotland could have been inserted at this time too.
E alone names the Scottish kings involved, but this information was present in its Canterbury precursor, as it appears in F. The latter also has E's 1025 entry on the battle of Holy River, its 1032 annal on the appearance of wildfire and death of Bishop Ælfsige of Winchester, and its 1033 material on the death of the bishop of Wells.
Entries peculiar to D are those for 1026 on Archbishop Ælfric of York's visit to Rome, and 1033 on the death of Leofsige of Worcester and succession of Brihtheah.
Possibly these entered an ancestor of D only when it reached York or Worcester.
The same may be true of its addition to the 1018 entry that the meeting between Danes and English at Oxford agreed to observe Edgar's law, which was probably taken from chapter 13 of the Letter of 1019–20, now preserved only in a York manuscript, although there may have been a Worcester copy too.
Another entry peculiar to D, the death of King Malcolm II of Scotland placed under 1034, was almost certainly inserted with other information on Scottish history at a late stage in its composition.
Although the Chronicle for Cnut's reign is evidently something of a patchwork, much of it may be from an early date.
C, D and E all use a detailed account of the fighting under Æthelred apparently composed between 1016 and 1023.
The entries from 1017 onwards are much briefer, lack the Æthelred chronicler's distinctive style, and are perhaps the work of different authors.
Most of each one down to 1022 may in its oldest form be practically contemporary with the events described.
C adds to the 1017 entry that the exiled ætheling Eadwig was afterwards killed, which could imply that the original was written before this happened; but it should be noted that the final sentence of the same annal, on Cnut's marriage to Emma before 1 August, comes after the notice of Eadric of Mercia's execution, which Florence of Worcester says happened at Christmas; if so, the sentence on the marriage looks like a relatively late addition.
At the worst, the entries for 1017–22 were not compiled later than the 1040s, when C becomes a contemporary chronicle.
The annals in C after 1022 also originated no later than this, and may be earlier, while those common to D and E, as we have seen, were possibly written in Canterbury under the Confessor.
Much of this material may have been copied from older sets of annals, and some conceivably derived from the brief comments sometimes made against individual years in the Tables which told churchmen the date of Easter.
It has already been suggested that comment in C under 1020, 1023 and 1030 was added from other sources, and E's entry on Archbishop Wulfstan's death in 1023 could have come from an Easter Table entry, although the additions made by D and E to 1022, and by D alone to 1023, seem too extensive to be from such a source.
Finally, it must be stressed that while many of the entries are arguably early, this is not to say that all have been correctly dated.
Mistakes were easily made: the C scribe, for example, originally omitted the year number for 1029 and had to squeeze it in.
It would therefore be foolhardy to argue that those who entered the battle of Holy River under 1025 and Cnut's visits to Rome and Scotland under 1031 were necessarily correct.
THE ENCOMIUM EMMAE REGINAE
It was evidently during the reign of Harthacnut (1040–2) that a St Omer churchman wrote the untitled Latin work now known as the Encomium Emmae.
He says that he worked at Emma's request to produce a record of the deeds which touched upon the honour of her and hers, and the oldest surviving manuscript, which is very close to the author's original, may be the copy she received: it contains a miniature which shows an ecclesiastic presenting a book to a woman while two figures, presumably her sons Harthacnut and Edward, look on.
The Encomiast was a  competent latinist, familiar with works by Lucan, Sallust, Virgil and possibly other classical authors, and well able to meet Emma's wishes.
It may be that she commissioned the piece under the influence of the Norman history written for her brother Duke Richard II by Dudo of St Quentin, while some have thought it political propaganda intended to influence events after Cnut's death.
However that may be, it is primarily a work of praise, and this is important in judging its reliability.
Emma, committed to the cause of her son Harthacnut in the succession dispute of 1035–40, and exiled for a time to Flanders as a result, seemingly wished to forget her previous marriage to Æthelred.
The Encomiast accordingly omits it, and begins with the history of Swegen Forkbeard and the Danish conquest of England.
He is not badly informed here, perhaps because participants had accompanied Emma to Flanders, and his account generally complements and sometimes extends that of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle.
Nevertheless, it may at points be untrustworthy.
The story of how Cnut's brother Harald became king of Denmark after Swegen's death and refused either to divide it or to help Cnut reconquer England does not square with Thietmar of Merseburg's statement that he was in England in 1016: were there aspects of Cnut's relationship with Harald upon which the Encomiast, if he knew of them, did not wish to dwell?
Similarly, it is hardly surprising that he speaks in glowing and not always accurate terms of Cnut's reign itself.
The way in which royal messengers allegedly searched far and wide for a suitable bride ignores the likelihood that the union with Emma was motivated purely by political considerations, while the statement that they sent other sons to Normandy to be educated is a misleading reference to the exile of Emma's offspring by Æthelred.
The insistence that Cnut intended Harthacnut to succeed to his entire kingdom may also be suspect, given the succession dispute which followed his death.
On other aspects of the reign, which is treated very briefly, the Encomium is of little value.
Cnut is said to have defended the weak, exalted justice and suppressed injustice, and been a great friend of churchmen and a generous benefactor of churches.
Indeed, the Encomiast claims to have witnessed his lavish gifts to the churches of St Omer on his way to Rome.
He then deals with Cnut's death, the grief of his subjects, and the quarrel over the succession.
Although his statements about Cnut's piety find ample confirmation elsewhere (see Chapter 4), it is difficult to avoid the impression that this account of Cnut is simply a stock description of a good Christian king, intended to reflect as much credit upon Emma as possible.
Other churchmen, too, had ideas about the duties of Christian rulers, and may have been less convinced than the Encomiast that Cnut lived up to them.
CNUT'S LAWS
Law codes are a major source for the Anglo-Saxon period, and those which Archbishop Wulfstan of York wrote for Æthelred and Cnut are among the most extensive.
Shot through with sermonising, piety, and concern for good government, they are ostensibly valuable sources on the law- giving activities of these kings, who appear in a very favourable light.
Unfortunately, an examination of the circumstances in which they were produced gives a much less favourable impression.
Churchmen had long admonished monarchs on their duties to God and people, and some kings had made church aims their own.
The great Frankish king and emperor Charlemagne (d. 814) convoked synods and gave their decisions the force of law by issuing them as royal capitularies.
Churchmen also joined laymen in his national councils, which legislated on church reform as well as secular affairs, and were particularly concerned about the establishment of peace.
The later Ottonian rulers of Germany behaved similarly.
In 1004 Henry II ordered a halt in his campaign in Italy so that no Christian blood would be shed at Easter.
In 1005 he held a synod at Dortmund which issued a decree on the keeping of fasts, and in 1006 he prohibited illegal marriages and the selling of Christians to the  heathen.
But in circumstances where rulers failed to provide the peace thought essential to a Christian society, ecclesiastics sometimes took matters into their own hands.
There developed in tenth-century France, where kings and territorial princes were often ineffective, a movement characterised by councils in which enthusiastic assemblies of laymen were harangued by bishops about oppression of churches, public disorder, and the necessity for peace.
Peace became the popular cry.
Without it, said Bishop Guy of Le Puy in 994, no one will see the Lord.
English churchmen, who must have been aware of these activities, were sometimes also familiar with the conditions which gave rise to them.
Peace was somewhat lacking under Æthelred II, and when his ecclesiastics too sought rectification they acted in an English as well as a continental tradition.
In England too, kings and laymen had been admonished about their lives and duties, and the church often sought royal authority for the measures it put forward.
The Constitutions of Archbishop Oda of Canterbury (941–58), apparently intended for recitation, told King Edmund to obey his bishops, and insisted that he rule justly.
They also lectured bishops, priests, clerics, monks and laymen.
Occasionally such provisions seem to have been promoted as royal law.
R.R. Darlington stressed that the ecclesiastical content of several tenth-century law codes suggests that they originated as the canons of synods. Æthelstan's first code, for example, and his Ordinance on Charities, both say that they were framed on the advice of Archbishop Wulfhelm of Canterbury and other bishops, and the text known as I Edmund appears from its prologue to be a set of decisions taken purely by the ecclesiastical wing of the witan (royal council); they may eventually have been issued as a royal decree, but that I Edmund in its surviving form is something other than this is implied by the fifth chapter, which exhorts the king to put churches in order.
As Edmund is unlikely to have issued law in which he exhorted himself, these provisions may be no more than a programme laid before the full witan, and perhaps preached to it.
National councils were an obvious forum in which churchmen could attempt to secure lay assent to their wishes, and this can seldom have seemed more desirable than in the years around 1000.
Æthelred's failure to protect his people and rule them justly, and the resultant dissatisfaction of Abbot Ælfric, Archbishop Wulfstan and presumably other ecclesiastics, were discussed in Chapter 1.
Wulfstan, as primate of York, doubtless had more political influence than most, and clearly did his best to rectify social conditions worsened by enemy harrying, heavy taxation, the severe famine of 1005, and maladministration.
His most relevant texts here are those on the national council held at Enham in Hampshire probably in 1008.
Two of them, known as V and VI Æthelred, are in Old English; a third (VI Æthelred Lat.) is in Latin, and contains important information on the procedure adopted at Enham which is absent from the others.
The meeting is said to have assembled at Pentecost (16 May), at the instigation of the archbishops Ælfheah and Wulfstan.
The bishops apparently began with a meeting of their own in which they established a pact of peace and concord.
Then, having assembled the people, and by the king's order, they preached about believing in one God and spurning pagan superstitions.
The rest of the Latin text, which deals with both religious and secular matters, including the preparation of a fleet, seems also to be what they preached, and it ends by stating that these were the statutes issued by King Æthelred which the nobles promised to observe.
In fact, all Wulfstan's Enham mater-ial, including the Old English V and VI Æthelred, seems to be a record of his preaching, agreed by those present, and later publicised as the decrees of the meeting.
This is also implied by VI Æthelred itself, where the opening chapter announces itself as "the first ordinance of the bishops" , but the introduction used thereafter is "and the decision of the witan is" .
Moreover, these texts fit well into the English and European context described above.
Carolingian influence on Wulfstan's thought seems to have been marked, and doubtless increased his desire for a more peaceful society, but his aims and methods were so common that identifying his precise source on particular matters is difficult.
His prohibition of the sale of Christians to the heathen, for example, was drawn from an English source, although he  may have known of Henry II's identical measure in Germany in 1006.
Equally, while the procedure which produced the Enham texts may have been similar to those responsible for some of Æthelstan's codes and I Edmund, the promulgation of archiepiscopal admonitions as royal decrees is also reminiscent of those issued by Henry II after the synod of Dortmund in 1005.
Furthermore, the interest shown by V and VI Æthelred in protecting the weak, suppressing disorder and improving the church was characteristic not only of Carolingian material, but of the contemporary continental peace movement too.
When secular affairs are mentioned, such as the prohibition of plots against the king's life, they are always such as to promote public order.
This may in fact may have been the prime interest of most of those gathered at Enham, who seem to have been attending something very like a French peace meeting.
Not long afterwards, Æthelred introduced his short-lived Agnus Dei penny, which replaced the royal portrait with a depiction of the Lamb of God, and bore on its reverse a dove.
Interest in the Lamb is known to have been considerable at this period, when the third invocation addressed to it in the Mass was changed from "have mercy upon us" to "give us peace" .
Hence, if the introduction of the Agnus Dei penny was decided at Enham, or intended to reflect events there, it would look more like a continental peace meeting than ever; and in this context, it is very unlikely to be coincidence that the name Enham apparently means "the place where lambs are bred" .
The choice of the village as the meeting's location may have owed much to the symbolic value of its name, and to the fact that there are quite likely to have been lambs in the surrounding fields at the time, as there still are in May.
Maybe they provided Wulfstan, who used as his pseudonym the name Lupus, the Wolf, with ready sources of illustration.
That the Dove of the Holy Spirit also appears on the penny is appropriate.
It is found  with the Agnus Dei elsewhere, and also had an association with the Enham meeting, held at Pentecost.
The foregoing both explains why Wulfstan's legal texts have such a homiletic tone, and raises considerable doubts whether they were really the means by which Æthelred's government implemented its decisions.
The fleet of 1008–9 is interesting here.
Wulfstan simply says that warships ought to be made ready every year after Easter.
The vagueness of this is understandable if it was simply intended to encourage the raising of a fleet before the meeting discussed it, and the archbishop later inserted with his own hand into a version of this chapter the words "if it is decided upon" .
The instructions eventually issued, as the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says, were that every 310 (probably rightly 300) hides were to produce a ship and every eight hides a helmet and byrnie.
So when Wulfstan's texts mention secular affairs it should be remembered that they may not fully reflect the decisions of the meeting which heard them preached, nor are they likely to reveal aspects of royal administration of which churchmen disapproved.
If they make Æthelred's activities appear considerably rosier to us than they did to contemporaries, this at least does something to explain how the king in whose name these high-sounding utterances were issued could be charged by his subjects in 1014 with hateful practices and injustice.
The Enham material has been discussed at such length because it suggests much about contemporary conditions, and is essential to an understanding of the documents which Wulfstan wrote under Cnut, some of whose actions must have been disapproved.
The irregularity of his semi-bigamous relationship with Ælfgifu of Northampton (see Chapter 4) and levy of £82,500 in 1018 did not fulfil the Christian king's duty to tax his people lightly and set them a good example, and in the early years of the reign many churchmen doubtless feared the worst.
Indeed, Bethurum Loomis argued that Wulfstan's disillusion with Æthelred, and perhaps with Cnut too, can be traced in his work, stressing that he modified his views on royal sanctity, seems not to have wished to rely on the king's ability to keep public order, and eventually stated that bishops should direct  all affairs, both lay and ecclesiastical.
Such attitudes she plausibly connected with the difficult circumstances in which he lived, and which required that his work should continue under Cnut, as it had under Æthelred.
Professor Whitelock showed that a set of provisions contained in Corpus Christi College Cambridge MS 201 was drawn up by Wulfstan after the meeting at Oxford in 1018.
It says that it is the counsel of the witan determined upon as soon as Cnut and his witan established peace and friendship between Danes and English, and that one of the first things the witan decided was that they would zealously observe Edgar's law and "investigate further at leisure what was necessary for the nation, as best they could" .
This implies that, as at Enham, churchmen laid a programme of reform (that of the Corpus manuscript) before the laymen, who maybe promised to observe it.
A.G. Kennedy, its most recent editor, has noted that "apart from chs. 25–7 there is nothing that amounts to much more than injunctions that justice should be done and that every man should do his duty" .
The emphasis on Edgar's law is understandable, as Wulfstan evidently considered it the most favourable to the church and the most conducive to righteous rule.
It could well be significant that Cnut is not himself said to have had any connection with the document, and it may reveal little of the real business of the Oxford meeting.
The promised deliberations probably resulted in the texts known as I and II Cnut, compiled by Wulfstan and given royal approval one Christmas at Winchester.
I Cnut is solely concerned with religion, and owes much to the 1018 text (which had itself drawn heavily on VI Æthelred), to VIII Æthelred (a Wulfstan document from 1014), to some of Edgar's provisions, and to various Wulfstan homilies.
Largely concerned with the protection of church and clergy, correct religious observance by ecclesiastics and laymen, and the rendering of church dues, it ends with exhortation: possibly it too was preached to king and court before it received the royal assent.
II Cnut is more complex.
It contains religious admonition despite announcing  itself as a secular ordinance, and many chapters are about the promotion of Christianity and the welfare of the church, while some of the secular material reflects the ecclesiastical desire for justice, public order and the protection of the weak.
It is also partly a conscious codification of existing law.
Chapter 12, for example, is a list of crimes in Wessex for which the fines are payable to the king, while chapter 18 states how often borough and shire courts should meet.
This is from one of Edgar's codes, and many other provisions either owe something to earlier edicts or are drawn directly from them.
A number are not known to be from previous material, and Wulfstan may have taken them from records of Cnut's administration.
However, some or all may equally be from earlier texts which have not survived.
Given the archbishop's motives, it is likely that II Cnut often presents a somewhat optimistic view of events.
Chapter 79, for example, gives undisputed possession of their land to all those who have defended it (i.e. discharged public burdens upon it) before the shire court.
This is pretty certainly a reference, among other things, to taxation, which is known to have resulted in the confiscation of defaulters' estates.
Wulfstan was not interested in recording this, presumably because as he thought that a king should levy only light taxes he disapproved of the procedure.
But he was concerned to prevent the system becoming a greater burden than ever through malpractice of the sort which the Worcester monk Hemming reports when he says that estates were sometimes taken even when the money due had been paid on time.
Clearly, such aspects of Cnut's rule as Wulfstan found displeasing are unlikely to be directly represented in his work, and some chapters are accordingly very difficult to interpret.
II Cnut 30, for example, is drawn mainly from I Æthelred 1, but changes its death penalty to mutilation, which inflicts no injury on the soul.
One can be confident that this is Wulfstan's own opinion, and the chapter, if one of Cnut's actual measures, might be an important indication of the archbishop's influence on him.
Alternatively, the change may have been made by Wulfstan himself, in much the same way that in his different  records of the Enham meeting he omitted from VI Æthelred death penalties contained in V Æthelred.
Assessing the extent of Cnut's association with these texts is therefore no simple matter.
That the similar material produced under Æthelred may reflect badly, rather than well, upon his administration is a conclusion that could be applied to Cnut too.
Certainly II Cnut 54.1, which forbids the keeping of a woman in addition to a wife, sits ill with the king's own relationship with Ælfgifu of Northampton, and suggests that he occasionally turned a deaf ear to Wulfstan's entreaties; but this does not necessarily mean that he lacked interest in the archbishop's work.
On the contrary, law-giving was an important part of Christian kingship, and there are consequently good reasons for thinking that some aspects of Wulfstan's activities would have been welcome to him, for he was certainly concerned to appear the Christian king (see Chapter 4).
If it is thus hardly surprising that he gave I and II Cnut his backing at a Christmas court at Winchester, it is also impossible to prove that his regime otherwise paid them much heed.
Cnut's laws, which initially look such promising sources, are in reality something of a quicksand in which their compiler and his motives can never be forgotten.
THE LETTERS OF 1019–20 AND 1027
Letters apparently written on Cnut's behalf in 1019–20 and 1027 need consideration too.
The first is preserved in the York Gospels, a contemporary manuscript annotated in Wulfstan's hand.
After a greeting Cnut announces that he will be a gracious lord and will support the rights of the church and just secular law.
Other chapters deal with church rights, just judgements and fair penalties, the adherence to Edgar's law promised at Oxford, non-interference with nuns, Sunday observance, and the keeping of fasts and festivals.
There also seems to be a stress on the function of bishops which fits with Bethurum Loomis' view of Wulfstan's attitude to them late in his life.
The secular part of the Letter deals with Cnut's visit to Denmark and the suppression of danger to the English.
No doubt this was the real point of the missive, but it is rather vaguely expressed and makes one wonder whether the author really had  much idea what had happened.
The Amen at the end implies that it was in its extant form intended to be preached, as does its survival, along with three of Wulfstan's homiletic tracts, in a gospel book.
It was perhaps originally an oral message from Cnut, committed to writing by an ecclesiastic for circulation to the shire courts, and then redrafted into its present state by Wulfstan.
It may be significant, as S.D. Keynes has suggested, that the chapters which bear most signs of his influence come at the end, and that their subject matter is closely related to that of the tracts entered before the Letter.
The Letter of 1027 survives in Latin (presumably translated from Anglo-Saxon) in Florence of Worcester's chronicle.
Well-informed on Cnut's doings, and a valuable source on his dealings with the pope and the German emperor in Rome and his Scandinavian wars, it is similar to Wulfstan's material in ordering intolerance of injustice and prompt payment of church dues, but cannot be his as he died in 1023.
It could have been written by its bearer, given by Florence as Abbot Lyfing of Tavistock, who eventually became bishop of Worcester, for this would further explain how Florence had a copy.
Lyfing was later a pluralist with no good reputation, but it is worth noting the Chronicle D text's description of him as "the eloquent bishop" : like Wulfstan, he may have been a notable preacher.
Certainly the Letter of 1027 is a reminder that the sentiments found in the works of Wulfstan and Ælfric may have been shared by other churchmen whose writings (if they ever existed) have not survived.
When the author of the Life of Edward the Confessor says that he trusted the cause of God to his bishops, and ordered secular judges to act fairly, so that honesty could have royal support and evil its just condemnation, this may be an indication that someone did for Edward what Wulfstan had done for Æthelred and Cnut.
THE CHARTERS AND WRITS
Surviving charters and writs are important.
The former, generally in Latin, are normally grants of land or privileges by kings and others, while writs, also in royal and private usage, were addressed to named individuals in the vernacular.
In the eleventh century the type now denoted the writ-charter was often employed to inform shire courts of royal transfers of lands and privileges, and this may partly explain a decline in the numbers of surviving charters.
By the reign of Edward the Confessor royal writs were authenticated by having a two-sided seal attached.
Charters bore no authentication: even the crosses and so-called "signatures" of the witnesses were written by the scribe responsible for the rest of the text.
Kings sometimes instructed or allowed churchmen to draft and write these documents, and Cnut apparently often did so.
An examination of his surviving charters and writs suggests that many originated in major churches, which recorded grants not only to themselves but also to local laymen.
The possibility that some were produced in a royal secretariat cannot be totally excluded, although the evidence for the existence of such an office under Cnut is far from compelling.
This material has various uses.
Obviously it records when and to whom the king was giving what, and so provides evidence on royal possessions and patronage, although some texts specify that the grantee purchased the item concerned, and this may sometimes have occurred even when not stated.
Important land transactions probably often took place at meetings, and charter witness lists are valuable evidence on the king's major followers, and, if enough survive, the careers of bishops, abbots, ealdormen and thegns can to some extent be reconstructed from them.
Charters also occasionally describe the circumstances and nature of the transaction concerned.
It is their evidence, for example, which shows Æthelred alienating and restoring church estates, while Cnut's request in 1035 for daily  prayers and masses for his soul in his donation (S 975) to the monastic community at Sherborne implies awareness of his approaching death.
Forgeries can on occasion be no less informative: the texts probably fabricated in Canterbury in Cnut's reign hint strongly at the problems the church was facing.
It is a pity that the utility of Cnut's charters is limited by their scarcity: only thirty-six have survived.
Even adding the eight writs, his reign is the least well-represented of any between those of Æthelstan and Edward the Confessor, and seven of the documents we have are fairly definitely later forgeries, while nearly half the rest are suspect.
Furthermore, only nine, a very low number, are to laymen, and the first to a donee with a Scandinavian name is from 1019.
Hence, these documents offer little on the important and possibly substantial grants of lands to Scandinavians immediately after Cnut's accession, probably because the majority were never recorded in this form, and little more on his lay patronage at other times.
A further limitation, true of charter material generally, is that they deal primarily with southern England, because most survived in the archives of the great southern churches.
Other warnings need sounding too.
Witness lists, for example, although doubtless often accurate records of those present at a transaction, are not always what they seem.
Some exhibit a suspicious symmetry: S 960, from 1023, is witnessed by six bishops (including Æthelnoth of Canterbury), six abbots, six earls and six ministri.
The  scribe of S 961, extant on its original single sheet of parchment, was equally concerned about the aesthetics of his product, and as an archbishop and four bishops are balanced by five abbots, and three earls by three priests, the list seems to have been curtailed so that the different orders match.
Three other apparent originals are similar.
S 963 has eight bishops (including Archbishop Æthelnoth), four earls, four abbots and eight ministri, and S 971 six bishops (including Æthelnoth), three earls, three abbots and twelve ministri, while the four earls and four milites in the first column of the list in S 977 are matched by eight abbots in the second.
More important, witness lists can throw up slight but significant discrepancies.
Bishop Æthelric of Selsey signs S 964 of 1032, although his predecessor Ælfmær appears in S 969 of 1033.
Possibly one is a forgery, but slips could occur in charters evidently not fabrications in the normal sense.
Two of Cnut's grants to laymen, S 963 and 971, are apparent originals written in 1031 by the same scribe.
He was careless, and in S 963 gave the indiction as the fourth when it was actually the fourteenth.
This suggests that he accidentally omitted the x from xiv when copying an exemplar.
More significant, Æthelnoth of Canterbury is given in the witness list as archbishop of York, "I, Æthelnoth, eminent archbishop of the church of York, have confirmed this royal gift." 
This too implies that the scribe was copying an exemplar, and accidentally jumped from Canterbury's name to York's subscription.
Moreover, his exemplar for the witnesses was not very new, as they include Earl Hakon, who died in 1030.
By the time he wrote S 971 he was better informed.
Hakon has disappeared, although the three earls who do sign are the same and in the same order as in S 963, while the latter's eight bishops and four abbots are now six and three respectively.
One can guess some of what happened.
News arrived that Hakon was dead.
This decreased the number of earls by one and so the abbots and  bishops were also reduced to keep the proportions the same — six, three, three, as against eight, four, four.
Perhaps to compensate, the number of ministri was increased.
S 971 has twelve compared with the eight of S 963, but these numbers too show symmetry with the rest.
Both lists are in this respect artificial, and the errors on Æthelnoth and Hakon suggest that they were copied from exemplars.
The anachronistic listing of Ælfmær of Selsey in S 969 (see above) may have arisen similarly.
In other words, scribes did not always either know or care exactly who had been present at a grant, and relied on extant lists of great men, doubtless sometimes copied from earlier charters.
Land transactions did not always involve documents.
When Cnut's henchman Tofi the Proud made a grant to Waltham an oral declaration seems to have been followed by the donor girding his sword round the image on a crucifix.
The sword was evidently the token of gift in a ceremony perhaps similar to that in which King Edgar granted privileges to Glastonbury by placing on the altar an ivory horn, which he ordered to be cut in half and preserved so that it could be offered as testimony in future.
Although both events are known from twelfth-century sources, they are likely to reflect genuine practice.
York Minster still preserves the Horn of Ulf, by which it claims to have received lands from a local magnate during the eleventh century, and tenure by horn was known even later.
But just as important as the token of gift was the witnessing of a transaction by good men and true.
This was no doubt why land transfers were often arranged at meetings, to which they were announced.
Sometimes they were publicised at more than one assembly.
A mortgage by Bishop Eadnoth of  Crediton from 1018 (S 1387) is said to have been declared to the borough meetings of Exeter, Totnes, Lydford and Barnstaple.
Moreover, a witness had obligations.
In the event of dispute he had to give testimony, whose value often seems to have been related to his rank.
In Æthelred's reign those who testified to the authenticity of one disputed land transaction included the archbishop of Canterbury, a bishop, an earl and the king's mother.
It is worth noting that the account of this case (S 1454) says nothing about the production of a charter as evidence.
Equally, when Bishop Æthelstan of Hereford was involved in litigation over an estate in Cnut's time, it was ordered (S 1460) that the boundaries be retraced, and this the bishop did together with the man who had sold him the land and the witnesses.
He had had a charter drawn up, which presumably contained a boundary clause, but this seems to have been less significant than the authority of the witnesses.
Nevertheless, it is clear that charters were often important in determining ownership, as the quantity in which they were produced implies, and that boundary clauses could be taken very seriously.
That this part of the text was usually in the vernacular hints at its role as the most functional element, and care was often taken over its drafting.
In eleven of Cnut's grants the Latin introduction to the boundaries is followed not by the first set of bounds but by an introduction in Anglo-Saxon.
This may mean that it was common for the bounds to be noted on site, and then sent to wherever the charter was drafted, and that in these instances the scribe copied in the Anglo-Saxon heading.
One of the originals from Cnut's reign (S 974) looks as though the boundary clause was added later than the main text, for there is a distinct gap between its last word and the beginning of the dating clause.
Furthermore, about forty wills, of laymen and women as well as ecclesiastics, have survived from the tenth and eleventh centuries, and with a range of other texts suggest that the use of written records extended well beyond simply  the recording of estate boundaries.
After a shire-meeting in Herefordshire in Cnut's day had declared that lands belonged to Leofflæd, her husband Thorkell the White rode to Hereford cathedral and had it recorded in a gospel book.
Other documents imply the existence of lay archives, and this is hardly surprising in a world in which there may have been considerable literacy in Anglo-Saxon.
When Brihtric's daughter was wooed by Godwin the agreement made at Kingston in Cnut's presence was recorded in triplicate: one copy was deposited at Christ Church Canterbury, and the second at St Augustine's, but Brihtric himself kept the third.
Likewise, a lawsuit over a disputed estate in Worcestershire in Cnut's time ended with copies of the judgement destined for Worcester cathedral, Hereford cathedral and the holders of the land.
Still, it is largely left to material from church archives to suggest the use of records in the vernacular on a considerable scale.
Eleventh-century additions in English to blank leaves in the York Gospels include surveys of three of the archbishopric's estates, an inventory of church treasures at Sherburn-in-Elmet, and a list of sureties in a legal case involving one Ælfric, while a Durham copy of Bede's Lives of St Cuthbert received an inventory of church possessions including a kettle and sixteen ornamented horns.
From the monastery of Ely we have farming memoranda which list and value livestock, seed, tools and other commodities supplied to Thorney Abbey, provide an inventory of animals on Ely estates, and catalogue the rent payable in eels (some 26,000) from various locations in the Fens.
This item is a rarity, extant on three strips of parchment which miraculously escaped the destruction of monastic records in the sixteenth century.
Generally, as with the York and Durham texts mentioned above, such ephemera often only exist today when entered into formal manuscripts whose  own chances of survival were relatively good.
It can plausibly be taken to indicate the original existence and subsequent disappearance of large, and perhaps very large, quantities of similar material.
OTHER SOURCES
Yet not all such sources have been completely lost, for the historian of Cnut, so ill-served by contemporary records, is more fortunate in those produced after his death, and especially in the late-eleventh and twelfth centuries.
From the immediate post-Conquest period come Domesday Book, the output of the hagiographers Goscelin and Osbern, and Hemming's valuable account of the estates of the bishopric of Worcester.
Among numerous works from the flowering of historical writing in the twelfth century, those of Florence of Worcester, Henry of Huntingdon and William of Malmesbury stand out.
The latter, in addition to recording the histories of Anglo-Saxon kings and churchmen, chronicled that of Glastonbury Abbey at the request of its monks, and several other monasteries, including Abingdon, Ely, Evesham, Peterborough and Ramsey, also had histories written at about this time.
One can be confident that those responsible for such productions sometimes had access to valuable oral and written information which no longer survives.
For example, the account of Cnut's visit to Sherborne in Goscelin's Life of St Wulfsige is very likely based on Sherborne tradition, as Goscelin, a monk of St Omer, came to England at the invitation of Bishop Hermann of Sherborne, probably spent time in the community there, and was writing at Hermann's request.
Similarly, his work for St Augustine's Canterbury was assisted by a lengthy stay there, while his Life of St Edith of Wilton, written for the nuns whose testimony he cites as an authority, contains details which suggest that he was familiar with their house, its traditions, and possibly records in Anglo-Saxon.
Just as Goscelin claims to have listened to a monk who had known St Wulfsige of Sherborne (d. 1002), Osbern of Canterbury says that as a boy he heard an account of the translation of  the relics of St Ælfheah in 1023 from a monk who was involved in it.
Historians were as willing as hagiographers to use oral tradition.
Henry of Huntingdon had in his youth heard very old men speak of the slaughter of Danes in England during the massacre of St Brice's Day in 1002, but neither he, nor his contemporaries Florence and William of Malmesbury, relied solely on such evidence.
All three researched and wrote their histories carefully.
Henry had copies of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle identifiable with our C and E, and went to some trouble to re-order his material so that his account of early English history was clearer than that of his sources; Florence helped his readers by prefacing his work with lists of bishops of English sees and genealogies of English royal dynasties.
He compared different sources on the same event, indicates when they cannot be reconciled, supplies cross-references, and edits his material to increase its clarity.
He had a copy of Cnut's Letter of 1027, and his additions to the eleventh-century Chronicle have usually to be taken seriously.
For example, he names Eadric Streona's father and six brothers, and all but one can be found in the witness lists of Æthelred's charters.
William of Malmesbury was a formidable, widely-read and extensively-travelled scholar and researcher.
A careful user and comparer of sources, he often draws attention to discrepancies between them, and sometimes criticises their reliability, noting, for example, that Cædwalla of Wessex's confirmation of a Glastonbury grant was signed with a cross although he was a pagan at the time.
His work on Glastonbury was assisted by research there, and in preparing his histories of English kings and bishops, the Gesta  Regum and the Gesta Pontificum, both of which appeared in 1125 and were revised subsequently, he seems to have visited most of the major cathedrals and abbeys in England, examining their archives and listening to their oral traditions.
As noted above, those archives very probably contained documents now lost, which were also available to others.
The Ramsey chronicle of c.1170, for example, claims to have used charters, some written in English, while there is good reason to think that the historian of Ely Abbey did have access to records compiled in Anglo-Saxon in the late tenth century and translated into Latin in the early twelfth.
Some churches also long possessed objects given to them by Cnut, which occasionally bore inscriptions to that effect, like the reliquary for the remains of St Vincent which he presented to the monastery of Abingdon.
Of the broadly contemporary foreign writers, the German bishop Thietmar of Merseburg, who died in 1018, is mainly valuable on the Danish conquest, while Adam of Bremen, working about forty years after Cnut's death, is a major source on his dealings in Scandinavia and with the German empire, even if his reliability can be questioned, as we noticed when dealing with his story of Swegen Forkbeard's exile from Denmark.
The Norman chroniclers William of Jumièges and, to a lesser extent, William of Poitiers, also have significant, but not necessarily trustworthy, material.
The former seems to have written most of his Norman ducal history, the Gesta Normannorum Ducum, in the 1050s after Edward the Confessor had promised the English throne to Duke William in 1051–2, and this is doubtless why he describes Anglo-Norman relations under Æthelred and Cnut, and comments on Edward's exile in Normandy.
As a Jumièges monk, some of his information may have derived from its former abbot, Robert, who became bishop of London and then in 1051 archbishop of Canterbury, but  fled England during the political crisis of 1052, subsequently returning to Jumièges, where he died.
William of Poitiers used the Gesta Normannorum Ducum when working on his history of William the Conqueror in the 1070s, but the beginning of his Gesta Guillelmi has not survived, and it now opens with events just after Cnut's death.
There are no contemporary Scandinavian written sources apart from rune stones.
Later Danish histories include the mid-twelfth-century Roskilde Chronicon and the works composed by Swegen Aggeson and Saxo Grammaticus c.1200.
Denmark had in Cnut's day only recently been converted to Christianity, and these authors are unlikely to have possessed much in the way of early documentary material, although like English historians they fairly clearly knew oral traditions which need not always have been groundless.
However, the most important sources available to later northern writers were the poems attributed to the professional skalds who visited princely courts and were paid to celebrate the achievements of patrons like Cnut, King Olaf Haraldsson of Norway (St Olaf) and Earl Eric of Lade.
These were first written down maybe in the twelfth century, but now survive, often in a fragmentary state, only in the Icelandic prose sagas of the thirteenth century and later, the most famous of which is Heimskringla, a series of lives of kings of Norway by Snorri Sturluson (d.1241).
Few historians today place much trust in the sagas (which apparently included a lost work on Cnut written c.1200) as sources for the eleventh century, but the verses which they quote are another matter.
It may seem incredible that they could have been remembered accurately for many decades, but the construction of skaldic verse was complex, and features such as the binding of pairs of lines by allit-eration, and rhyme and consonance within lines, perhaps facilitated the correct transmission of individual words.
Even so, this does not preclude the possibility that whole verses were varied or fabricated later, or associated by the  saga writers, who sometimes misunderstood this material, with the wrong poet and/or wrong leader.
Alastair Campbell, for example, thought that a verse supposedly from Thord Kolbeinsson's Eiríksdrápa, which connects Earl Eric of Lade with the battle of Ringmere in 1010, is a fabrication, and that lines about an attack on Norwich said by the thirteenth-century Knytlinga Saga to be from Ottar the Black's Knútsdrápa probably came from a different poem on Swegen, who is known to have sacked the town in 1004.
Nevertheless, skaldic verses are usually taken as authentic works of the poets to whom they are attributed, although their original order is frequently unclear, and manuscript variations sometimes call the correct reading of individual words into question.
Of course, even if accurately transmitted the reliability of this poetry is still open to doubt.
Ottar, for example, seems not to have composed his Knútsdrápa until after 1025, at least ten years later than the campaigns of 1015–16 which it largely describes, and it is therefore possible to query details not confirmed by the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle.
But the Chronicle itself is not comprehensive enough to make such doubts irresistible (see below), and skaldic poetry is sometimes a valuable supplement to our other sources, especially on the fighting of Æthelred's reign and Cnut's activities in Scandinavia.
Moreover, poems produced at Cnut's behest (Thorarin Praise-Tongue was paid fifty marks for his Tøgdrápa), although obviously biased in his favour, can imply much about the ways in which he wanted to be seen.
Naturally, no source, especially those written later than the period they describe, can be trusted implicitly.
Just as  Goscelin's statement that Cnut was devoted to St Edith sits somewhat ill with a remarkable tale reported by William of Malmesbury, and may simply reflect what the Wilton nuns wanted people to believe, churchmen writing the histories of their own foundations tended to be prejudiced.
For example, Hemming's account of lands disputed between the bishopric of Worcester and Evesham Abbey does not accord with other evidence, and nor does the Ramsey chronicle's version of the difficulties experienced by their abbot early in Cnut's reign.
There were other causes of distortion too.
When Florence of Worcester draws elements of his account of the battle of Assandun in 1016 from Sallust he is revealing quite a lot about the classical interests of twelfth-century historians, but also raising doubts about his own reliability, and William of Malmesbury, whose methods so often find favour with modern scholars, nevertheless records miracle stories which his critical faculties ought to have led him to doubt, and perhaps did; and like historians of all periods, William, Florence and their colleagues were at the mercy of the bias and inadequacy of their sources, as well as their own prejudices and errors.
Fortunately, none of this means that their work can simply be tossed overboard, for two examples should suffice to prove the contention that writers subsequent to Cnut's day sometimes had access to important evidence.
The first concerns taxation.
Later authors, Hemming on the bishopric of Worcester, Hugh Candidus on Peterborough, and William of Malmesbury on Glastonbury and Malmesbury, record that those who could not pay their taxes under Cnut were likely to suffer temporary or permanent losses of estates.
Domesday Book shows that this could indeed be eleventh-century practice, and there are what look like references to it in Wulfstan's legal text II Cnut and the rubric of one of Cnut's charters.
Moreover, not only do these sources tend to confirm each other, they collectively explain how Cnut was able to raise the very large sum of £82,500 in 1018.
Church archives and traditions recorded  and remembered losses of lands, as is hardly surprising: William's claim that his evidence on Malmesbury came from documents in English is entirely credible.
The second example is even more striking.
In the 1130s the Anglo-Norman poet Gaimar, who was based in Lincolnshire, wrote a history of the English in French verse.
He appears to have had a copy of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle similar to E, but the later part of his work is filled with romance, and might seem to belong to what has been called the twelfth-century fictionalising history best exemplified by Geoffrey of Monmouth's Historia Britonum.
When he describes the foreign exile of Edmund Ironside's sons Edmund and Edward, for example, Gaimar misnames them Edgar and Æthelred, and tells a rousing, romantic tale of their adventures, complete with dialogue.
Yet the popular traditions from which such stories presumably came were not always totally fictitious, and cannot be simply ignored.
Gaimar also says that Æthelred II had a brother named Edmund who desired to take his kingdom and was supported in this by the Welsh, as he was married to the daughter of one of their kings.
He assisted Edmund Ironside against Cnut, but died and was buried in Hereford, while the Ironside himself took the sister of a Welsh king, and received the support of the Welsh beyond Severn from Lancaster to Malvern.
Now although the only known brother of Æthelred named Edmund died in the early 970s, when Thietmar of Merseburg describes events in England in 1016 he tells how, after a battle in which Edmund was killed, the Danes fled from before London because they had heard that help was on the way from Edmund's brother Æthelstan and the Britannis.
This account too contains some blunders, for it is likely that it was Æthelstan who was killed in battle, at Sherston, and that  Edmund brought the relief, but when Thietmar wrote Britannis he was not thinking of Englishmen, whom he always describes as Angli.
Obviously it is impossible to be sure who he meant by it, and Freeman, who noticed this long ago, suggested that he was indicating troops levied mainly within the western shires.
Taken with Gaimar's story, however, it is more likely that these men were the Welsh of Wales.
There is further evidence in the poem LiDsmannaflokkr, apparently composed in Cnut's army c.1017, which mentions the sword ringing on brezkum byrnies.
The word brezkr may mean something as general as British, but seems usually to denote the Welsh.
If Edmund Ironside's involvement with the Welsh is not thought sufficiently established by this evidence, it can also be fitted into a plausible historical context.
At some point, he and Eadric Streona of Mercia became enemies.
Possibly the latter had supported Queen Emma in plans that one of her sons, rather any of the offspring of Æthelred's first consort, should succeed him.
The Life of Edward the Confessor, written some fifty years later, claims that when she was  pregnant with him all the men of England took an oath to accept the child as king should it be a boy, while the Norman Inuentio et Miracula Sancti Vulfranni of c.1053-4 alleges that he was anointed and consecrated king as a boy.
However that may be, it is unlikely to be coincidence that Eadric first defected to Cnut only shortly after Edmund's takeover of the Five Boroughs in the east midlands in 1015, and marriage to the widow of the Siferth whom Eadric had recently had murdered.
The latter's relations with his Welsh neighbours cannot always have been good, for the Annales Cambriæ say that in 1012 he led an expedition against St David's.
Depending upon when Edmund's Welsh alliance was made, it may have been an additional factor in persuading Eadric to change his allegiance, or a move to put pressure on him once he had deserted.
Moreover, Edmund's association with the Welsh may also cast light on why Ottar the Black's Knútsdrápa apparently refers to the battle of Assandun being followed by another at Danaskógar (skógr = wood, forest).
If, as seems likely, this is the Forest of Dean, it would further explain why Cnut and Edmund eventually made peace in Gloucestershire.
There is much that is important about all this.
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle is detailed on the events of 1016, but clearly it omitted at least one important aspect of the fighting.
Edmund's Welsh alliance has to be pieced together from a twelfth-century poet, a contemporary German bishop, and two skaldic poems.
All sources, especially late ones, are likely to get things wrong, sometimes spectacularly so, but that does not mean that everything in them can simply be swept aside as nonsense.
Even tales such as Gaimar's on the two Edmunds and the Welsh can contain grains of truth.
Scepticism is an essential part of our approach to sources: so too is an open mind.
In all, the scarcity of contemporary material is such that Cnut's personality and many of his activities will remain forever unknown.
The inadequacies of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle and the surviving charters, even when supplemented by such other fragments as the skaldic poetry and the Letters of 1019–20 and 1027, make it impossible to construct a decent chronology of his reign, while Wulfstan's legal texts are far from straightforward as guides to his administration.
But Cnut was considerably more fortunate in the sources produced within 150 years of his death, for the explosion of literary activity which began shortly after the Norman Conquest, and which was to ensure that no future reign would be as badly documented as those of Cnut and his sons, also cast its light back to his period.
For all their limitations, later works have valuable insights to offer, especially on Cnut's relations with the English church.
Without them, much of what follows would be impossible.
CNUT, ENGLAND AND NORTHERN EUROPE, 1017–35
Cnut inherited from his royal Scandinavian and English predecessors relations of an often threatening as well as potentially profitable sort with a very wide range of territories.
Once in control of Denmark (possibly from 1019, see below), he became concerned, like Swegen, Harald Bluetooth and probably Gorm the Old before him, with Norway, Sweden, the German empire and the Slav peoples east of the Elbe, including the Poles.
Both Harald and Swegen had taken Slavonic consorts and thought it desirable to subjugate Norway.
Swegen also had dealings with the Swedes, and involved himself with Normandy and in the Irish Sea, perhaps selling his ill-gotten gains and fraternising not only with Duke Richard II in Rouen, but also the rulers of Norse settlements in Ireland such as Dublin, Wexford, Waterford, Cork and Limerick.
Æthelred too had troubles with the Irish Sea and Normandy, sending expeditions against both, marrying Richard's sister Emma, and going into exile with her kin in 1013.
He may have asked for Norman help against his enemies in 1009, and a continental source records that he at some point appealed to the French monarch Robert the Pious for assistance, conceivably in the hope that he could exert pressure on the Normans.
Like other English kings, he had relations with the Welsh and the Scots too.
We have seen the former being raided by Eadric Streona in 1012 and fighting for Edmund Ironside in 1016, while the latter are said to have attacked Durham in 1006, and by Æthelred's death King  Malcolm II was planning a further incursion.
Hence, Cnut's inheritance was international and many-faceted: there were numerous opportunities to be taken, pitfalls to be avoided and problems to be overcome, both at home and abroad, before his dominion and influence extended over much of the northern world, and merited the title by which his fellow Scandinavians know him today: Knut den store — Cnut the Great.
THE EARLY YEARS IN ENGLAND
According to Florence of Worcester, shortly after Æthelred died in April 1016 certain English churchmen and nobles elected Cnut king, came to him at Southampton, swore fid-elity and repudiated all Æthelred's progeny; in return, he vowed to be a good lord in matters both church and lay.
As late Anglo-Saxon rulers were often required to give undertakings of this sort at their coronations, Cnut was possibly crowned and anointed at this time.
His involvement in such a ceremony after the death of Edmund Ironside is even more likely.
Florence says that he held a meeting at London, and asked the witnesses of his agreement with Edmund whether the latter's brothers and sons were entitled to succeed him.
They replied that Edmund left no claim to his brothers and had wanted Cnut to support and protect his sons until they were old enough to rule, and they also swore that they wished to elect Cnut king, humbly obey him, and pay tribute to his army.
Finally, after he had given them a pledge supported by the oaths of Danish leaders, they completely rejected Edmund's brothers and sons and denied that they were kings.
Whether or not they lied in describing the agreement with Edmund, as Florence claims, Cnut's use of it (assuming that the Worcester chronicler can be trusted thus far) to legitimise his position is interesting, because it suggests that right of conquest was not thought title enough.
The meeting was obviously intended to establish him as sole king, and may have led directly to the coronation in London by Archbishop Lyfing reported by a twelfth-century dean of St Paul's.
That Cnut's earliest coin type, Quatrefoil, is the first  since Edgar's Bust Crowned issue to show a king wearing a crown could be some indication of its importance.
Having established his rule over the English at least in name, another pressing need was the reward of his army.
The Chronicle says that the agreement with Edmund included the fixing of a tribute and that London bought peace from the enemy too, and we have seen that the later meeting there reaffirmed that a tribute would be paid.
Cnut's men had fought hard, and doubtless expected to be remunerated accordingly.
Failure to meet these expectations would have been dangerous, especially as his army consisted partly of the forces of independent warlords like Thorkell the Tall and the Norwegian Earl Eric of Lade, whose loyalty could not be taken entirely for granted.
Collection of the very large sum of £72,000 therefore almost certainly went on throughout 1017 and into 1018, when it was handed over, along with £10,500 from London.
Some of the Scandinavian ships then went to Denmark, and Danes and English came to an agreement at Oxford.
This may indicate that no final reconciliation could take place until after the payment had been made.
Conditions in England while the tax was being gathered are likely to have been grim, considering the devastation caused by the recent fighting, and that the tribute came on top of the large amounts levied in Æthelred's reign.
Cnut divided the country in four in 1017, keeping Wessex for himself and giving East Anglia to Thorkell, Mercia to Eadric, and Northumbria to Eric.
Neither the precise purpose nor the duration of this move are clear, but it was probably largely intended to provide an interim military government, facilitate the collection of taxation, give Cnut's chief supporters the impression that their efforts were proving worthwhile, and hold the country down.
The continuance of large-scale English resistance may have been unlikely, but there were sources of danger to be neutralised.
One was Eadric of Mercia himself.
He had played a successful hand under Æthelred, and maintained his position in the fighting of 1015–16, but Cnut, perhaps with the  encouragement of his consort Ælfgifu of Northampton, who retained some sort of recognised position even after his marriage to Emma of Normandy, and whose father Eadric had overthrown, clearly decided that he was too powerful and dangerous to be tolerated further.
The Encomiast has him beheaded by Earl Eric personally, while Florence says that he was killed in London at Christmas 1017 and that Cnut ordered the corpse to be left unburied.
The Chronicle too mentions his death, and also those of Northman of Mercia and the West Saxons Æthelweard and Brihtric, although there are indications that the blood-letting went further still.
Executions are easily exaggerated, but the Encomiast's statement that many English leaders were killed with Eadric, and that of the later Evesham chronicle that many of his soldiers died too, are quite plausible, given that he would have had powerful henchmen whom it was doubtless politic to eliminate.
More generally, the Norman William of Poitiers, writing just after the Conquest, claims that Cnut cruelly slaughtered the noblest of England's sons, young and old, to ensure the dominion of himself and his children.
Others were banished, including Eadwig, "king of the ceorls" , who had quite likely been the leader of a peasant rising.
Conditions late in Æthelred's reign could well have resulted in such a movement, for apart from the effects of famine and enemy harrying, those landowners with dependent peasantry may often have expected them to shoulder much of the tax burden, and that burden had been particularly heavy between 1011 and 1014.
Eadwig, who bore, or affected, a royal name, looks like a significant figure, and Florence says that he was eventually reconciled with Cnut.
Surviving members of the English royal family were an obvious focus for opposition, as Cnut's desire to deny Edmund's relatives their rights at the London meeting shows.
Florence reports under 1016 that English counsellors decided upon the exile of the much-respected ætheling Eadwig, Æthelred's only surviving son by his first consort, and that Cnut, exulting at their abandonment of him, plotted his murder by promising honours, dignities and favour to the nobleman Æthelweard in return for Eadwig's head.
However, Æthelweard, who was of the finest English stock, and may well have been the man of that name executed by Cnut in 1017 (see above), dissembled by undertaking what he had no intention of performing, and the Chronicle records the ætheling's eventual banishment in 1017.
He seems later to have returned; possibly an attempt on the throne was being planned when he died, for the C text's statement that Cnut afterwards had him killed is followed by Florence, who adds that he was betrayed by those he held dearest.
The history of Edward and Edmund, the infant sons of Edmund Ironside, is almost totally dark until Edward's eventual return from Hungary in 1057.
Florence says that Eadric advised Cnut to kill them, but that he was ashamed to do so in England, and despatched the boys for the purpose to his ally the king of Sweden, who sent them to Hungary.
The twelfth-century poet Gaimar's tale that they went first to Denmark, and that there was a plot to restore them, may not be complete nonsense.
This left Edward and Alfred, Æthelred's sons by Emma.
Obscure as they are, one can be confident that relations with Normandy were an important aspect of Æthelred's  reign: he is known to have made a treaty with Richard I, married his daughter, and gone into exile there in 1013, and reported to have both sent a military expedition against it and in 1009 asked Duke Richard II for help.
Scandinavian forces left England for Normandy in the summer of 1000, and Swegen Forkbeard allegedly made an agreement with Richard II in Rouen c.1013.
According to Thietmar of Merseburg, Emma was in London during the siege of 1016, and she may be the lady referred to in the poem LiDsmannaflokkr.
William of Jumièges says that Cnut married her after having her brought from the city before the siege ended and giving her weight in gold and silver before the whole army, but his chronology here is suspect, as he places the battle of Auxendunum (presumably Assandun, 18 October) before Æthelred's death on 23 April, and the more contemporary Chronicle date of mid-1017 for the marriage is preferable.
Despite the Encomiast's tale of how Cnut's men, searching far and wide for a suitable wife, eventually found her in Normandy, it may be, as Keynes has argued, that Emma had remained in England throughout.
The prime motive behind Cnut's desire for the union was almost certainly to prevent her sons gaining Norman military assistance, and it may well have occurred in mid-1017 because the preceding months were occupied by negotiations with her brother Richard.
The Encomiast mentions the exchange of emissaries, and Ralph Glaber, writing in Dijon before c.1030, thought that the marriage followed an agreement with Richard, and that Cnut at  some stage sent the Normans military help, while the Inuentio et Miracula Sancti Vulfranni, written in the Norman abbey of St Wandrille c.1053-4, says that the match had Richard's consent and support.
The latter two sources are of uncertain reliability, while the Encomiast's suppression of Emma's previous marriage to Æthelred makes one suspicious of his entire treatment of the affair, but it is inherently likely that negotiations did take place, for Cnut was shrewd enough to appreciate that gaining Emma's assistance against her sons without Richard's goodwill would have been to leave the job half done.
That he later troubled to marry his sister Estrith to Richard's successor Robert (see below) probably also implies that his wife's cooperation was not alone thought sufficient.
Her previous experience as queen of England conceivably added to her attractions, and Swegen's treaty with Richard may have facilitated the discussions, especially if, as is quite likely, Cnut was present when it was made.
The Encomiast has Emma stipulating that a son of hers, rather than any of his other progeny, should be given the succession, and in the circumstances this seems a plausible feature of the deal, especially as she had evidently earlier required the English to guarantee that her son Edward would succeed Æthelred.
Now, however, he, Alfred and their sister Godgifu were abandoned to what must have looked like permanent exile in the Norman court; Edward was doubtless on his way there when he visited the monastery of St Peter's Ghent in December 1016 and, according to a charter, promised them English lands should he become king.
Cnut still had a difficult road to travel, but by the end of 1017 some major obstacles already lay behind him, and his position in England was much more secure than it had been twelve months earlier.
Apart from the meeting and coronation in London, and Cnut's presence there at Christmas 1017 for Eadric's execution, little is known of his whereabouts very early in the reign.
In 1018 Thietmar of Merseburg says that he destroyed the crews of thirty pirate ships, and he perhaps visited Canterbury to initiate his important and generally good relations with the archbishopric.
Archbishop Lyfing is likely to have recently returned from Rome, where he received his pallium and letters of exhortation for Cnut from Pope Benedict VIII.
The charter S 950 is a grant to him from 1018, and so is S 952, which alleges that Cnut gave Christ Church freedom, and may be connected with the report (S 985) that he confirmed their liberties by placing their charters on the altar.
A contemporary Christ Church gospel book records the entry of Cnut and his brother Harald into confraternity with the community, and although Cnut could simply have given them Harald's name, it is possible that he was in England in 1016, as Thietmar says, remained with Cnut, went to Canterbury, and returned to Denmark with part of the fleet after the payment of 1018.
If a Canterbury visit did occur in 1018 it may have been while Cnut and his men were waiting for the £82,500 to be handed over, as the bulk of those who received it were doubtless based in and around London.
Cnut subsequently retained forty ships in his service, and proceeded west for the meeting at Oxford where the Chronicle says Danes and English came to an understanding.
Its nature is unknown, for the D text's statement that they agreed to observe Edgar's law was probably taken from the Letter of 1019–20, itself influenced by Archbishop Wulfstan of York, who drew up a document after the meeting which stated that the witan had decided to zealously observe Edgar's law.
We have already seen that this may simply have been a way of saying that Wulfstan had secured an undertaking that they were going to abandon practices which he found displeasing.
However, Wulfstan does say that "Cnut, with the advice  of his councillors, fully established peace and friendship between the Danes and the English and put an end to all their former enmity" .
This implies, as does its appearance in the Chronicle, that the Oxford assembly was important, and that the payment of tribute and the departure of part of Cnut's fleet had prepared the way for an accommodation between the two sides.
Like the meeting in London just after the death of Edmund Ironside, it hints at a realisation on Cnut's part that his rule would to a degree depend on English support.
It will become evident in Chapter 5 that this was so.
From Oxford he may have travelled into the south-west.
The charters S 951 and 953 are gifts in Cornwall purportedly made by him in 1018, although neither is of certain authenticity, and this was seemingly also the date of his lost foundation charter for Buckfast Abbey in Devon.
Maybe he wintered in the area, attempting to ensure the loyalty of the West Saxon heartland where Æthelred's son Eadwig the ætheling may have recently returned and died and where there was soon to be difficulty, for in 1019 one of his men, Agemund, received a Dorset estate by S 955, and the dubious Exeter charter S 954 bears the same date.
By late March 1019 he is likely to have been in Winchester: S 956 was granted in the royal presence to the New Minster during the first week of Easter, and has a long witness list which no doubt represents the gathering of the Easter court.
DENMARK c.1014-19
Later in 1019, the Chronicle says that Cnut sailed for Denmark and stayed there all winter.
Events among the Danes are little known in these years.
The Encomiast alleges that Swegen Forkbeard took his elder son Cnut on the conquest of England, leaving Harald, the younger, in Denmark, and that after Swegen's death Cnut returned and asked Harald to divide it between them, while offering him the eventual choice of Denmark or England if he would assist in  subjugating the latter; but Harald refused both requests and, after jointly bringing their mother back from among the Slavs, Cnut sailed for England alone.
The Encomiast's reliability here is questionable.
Thietmar of Merseburg has Harald involved in the siege of London in 1016, and we have seen that the Canterbury confraternity entry may also support his presence in England.
Numismatic evidence is relevant too.
Mark Blackburn has shown that the earliest Scandinavian coins inscribed CNVT REX DÆNOR (Cnut, king of Danes), and modelled on Æthelred's final Last Small Cross type, were struck from dies probably made in Lincoln no later than 1015, and so could have originated during Cnut's sojourn in Denmark in 1014–15.
This seems to fit the Encomiast's evidence on his claim to the Danish throne, but throws no light on what happened to Harald, or when.
Later sources claim to.
The Danish mid-thirteenth-century Annales Ryenses have him deposed in favour of Cnut for effeminacy, and Cnut then replaced by Harald because of absence from Denmark, but restored after Harald's death.
While this may be "absurd" , there are other hints that the position was more complex than the Encomiast either knew or wanted to admit.
A royal grant (S 952) of dubious authenticity to Christ Church Canterbury from 1018 is witnessed by a Haldenne princeps regis who also appears (as Haldan princeps) as a donor of land to them in later obituaries.
Now according to the mid-twelfth-century Roskilde Chronicon, after the death of Harald Bluetooth a certain Swegen invaded England and expelled King Æthelred, and his sons Gorm and Harthacnut attacked Denmark and killed King Haldanus and his sons.
The one then took Denmark and the other England, as their father had died in the meantime.
Whether Haldanus was the son of  Harald Bluetooth is, it says, doubtful.
This story seems garbled and may be nonsense, but the coincidence between King Haldanus and the Haldenne princeps regis of the Canterbury material remains; possibly Cnut did have a relative or associate of this name, for the fact that his sister Santslaue occurs only in the Liber Vitae of New Minster Winchester indicates that his kin could have extended further than the threadbare sources reveal.
Nor is it unlikely that some of them, or others, were interested in taking the Danish throne, and that the later stories about the killing of Haldanus and the expulsion of Harald reflect this, if in a distorted form.
An alternative to thinking that Harald had been in England since 1016, and returned to Denmark with part of a disbanded fleet in 1018, might be that he had in the interval been expelled from it, and sailed with the fleet in 1018 in an attempt to regain control.
But this is sheer speculation.
What is tolerably certain is that he was still alive when he either entered into confraternity with Christ Church or Cnut gave them his name, and that when Cnut himself sailed for Denmark in 1019 it was to suppress trouble.
The Letter of 1019–20 says that he intended to avert a threat to England, and succeeded in dealing with great dangers, so that the Danes would henceforth at need be able to assist the English.
Little can be made of this, although the biographer of Edward the Confessor speaks of Danes preparing to rebel against Cnut early in his reign, and Henry of Huntingdon thought that an English and Danish attack on the Wandali (the Wends, the Slav peoples on the southern shores of the Baltic) occurred in its third year.
The Letter is clearly concerned to give a favourable impression, but the situation was presumably fairly stable when Cnut returned to England in the spring of 1020.
By then Harald is usually assumed to have been dead.
1020–4
A large meeting was held at Cirencester at Easter (17 April) 1020 and Ealdorman Æthelweard of Wessex outlawed.
Cnut's absence had obviously seen unrest in the  area, but unless it was connected with the return of the ætheling Eadwig (date unknown, see above) its nature is obscure.
Later in the year, probably on the anniversary of 18 October, he went to Assandun for the consecration of the church which commemorated the battle of 1016.
This was performed by Archbishop Wulfstan of York, Lyfing of Canterbury having died on 12 June.
It may have been at about the same time that monks were installed in the church of St Edmund at Bury.
Henceforth, knowledge of Cnut's activities deteriorates.
The outlawing of Earl Thorkell of East Anglia on 11 November is his sole recorded action in 1021, and in 1022 the Chronicle says simply that he sailed out with his ships to Wiht (D reads Wihtland).
Both events merited fuller treatment.
Thorkell's expulsion belongs to the ambivalent relations between Cnut and some of his powerful Scandinavian followers discussed more fully in Chapter 5, and may reflect considerable political difficulties, possibly linked to friction with some East Anglian and Fenland churches around this time.
Indeed, it is not unlikely that he at some point faced armed resistance in the Fens, as the Liber Eliensis mentions a siege of Ely.
Even so, that he was able to expel the powerful figure to whom he may have owed much of his victory in 1016 must say something about the effectiveness of the power base which he had succeeded in creating in England in the intervening years.
If Thorkell had once dreamt of dominating the young king then he had dreamt in vain, although he soon proceeded to occupy a position in Denmark which would cause further problems within the next two years.
The Chronicle annal for 1022 is thoroughly obscure.
Elsewhere, its entries regularly use Wiht and Wihtland to denote the Isle of Wight; why Cnut needed a navy there at this date is less clear.
Sandwich was better situated to meet a threat from Scandinavia; Wight, where Harold's ships awaited William the Conqueror long and unsuccessfully in the summer of 1066, implies a connection with the south or west, and perhaps particularly Normandy.
If Ralph Glaber's information on the assistance sent to the Normans  by Cnut is correct, it could have been a staging-post on a journey south.
Indeed, if his (undated) grant to the abbey of Fécamp (S 949) is genuine, one might suppose that he visited the Norman coast at some time, and his generosity to a foundation which had been particularly favoured by the ducal family (in 1001 Richard II invited the celebrated monastic reformer William of Dijon to be its abbot) seems most likely to mean that his relations with them were still satisfactory.
A move to Wight with hostile intent against the Normans in 1022 also appears the less plausible because the eventual worsening of Cnut's relations with the duchy (see below) is not known to have preceded Richard II's death in 1026.
It is now thought to have been Richard, rather than his son Robert, who gave Godgifu, sister of the æthelings Edward and Alfred, in marriage to Count Dreux of the Vexin.
This implies that the exiles enjoyed a certain status in his court, but need not mean that he envisaged actively espousing their cause, or had become dissatisfied about Emma's union with Cnut.
Nevertheless, Dudo of St Quentin's history of the Norman dukes, which is addressed to Richard II, claims that an English king, Alstemus, gave assistance to Richard's great-grandfather Rollo, and later invoked a pact between them to receive Rollo's help against English rebels, at the same time presenting the Norman with half of his kingdom and his property, which Rollo returned to him.
Dudo also says that one of Richard I's enemies acknowledged that the English were subject to him.
Unfortunately, it is uncertain whether he was writing during Emma's marriage to Cnut or that to Æthelred, but these tales hint that one or both suggested to Richard II that a claim to England was worth recording, and that he wanted to keep his options open.
Even so, Cnut's journey to Wight in 1022 need have had nothing to do with the Normans.
It could have been directed against a piratical descent of the sort which had happened in 1018 (see above), and would occur again in 1047, when twenty-five ships harried Sandwich and  Wight.
Furthermore, it is possible that the Chronicle entry for 1022 does not refer to the Isle of Wight at all.
J.C.H.R. Steenstrup pointed out that an account of a northern voyage given to King Alfred, and incorporated into his translation of Orosius' Histories against the Pagans, mentions Witland as an area east of the Vistula (now north-east Poland), and judged that Cnut was operating on the southern shores of the Baltic.
Henry of Huntingdon's tale of fighting against the Slavs (see above) might also be relevant, and if Cnut did spend part of 1022 in the Baltic it would explain why the Chronicle C text records his return from Denmark in 1023 without, otherwise, having said that he had gone there.
Against this theory is that the Wiht of C and E indicate that this was the annal's original reading rather than D's Wihtland, and that it seems very likely to mean Wight.
Also, unless something particularly striking happened there, it is difficult to see why an English annalist should single out Witland from the various places which Cnut may have visited during a Baltic expedition.
At any rate, he was in Denmark early in 1023, making terms with Thorkell, whose position there had strengthened since his expulsion from England two years earlier to the extent that Cnut left it in his care and exchanged sons with him.
Thorkell probably received one of Cnut's offspring by Ælfgifu of Northampton, as Harthacnut, who can at this date have been no older than five, was present at the translation of the relics of Archbishop Ælfheah (see below) in June.
Cnut brought Thorkell's son back to England.
Osbern has his father killed by a lowly mob and thrown to birds and wild animals; more reliable sources do not mention him again.
Arguing from silence is dangerous, but had he played a significant role in Cnut's Scandinavian wars of c.1025-8 (see below) information about it might have been expected to survive, and so he perhaps did disappear from the scene soon after 1023.
Possibly  Cnut took active steps to rid himself of this dangerous figure for good.
We do not know.
His return to England seems to have been accompanied by Bishop Gerbrand of Roskilde, who was to be consecrated by Archbishop Æthelnoth of Canterbury, and is among the witnesses of the charter S 958.
Although this grant to Ely, dated 1022, is a likely forgery, its witness list could come from a genuine document of 1023, as Cnut may have visited the monastery on his return to deal with trouble involving the abbot, who had recently taken his case to Rome.
By early June he was in London for the translation from St Paul's to Canterbury of the body of St Ælfheah.
As we shall see, this may well have been politically motivated to the extent that the relics of the archbishop so recently and brutally murdered by Cnut's countrymen were perhaps serving as a rallying point for discontent in the city.
However that may be, they were removed, with the assistance of troops if Osbern can be believed, and accompanied from Rochester to Canterbury by Queen Emma and Harthacnut; Cnut remained in London.
S 961, a grant in Dorset to the Scandinavian Orc, is the only relic of his activities in 1024.
At the same time, events across the North Sea were building to a crisis.
THE NORTHERN WARS
After the death of King Olaf Tryggvason of Norway at the battle of Svold in 999 it had been ruled by Earl Eric of Lade and his brother Swegen under the sovereignty of Cnut's father; according to later Scandinavian tradition, Eric married Swegen Forkbeard's daughter Gytha.
He may have fought in the army raiding England between  1009 and 1012, and certainly assisted in Cnut's conquest of 1015–16, subsequently receiving the earldom of Northumbria.
Norway he left under the control of his brother Swegen and son Hakon, but the former died shortly after being defeated by Olaf Haraldsson in c.1015 at the battle of Nesjar (in the Oslofjord); Olaf became king, and Hakon made his way to England.
Cnut thus lost the control over Norway enjoyed by his father, and Olaf conceivably had some connection with whatever early difficulties he experienced in Denmark.
In so far as these involved Thorkell after 1021 it is worth remembering that Olaf and he had been associates in the army of 1009–12, and that both had later served Æthelred.
King Olaf of Sweden was also an ally, as well as step-son, of Swegen Forkbeard, and presumably the Swedish king who according to Florence of Worcester had a treaty with Cnut.
Adam of Bremen confirms this, and recounts that with Olaf's help he intended to conquer both England and Norway.
Unfortunately, Olaf died c.1022, to be succeeded by his son Anund Jacob, and Cnut's position in Denmark subsequently came under serious threat.
The Chronicle E text says under 1025 that he went to Denmark, to the Holy River, where he met Ulf and Eglaf with large Swedish naval and land forces, and that very many men, both Danes and English, fell on his side, and the Swedes had possession of the field.
The next annal in E is not until 1028, and hence it is quite feasible that the 1025 entry has been dislocated by one or even two years.
Later Scandinavian sources suggest a date of 1027 for the battle of Holy River, but this is rendered implausible by chapter 13 of the Letter sent by Cnut to England in that year, which mentions people who had tried to deprive him of his kingdom and his life, but whose power had been destroyed by God, and says that he is returning from Rome to Denmark to make peace with them.
As the fighting was apparently over by the time he attended the German emperor Conrad II's imperial coronation in Rome in March  1027, the most likely year for Holy River therefore seems to be 1026, or conceivably, if operations were protracted, 1025.
Only if there was further trouble after the visit to Rome would 1027 be a plausible date.
Although Ulf and Eglaf are often identified with Ulf, the husband of Cnut's sister Estrith, and his brother Eglaf, this is not certain.
Eglaf held an English earldom, and any rebellion must have been forgiven, if he fled England after Cnut's death as later Welsh chronicles say.
Even so, he last witnesses a dated charter (S 961) in 1024, which would fit well enough with his presence at Holy River.
If his brother Ulf was involved, as stated by Saxo Grammaticus and possibly lost northern sources, he too must have made his peace with Cnut, who allegedly had him assassinated in a church at Roskilde.
Obviously, he and Eglaf may have sided with those attacking Denmark, and one or both could later have been forgiven, but other candidates are available as Cnut's opponents at Holy River.
The skald Sighvat's poem Austrfararvísur (Eastern Travel Verses) describes a journey to Sweden by its author on behalf of Olaf of Norway, and refers several times to a chieftain named Ragnvald, who appears once with "the wise Ulf" .
Moreover, another of Sighvat's poems, Erlingsflokkr, on the Norwegian Erling Skjalgsson, mentions the marriage of one of his sisters to Ragnvald, father of Ulf, and  verse 19 of Austrfararvísur includes an unnamed brother of Ulf.
The Icelandic saga writer Snorri Sturluson was by the early thirteenth century calling this brother Eglaf, and identifying Ragnvald as earl of Västergötland in Sweden.
It might be doubted whether Ragnvald's sons, who were first put forward as Cnut's opponents at Holy River long ago, would have been sufficiently well known in England for the Chronicle entry to be readily intelligible, but this is not certain, and an annalist naming leaders of large Swedish forces may have thought it obvious that they were Swedes themselves.
In all, identifying Ulf as the son of Ragnvald seems at least as plausible as believing that he was Cnut's brother-in-law Ulf.
Whoever they were, Ulf and Eglaf are unlikely to have been the prime movers in the attack on Cnut.
The campaign which included the fight at Holy River was probably a joint enterprise of Olaf of Norway and Anund Jacob of Sweden, who perhaps both felt threatened by the strength of Cnut's position in England and Denmark, and hoped to profit by his absence from Scandinavia.
Sighvat's Knútsdrápa, apparently composed shortly after Cnut's death, has Olaf taking a fleet south from the river Nid (in the Trondheim area) to Zealand, and Anund leading a Swedish force against the Danes.
But, says Sighvat, they were unable to subdue Denmark, and one of them, the destroyer (hlöDr) of the Danes, harried Skåne.
There is no doubt that Cnut disposed of this threat, but where Holy River fits in is unclear.
Sighvat's poem is known to be incomplete, but surviving verses do not mention the battle, and Ottar the Black's Knútsdrápa says that Cnut opposed or threw back (hnekDir) the Swedes there, and describes him as their withstander (prengvir), neither of which is resonant  of overwhelming victory, Indeed, if Holy River was known only from the Chronicle entry one would think it a defeat, but Ottar is unlikely to have included a famous reverse in a list of Cnut's achievements, and the royal title used in the 1027 Letter (see below) suggests that he did eventually claim suzerainty over some Swedes.
Also, coins seem for a time to have been minted in his name in Sigtuna (on Lake Mälar, near modern Stockholm) with the title REX SW (king of Swedes), by a moneyer who had earlier struck for Anund Jacob.
However, the significance of this is questionable, as extant specimens all emanate from a single obverse die.
Holy River is usually identified with that still called Helga Å, which enters the sea near Kristianstad in southern Sweden, and then lay roughly on the eastern border of the Danish province of Skåne.
This is plausible enough, although Bo Gräslund has recently contended that a watercourse near Stockholm once bore the name too, and that a battle there would provide a better historical context for the Sigtuna coinage and Cnut's claim to rule some of the Swedes.
This may or may not be so.
P.H. Sawyer has drawn attention to rune stones in Denmark and Västergötland raised in honour of men accorded the English epithet thegn, and concluded that the latter area was the part of Sweden controlled by Cnut, through agents who received a title borne in England by royal subordinates.
Seven instances or variations of the place-name Thegnaby in the coastal  area between Oslo and Göteborg could be part of this picture too, and hint at a considerable degree of organisation.
Cnut's supremacy over part of Sweden may be obscure; it need not have been ineffective.
Sighvat's Knútsdrápa indicates that he had sailed from England to deal with the threat posed by Olaf and Anund Jacob, and mentions his visit to Rome.
He was certainly present there at the imperial coronation of Conrad II at Easter (26 March) 1027, and the Letter states his intention of returning to Denmark to make peace.
By this time, if not before, he must have been preparing to overthrow Olaf of Norway.
The Letter calls him king of all England and Denmark and the Norwegians and of some of the Swedes, which if genuine implies that he already claimed Olaf's throne, and Florence of Worcester says that in 1027 he heard that some Norwegians were discontented, sent them large quantities of gold and silver, and secured an undertaking of future support.
But he returned to England before launching his campaign, almost certainly to marshal his resources.
The Chronicle C text records that in 1028 Cnut sailed from England to Norway with fifty ships; D and E add that he drove Olaf away and took it for himself.
The skaldic poetry is more helpful.
Sighvat was in Olaf's service at the time, and his Vestrfararvísur (Western Travel Verses) name Earl Hakon, son of Earl Eric of Lade, as acting with Cnut, and speak repeatedly of money offered to Olaf's men, while the Tøgdrápa of Thorarin Praise-Tongue, who apparently sailed with Cnut's fleet, indicates that he went first to Denmark to assemble his ships in the Limfjord in Jutland, and then proceeded north along the Norwegian coast to Trondheim.
Olaf's major followers had seemingly not only  been seduced by Cnut's cash, but also angered, according to Adam of Bremen, by the king's tendency to apprehend their wives for sorcery.
He was able to mount no effective resistance and withdrew, while Cnut put Norway under Hakon's control.
If Thorarin is reliable this was also the point at which he entrusted Denmark to one of his sons.
Sighvat's Knútsdrápa implies that he had a son there at the time of the joint attack by Olaf and Anund, possibly the one given to Thorkell in 1023.
The Chronicle D and E texts assign Cnut's return to England to 1029.
Either in that or more likely the following year Earl Hakon was drowned at sea, and Olaf took the opportunity to return to Norway.
In 1030 he was killed at the battle of Stiklestad (near Trondheim) by his own people, and Cnut then put his consort Ælfgifu of Northampton and their son Swegen in charge there.
Swegen Forkbeard had ruled Denmark, controlled Norway, and been allied with King Olaf of Sweden.
Cnut inherited this alliance, but Norway was lost to Olaf Haraldsson as he was conquering England, and Denmark may have had to be left to his brother Harald.
It hence took time to recreate his father's empire.
His position in England had to be secured, and early difficulties in Denmark, Thorkell, Olaf of Norway and Anund Jacob of Sweden had all to be overcome; thus, not until 1028 did Cnut's position in Scandinavia rival Swegen's in 1013.
But this is not to deny his achievement, which was fairly clearly founded on political, military, administrative and diplomatic skills of a high order, and his own sense of it is indicated by his adoption around this time of a crown modelled on that worn by the German emperors.
His considerable standing in the northern world is also reflected by his good relations with the emperor Conrad II, which culminated in the betrothal of his daughter Gunnhild to Conrad's son (see page 109).
He seems to have intended to rule Norway, like Swegen, through the earls of  Lade, and his dominion there would doubtless have been more secure if Earl Hakon had not died prematurely and without issue.
Still, the return of Olaf's son Magnus to Norway, and expulsion of Ælfgifu of Northampton and her son, lay in the future in 1030, when Cnut was perhaps at the zenith of his power.
ROME AND SCOTLAND
Nothing is known of his other activities in that year (but see below), and 1031 brings a further set of problems.
The Chronicle C text is blank here, while D and E record visits to Rome and Scotland.
1031 for the Rome visit may be a scribal error for 1026 (MXXVI having become MXXXI), for as Cnut was certainly in Rome in March 1027 his journey could have started late the previous year.
All the same, he possibly did visit it twice.
According to Goscelin's account of the translation of the relics of St Mildred from Thanet to St Augustine's Canterbury, written in the late eleventh century, Cnut went to Canterbury as he was setting out for Rome and promised that he would allow the translation if he returned safely.
Sure enough, St Augustine saved him from shipwreck on the way back, he agreed to the translation, and ordered Ælfstan, abbot of St Augustine's, to come to him at Whitsuntide.
Ælfstan anticipated events by receiving the royal assent on the Saturday, and arrived in Thanet on Whit Sunday itself.
Knowing the likely unpopularity of his mission, he concealed its purpose from the island's inhabitants, and withdrew from their banquet early, with the excuse that he had been tired by the journey; later, when they had gone exhausted to their beds, he entered Mildred's church accompanied by selected monks and the soldiers he had prudently brought with him.
Much of the night passed in vain attempts to open the tomb, but an appeal to the saint herself worked wonders (a common feature of such tales), and the party made for its ships with the precious plunder.
Narrowly escaping the hostile intentions of the awakened populace, they eventually bore Mildred into Canterbury amid great rejoicing.
This translation, says Goscelin, took place in 1030, on 18 May, when  Benedict was pope, Henry emperor, Cnut king of England, Æthelnoth archbishop of Canterbury, and Ælfstan abbot of St Augustine's.
Apart from the fact that the pope at this time was John XIX and the emperor Conrad, these details are consistent.
Whitsuntide was 17 May in 1030, and as the saint's body was raised during the following night, it would have entered Canterbury on 18 May.
Now if Goscelin was correct in believing that the translation occurred immediately after Cnut's return from Rome, this seems unlikely to be the visit of 1027.
Moreover, the story of Cnut's presence in Canterbury before and after the Rome trip, and of the storm and near shipwreck, also occurs in his account of the miracles worked by St Augustine.
This omits the details on Mildred, but adds, in a way reminiscent of chapter 5 of the 1027 Letter, that Cnut was most acceptable to the emperor, and says that on landing he hurried to St Augustine's to offer them rich gifts — no doubt including the gold plate which he took from his treasures and held aloft to attract the saint's attention during the storm.
One hesitates long before accepting such details from a hagiographer writing some sixty years later, not least because by Goscelin's time the canons of St Gregory's Canterbury were claiming that they, not St Augustine's, had Mildred's remains.
However, the most notable feature of these accounts is not so much their dating, as the apparent belief in St Augustine's, where Goscelin spent the last years of his life, that Cnut visited them both on the way to and from Rome.
This may be invention, for the propaganda value of possessing a saint courted thus by a king renowned for his piety is obvious; but if not, and taken together with the Encomiast's statement that Cnut visited St Omer while on pilgrimage to Rome, a journey in which he embarked from somewhere near Canterbury (maybe Sandwich) and sailed to Flanders seems a distinct possibility.
It is not readily  identifiable with the 1027 trip (even though Goscelin's mention of the emperor in the second story seems to refer to it), as the Letter says that he had arrived in Rome from Denmark and intended returning there.
The evidence is inconclusive, but a further visit to Rome, perhaps in 1030, cannot be completely ruled out.
Although the date, like that for the Rome trip, should not be pressed, the Chronicle E text (D is less detailed) says that in 1031 Cnut went to Scotland and received the submission of three kings, Malcolm (II, 1005–34), Mælbæth and Iehmarc.
There has been doubt whether Mælbæth is identifiable with Shakespeare's Macbeth, who deposed Malcolm II's grandson Duncan in 1040, and whose name is given clearly enough as MacbeoDen by D under 1054.
Even so, B.T. Hudson has recently stressed that a spelling in D is irrelevant to one in E, and used twelfth-century evidence (and E is a twelfth-century manuscript) to show that in any case Mælbæth is a convincing English version of Macbeth, whose family ruled, conceivably by the early eleventh century with the title king, an area around the Moray Firth as far north as Sutherland and Caithness.
Iehmarc may have been Echmarcach Ragnallson, later king of Dublin (see below), but who possibly in 1031 controlled part of Galloway and maybe the Isle of Man.
Ralph Glaber reports that Cnut fought a long war against Malcolm and the Scots, that they were eventually reconciled through Emma and Richard of Normandy, and that he received Malcolm's (otherwise unknown) son from the baptismal font.
Written before c.1030, this must if correct refer to events prior to Richard's death in 1026, and perhaps to the aftermath of the battle of Carham.
Early-twelfth-century works attributed to Symeon of Durham  mention Carham (on the Tweed) twice.
The Historia Dunelmensis Ecclesiæ says that the English were heavily defeated there by the Scots in 1018, and the Historia Regum that it was a great battle fought in 1018 between Earl Uhtred of Northumbria and Malcolm king of Scots, supported by Owain king of Strathclyde.
Unfortunately, the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle has Uhtred killed on Cnut's orders in 1016.
Either this date is wrong, and he died later, or Carham was in 1016 or earlier, or it was in 1018 and the Historia Regum is mistaken about Uhtred's presence there.
The late-eleventh-century Durham tract De Obsessione Dunelmi states that after his death Eadwulf, his brother and successor as earl of Bernicia, surrendered Lothian (i.e. territory beyond the Tweed) to Malcolm, but yet another Durham work, the De Primo Saxonum Adventu, has Lothian given to the Scots by Edgar.
The De Obsessione says that Malcolm assaulted Durham and was driven off by Uhtred during Æthelred's reign, and the Irish Annals of Ulster record fighting between Scots and English in 1005 (recte 1006).
It would not be surprising if Malcolm renewed his efforts c.1016-18, considering the likely state of England at the time, and Cnut could well have acted against him once free to do so.
Ralph Glaber may thus be correct in referring to hostilities before 1026.
However, the 1031 visit itself, assuming that it is not misdated, suggests further trouble.
A verse by Sighvat says that famous princes have brought their heads to Cnut from Fife to buy peace; where this fits in is not clear, although as it also refers to St Olaf, and in the past tense, his death in 1030 had evidently occurred before it was composed.
RELATIONS WITH THE WELSH AND THE IRISH
A verse attributed to Ottar the Black greets the ruler of the Danes, Irish, English and Island-dwellers.
The reference to the Irish not only brings to mind Swegen Forkbeard's putative activities in the Irish Sea and Adam of Bremen's story of his stay with a rex Scothorum (? king of the Irish), but can also be linked to the possibility that the Iehmarc who submitted in 1031 was Echmarcach Ragnallson, who replaced Sihtric Silkbeard as king of Dublin in 1036.
Hudson has concluded that Cnut received the submission of the Scots in 1031 in Strathclyde, during a naval expedition into the Irish Sea, and whether or not Echmarcach did rule in Galloway and the Isle of Man at this time (see above), his presence at the meeting could be relevant to Cnut's relations with the Irish.
Similarly, the plundering of Wales by the Foreigners (i.e. Scandinavians) of Dublin and the English, recorded by the Irish Annals of Tigernach under 1030, may have been a joint expedition, and there is a faint possibility that Dublin's first bishop was consecrated by Archbishop Æthelnoth of Canterbury in Cnut's time, with whatever implications that might or might not have.
It is conceivable, too, that the Sihtric dux who witnesses three of Cnut's charters may be the Dublin monarch Sihtric Silkbeard, who used dies evidently made for him in the mint at Chester to strike pennies naming him king of the Irish and modelled on Cnut's Quatrefoil type.
As for Wales, a charter forged in Llandaff in the twelfth century claims that the Welsh ruler Rhydderch ab Iestyn (d.1033), whom it calls king, confirmed Bishop Joseph of Llandaff in possession of all the see's lands and charters, with the support of Archbishop Æthelnoth and letters from Cnut.
Opinion is divided on whether this document was  forged on the basis of a record made in Joseph's time.
If so, Cnut's power would seem in some sense to have extended into Wales.
As so often, there is much here that is both tempting and tenuous.
One would like to know more, for example, of the circumstances in which Sihtric Silkbeard's son Olaf was killed by Englishmen on his way to Rome in 1034, and about the death of Caradog, son of Rhydderch ab Iestyn, at the hands of the English in 1035.
Still, it is far from unlikely that both Swegen and Cnut did have relations with the Scandinavian colonies in Ireland, and there is just enough evidence to suggest that when the Encomiast named among the latter's dominions not only England, Denmark and Norway, but also Brittania and Scothia, he was not necessarily exaggerating.
Cnut was well able to raise powerful fleets, which may have been effective not only in Scandinavia, but also against Scotland and Wales, and in the Irish Sea.
Claims to suzerainty over the Scots, Irish and Welsh are thus far from unlikely, and may for a time have enjoyed a foundation in reality.
Nor need these relations have owed everything to his father.
Æthelred's expedition into the Irish Sea in 1000 implies difficulties there, and earlier Anglo-Saxon kings had frequent contacts with the Welsh, whose border was no doubt often troubled.
Eadric Streona's raid on St David's in 1012 was not the first English incursion of Æthelred's reign, and Cnut had been opposed by Welsh allies of Edmund Ironside in 1016, and felt it necessary to settle several Scandinavian earls in the west midlands, one of whom, Eglaf, ravaged Dyfed in 1022; it is Welsh, not English, sources which record his flight from England after Cnut's death.
In 1039 Earl Leofric of Mercia's brother Edwin was killed in battle by Gruffydd ap Llywelyn, king of Gwynedd and Powys (north and mid-Wales), who was to extend his power over all his countrymen before meeting his death during Harold Godwinsson's Welsh campaign of 1063.
King Æthelstan, whose lordship over various Welsh princes  is implied by their witnessing of his charters, also invaded Scotland in 934, and the Scots were among the enemies he defeated at Brunanburh three years later.
The control of the Northumbrian kingdom first established by Æthelstan in 927 brought his successors too into regular contact with the Scots, and notably Edgar, who in 973 was consecrated at Bath in a ceremony perhaps intended to celebrate his lordship of all Britain.
Shortly afterwards, he probably ceded Lothian to the Scottish king Kenneth, and received his submission and that of other princes, including the kings of Gwynedd and Strathclyde.
Cnut's taking of a second, imperial, crown may well have been stimulated not only by a position in Scandinavia which emulated that of Swegen, but by achievements in Britain which lay firmly in a tradition established by the greatest of his royal Anglo-Saxon predecessors.
GERMANY AND NORMANDY
Two other areas, Germany and Normandy, were particularly important late in Cnut's reign.
His Danish border with Germany, and evident desire to emulate its rulers, must have stimulated mutual contact, although nothing is known of relations with the emperor Henry II (1002–24).
By his day the sort of German pressure on Denmark experienced by Harald Bluetooth was a thing of the past, for Henry was fully occupied with campaigns in Italy and Lotharingia, and especially against Cnut's uncle Boleslav of Poland, and may have troubled little about Swegen and Cnut, who were presumably happy to leave the Germans largely to their own devices while they were subjugating England.
Even so, one could guess that his wars against the Poles (peace was made in 1018) led to coldness with Boleslav's nephew, and that Cnut's attitude to the Germans improved when first Henry and then Boleslav (1025) died.
Adam of Bremen's statement that he and Henry's successor, Conrad II (1024–39), made peace through the mediation of the archbishop of Hamburg-Bremen hints at initial difficulties, but the only certainty is that good relations existed by March 1027, when Cnut attended Conrad's imperial coronation.
His pride in doing so is clear from the Letter of 1027, and no doubt extended to his other contacts with Conrad.
Adam, who is conflating events from various dates here, reports that Conrad asked for the marriage of Cnut's daughter (Gunnhild) to his son (Henry), and ceded Schleswig and territory north of the river Eider (south of Hedeby) as a token of their treaty of friendship.
However, the marriage negotiations are likely to have been after 1027.
Conrad had sent an embassy to Constantinople to arrange Henry's union with a daughter of the emperor Constantine VIII, who had no male heir.
Constantine's death in November 1028, and the marriage of the fifty-year-old Zoe to Romanus Argyrus, who thus gained the Byzantine throne, brought this to nothing, and it was probably in 1029 or later that a stronger link with Cnut became attractive.
Adam says that Cnut's valour secured a firm peace among the Slav peoples east of the Elbe, and Conrad perhaps gained military assistance against those troubling eastern Saxony, and Cnut's neutrality during the German campaigns which led to the submission of his cousin Mieszko II of Poland in 1032.
Gunnhild's betrothal to Henry occurred in 1035, and the marriage itself in 1036; she died of pestilence in Italy two years later.
Relations with Normandy were as important at the end as at the outset of Cnut's reign, because his marriage to Emma ultimately failed to maintain the good relations with her kin necessitated by their sheltering of Edward and Alfred, her sons by Æthelred.
Her brother Duke Richard II, with whom the union had almost certainly been negotiated in 1017, died in 1026, to be succeeded by his sons Richard III (1026–7) and Robert (1027–35).
Adam of Bremen states that Cnut's sister Margaret (usually known by her other  name, Estrith) married Duke Richard, who repudiated her, and set off on pilgrimage to Jerusalem to escape Cnut's wrath.
This is confused: it was Robert who went on pilgrimage to Jerusalem, dying on the return journey in 1035, and Ralph Glaber says clearly that it was he who married and divorced Estrith.
The diplomacy which must have preceded this match, and Cnut's desire for it, imply worries about Robert's attitude which were to prove well founded.
William of Jumiéges alleges that he treated the æthelings Edward and Alfred with honour, adopted them as brothers, and sent messengers to Cnut asking that they be restored to their own.
On Cnut's refusal, he commanded the construction and assembly of a large fleet at Fécamp.
This sailed for England, was driven by a gale to Jersey, made its way to Mont St Michel, and was then used in a campaign against Count Alan III of Brittany.
Nevertheless, envoys subsequently arrived from Cnut offering to restore half England to Æthelred's sons and establish peace, as he was gravely ill, whereupon Robert decided to postpone his expedition and go to Jerusalem.
S.D. Keynes has shown that Norman charter evidence seems to support important elements of this account.
Edward and Alfred appear together in only two of Robert's grants, one dated 1033 to the abbey of St Wandrille, and another, to the abbey of Fécamp, probably from that year.
Indeed, similarities in their formulae suggest that both were drawn up at Fécamp in 1033.
Also, a further grant by Robert to Fécamp from the early 1030s, which survives on its original single sheet of parchment, is witnessed by Edward as king, and in yet another charter, witnessed by Robert, Edward "king of the English" makes a grant to Mont St Michel.
It looks as though Robert may well have assembled a fleet at Fécamp, seemingly in 1033, and that it visited Mont St Michel, where Edward made a gift to the monks.
Another witness of the charter to St Wandrille dated 1033 is King Henry I of France, who is known from other sources to have been briefly in exile with Robert at Fécamp, and according Edward the title "king of the English" would presumably have done Robert's prestige no harm at all, as he would thus have been entertaining two exiled monarchs at the same time.
Whether his ships ever sailed against England, as William of Jumièges claims, is another matter.
Mont St Michel is known to have been disputed between Brittany and Normandy at about this date, and Robert's fleet may from the first have been intended to operate against it and the Bretons.
Furthermore, William of Jumièges was probably writing in the 1050s, after Edward the Confessor had promised the English throne to Robert's son William, and it was fairly clearly this which led him to repeat Dudo of St Quentin's story of the English king who entered into a pact with the Normans and later received Rollo's assistance against rebels, to include accounts of Anglo-Norman relations in the days of Æthelred and Cnut, and to end his description of Cnut's conquest of England and marriage to Emma by stating that he had wished to explain King Edward's origins to those who were ignorant of them.
At much the same time (c.1053-4), a monk of St Wandrille was similarly including in his Inuentio et Miracula Sancti Vulfranni an account of how Edward and Alfred took refuge in the Norman court, were welcomed by Richard II, and treated as his sons.
Edward was clearly, and not surprisingly, of considerable interest in Normandy at this date, and William of Jumièges would have had a motive for inventing Robert's expedition against England, to increase Edward's debt to the Normans in general and William's father in particular.
Nevertheless, it is not certainly fictitious, for the paucity of English sources on the later years  of Cnut's reign makes their silence inconclusive, and Robert may have been moved not only by feeling for the æthelings and his apparent friendship for their sister Godgifu's husband, Count Dreux of the Vexin, but also by memories of his rift with Cnut's sister Estrith.
If it did sail against him, Cnut presumably took appropriate measures, and contrary winds need not have been the only force responsible for its repulse.
William of Jumièges' statement that he later offered the æthelings a share of England is very difficult to credit; it may owe something to Dudo's story of the offer made to Rollo, or result from confusion with the events of 1041, when Edward returned to England at Harthacnut's invitation and according to the Chronicle C text was sworn in as king.
These events across the Channel had something of a postscript after Cnut's death.
William of Jumièges, elaborated by William of Poitiers, reports that Edward set sail with forty ships, crossed to Southampton, defeated a large English force, and returned to Normandy after realising that he needed more men to obtain the kingdom.
Meanwhile, Alfred sailed from Wissant to Dover, went inland, and was betrayed to death by Earl Godwin.
The Chronicle C text for 1036 also records his arrival and death, which an obit in an Ely calendar shows occurred on 5 February.
As Cnut himself only died on 12 November 1035, it looks as though Alfred, and doubtless Edward too, were poised to act.
If their friend Duke Robert had not died on his way back from Jerusalem these expeditions might have been better supported, and had a different outcome.
THE END IN ENGLAND
Obscure as they often are, more is known of Cnut's foreign relations than his later years in England.
He may have visited Glastonbury on 30 November 1032, and the five charters from 1033 (S 967–70, 972) are the most to survive  from any year of his reign.
1034 has only one (S 973) and 1035 three (S 974–6).
Of these, S 975, to the monks of Sherborne, is of some interest.
It expresses Cnut's wish that the gift of transitory earthly riches will secure eternal rewards in heaven, the redemption of his soul, and absolution from his crimes.
Such sentiments are common in charters, but this one goes further.
The monks are always to offer prayers to almighty God, and daily to beseech God by singing psalms and celebrating masses for his sins, so that after his death through God's mercy and their holy intercession he will come to the heavenly kingdom.
It looks as though Cnut was already mortally ill when he made this grant.
He died at Shaftesbury on 12 November 1035 and was buried in the Old Minster Winchester.
That he knew of death's approach and had time to prepare for it, and that others knew and were preparing too, is implied not only by S 975 but also the rapidity of the ætheling Alfred's actions late in the year.
How far Cnut used the time available to determine the succession is not clear.
Harthacnut, no older than seventeen, had been in Denmark for some years by 1035.
According to the Encomium, Florence and later Norse tradition, he was its king, and he evidently struck coins as REX before his father's death.
Swegen, probably Cnut's eldest son, had since 1030 been ruling Norway with his mother Ælfgifu of Northampton.
Florence says that Cnut made him king of Norway, but he was expelled by Olaf's son Magnus c.1034, and died shortly afterwards in Denmark.
Harthacnut chose to remain there, presumably because he was exercised by the threat which Magnus posed to his own position, and this left Harold Harefoot, Cnut's other son by Ælfgifu of Northampton, to dispute the English throne with his half-brother's supporters, headed by Queen Emma and Earl Godwin.
Accepted first as regent, he was in 1037 recognised as king, and Emma went into exile.
Adam of Bremen reports that Cnut had intended Swegen to rule Norway, Harthacnut Denmark, and Harold England, and the Historia Regum attributed to Symeon of Durham that he made Harold the  English king, but the Encomium says that he not only promised Emma that any son of hers should be heir, but later on oath pledged the whole kingdom subject to him to Harthacnut, who received oaths of loyalty from English nobles.
Obviously, this was what Emma wanted to read, but one would have expected her to take advantage of her rival Ælfgifu of Northampton's absence from England to press Harthacnut's case with his father, and it seems significant that both the Chronicle C and E texts consider Harold's claim and identity questionable, that the Oxford meeting which followed Cnut's death decided that he should hold the country for himself and his brother, and that Emma was allowed to reside in Winchester with Harthacnut's housecarls to keep Wessex for him.
Harthacnut was thus evidently thought to have a claim, which his housecarls (if they were not simply inherited from his father) were perhaps in England to safeguard.
The irregularity of Cnut's relationship with Harold's mother possibly influenced some: the Encomiast claims that Archbishop Æthelnoth refused to crown him, although he does not connect this with Harold's birth.
Nevertheless, he had much support, especially north of the Thames and among the troops in London, and suggestions that he was not Cnut's son are likely to be false.
The Encomiast's tale that he was born to another woman and smuggled into Ælfgifu of Northampton's bed at least implies that he was generally recognised as son of Cnut and Ælfgifu, and Adam calls Gorm the Old Hardecnudth Vurm, which if correct makes  it feasible to believe that Cnut named Swegen and Harold from his father and grandfather, and Harthacnut, evidently the third-born, after his great-grandfather.
Whatever his intentions about the succession, it was almost certainly not the confusion which actually occurred.
Probably, like other strong rulers (Charlemagne, for example), he faced strife within his own family which proved difficult to resolve.
Sending Ælfgifu and Swegen to Norway perhaps had its advantages here, and maybe Harold Harefoot was not allowed to live at court, which might partly explain alleged doubts about his identity.
If so, such expedients failed, for Ælfgifu was soon back in England supporting her son, and he may well have owed his popularity in the midlands partly to her Mercian kindred.
Thus, Cnut's reign ended, like that of Edgar, one of the greatest of his Anglo-Saxon predecessors, with the king's early death and a succession dispute between his sons.
The complex legacy which he had inherited in 1016 had been well utilised, a considerable number of its problems solved (for a time, at least), and many of its opportunities taken.
After some early difficulties, his grip on England apparently became firm enough, and its magnates committed to the Danish dynasty: nobody seems to have taken the claims of the æthelings Edward and Alfred seriously in 1036.
Like other powerful English rulers, he may also have been recognised as overlord by the Welsh and Scots, and possibly some of the Irish.
He combined this with achieving a position in the Scandinavian world which rivalled and in some respects surpassed that of his father.
Not since Æthelstan, a century earlier, had an English king married a female relative to the German imperial heir; no Danish monarch had ever done so.
He had gone to Rome once, maybe twice, and his relations with continental potentates were doubtless more extensive than we can now know.
The Aquitanian chronicler Adémar of Chabannes says that Cnut sent Duke William the Great of Aquitaine yearly embassies with costly gifts, and received even more costly ones in return.
If this looks like the tip of a diplomatic iceberg, it  at least indicates Cnut's international standing, which his evidently extensive gifts to foreign churches were surely intended to foster.
That the dominions which he had so laboriously assembled fragmented upon his death (indeed, his position in Norway had collapsed before it) is a pointer to Cnut's abilities, and of how individual, and hence transitory, political achievement could be.
Within seven years all his sons were dead too, and the West Saxon dynasty, in the person of Edward the Confessor, sat once more upon the throne of England.
CNUT AND THE ENGLISH CHURCH
Not the least of the problems which Cnut faced as king of England was an important and complex relationship with the English church.
Its importance arose from the extent to which Christianity had by the early eleventh century become part of political and national life, its complexity in part from the complex nature of church affairs themselves.
If it occasionally had Cnut in difficulties, it also offered him considerable opportunities, and it is no less generous to the historian, who is better informed upon it than any other aspect of Cnut's rule.
The Anglo-Saxons accepted Christianity in the seventh century, and in some respects its progress thereafter was spectacular.
Within a hundred years of the missionaries' arrival many English men and women had enthusiastically adopted the monasticism which was considered the purest form of the Christian life and the surest way to salvation, and which had spread throughout western Europe in the fifth and sixth centuries.
Northumbria quickly produced, in the monk Bede (d.735), one of the great scholars of the early Middle Ages, and by the time of his death English missionaries were themselves at work attempting to convert the continental Germans.
Elsewhere, progress was slower.
The early English bishop-rics were large, and Bede complained that there was insufficient preaching, while Latin, the language of the church, probably always remained the province of well-educated monks and higher clergy.
Bede supplied ignorant clerics with English translations of the Creed and Lord's Prayer, and King Alfred was concerned to provide vernacular versions  of key works, such as Pope Gregory the Great's Pastoral Care, a handbook for bishops.
In the tenth and eleventh centuries the texts produced for the education of parish priests were still in English.
By then, however, the number of priests and church buildings had greatly increased.
Some of the earliest English churches, minsters containing communities of secular (i.e. non-monastic) priests, were responsible for the spiritual welfare of a sizeable surrounding area, perhaps sometimes as large as fifteen modern parishes.
In time these were joined, and often had their jurisdiction diminished, by large numbers of churches served by single priests and founded by private individuals, frequently nobles, for whom their own place of worship was a source of financial as well as religious benefit.
By the late eleventh century village churches are likely to have been fairly common: it is known that there were over 400 in Kent.
This is not the only indication of considerable interest in religion.
Surviving rules of gilds of laymen suggest that most such associations had a spiritual aspect; in tenth-century Exeter gildsmen assembled "for the love of God and for our souls' need, having regard both to the prosperity of our life and also to the days thereafter which we wish to be allotted to us at God's Judgement" , and gave any member going on pilgrimage overseas five pence from each of his colleagues.
A pilgrim, whether bound for Rome, or Jerusalem, or simply one of the many shrines in England, would have expected to see the relics of the saints.
These holy men, whose sanctity was often clear from the miracles which God had allowed them to perform in life, had in death entered his presence.
They could therefore intercede with him for the living, to whom they might appear, and for whom they might still work miracles.
Their activities were thus not only believed to be tangible proof of the truths of Christianity, but were also an essential link between men and a somewhat remote but terrifying god.
A church could derive both prestige and wealth from possessing the relics of a major saint, whose devotees were expected to be generous in their donations of land and precious metal.
Moreover, English interest in saints, like  that of the French, seems to have been particularly intense in the second half of the tenth century and early decades of the eleventh, when many saints' lives were written and a number of relics were transferred to new shrines.
One of two surviving copies of a list of saints' resting places in England was produced in New Minster Winchester in Cnut's time.
Relics were also important in the contemporary French peace movement, being prominently displayed at the large and enthusiastic public gatherings organised by bishops in an attempt to improve the state of public order; they possibly found similar use in England, where the national assemblies of Æthelred II may occasionally have resembled continental peace meetings.
CHURCH WEALTH
In view of all this, it is hardly surprising that Domesday Book reveals a country in which the church was in places a mighty landowner.
The two richest foundations were the sees of Canterbury and Winchester, the former with a revenue of about £1,750, the latter with over £1,000.
Yet all other bishoprics were surpassed by the greater monasteries — Glastonbury, Ely, Bury St Edmund's, and St Augustine's Canterbury.
In total, monks and nuns disposed of between a sixth and a seventh of all Domesday landed value.
Bury, reformed in Cnut's reign, and Westminster, patronised by Edward the Confessor, may have gained much of their endowment during the eleventh century, but otherwise the Domesday picture was probably very similar to that which faced Cnut on his accession.
Ely, for example, had already received the bulk of the lands it held in 1086, and the same may well have been true of other foundations such as Glastonbury, Abingdon and the Old and New Minsters in Winchester.
These churches had gained many of their possessions  from wealthy laymen as a result of the noble piety which characterised the monastic reform movement of the tenth century, when substantial numbers of new monasteries were created and old ones re-established.
Some leading families were closely associated with particular foundations.
In Æthelred's reign Ramsey was patronised by Ealdorman Æthelwine of East Anglia and his relatives, Ely by Ealdorman Brihtnoth and his kin.
The foundation of Tavistock by Ordulf, the king's uncle, was completed, the creation of Burton by Wulfric Spott, and of Cerne and Eynsham by Ealdorman Æthelmær, undertaken.
Gifts could comprise not only land, but also money and precious objects, including jewellery.
Nevertheless, the religious state of the country in 1017 was one of some diversity, especially geographically.
The monastic reform movement, so important in the south, had at this date penetrated no further north than Burton in Staffordshire and Crowland in south Lincolnshire.
The lands to the north and east of a line joining these two houses had in the ninth century been conquered and to some degree settled by pagan Scandinavians, who had destroyed the existing monasteries and several of the bishoprics, and such evidence as there is suggests that the Christianity practised within them retained aspects upon which the stricter kind of churchman would have frowned.
Stone monuments from tenth and eleventh century Northumbria sometimes contain scenes from pagan myth and legend.
The stories of Sigurd and Wayland seem to have been particularly popular, and while, as R.N. Bailey has argued, such carvings could have been attempts to link pagan with Christian belief, one is still driven to the conclusion that they "may have appealed to tastes and interpretations which were based more on the traditions of Scandinavia than the Christian Fathers" .
That paganism itself was not completely extinct is indicated by the tract known as The Law of the Northumbrian Priests, probably compiled in Cnut's reign, which forbids heathen practices, witchcraft, idol worship, and the existence of sanctuaries  around stones, trees and wells.
It further reveals that a non-celibate priesthood was tolerated in Northumbria.
Differences between north and south cannot, however, be attributed solely to Scandinavian influence.
The monastic reform movement did not reach north-west Mercia either, yet this area had not been much influenced by Scandinavian settlement, and it did eventually extend into East Anglia, which had to some degree been so affected.
Possibly the West Saxon monarchy's links with the new monasticism had something to do with its lack of popularity in northern Mercia and Northumbria.
At any rate, their bishoprics could not equal the territorial wealth, and so presumably to an extent the political influence, of some of their southern brethren.
The archbishopric of York was poverty-stricken compared with that of Canterbury, the communities of secular canons characteristic of north-west Mercia could not remotely approach the holdings of the great southern monasteries.
KINGS AND THE CHURCH
No layman was expected to be more generous to the church, or was more intimately connected with it, than the head of this Christian society, the king.
On his accession he was crowned and anointed by ecclesiastics.
They believed that he held his kingdom from God, that it was his duty to provide peace and justice and to further Christianity, and that his life should be a fitting example to his people.
As the tenth century wore on English churchmen, like their counterparts in Ottonian Germany, were increasingly inclined to compare the king with Christ himself.
Royal gift-giving to churches could be lavish.
While on an expedition to Scotland King Æthelstan visited the shrine of the great northern saint Cuthbert at Chester-le-Street, and gave royal gifts (regia munera).
They included two chasubles, an alb, a stole with a maniple, a girdle, three altar covers, a silver chalice, two dishes — one of gold, one of "Greek work" — a silver censer, an ivory and gold cross, a  royal cap of gold texture, two silver candelabra embellished with gold, a missal, two gospel books in gold and silver, a Life of St Cuthbert, three tapestries, four large bells, three horns fashioned in gold and silver, two standards, a lance and two gold rings.
Eadred left two gold crucifixes and two swords with gold hilts to Old Minster Winchester in his will, together with £4,000.
His nephew Edgar gave Ely a cross with a gold front containing three golden images and precious stones, the rest being of silver gilt; the silver base was in three parts with gilt embellishment.
Other of his gifts included a gospel book, his royal cloak extensively covered in gold, and reliquaries from the royal chapel complete with relics.
He also seems to have donated his belt and hose, as a twelfth-century account of their treasures lists a girdle made from the one and an alb decorated with gold thread from the other.
The frequent appearance of objects of gold and silver is striking.
So is the range of the gifts, which included not only items of direct utility to a church, such as the ecclesiastical vestments and bells received by St Cuthbert, but also objects whose chief characteristic was that they had belonged to the king, like Æthelstan's cap and Edgar's cloak.
The presence of such items in a church may have been intended to increase popular respect for the monarchy.
Yet gift-giving was not the only connection which these kings had with religion.
Æthelstan was an assiduous collector of relics and had a probably genuine concern for the salvation of his soul.
Edgar promoted the monastic reform movement, and two of his children, Edith and Edward the Martyr, were soon regarded as saints.
So was Ælfgifu, wife of King Edmund I, and Eadburg, daughter of Edward the Elder.
The royal saint, beginning with the Northumbrians Edwin and Oswald in the seventh century, had been a recurrent and important Anglo-Saxon phenomenon, and tended to reinforce the fusion of monarchy and church.
Nor, if Cnut and his advisers sought models for his kingship, need they only have looked to the English past: there was also the European present.
The French king Robert the Pious (996–1031) allegedly delighted in generosity to the poor, in acts of humility, such as when he washed the feet of 160 clerics with his own hair, and in making gifts to churches.
Humility and displays of emotion were not considered unkingly.
Wipo, the biographer of the emperor Conrad II of Germany, says that he burst into tears after hearing a sermon delivered to him at his coronation in 1024.
Naturally, kings did not treat all churches alike.
Some were richer and more prestigious than others, and their favour presumably the more worth having.
Also, their inmates may often have come from the ranks of the noble and landowning class.
Monasteries, hopeful of future gain, could frequently have preferred their entrants to be from wealthy families.
The relatives of both Leofsige, abbot of Ely from 1029 to 1044, and of Ælfwine, bishop of Elmham in Cnut's reign, granted estates in Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridgeshire to Ely when their sons entered the monastery, and the Liber Eliensis says that it was Leofsige's own policy to accept no monk who was not well-educated and of good birth, so that the church might be enriched by liberality.
Consequently, it is not surprising that senior churchmen were sometimes related to each other.
Brihtheah, the nephew of Archbishop Wulfstan, was abbot of Pershore and later bishop of Worcester, while Bishop Brihtwine of Sherborne was succeeded by his brother, and Brihtwold of Cornwall was the uncle of Lyfing, abbot of Tavistock and subsequently bishop of Crediton, Cornwall and Worcester.
Family influence must have secured some of these appointments, and family loyalties were not forgotten in the service of the church.
Bishop Oswald of  Worcester granted church land to his relatives in the late tenth century, and his successors Wulfstan and Brihtheah followed suit.
Such gifts were doubtless useful in providing reliable support for episcopal authority.
Hemming says that Brihtheah's were made because he was from Berkshire and had no relatives in Worcestershire, and in Edward the Confessor's time Bishop Hermann complained that nobody could hold the see of Ramsbury without the help of kinsmen.
THE CHURCH AND POLITICS
Churchmen must always have been aware of family loyalties, and when these became involved in politics there may often have been a strong temptation to give active support.
The family of Bishop Eadnoth of Dorchester, who had been both monk and abbot of Ramsey, and whose rich brother gave land to the monastery, was possibly allied with that of Æthelstan Half-King, the powerful ealdorman of East Anglia in the mid-tenth century, whose sons were great patrons of Ramsey.
Eadnoth was, at least, killed fighting at Assandun in 1016 along with his successor at Ramsey, Abbot Wulfsige, and Æthelstan's grandson, Æthelweard.
Personal ambition was doubtless another factor which tended to enmesh ecclesiastics in politics.
Bishop Lyfing of Crediton is said by Florence of Worcester to have been accused of being associated with Earl Godwin in the murder of the ætheling Alfred in 1036, and one of his accusers was Archbishop Ælfric of York, who had designs on the bishopric of Worcester, given to Lyfing by Harold Harefoot as a reward for his support.
If such machinations are seldom heard of in this period it is unlikely to be because they were rare.
These factors — the noble connections of  churchmen and the extent of their involvement in the secular world — meant that the king's attitude to them could be determined not only by the importance of their spiritual role in a society in which religion mattered, but also by an intricate web of personal political allegiances and aspirations deeply rooted in lay affairs.
This was one reason among many why kings and churchmen could sometimes be at odds.
To be sure, the latter did not always approve of royal actions, for even the most pious rulers occasionally transgressed.
Henry II of Germany incurred ecclesiastical disapproval by entering into an alliance with heathen Slavs against Christian Poles, while his French contemporary Robert the Pious repudiated his first wife and took a second who was within the forbidden degrees of kinship.
Æthelred II was perhaps not the most pious of kings, but even if he was, his relations with churchmen could be stormy.
Ecclesiastical wealth could be a sore temptation, and in his youth Æthelred misappropriated (in their view) the lands of several churches.
He also had difficulties with Bishop Ælfstan of Rochester, whose diocese he ravaged in 986, and Bishop Æthelsige of Sherborne, who incurred the king's anger, was expelled from his see, and went abroad never to return.
Perhaps some of his churchmen allowed personal ambition and family loyalties to involve them in the political divisions of the reign, and so may have welcomed a change of dynasty in 1016.
No doubt still more simply welcomed peace.
Yet if not all of them necessarily regarded Cnut with disfavour on his accession, it is likely that there were quarters in which he had to face considerable initial hostility.
Not only may churchmen have lost kinsmen in the recent fighting, but enemy harrying had almost certainly resulted in  extensive damage to church lands and possessions.
The abbey of Tavistock was burnt in 997, and that of Cerne later despoiled by Cnut, while St Mary's church in Exeter was seemingly destroyed in the sack of 1003, and the nunnery at Minster-in-Thanet at some stage in Æthelred's reign.
Worst of all, Christ Church Canterbury was burnt in 1011 and its archbishop murdered the following year after refusing to be ransomed.
Churches which escaped are likely to have paid for the privilege: the raiders had threatened to destroy Christ Church in 994 unless they were given a sum promised them by Archbishop Sigeric.
Small wonder that some of their prey did not mince their words.
In his Life of St Oswald, Brihtferth of Ramsey described the Danes as accursed (nefandi) and accomplices of Beelzebub, while Archbishop Wulfstan's Sermon of the Wolf equates the imminent Scandinavian conquest of England with the reign of AntiChrist.
Wulfstan quickly changed his tune once Cnut was king, but in 1017 memories of the destructive wars of the previous three decades must still have been very fresh, among churchmen as well as their lay brethren.
Moreover, there is much to suggest that Cnut's reign was itself a difficult time for some churches.
Heavy taxation was a major factor here, as various sources  (discussed in Chapter 5) are at pains to stress, and Dr Gem has argued that there was a recession in church building as a result.
Some foundations had to melt down precious objects and sell off estates, and even the wealthier, such as the abbey of Glastonbury, were occasionally in difficulties.
As early as 994 Archbishop Sigeric of Canterbury was forced to borrow £115 from Bishop Æscwig of Dorchester to prevent the raiders burning his cathedral to the ground, giving in return an estate in Buckinghamshire.
Sigeric's successor, Ælfric, recovered it, but N.P. Brooks has pointed out that other losses would have left no trace in the Canterbury records if they were not regained, and Thietmar of Merseburg says that Archbishop Ælfheah was unable to ransom himself in 1012 because of dire poverty.
Of course, the picture may not have been quite as bleak as all this might suggest.
Donations by pious laymen doubtless continued, and Glastonbury and Canterbury not only survived, but did so as wealthy churches.
The seventy-five years preceding 1066 were a time of great activity in the Canterbury scriptorium, which produced a number of magnificently-illustrated gospel and service-books, as well as many more mundane volumes apparently intended to form a new cathedral library.
Even so, there are signs that its inmates were under pressure from the king and his officials.
Eadui Basan, a well-known Canterbury scribe who worked on several surviving de luxe manuscripts, forged S 914, which purports to be a refoundation of the monastic community by Æthelred, possibly as some sort of safeguard at a time when Cnut was trying to force upon them, in his royal priest Eadsige, a non-monastic archbishop.
It may be significant that it was almost certainly Eadui who also wrote the oldest surviving copy of S 22, an alleged grant of the Kentish king Wihtred (d.725) apparently forged in Canterbury in the early ninth  century.
His motive was probably connected with the part of the text which says that the estates of Christ Church and other Kentish churches are henceforth to be free of all secular service and royal debt.
If this had been implemented, taxation of church land in Kent, which was extensive, would have ceased.
Moreover, Brooks has stressed the verbal similarities between S 22 and S 985, which records an alleged gift by Cnut and was copied by Eadui into a Christ Church gospel book in the form of a royal writ.
It describes how Archbishop Lyfing spoke to the king about the freedom of his church, and then rejected Cnut's offer of a new charter of freedom with the complaint that he had plenty such charters if only they were good for anything.
Cnut then laid the charters on the altar and freed Christ Church in the same terms as his predecessors.
It is not impossible that S 985 is simply a forgery concocted by Eadui to protect his church from the demands of royal officials.
If, on the other hand, it records a genuine act by Cnut, Lyfing's complaint about the uselessness of existing charters may well be an allusion to the activities of those same officials.
It was not to be the last.
In S 987, a writ from 1035, Cnut declares that he will not permit wrong to be done to Canterbury no matter who may be reeve (presumably of Kent)— a clear indication that it was still suffering from the attentions of his men.
There were thus many reasons, grounded in both Æthelred's reign and his own, why individual churchmen may have harboured resentment against Cnut, and it will be suggested below that this could take a religious form.
Generally, however, they must have been concerned to persuade him to become an amenable ruler.
Archbishop Wulfstan of York had done his best under Æthelred to rectify social conditions worsened by ravaging, taxation and famine, and produced for the 1018 meeting of Danes and English at Oxford a text "devised according to many good precedents" and intended to be of "advantage in religious and secular matters" which he later used as a basis for his more extensive legal material in Cnut's name.
Archbishop Lyfing of Canterbury, returning from Rome with his pallium, also brought letters and messages from Pope Benedict VIII, who evidently urged Cnut to "everywhere exalt God's praise and suppress wrong and establish full security" .
At his coronation he probably promised to preserve true peace, prohibit all iniquities and show equity and mercy in all his judgements.
The same year (1017) he married Emma, herself a generous giver to churches, whose previous experience as Æthelred's wife ought to have made her a fount of good advice on English churches and churchmen and how they were best dealt with.
CNUT'S RELIGIOUS BACKGROUND
Cnut must have needed it.
Danish Christianity went back only to his grandfather Harald Bluetooth, and according to Adam of Bremen Christians were for a time persecuted by Swegen Forkbeard.
However, if this occurred at all it is unlikely to have lasted long.
Adam also says that Swegen destroyed idolatrous rites, commanded the Norwegians to receive Christianity, and appointed a bishop who had come from England to teach in Skåne.
The skald Thorleif Rauthfeldarson has him bloodying swords in England with God's help, and he was eventually buried, perhaps first in York Minster, but later in a church at Roskilde, according to the Encomiast in a tomb which he had prepared himself.
Hence it is fairly clear that Cnut, who received the name Lambert at his baptism, was a Christian when he acquired the English throne, and the same was probably true of most of his major followers.
Certainly, some were later prepared to patronise English churches.
On the other hand, the rank and file of his army of conquest of 1016, comprising Norwegians and Swedes as well as Danes, doubtless contained a fair number of heathens, and it is very unlikely that the Danish church had yet permeated national life as deeply as that of the English.
In particular, Cnut, unlike William the Conqueror, whose Norman duchy contained a vigorous church, was not in a position to start replacing English personnel with continentals on any scale.
In matters of religion he was largely obliged to play an English game, with English men, and by English rules.
Although, as will shortly be evident, he became extravagantly pious, he retained some of the values and attitudes of a pagan past.
A warrior king, he patronised Scandinavian skalds who celebrated his victories in poems which had their roots in the world of the pagan gods and heroes.
To Cnut and some of his contemporaries this world still mattered, and evidence of this has been found where it might have been least expected.
Professor Biddle has proposed that a stone fragment unearthed in excavations of Old Minster Winchester in 1965, which may depict part of the story of Sigmund (father of Sigurd), of the Volsung family, originally formed part of a decorative frieze in the church commissioned by Cnut.
The presence of this pagan tale in a cathedral is strikingly reminiscent of Sigurd's appearance in Christian contexts on sculptures in northern England, and the possible positioning of the frieze near Cnut's tomb may imply that he was inviting comparison of his own exploits with those of the Volsungs.
All the same, it is not obvious that he differed much from his English predecessors in this sort of area, for the Anglo-Scandinavian background outlined in the Introduction again becomes relevant here.
King Edgar was criticised for inviting heathens into the country, some of whom were possibly poets, while Æthelred evidently patronised the skald Gunnlaug, and it was probably during his reign that the surviving manuscript of Beowulf, with its story of pagan  Scandinavia, was written.
The poet praises Beowulf by linking his killing of the monster Grendel with the feats of Sigmund, who was clearly expected to be familiar to an English audience.
Also, English kings too could have their military prowess celebrated by poems which gloried in slaughter in ways not dissimilar to those on Cnut, as that on the battle of Brunanburh demonstrates.
Nor, of course, did the church always disapprove of war — the English coronation service made clear to the king that he must protect his people, and symbolised this with the gift of a sword.
CNUT AND ÆLFGIFU OF NORTHAMPTON
But it must have disapproved of Cnut's marital practices.
His relationship with Ælfgifu of Northampton may well have begun before he married Emma of Normandy in 1017.
She was the daughter of Ealdorman Ælfhelm of Northumbria, and Cnut's association with her was probably intended to secure her family's support.
Hence, it is likely that she was openly acknowledged as his consort, and was present when he was chosen as king in 1016.
By this time she could already have borne him their two sons, Swegen and Harold.
Nor is it likely that either she or her children were set aside when he married Emma, although she was possibly provided with an establishment in her own part of the world, perhaps Northampton, and expected to stay there.
This may explain why in 1035 Harold's claim to be Cnut's son was greeted by some with incredulity.
Nevertheless, the probability that early in 1023 Thorkell the Tall was willing to accept one of Ælfgifu's sons in exchange for his own when he and Cnut were reconciled strongly implies that the boy was openly acknowledged by Cnut.
That after the conquest of Norway Swegen was put in charge of it under his mother's tutelage reinforces this conclusion.
Although it may have been a convenient way of getting her out of the country, this also indicates that Ælfgifu had previously enjoyed a recognised position.
Entries in the Liber  Vitae of Thorney Abbey, a record of the names of church friends and benefactors which survives in a hand of c.1100, seem to confirm this.
After the names of Cnut, Harold and Harthacnut appear those of"Imma Regina.
7 Ælfgifu. ÆgelnoD archiepiscopus. 7 ÆDericus episcopus."
It is noteworthy that Ælfgifu is not called queen, but that she nevertheless occupies a position next to Emma and before the archbishop of Canterbury.
This suggests that she is Ælfgifu of Northampton, and that her status, in Thorney at least, was considerable.
Although she was absent from England late in the reign, Cnut was before that in the position of having two consorts.
This clearly contravened church teaching: in II Cnut 54.1 Archbishop Wulfstan forbids a priest to minister to a man who has both a rightful wife and a concubine.
The church also disqualified the offspring of concubines from inheriting, but in allowing Swegen to rule Norway Cnut recognised that he had a claim.
How far laymen would have disapproved of his behaviour is another matter, for concubinage of a type whereby a married man could also have a relationship with a woman who had a recognised position and whose children might share in the inheritance had been common among Germanic peoples, and may still have existed in England in Cnut's day.
Indeed, several tenth-century royal consorts are shadowy figures of doubtful legitimacy, and it is possible that Æthelred's first, who like Ælfgifu of Northampton never witnesses charters, was not a fully-married wife.
Even so, churchmen must have disagreed with Cnut's behaviour, although perhaps many did so diplomatically, that is to say , silently.
However much Cnut may have played the Christian king, he was, like other rulers, willing to turn a blind eye to church teaching when it suited him.
THE USES OF RELIGION: CNUT, PIETY AND CHRIST
All the same, most of the time it was expedient to follow where the church led.
His coronation, for example, must have been important in giving his regime a much-needed aura of legitimacy.
The point is made in the contemporary depiction of Cnut and Emma giving a cross to New Minster Winchester, preserved in its Liber Vitae.
A hovering angel places a crown on Cnut's head, while pointing upwards to a seated Christ.
Once crowned, his position had divine sanction, was regarded by the church as sacrosanct, and so was considerably strengthened.
The Letter of 1027 reports that he visited Rome to pray for the redemption of his sins and the security of his subjects, and tells how he had negotiated with the pope a reduction in the sums paid by English archbishops when they went for the pallium.
This is Cnut the caring Christian king and diplomat, vowing to amend what has hitherto been done amiss through negligence or the intemperance of youth, and stressing the generosity of his reception by the emperor to enhance his own prestige.
Good religion could be good politics, good politics could require good religion, and there can be no question that Cnut threw himself into certain aspects of his role with zest.
There is the Encomiast's eye-witness account of his lavish gifts to the monasteries and poor of St Omer when on the way to Rome, and of the tears and breast-beating which accompanied them.
This makes it easier to accept such later stories as that of Symeon of Durham, who says that he walked barefoot for five miles before reaching the church of St Cuthbert.
There may also be a basis of fact, in a planned act of piety, behind the famous story of how Cnut attempted to turn back the waves and then used his failure to demonstrate to his followers the weakness of his power  compared with that of the king of heaven.
After this, says Henry of Huntingdon, he placed his crown on the head of a crucifix and never wore it again.
Similarly, Goscelin says that one Easter at Winchester Cnut refused to wear his crown and put it on a crucifix, with the explanation that the king of kings was more worthy of it than he.
Such displays of humility are not only reminiscent of those of Robert the Pious in France, they may also reflect the teaching of Cnut's own churchmen.
As Eric John has emphasised, early-eleventh-century kings were invited to identify not with Christ in majesty, but with the suffering Christ, and drawings of the crucifixion survive from this period in which his suffering on the cross is made very explicit; perhaps the cross which Cnut gave to New Minster, which bore an image of the crucified Lord, did so too.
Abbot Ælfric stressed Christ's humility, describing in his homily The Exaltation of the Holy Cross how an angel reminded the seventh-century Byzantine emperor Heraclius that he "would not encircle his head with a golden crown, but with one of thorns" , and that before the crucifixion "he was not clothed in purple, nor adorned with a royal crown, nor rode he…upon a horse but upon the back of an ass" .
In response, Heraclius "took off his purple…then went he with naked feet and took the Cross, praising God with the shedding of tears" .
The tears, the bare feet, and the rejection of royal insignia have enough in common with Cnut's behaviour to indicate that he responded to what he heard preached.
He was eager to imitate other rulers, and not least the king of kings himself, in continuance of the tradition which likened earthly kings to Christ.
Even his Icelandic  skalds understood this, and adapted their products accordingly.
Thorarin Praise-Tongue's HöfuDlausn and Hallvard's Knútsdrápa both have Cnut defending his land as God does heaven.
Paradoxical as it may seem, his acts of humility were really statements about the elevated nature of his power.
With this extravagant behaviour, as the Encomiast says, went lavish gifts of precious objects.
The New Minster Liber Vitae shows the cross he gave them as large, no doubt correctly.
It contained relics, and when melted down in the twelfth century yielded 500 marks of silver and thirty of gold.
Similarly, Cnut and Emma gave to Abingdon a reliquary for the remains of St Vincent which bore upon it the inscription "King Cnut and Queen Ælfgifu commanded the making of this reliquary from 230 gold mancuses, refined by fire, and two pounds of silver of great weight" .
He also ordered a gold shrine to be made for St Edith at Wilton which required the skills of three goldsmiths, while Westminster Abbey received an arm of St Cyriacus, bought for 100 marks and clad in gold and silver.
It could still be seen there in the fourteenth century.
Clearly, gifts of precious metal were something in which Cnut delighted, and it has recently been argued that the magnificently-illustrated gospel books which have survived from this period, and others which have not, were commissioned by Cnut and Emma for donation to favoured individuals and churches.
He may, for example, have given the York Gospels, produced in Canterbury, to Archbishop Wulfstan.
Such giving lay not only in the tradition of church  patronage established by his royal Anglo-Saxon predecessors, but must have come naturally to him anyway.
Ostentatious displays of wealth in gold and silver were very much a part of the secular as well as the ecclesiastical world.
Not least, they were a part of military splendour.
Weapons were often embellished with precious metal, and the Encomiast describes the magnificence of Cnut's invasion fleet, and the gold and silver decoration of its ships.
Gift-giving and Christ-like displays of humility are unlikely to have been the only aspects of religion which Cnut found attractive.
The story of how he left his crown on a crucifix is of great interest here.
The giving of crowns and other regalia to chuches was not uncommon.
A crown now on the head of a Madonna in Essen may be that of the child Otto III, while another on the head of a crucifix in Vercelli has been thought a gift of his.
Nor were donors always royalty: the wife of Cnut's henchman Tofi the Proud adorned a crucifix at Waltham in Essex with a crown, as well as decking it with other ornaments.
Moreover, the Winchester crown need not have been the only one that Cnut gave away, as Christ Church Canterbury seems also to have received one.
All the same, there was perhaps rather more to this matter than initially meets the eye.
Goscelin says that he put his crown on the Winchester crucifix when he had supremacy over four kingdoms.
If correct, this apparently means that it was after the conquest of Norway in 1028 and therefore after he attended the imperial coronation of Conrad II of Germany in Rome in 1027.
It may be that he took new insignia after the subjugation of Norway, and that he left his old crown in Winchester, in much the  same way that Henry II of Germany had, at his imperial coronation in 1014, hung his former crown above the altar of St Peter's, where Cnut would almost certainly have seen it thirteen years later.
Possible similarities between Cnut's (lost) seal and Conrad II's imperial seal perhaps belong in this context too, as may his willingness to allow his son Harthacnut to become king of Denmark, conceivably in imitation of the crowning of Conrad's son Henry (III, born in 1017) at Aachen in 1028.
There are also resemblances between the drawing of Cnut in the New Minster Liber Vitae, usually dated c.1031, and two pictures of Henry II.
In a sacramentary he is shown being crowned by Christ, and in a book of pericopes (biblical extracts) which he gave to the cathedral of Bamberg, Christ is crowning Henry with one hand and his wife Kunigund with the other, while the patron saints of Bamberg, Peter and Paul, look on.
Cnut is being crowned and Emma is apparently being given a veil by angels pointing to Christ, who is flanked by the patron saints of New Minster, the Virgin Mary and Peter.
More significant still, Cnut's crown in the New Minster drawing is a lily crown, very similar to that which appears on his first Quatrefoil coin type, but with an additional arched bar spanning its centre.
This resembles the bar which Conrad II added to the imperial crown probably made originally for the coronation of the emperor Otto I in Rome in 962.
In other words, the crown which the Liber Vitae depicts Cnut as wearing late in his reign looks like a German imperial crown.
Of all continental rulers, the German emperors may have been the ones Cnut was most eager to imitate, for in the second half of his reign he perhaps wished to see his own position in the northern world as emulating theirs in Europe.
However, there may  also have been English precedent and inspiration for the adoption of a second crown — notably in Edgar's second, "imperial" , coronation at Bath in 973.
RELIGION AND POLITICS: CNUT, EDMUND IRONSIDE AND EDWARD THE MARTYR
Another example of the rich and regal possibilities which religion offered Cnut is provided by a visit which he made to Glastonbury on 30 November of a year which may have been 1032, when William of Malmesbury says that he laid a cloak decorated with peacocks on the tomb of Edmund Ironside.
The peacock appears in other English contexts — together with the Tree of Life on a finger-ring bearing the name of the ninth-century West Saxon king Æthelwulf, and on the lid of the eighth-century Mortain casket.
In Christian belief it was a symbol of the resurrection of the flesh, and may have been significant in Scandinavian paganism too, for the bones of a peacock were found within the ninth-century ship-burial from Gokstad in Norway, whereas all other animal remains lay outside it.
All the same, peacock decoration is known on surviving Byzantine silks, and it may be that the cloak which Cnut gave Edmund was one of the precious cloaks (pallia) which Conrad II presented to him in 1027.
This visit to Glastonbury must have been an impressive occasion, but there was probably more to it than simply pomp and piety.
William of Malmesbury says that Cnut honoured the brotherly corpse with pious lamentations, and that he was accustomed to calling Edmund his brother.
The fact that the visit took place on the anniversary of Edmund's death, together with the peacock cloak, suggests that Cnut was expressing concern for Edmund's salvation.
But he may also have intended to remind those present that he had come to the throne as a result of the treaty he had made with Edmund, which according to Florence of Worcester established peace, friendship and brotherhood  between them.
Florence further says that witnesses of the agreement later declared that Edmund left no portion of the kingdom to his brothers should he die, and agreed that Cnut should be the protector of his sons until they came of age.
After his death, however, Edmund's sons were set aside.
This account of the treaty may, as Florence claims, have been a lie, but it, or something like it, could well have been what Cnut preferred people to believe, for he may have been aware that it had not been unusual within the West Saxon dynasty for brother to follow brother: it was the succession of King Æthelwulf's sons in turn which brought Alfred to the throne in 871, despite the fact that his brother Æthelred I had male issue.
Favouring Edmund, stressing their brotherhood, and bringing their treaty to the fore diminished the extent to which Cnut looked a usurper.
He perhaps promoted the cult of Edward the Martyr for similar reasons.
An injunction that his feast day is to be observed appears in the legal texts which Wulfstan drafted for him, and if the same clause in surviving copies of Æthelred's laws is a later interpolation, as Patrick Wormald has contended, then Cnut's interest in Edward, implied by his apparent gift of relics of this saint to Westminster Abbey, would be all the more striking.
It was possibly connected with a desire to discredit Æthelred, whose followers had murdered Edward, and who had acquired the throne as a result.
P.A. Stafford thinks that Cnut may have reinforced this by encouraging the cults of other murdered princes, such as Wigstan, a ninth-century Mercian, whom he had translated from Repton to Evesham.
Alternatively, as Æthelred had himself patronised his half-brother's cult, it could be argued that Cnut was stressing the continuity of his regime with his predecessor's, and generally enhancing the prestige of kingship.
His interest in Edmund Ironside and Edward the Martyr is thus the first of several indications that attitudes to religion in his reign may have had distinct political overtones.
Nor was this always to his advantage.
If, as suggested above, he faced considerable initial hostility, and presided over a government which some churchmen found oppressive, religion could have been one way in which opposition was expressed.
RELIGION AND POLITICS: THE CULTS OF ST ÆLFHEAH AND ST EDMUND OF EAST ANGLIA
It is, at least, in this context that two of the most popular cults of the day, those of Ælfheah and Edmund of East Anglia, can be considered.
Archbishop Ælfheah of Canterbury was murdered in April 1012 by a Scandinavian army possibly associated with Cnut's father.
The entry of his feast-day in eleventh-century church calendars indicates that he became fairly widely venerated, and miracles were occurring at his tomb in St Paul's before the translation of his remains from London to Canterbury in 1023.
The translation merits attention, and fortunately two detailed accounts of it have survived, one by Osbern and a second in the D version of the Chronicle; both are discussed in more detail in Chapter 5.
Osbern records the presence of royal housecarls to prevent interference by the Londoners, and this can be fitted into a credible historical context of popular hostility to the Danes in the city, arising from the fighting and sieges of Æthelred's time, the heavy taxation of 1018, and the probability that Cnut found it prudent to maintain a garrison there.
It is therefore likely that support for Ælfheah's cult in London had a political as well as a religious aspect, and so the removal of his relics may indeed have been expected to provoke opposition.
The use of a cult as a means of political expression would be far from unparalleled.
The veneration of several murdered Anglo-Saxon royal saints, and especially of Edmund of East Anglia and Edward the Martyr, almost certainly had overtones of this kind, and probably so too did the rapid growth of St Olaf's cult in Norway in the 1030s, occasioned partly by the unpopular rule of Swegen and Ælfgifu of  Northampton, who owed their position to his death.
It may also not have been the least of Ælfheah's attractions to the people of London, heavily taxed in 1018, that he was murdered for being unable or unwilling to give money to the Danes; nor need it have made Cnut's position any easier that King Æthelred, too, lay buried in St Paul's.
Ælfheah's cult may therefore have presented him with considerable problems, and it is unlikely to be coincidence that the bishopric of London is known to have suffered at his hands.
Concerned to be an extravagantly pious king, and to take full political advantage of the elevated position enjoyed by Christian monarchs, the popular regard for an ecclesiastic so recently and brutally murdered by his countrymen may have been a source of considerable embarrassment.
It would have been a way of criticising his regime which it was difficult to counter directly, and, in the short term perhaps most troublesome of all, it was possibly also a source of popular disorder.
Certainly, if there was a degree of hostility to the Danes in London the anniversary of Ælfheah's death on 19 April would have been a time when feelings ran particularly high, for Cnut's England was clearly conscious of anniversaries of recent events, as awareness of the dates of the battle of Assandun in 1016 and the death of Edmund Ironside indicates.
So it may be significant that in 1023 the translation of Ælfheah's body began on 1 June, only about six weeks after the anniversary.
If 19 April 1023 saw expressions of anti-Danish feeling, Cnut could have decided that it was time for the situation to be defused by removing the body to Canterbury.
He then waited for the next major religious festival — Whitsuntide — and made the translation into a great occasion, although with troops at hand in case of trouble.
Perhaps like Æthelred with Edward the Martyr, he attempted to disarm the opposition by making much of the saint himself.
He was, at least, later believed to have given one of Ælfheah's fingers  to Westminster Abbey.
There were other advantages to the translation too.
It must have pleased the powerful church of Canterbury, with which he seems to have wished to be on good terms, and been gratifyingly displeasing to that of London.
Religious affairs were complex, but pregnant with possibilities.
There are traces of a similar position in East Anglia — like London, a locality which had received much recent attention from hostile armies, and strongly resisted them.
In addition to the slaughter of Ealdorman Brihtnoth and his followers at Maldon in 991, East Anglian leaders were killed fighting Swegen in 1004, while six years later Brihtnoth's son-in-law and "many good thegns and a countless number of people" died at the battle of Ringmere.
The raiders then spent three months harrying and burning the area.
Among the casualties at Assandun in 1016 were several important East Anglians and doubtless a large number of lesser people.
Cnut had a church built at the site of the battle, and it was consecrated in 1020, at about the same time that he allowed the replacement of clerics by monks in St Edmund's church at Bury.
According to Hermann, working in the late eleventh century, this happened because Edmund's popularity was increasing, and this tends to be confirmed by the entry of his feast-day in calendars produced in Winchester and Canterbury at about the same time, and by the inclusion of a special mass for him in a sacramentary probably written in Ely.
Explaining this popularity is not difficult: Edmund was himself killed by the Danes, and it was perhaps only natural that veneration for him should  grow in the area which had formed his kingdom, and seen a great deal of the renewed conflict between Danes and English.
It thus seems significant that there appears to have been a rumour that Edmund was in some way responsible for the death of Cnut's father, after issuing a vain warning that tribute should not be levied from his church's lands.
As it is not recorded until the work of Hermann and Florence of Worcester, who states that the saint speared Swegen from his horse, it would not be impossible to consider this story a reaction to taxation by the Normans; but if it did originate earlier it too conceivably had something to do with Edmund's increasing popularity, and if Florence's version was current in Cnut's time he cannot have been flattered by the notion that Edmund had disposed of his father in a similar way to that in which St Mercurius was believed to have killed the emperor Julian the Apostate.
In any case, there is a still stronger piece of evidence that Edmund's popularity in Cnut's day was connected with the recent past.
When the new basilica of his church was consecrated late in the reign the day chosen for the event was not his own feast-day on 20 November, but that of St Luke on 18 October — the anniversary of the battle of Assandun in 1016.
If the story of Edmund's connection with Swegen's death does date from Cnut's time, it is interesting, and seems to hint at one of the most resented aspects of Danish rule, that Edmund, like Ælfheah, had not only been martyred by the Danes, he had also refused to give them money.
Indications that Cnut had difficulties with some Fenland  ecclesiastics can also be considered in this context.
It is possible that the abbacy of Ely was vacant from before Æthelred's death until 1019, and clear that the abbot next appointed ran into some kind of trouble.
The E version of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says that he was unjustly driven from Ely and went to Rome to clear himself before the pope of the charges brought against him.
Unfortunately, we are told neither what the charges were nor who had brought them.
Yet if they, or the possible abbatial vacancy, had any connection with the king, both may have stemmed from the unsuccessful attack which the Liber Eliensis records him as once having made on the monastery.
This was perhaps during the fighting of 1016.
There also seems to have been trouble at Ramsey.
Abbot Wulfsige, killed at the battle of Assandun, was according to the twelfth-century Ramsey chronicle succeeded by a German, Wythman, who quarrelled with the monks and accused them of disobedience and negligence of monastic discipline before the diocesan bishop.
The latter, however, visited the monastery unexpectedly, and found the accusations groundless.
Shortly thereafter, Wythman left on pilgrimage, to be succeeded by a member of the community, Æthelstan.
The Peterborough chronicler Hugh Candidus tells a different tale, stating that in the days of Abbot Ælfsige of Peterborough (1006–42) the Ramsey monks were accused before the king "for a certain reason" , and that in the royal presence it was decided that the monastery should be destroyed and its monks expelled.
The king, in great anger, ordered the immediate implementation of this judgement, but relented on the intercession of Abbot Ælfsige and Queen Emma, who argued that it was unjust to punish the whole community for the faults of a few.
Ælfsige then appointed a new abbot from among the Ramsey monks.
It is difficult knowing how far to credit such stories in twelfth-century sources, although given that the Ramsey chronicle is recording the history of its own house, and that the Peterborough source refers to trouble there at  the same time, it is reasonable to believe that trouble of some sort there was.
Moreover, unless Hugh is wildly inaccurate it seems to have gone beyond the simple quarrel between abbot and flock described by the Ramsey source.
The flock are unlikely to have been as completely innocent as the latter suggests, and their guilt may well have had a secular aspect, for it might be doubted whether Cnut would have become involved with spiritual shortcomings.
Nor need it have been completely unexpected, for the original appointment of a German, whom Cnut had possibly brought from Denmark, could, though need not, imply that he was concerned from the start about the trustworthiness of the Ramsey abbot.
It may be a coincidence that this affair, the consecration of the church at Assandun, and the introduction of monks at Bury all happened at about the same time.
Even so, together with the problems at Ely, they may reflect a somewhat hostile attitude to Cnut in this area, perhaps exploited by Thorkell, its earl, who was banished in 1021.
Not impossibly there was a resistance movement in the Fens, as later under William the Conqueror, and ecclesiastics became involved.
If so, Cnut's attack on Ely may have been after 1016.
Nevertheless, the situation was probably of a complexity that cannot now be recovered.
When considering events at Ramsey, for example, it should be remembered that Cnut allowed one of its monks to take the see of Dorchester not long after his accession.
Nothing is known of Bishop Æthelric's connections, but it could be that if he had relatives they were among Cnut's supporters, or that as an individual he was prepared to back the king, for he is said to have enjoyed the royal favour.
His promotion should at any rate warn against over-simplification.
As for Edmund, the Danes themselves may have supported his cult, as the Danish rulers of East Anglia came to do in the ninth century, and if so he would eventually have become a means  of reconciliation between the two peoples.
The consecration of his new basilica on the anniversary of Assandun and the erection of a church on the battlefield could also have owed something to Danish interest.
Their own losses in the battle may have been heavy, and they possibly wished to honour their dead and provide for their salvation.
Cnut himself perhaps wanted to commemorate a great victory.
In so far as these religious matters were an expression of English resentment against their conquerors, such a Danish attitude would have tended to appease and disarm the opposition.
This may have been one of the purposes behind some of Cnut's actions, as has been suggested in connection with his interest in Ælfheah.
It is a pity that the extent of his involvement with the introduction of monks into Bury St Edmunds is uncertain, although it apparently occurred with his licence.
However, Hermann says that he was generous to them, and the Bury Psalter and the Bury Gospels, both of which seem to have been produced in Christ Church Canterbury, were possibly commissioned by him as gifts.
The charter S 980, in favour of Bury, could well be a forgery of the late eleventh-century, although its donation of eels, fish, a fishery, and judicial rights may come from a genuine text.
Cnut is also said to have had the relics of saints Botulf and Jurminus translated there, and a ditch dug round the abbey's lands to protect it from interference.
If his generosity was occasioned by concern at the growth of Edmund's cult, and its connection with Swegen and taxation, it may have been principally an attempt to mollify the opposition by making much of patronising the saint himself.
Similarly, his patronage of Cerne was perhaps connected with his looting of the abbey during his campaign of conquest.
He had nothing to lose by ostentatious atonement for past sins; and St Eadwold, whose relics Cerne claimed to possess, was the brother of Edmund of East Anglia.
CHURCH APPOINTMENTS
If some ecclesiastics showed resentment against the Danes, many others were doubtless willing to make the best of the new regime.
Promotions to abbacies and bishoprics were probably often the subject of competition between important families, and canvassing and intrigue may have taken place both locally and at court.
Something of this can be seen in the Confessor's reign, when Godwin supported one of his kinsmen, a Canterbury monk, in an attempt to obtain the archiepiscopacy.
Cnut may well have profited from this sort of process, for the sources are scanty and their silence on the matter of simony is not enough to rule it out.
Æthelred, Harold Harefoot, Harthacnut and Edward may all have been guilty of it, and there seems no reason why Cnut should have been an exception.
An examination of his appointments hints at some of the other factors involved.
The sees of Ramsbury and Hereford did not fall vacant in his reign, while it is not known which king appointed Bishop Godwin II of Rochester.
Of the promotions made under Cnut, nothing can be said of the origins of Ælfric II of Elmham, Leofgar of Lichfield, Brihtmær of Lichfield and Æthelric of Selsey, or of the reasons why Ælfric Puttoc, the praepositus of Winchester, was made archbishop of York in 1023.
Others were appointed to sees from ecclesiastical establishments — monasteries in every case but one — within the diocese concerned.
This was true of Lyfing of Crediton, who had been abbot of Tavistock; of Æthelric and Eadnoth II of Dorchester, both Ramsey monks; of Edmund of Durham; of Brihtwig of Wells, abbot of Glastonbury; and of Brihtheah of Worcester, abbot of Pershore.
One might add Ælfwine of Elmham, a monk of Ely in the nearby diocese of Dorchester.
These promotions may sometimes have resulted from family connections securing the nomination from Cnut, or to local influence being so important for a  bishop that there was a natural tendency to choose a local man.
The former rather than the latter could have been true of Brihtheah of Worcester, whose family was that of Archbishop Wulfstan of York and Worcester, but whose kins-men lived in Berkshire, while if Symeon of Durham's account of the election of Bishop Edmund is correct, Cnut simply confirmed a choice made in Durham.
Lyfing of Crediton doubtless owed his advancement largely to the influence of his uncle Brihtwold of Cornwall and to his own services to Cnut during the 1027 pilgrimage to Rome.
The origins of the abbots appointed in Cnut's reign are seldom known.
Internal promotion seems to have been frequent, and occurred with Ælfstan of St Augustine's Canterbury, Leofric and Leofsige of Ely, Æthelstan of Ramsey and Leofsine of Thorney.
Perhaps many other abbots had also been monks of the houses they eventually ruled, and Cnut did not always take much interest in their selection.
On the other hand, new men were occasionally brought in from outside.
Brihtric of Burton and Ealdred of Tavistock were both Winchester monks, and Siward of Abingdon was from Glastonbury.
This leaves a group of appointments which look like the deliberate insertion of royal supporters into important positions.
The promotion of Æthelnoth to Canterbury in 1020 seemingly shows Cnut as willing to allow the Christ Church monks to elect their own dean.
This may in part have been a political move, for if he was the son of Ealdorman Æthelmær of Wessex, as is usually assumed, he came from a major West Saxon family, and had a brother, Æthelweard, executed by Cnut in 1017 and a brother-in-law (another Æthelweard) banished in 1020.
He had a good later reputation, and according to Osbern was very acceptable to Cnut because he had given him holy chrism.
Freeman suggested that this refers to participation in a ceremony of confirmation at Southampton in 1016, or to Cnut's coronation by Archbishop Lyfing in 1017.
However  that may be, Cnut's considerable generosity to Canterbury implies that he did have good relations with Æthelnoth, and this possibly made him the more determined to control the selection of his successor.
He evidently intended that this should be the royal priest Eadsige, who took over some of Æthelnoth's duties in 1035 and succeeded him in 1038.
As he became a monk at Christ Church as a preliminary, it looks as though Cnut did not feel able to ride roughshod over the church of Canterbury.
Other royal priests raised to the episcopate were Ælfwine, who became bishop of Winchester in 1032, and Duduc, who received Wells a year later.
These men must have been close to the king, and no doubt had considerable influence with him.
There survives a copy of a letter sent to a priest Ælf., almost certainly Ælfwine, which says that none of the royal councils are hidden from him, and asks for his intercession with the queen so that the writer might be given a fishery.
He also, according to Goscelin, helped Abbot Ælfstan persuade Cnut to allow the translation of St Mildred's remains to St Augustine's Canterbury.
His elevation to the wealthy and important see of Winchester confirms his influence.
Duduc had been given lands at Congresbury and Banwell in Somerset and a monasterium in Gloucester before he was promoted to Wells, and another royal priest, Stigand, received the new church at Assandun and became a major figure under Edward the Confessor, eventually (and illegally) holding the great sees of Winchester and Canterbury in plurality.
Probably to be grouped with the royal priests as a king's man is Ælfweard, allegedly a relative of Cnut, who became bishop of London in 1035 without relinquishing the abbacy of Evesham, contrary to church law.
Cnut's relations with the see of London seem to have been poor, and on the death of Bishop Ælfwig he could well have wished it to be held by one of his own supporters.
Also of interest is Abbot Ælfmær of St Augustine's Canterbury.
He may have cooperated with the Danes in some way at the siege of Canterbury in 1011, and it was maybe in 1023 that he received the bishopric of Sherborne after the expulsion of Bishop Brihtwine.
Although Brihtwine was eventually reinstated after Ælfmær vexed the Sherborne flock, went blind and returned to Canterbury, one would gladly know more of what lay behind this.
If Cnut was primarily responsible for the expulsion it would show that he sometimes dealt in a fairly high-handed manner with ecclesiastics who incurred his displeasure.
Even so, the deposition of a bishop was not an expedient which was properly within his power, and Brihtwine's restoration may reflect this.