

Ten
The Land
As soon as the Indian earns three reales a day, he will never work more than half the week, so that he will still have the same nine reales he gets at present.
When you have changed everything, you will have to return to where you started: to freedom, to that true freedom which wants neither taxes nor regulations nor measures to develop agriculture: to that marvellous laissez-faire which is the last word of political economy
A Mexican landowner, 1865
The prejudice which used to operate against all the popular classes still exists against the peasants.
They do not receive the education of the middle class: hence their differences, the lack of esteem for the countryman, his vigorous desire to escape from the oppression of this contempt.
Hence the decadence of old customs, the corruption and deterioration of our race
A Mantua newspaper, 1856
I
In 1848 the population of the world, even of Europe, still consisted overwhelmingly of countrymen.
Even in Britain, the first industrialised economy, city-dwellers did not outnumber country-dwellers until 1851, and then only just (51 per cent).
Nowhere else except in France, Belgium, Saxony, Prussia and the United States did more than one in ten of the population live in cities of 10,000 and over.
By the middle and late 1870s this situation had been substantially modified, but with few exceptions the rural population still largely prevailed over the urban.
So, for by far the greater part of humanity, the fortunes of life still depended on what happened to and on the land.
What happened on the land depended partly on economic, technical and demographic factors which, allowing for all local peculiarities and lags, operated on the scale of the globe, or at least of large geographical-climatic zones, and on institutional factors (social, political, legal, etc.) which differed much more profoundly, even when the general trends of world development operated through them.
Geographically the North American prairies, the South American pampas, the steppes of south Russia or of Hungary were quite comparable: great plains in the more or less temperate zone, suited to the large-scale cultivation of cereals.
All of them indeed developed what was, from the point of view of the world economy, the same kind of agriculture, becoming massive exporters of grain.
Socially, politically and legally there was a very large difference between the American plains, largely unoccupied except by hunting Indian tribes, and the European ones, long if thinly settled by an agricultural population; between the free farmer-settlers of the New World and the serf peasants of the Old, between the forms of peasant liberation after 1848 in Hungary and those after 1861 in Russia, between the large ranchers or estate owners of Argentina and the noble landlords and gentry of eastern Europe, between the legal systems, the administration, the land policies of the various states involved.
For the historian it is equally illegitimate to overlook what they had in common as it is to neglect the differences.
What a growing part of agriculture all over the world had in common was subjection to the industrial world economy.
Its demands multiplied the commercial market for agricultural products — mostly foodstuffs and the raw materials of the textile industry, as well as some industrial crops of lesser importance — both domestically, through the rapid growth of cities, and internationally.
Its technology made it possible to bring hitherto unexploitable regions effectively within the range of the world market by means of the railway and the steamer.
The social convulsions which followed the transfer of agriculture to a capitalist, or at least a large-scale commercialised pattern, loosened the traditional ties of men to the land of their forefathers, especially when they found they owned none of it, or too little to maintain their family.
At the same time the insatiable demand of new industries and urban occupations for labour, the growing gap between the backward and ‘dark’ country and the advancing city and industrial settlement, attracted them away.
During our period we see the simultaneous and enormous growth of trade in agricultural produce, a remarkable extension of the area in agricultural use, and — at least in the countries directly affected  by world capitalist development — a major ‘flight from the land’.
For two reasons this process became particularly massive during the third quarter of the nineteenth century.
Both are aspects of that extraordinary widening and deepening of the world economy which forms the basic theme of world history at this period.
Technology made possible the opening of geographically remote or inaccessible areas to export production, most notably the plains of the central United States and of south-eastern Russia.
In 1844–53 Russia exported about 115 million hectolitres of grains per year, but in the second half of the 1870s between 47 and 89 million.
The United States, which had exported negligible quantities in the 1840s — perhaps 5 million hectolitres — now sold abroad more than 100 million.
At the same time we find the first attempts to develop certain overseas areas as specialist producers of such exports to the ‘developed’ world — indigo and jute in Bengal, tobacco in Colombia, coffee in Brazil and Venezuela, not to mention cotton in Egypt, etc.
These replaced or supplemented the now traditional export crops of the same kind — the declining sugar from the Caribbean and Brazil, cotton from the southern states of America, whose trade was at least temporarily wrecked by the Civil War of 1861–5.
On the whole, with certain exceptions — such as Egyptian cotton and Indian jute — these economic specialisations did not prove to be permanent, or else, where permanent, they did not develop on any scale comparable to that of the twentieth century.
The lasting pattern of this world-market agriculture did not establish itself until the period of the imperialist world economy of 1870–1930.
Boom products rose and fell; areas which provided the main body of such exports in our period were later to stagnate or abandon them.
Thus, if Brazil was already the major producer of coffee, the state of São Paulo, which is predominantly identified with this crop in our century, as yet harvested only about a quarter of the production of Rio and at most a fifth of the entire country; about half the production of Indonesia and only about twice as much as Ceylon, where the development of tea-culture was still so negligible that exports were not separately registered until the second half of the 1870s, and then in tiny quantities.
Still, a major international trade in agricultural produce was now in being, normally — for obvious reasons — leading to extreme specialisation  or even monoculture in the exporting regions.
Technology made it possible, for after all the major means of transporting bulk produce over long land distances, the railroad, was hardly available before the 1840s.
At the same time technology visibly followed demand, or sought to anticipate it.
This was most evident on the wide plains of the south-western United States and several parts of South America, where cattle multiplied virtually without human effort, herded by gauchos, llaneros, vaqueros and cowboys, and called loudly to all profit-minded citizens for means of converting it into money.
Texas drove some beasts to New Orleans and after 1849 to California, but it was the promise of the great north-eastern market which urged ranchers to explore those long routes which have become part of the heroic romance of the ‘Wild West’, linking the remote south-west with the slowly approaching railheads and through them with the giant transport centre of Chicago, whose stockyards were opened in 1865.
They came each year in tens of thousands before the Civil War, in hundreds of thousands for the twenty years after it, until the completion of the railway network and the advance of the plough on the prairies brought the classical period of the ‘Wild West’(which was essentially a cattle economy) to an end in the 1880s.
Meanwhile another method of utilising livestock was explored: the preservation of slaughtered meat, by the traditional methods of salting and drying, by some sort of concentration (Liebig's meat extract began to be produced in the River Plate states in 1863), by canning and finally by the decisive device of refrigeration.
However, though Boston received some refrigerated meat in the late 1860s, and London a little from Australia from 1865, the trade did not really develop until after the end of our period.
It is no accident that its two great American pioneers, the packing tycoons Swift and Armour, did not establish themselves in Chicago until 1875.
The dynamic element in agricultural development was thus demand: the ever-growing demand for food of the urban and industrial parts of the world, the ever-growing demand of the same sectors for labour and, linking the two, the boom economy which raised the standards of consumption of the masses and thus their per capita demand.
For with the construction of a genuinely global capitalist economy new markets sprang from nowhere (as Marx and Engels noted), while old ones grew dramatically.
For the first time since the  Industrial Revolution, the capacity of the new capitalist economy to give employment caught up with its capacity to multiply production (see chapter 12 below).
In consequence, to take one example, the British per capita consumption of tea trebled between 1844 and 1876, and the per capita consumption of sugar rose from c. 17 to c. 60 lbs in the same period.
World agriculture thus increasingly divided into two parts, one dominated by the capitalist market, national or international, the other largely independent of it.
This does not mean that nothing was bought and sold in the independent sector, still less that the agricultural producers in it were self-sufficient, though it is probable that a rather high proportion of peasant agriculture was consumed on the peasant holding, or within the narrow limits of a local system of exchange, if only because the food demands of the small cities in so many areas could be supplied from within a radius of little more than one or two dozen miles.
Still, there is a substantial difference between the sort of agricultural economy in which sales to the wider world are marginal or optional, and the sort whose fortunes depend on them; between — to put it another way — those haunted by the spectre of a bad harvest and consequent famine, and those haunted by its opposite, overproduction or sudden competition and a collapse of prices.
By the 1870s sufficient of world agriculture was in the second position to make agrarian depression both world-wide and politically explosive.
Economically the traditional sector of agriculture was a negative force: it was immune to the fluctuations of the great markets or, if not, it resisted their impact as best it could.
Where it was strong, it kept men and women on the land, in so far as the land could give them a living, or sent its excess population along the well-beaten traditional tracks of seasonal migration, like those which took the smallholders of central France to and from the building sites of Paris.
In extreme cases it might actually be beyond the range of townsmen's knowledge.
The murderous droughts of the sertão of north-eastern Brazil brought a periodic exodus of starveling backwoodsmen, as scrawny as their scrub cattle; the news that the drought was over took them back again, to the dry, cactus-riddled landscape where no ‘civilised’ Brazilian went, unless on a military expedition against some wild-eyed back-country messiah.
There were  areas in the Carpathians, in the Balkans, in the western marches of Russia, in Scandinavia and Spain — to confine ourselves only to the most developed continent — where the world economy, and hence the rest of the modern world, material or mental, meant little enough.
As late as 1931 the inhabitants of Polesia, when asked by the Polish census officials about their nationality, quite failed to understand the question.
They answered ‘We are from hereabouts’ or ‘We are locals’.
The market-sector was more complex, since its fortunes depended both on the nature of the market, or in some cases of its mechanism of distribution, on the degree of specialisation of the producers, and on the social structure of agriculture.
At one extreme, there might be the virtual monoculture of the new agricultural areas, imposed by their orientation towards a remote world market, and intensified, if not created, by the characteristic mechanism of foreign merchant firms in the great port cities which controlled this export trade — the traditional Greeks who ran the Russian corn trade through Odessa, the Bunges and Borns from Hamburg who were about to fulfil the same function for the River Plate countries from Buenos Aires and Montevideo.
Where such exports were produced by large estates, as was usual in tropical plantations (sugar, cotton, etc.), almost invariable with overseas cattle and sheep-ranching, though rather less common with tillage crops, the pattern of specialisation was complete.
Incidentally, in such cases identity of interest produced a close symbiosis between the large producers — where they happened to be natives and not themselves foreigners — the great trading houses and compradore interests of the export/import ports, and the policies of the states representing the European markets and suppliers.
The slave-owning aristocracy of the Southern United States, the estancieros of Argentina, the great wool-ranchers of Australia, were as enthusiastically devoted to free trade and foreign enterprise as the British, on whom they depended, since their incomes depended exclusively on the free sale of the produce of their estates, in return for which they were more than ready to accept any non-agricultural products which their customers exported.
Where crops were sold both by large estates and small farmers or peasants, the situation was more complex, though in peasant economies, for obvious reasons, the proportion of the crop which came on the world market — i.e. which  was not consumed by the producers — from large estates was normally much larger than that which came from the peasant holdings.
At the other extreme, the growth of urban areas multiplied the demand for a variety of different foodstuffs, in whose production the sheer size of the farming unit gave no special advantages, at any rate compared with those to be drawn from intensive cultivation and from the natural protection of high transport costs and defective technology.
Those who produced staple grains might have to worry about the competition of national or world markets which hardly troubled those who sold dairy products, eggs, vegetables, fruit or even fresh meat — or any other perishable commodity which could not be transported over large distances.
The great agrarian depression of the 1870s and 1880s was thus essentially a depression of the staple national and international food-crops.
Mixed farming, peasant agriculture, especially that of commercially-minded rich peasants, could flourish in such situations.
This was one reason why the predictions of ruin which were made for the peasantry failed at this stage even to look like coming true in some of the most industrialised and developed countries.
It was easy to establish that a peasant unit was unviable below a certain minimum size of holding and resources, which varied with soil, climate and type of production.
It was much harder to show that the economy of large estates was superior to that of medium or even small units, especially when most of the labour demands of such units could be met by the virtually unpaid labour of large peasant families.
The peasantry was constantly eroded by the proletarianisation of those whose holdings were too small to support them, or the emigration of those extra mouths which demographic growth multiplied, and which could not be fed on the family's land.
Much of it was always poor, and the sector of smallholders or dwarf peasants undoubtedly tended to increase.
But, whatever their importance in economic terms, the number of middling peasant holdings not only maintained itself, but even increased sometimes.
The growth of the capitalist economy transformed agriculture by its massive demand.
It is thus not surprising that our period saw an increase in the amount of land put to agricultural use, not to mention the even greater increase in output through improved productivity.
What is not generally recognised is how vast this extension of agricultural land was.
Taking the statistically available world as a whole, between 1840 and 1880 the area under crops rose by half, or from c. 500 to c. 750 million acres.
Half of this increase occurred in America, where the farmed area trebled in this period (it quintupled in Australia and grew two-and-a-half times in Canada).
There it chiefly took the form of a simple geographical advance of agriculture into the interior.
Between 1849 and 1877 wheat production was pushed forward about nine degrees of longitude in the United States, mainly during the 1860s.
It is, of course, worth remembering that the region west of the Mississippi was still comparatively undeveloped.
The very fact that the ‘log-cabin' has become the symbol of the pioneer farmer indicates this: on the great prairies timber was not so plentiful.
However, though less immediately visible for being distributed among and around the cultivated area, the figures for Europe are in their way even more startling.
Sweden more than doubled its crop area between 1840 and 1880, Italy and Denmark expanded it by more than half, Russia, Germany and Hungary by about a third.
Much of this came from the abolition of fallow, much from the farming of what had hitherto been moor, heath or marsh, much, unfortunately, from the destruction of woodlands.
In southern Italy and its islands about 600,000 hectares of trees — or about a third of the modest total still standing in those desiccated landscapes — disappeared between 1860 and 1911.
In a few favoured regions, including Egypt and India, large-scale irrigation works were also of significance, though a simple and fervent faith in technology produced disastrous and unforeseen side effects, then as now.
Only in Britain had the new agriculture already conquered the whole country.
There the area under crops grew by less than 5 per cent.
It would be tedious to multiply the statistics of growing agricultural output and productivity.
What is more interesting is to discover how far these were due to industrialisation, and used the same methods and technology as were transforming industry.
Before the 1840s the answer would have been: to a very small extent.
Even during our period a great part of agriculture was conducted in ways which would have been quite familiar a hundred, even two hundred years earlier, which was natural since striking results could still be achieved by generalising the best methods known to pre-industrial farming.
The virgin lands of America were cleared with fire and axe, as in the middle ages; explosives for removing tree-stumps were at best ancillary.
The drainage ditches were dug with spades, the ploughs drawn by horses or oxen.
For productivity the substitution of the iron for the wooden plough, or even — a neglected but important development — of the scythe for the sickle, were more important than the application of steam power, which never found the basic labours of the farm congenial, since it was largely immobile.
Harvesting was the main exception, for it consisted of a series of standardised operations requiring very large temporary inputs of labour — and with the growing shortage of labourers its cost, always high, rose sharply.
Threshing machines spread where grain was harvested in developed countries.
The major innovation — reaping, harvesting and mowing machines — were confined largely to the United States, where labour was short and fields were large.
But in general the application of ingenuity and inventiveness to agriculture did rise strikingly.
In 1849–51 an annual average of 191 agriculture patents were taken out in the United States; in 1859–61, 1,282; in 1869–71, no less than 3,217.
Yet, all in all, farming and the farm remained visibly what they had always been in most parts of the world: more prosperous in the developed areas, and hence investing more heavily in improvements, buildings, etc., more businesslike in many places, but not transformed out of recognition.
Even industry and its technology were unobtrusive outside the New World.
The mass-produced ceramic drainpipes, which were perhaps its most important contribution to agriculture, were buried, the wire-netting and barbed wire which was to take over from walls, hedges and wooden fencing, confined to the ranges of Australia and the United States, corrugated iron hardly  yet emancipated from the railroads in connection with which it had been developed.
Still, industrial production now contributed seriously to agricultural capital, and so, through the (largely German) science of organic chemistry, did modern science.
Artificial fertilisers (potash, nitrates) were not yet used on a large scale: Chilean nitrate imports to Britain had not reached 60,000 tons by 1870.
On the other hand, a huge trade developed, to the temporary benefit of the finances of Peru and the permanent profit of some British and French firms, in the natural fertiliser guano, of which some 12 million tons were exported between 1850 and 1880, when the guano boom collapsed; a trade unthinkable before the era of global mass transportation.
II
The economic forces moving agriculture in those areas where it was accessible to change were those of expansion.
Yet over most of the world it inevitably came up against social and institutional obstacles which prevented or inhibited it, and in so doing also stood in the way of the other great task which capitalist — or indeed any — industrial development set its landed sector.
For its function in the modern economy was not merely to supply food and raw material in rapidly growing quantities, but also to provide a — indeed the — most important reservoir of labour power for the non-agricultural occupations.
Its third great function, that of providing the capital for urban and industrial development itself, it could hardly help fulfilling in agrarian countries, where there were few other sources of revenue for governments and the rich; though it might fulfil it inefficiently and inadequately.
The obstacles came from three sources: the peasants themselves, their social, political and economic superiors, and the entire weight of institutionalised traditional societies, of which pre-industrial agriculture was both the heart and the main body.
All three were the predestined victims of capitalism, though, as we have seen, neither the peasantry nor the country-based social hierarchy which rested on its backs were in any immediate danger of collapse.
At the very least, all three of these linked phenomena were theoretically  incompatible with capitalism, and therefore tended to enter into collision with it.
For capitalism the land was a factor of production and a commodity peculiar only by its immobility and limited quantity, though, as it happens, the great opening of new lands at this period made these limitations appear relatively insignificant for the time being.
The problem of what to do about those who happened to own this ‘natural monopoly’, thus levying a toll on the rest of the economy, therefore seemed relatively manageable.
Agriculture was an ‘industry’ like any other, to be conducted on sound profit-maximising principles, the farmer an entrepreneur.
The rural world as a whole was a market, a source of labour, and a source of capital.
In so far as its obstinate traditionalism prevented it from doing what political economy required, it had to be made to.
There was no possible way of reconciling such a view with that of peasants or landlords, for whom land was not merely a source of maximisable income but the framework of life; with that of social systems, for which the relations of men to the land and to each other in terms of the land were not, as it were, optional, but obligatory.
Even at the level of government and political thinking, where the ‘laws of economics’ might be increasingly accepted, the conflict was stark.
Traditional landlordism might be economically undesirable, but was it not the cement which held together a social structure which might otherwise collapse into anarchy and revolution?
(The British land policy in India was to come to grief over this dilemma.)
Economically it might be simpler if there was no peasantry, but was not its sturdy conservatism a guarantee of social stability, as its sturdy and numerous progeny were the backbone of most government's armies?
At a time when capitalism was evidently ruining its working classes, could a state afford to do without a reservoir of healthy countrymen from which to recruit the towns?
Nevertheless, capitalism could not but undermine the agrarian bases of political stability, especially on the margins of, or within the dependent periphery of, the developed west.
Economically, as we have seen, the transition to market production, and especially export monoculture, both disrupted traditional social relations and  destabilised the economy.
Politically ‘modernisation’ implied, for those who wanted to undertake it, a frontal collision with the main support of traditionalism, the agrarian society (see chapters 7 and 8 above).
The ruling classes of Britain, where pre-capitalist landlords and peasants had disappeared, and of Germany and France, where a modus vivendi with the peasantry was established on the basis of a flourishing, and where necessary protected, home market, could rely on the loyalty of the countryside.
But elsewhere they could not.
In Italy and Spain, in Russia and the United States, in China and Latin America, it was more likely than not to be a region of social ferment and occasional explosion.
For one reason or another three types of agrarian enterprise were under particular pressure: the slave plantation, the serf estate and the traditional non-capitalist peasant economy.
The first was liquidated within our period by the abolition of slavery in the United States and in most parts of Latin America, except Brazil and Cuba where its days were numbered.
It was officially abolished there in 1889.
For practical purposes by the end of our period chattel slavery had retreated to the more backward parts of the Middle East and Asia, where it no longer played a significant agricultural role.
The second was formally liquidated in Europe between 1848 and 1868, though the situation of the impoverished and especially the landless peasantry in regions of large estates in southern and eastern Europe often remained semi-servile, in as much as it remained subject to overwhelming non-economic coercion.
Where peasants have inferior legal and civil rights to those enjoyed by the rich and powerful, in fact, whatever the theory, they can be coerced non-economically, and on Wallachian, Andalusian or Sicilian estates they were.
Compulsory labour services in many Latin-American countries were not abolished, and indeed intensified, so that we can hardly speak of a general liquidation of serfdom there.
However, it seems increasingly to have  been confined to Indian peasants exploited by non-Indian landlords.
The third maintained itself, as we have seen.
The reasons for this wholesale liquidation of pre-capitalist (i.e. non-economic) forms of agrarian dependency are complex.
In some cases political factors were obviously decisive.
In the Habsburg Empire in 1848, as in Russia in 1861, it was not so much the unpopularity of serfdom among the peasantry which determined emancipation, undoubted though this was, as the fear of a non-peasant revolution which might acquire decisive force by mobilising peasant discontent.
Peasant rebellion was a constant possibility, as demonstrated by the agrarian risings in Galicia in 1846, in southern Italy in 1848, in Sicily in 1860, and in Russia in the years after the Crimean War.
But it was not the blind peasant rebellions themselves which frightened governments — they were short-lived and would be put down with fire and sword even by liberals, as in Sicily  — but the mobilisation of peasant unrest behind a political challenge to the central authority.
The Habsburgs thus tried to isolate the various movements of national autonomy from their peasant base, and the Russian tsar did the same in Poland.
Without the support of the peasantry the liberal-radical movements were insignificant in agrarian countries, or at least manageable.
Both Habsburgs and Romanovs knew this and acted accordingly.
However, insurrection and revolution, whether by peasants or others, explain little more than the timing of some cases of serf emancipation, and nothing about the abolition of slavery.
For unlike serf insurrection, slave rebellion was relatively uncommon — nowhere more so than in the United States  — and never in the nineteenth century considered a very serious political threat.
Was the pressure to abolish serfdom and slavery then economic?
Certainly to some extent.
It is all very well for modern econometric historians to argue retrospectively that slave or serf agriculture was actually more profitable or even more efficient than agriculture manned by free labour.
This is perfectly possible, and the arguments are indeed strong, though the matter is the subject of impassioned debate among mathematically minded historians as well as among others.
However, it is undeniable that contemporaries, operating with contemporary methods and criteria of accountancy, believed that it was inferior, though of course we cannot tell how far the very justified horror of slavery or serfdom biased their calculations.
Still, Thomas Brassey the railway entrepreneur, speaking with the voice of business common sense, observed of serfdom that the crop yield in servile Russia was half that in England and Saxony and less than in any other European country, and of slavery that it was ‘obviously’ less productive than free labour and more expensive than people thought, bearing in mind the cost of purchase or of rearing and maintenance.
The British consul in Pernambuco (admittedly reporting to a passionately anti-slavery government) reckoned that the employer of slaves lost 12 per cent in interest which the capital spent on their purchase would otherwise have earned.
Mistaken or not, such views were common outside the ranks of slave-owners.
Indeed, slavery was patently on the decline, and not for humanitarian reasons either, though the effective ending of the international slave-trade by British pressure (Brazil resigned itself to abolition in 1850) clearly cut the supply of slaves and raised their price.
The import of Africans into Brazil dropped from 54,000 in 1849 to virtually zero in the mid-1850s.
The internal slave-trade, though much used in abolitionist arguments, seems to have played no major role.
Still, the shift from slave to non-slave labour was striking.
By 1872 the free coloured population in Brazil was almost three times as large as the slave population, and even among pure Negroes the two groups were almost equal in number.
In Cuba by 1877 the number of slaves had halved, from 400,000 to about 200,000.
Possibly even in the most traditional area of slave cultivation, sugar, the mechanisation of sugar-mills from the mid-century diminished the need for labour in processing the product, though in booming sugar economies like Cuba it produced a corresponding rise in the demand for field-hands.
However, given the increasing competition of European beet-sugar and the extremely high labour-component in the production of cane-sugar, the pressure to lower labour costs was considerable.
Could the slave-plantation economy bear the double cost of investing heavily  in both mechanisation and slave workers?
Such calculations encouraged the substitution (at least in Cuba) of slaves not so much by free labour as by indentured labour, from among the Maya Indians of Yucatan, victims of the Race War (see chapter 7 above) or from newly opened China.
However, there seems no doubt that slavery as a mode of exploitation was on the decline in Latin America, even before it was abolished, and that the economic case against this form of labour appeared increasingly strong after 1850.
As for serfdom, the economic case against it was both general and specific.
In general terms it seemed clear that the prevalence of tied peasants inhibited the development of industry, which was regarded as requiring free labour.
The abolition of serfdom would therefore be a necessary precondition of free labour mobility.
Moreover, how could serf agriculture be economically rational since, to quote a Russian defender of serfdom in the 1850s, it ‘precludes the possibility of establishing the cost of production with any accuracy’.
It also precluded adequate rational adjustment to the market.
More specifically, both the development of a home market for a variety of foodstuffs and agrarian raw materials, and of an export market — mainly for grain — undermined serfdom.
In the northern part of Russia, never very suited to extensive grain farming, peasant farms displaced estate production of hemp, flax and other intensive crops, while handicrafts provided a further market for the peasantry.
The number of serfs performing labour services, always a minority, fell.
It paid landlords to commute services to market-oriented money-rents.
In the empty south, where virgin steppe country turned into livestock ranges and thereafter wheat lands, serfdom was of no great significance.
What landlords needed for the booming export economy was better transport, credit, free labour and even machines.
Serfdom survived in Russia, as in Rumania, chiefly in areas of grain production with a dense peasant population, where landlords could either compensate for their competitive weakness by raising labour services, or alternatively hope by the same method temporarily to cut themselves in cheaply on the grain export market.
However, the abolition of unfree labour cannot be analysed simply in terms of economic calculation.
The forces of bourgeois society were opposed to slavery and serfdom not simply because they believed them to be economically undesirable, nor for moral reasons, but because they seemed incompatible with a market society based on the free pursuit of individual interest.
Conversely slave-owners and self-lords on the whole stood by the system because it seemed to them the very foundation of their society and their class.
They might actually find it impossible to conceive of themselves without the slaves or serfs who defined their status.
The Russian landlords did not and could not revolt against the tsar, who alone provided them with some legitimation against a peasantry profoundly convinced that the land belonged to him who laboured it, but also of their hierarchic subordination to the representatives of God and the emperor.
But they opposed emancipation fairly solidly.
It was imposed from outside or above and by superior force.
Indeed, had abolition/emancipation been the product of economic forces alone, it would hardly have produced such unsatisfactory results in both Russia and the United States.
The areas in which slavery or serfdom had been of marginal importance or genuinely ‘uneconomic’— e.g. northern and southern Russia or the border states and the south-west in the United States — adjusted readily to its liquidation.
But in the core areas of the old system the problems were much less tractable.
Thus in the purely Russian ‘black earth’ provinces (as distinct from the Ukraine and the steppe frontier) capitalist agriculture was slow to develop, labour dues remained prevalent in the late 1880s, while the expansion of tillage (at the expense of meadows and pastures and at the cost of reinforcing the old three-field system) lagged far behind the southern grain lands.
In short, the purely economic benefits of ending the economy of physical coercion remained debatable.
In the former slave economies this cannot be explained on political grounds, since the South was conquered and the old plantation aristocracy was at least temporarily powerless, though it soon returned.
In Russia the interests of the landlord class were, of course, carefully considered and safeguarded.
The problem here is rather why emancipation produced an agrarian solution satisfactory to neither gentry, peasantry nor to the prospects of a genuinely capitalist agriculture.
In both areas the answer depends on what is the best  form of agriculture, and especially of large-scale agriculture, under capitalist conditions.
There are two major variants of capitalist agriculture, which Lenin called respectively the ‘Prussian’ and the ‘American’way: large estates operated by capitalist landlord-entrepreneurs with hired labour, and independent commercial farmers of varying sizes also operating with hired labour where necessary, though on a much smaller scale.
Both imply a market economy but, whereas even before the triumph of capitalism most large estates operated as productive units exist to sell a large proportion of their output, most peasant holdings, being primarily self-sustaining, do not.
Hence the advantage of large estates and plantations for economic development had lain not so much in their technical superiority, higher productivity, economies of scale, etc., as in their unusual capacity to generate agricultural surpluses for the market.
Where the peasantry remained ‘pre-commercial,’ as in large parts of Russia and among the emancipated slaves of the Americas who returned to subsistence peasant agriculture, the estate retained this advantage, but without the physical compulsions of serfdom or slavery it now found it more difficult to obtain labour, unless the former slaves or serfs were landless or so short of land as to be obliged to become hired labourers — and unless there was no more attractive labour for them to take.
But on the whole the ex-slaves did acquire some land (though not the '40 acres and a mule' of which they dreamed) and the ex-serfs, though losing some of the land to the lords, especially in the regions of expanding commercial agriculture, remained peasants.
Indeed, the survival — even reinforcement — of the old village commune with its arrangements for periodic equitable land-redistribution safeguarded the peasant economy.
Hence the increasing tendency for landlords to develop share-cropping tenancies to replace the crops they themselves found it more difficult to produce.
Whether the Russian landed aristocracy, landowners like Tolstoi's Count Rostov or Chekhov's Mme Ranevskaya, were more or less likely to transform themselves into agrarian capitalist entrepreneurs than ante-bellum  plantation owners, dreaming of Walter Scott, is quite another question.
But, if the ‘Prussian’ road was not taken systematically, neither was the ‘American’road.
This depended on the creation of a large body of enterprising peasant farmers growing essentially cash crops.
A minimum size of holding was necessary for this, varying with circumstances.
Thus, in the southern United States after the Civil War, ‘experience has shown that it is doubtful whether any profit can accrue to a cultivator whose annual crop is less than fifty bales…
The man who cannot make eight or ten bales at least has almost no object in life and nothing to live on.’
A large part of the peasantry therefore remained dependent on subsistence farming if their holdings allowed it or, where they did not, depended on labouring to eke out their insufficient (and often cattle-less or cartless) holdings.
Within the peasantry a sizeable body of commercial farmers undoubtedly developed — they were of substantial significance in Russia by the 1880s — but class differentiation was inhibited by various factors — racialism in the United States, the persistence of the organised village community in Russia  — and as often as not the fully commercialised and capitalist rural sectors were outside traders or money-lenders (commercial firms and banks).
Neither abolition nor emancipation therefore produced a satisfactory capitalist solution of ‘the agrarian problem’, and it is doubtful whether this could have been achieved unless the conditions for the development of a capitalist agriculture were already present, as in the areas on the margins of the slave/serf economy such as Texas or (in Europe) Bohemia and parts of Hungary.
There we can see the ‘Prussian’ and/or ‘American’process in action.
The large noble estates, sometimes helped by injections of finance from the compensation payments for the loss of labour services, transformed themselves into capitalist undertakings.
In the Czech lands they owned 43 per cent of the breweries, 65 per cent of the sugar factories and 60  per cent of the distilleries in the early 1870s.
Here, with the concentration on labour-intensive crops, not only large estates with hired labour but large peasant farms also flourished, and even began to catch up with the estates.
In Hungary these remained dominant and the wholly landless serfs got freedom without any land at all.
Still, the differentiation of the peasantry into rich and poor or landless was also marked in the advanced Czech lands, as is indicated by the fact that the number of goats — the typical poor man's animal — almost doubled between 1846 and 1869.
(On the other hand the output of beef per head of the agricultural population also doubled, a reflection of the growing food market of the cities.)
But in the old core areas of physical coercion, such as Russia and Rumania, where serfdom lasted longest, the peasantry were left as a fairly homogeneous mass (except where divided by race or nationality) and discontented, if not potentially revolutionary.
Sheer impotence, due to racial oppression or the dependency of landless men might keep them quiet, like the rural Negroes of the American South or the labourers of the Hungarian plains.
On the other hand, the traditional peasantry, especially when communally organised, became if anything more formidable.
The Great Depression of the 1870s opened an era of rural unrest and peasant revolution.
Could this have been avoided by a ‘more rational’ form of emancipation?
It is doubtful.
For we find very similar results in those regions where the attempt to create the conditions of capitalist agriculture was made not by some global edict abolishing the economy of coercion, but by the more general process of imposing the law of bourgeois liberalism: transforming all landed property into individual property and turning land into a freely saleable commodity like anything else.
In theory this process had already been widely applied in the first half of the century (see The Age of Revolution, chapter 8) but in practice it was enormously reinforced after 1850 by the triumph of liberalism.
This meant, first and foremost, the break-up of old communal organisations and the distribution or alienation of collectively held land, or the land of non-economic institutions such as the church.
This was done most dramatically and ruthlessly in Latin America, e.g. in Mexico under Juarez in the 1860s or in Bolivia under the dictator Melgarejo (1866–71), but it also took place on a large scale in Spain after the revolution of 1854, in Italy after the unification of the country under the liberal institutions of Piedmont, and wherever else economic and legal liberalism triumphed.
And liberalism advanced even where governments were by no means unqualified in their crusading zeal for it.
The French authorities did something to safeguard communal property among their Moslem subjects in Algeria, even though Napoleon III (in the Senatus-Consulte of 1863) found it inconceivable that individual property rights in land should not be established formally among the members of Moslem communities ‘where possible and opportune’, a measure which actually had the effect of permitting Europeans for the first time to buy them out.
Still, it was not a charter for wholesale expropriation like the Law of 1873 which (after the great insurrection of 1871) proposed the immediate transfer of native property to French legal status, a measure which ‘benefited hardly anyone except [European]businessmen and speculators’.
With or without official backing, the Moslems lost their lands to white settlers or land companies.
Greed played a part in such expropriations: by governments for the profits from land sales or other income, by landlords, settlers or speculators for estates easily and cheaply acquired.
Yet it would be unjust to deny the legislators the sincerity of their conviction that the transformation of land into a freely alienable commodity and the transformation of communal, ecclesiastical, entailed or other historically obsolete relics of an irrational past into private holdings, would alone provide a basis for satisfactory agricultural development.
But it did not, at any rate for the peasantry, which on the whole refused to turn itself into a flourishing class of commercial farmers even when it had the chance to do so.
(Mostly it had not, since it was unable to acquire the land put on the market, or even to understand the complex legal processes which led to its expropriation.)
It may not have strengthened the ‘latifundium’ as such — the term is ambiguous and deeply encrusted in political mythology but whoever it strengthened, it was not the subsistence peasant, old or new, the marginal villager who depended on the common lands and, in regions subject to deforestation and erosion, the land itself, no longer protected by communal control of its use.
The main effect of liberalisation was to sharpen the edge of peasant discontent.
The novelty of this discontent was that it could now be mobilised by the political left.
In fact, outside parts of southern Europe, it was not yet so mobilised.
In Sicily and southern Italy peasant insurrection in 1860 attached itself to Garibaldi, a splendid blond and red-shirted figure who looked every inch the people's liberator, and whose belief in a radical-democratic, secular and even vaguely ‘socialist’ republic did not seem at all incompatible with their own belief in the saints, the Virgin, the Pope and (outside Sicily) the Bourbon king.
In Southern Spain republicanism and the International (in its Bakuninite form) made rapid headway: hardly any Andalusian township between 1870 and 1874 lacked its ‘workers’ society'.
(In France, of course, republicanism, the prevalent form of the left, was already well-established in certain rural regions after 1848 and in a moderate form enjoyed majority support in some after 1871.)
Perhaps a rural revolutionary left emerged in Ireland with the Fenians in the 1860s, to burst out in the formidable Land League of the late 1870s and 1880s.
There were admittedly plenty of countries even in Europe — and practically all outside that continent — where the left, revolutionary or otherwise, as yet failed to make any impact on the peasantry; as the Russian populists (see chapter 9 above) discovered when they decided to ‘go to the people’ in the 1870s.
Indeed, in so far as the left was urban, secularist or even militantly anti-clerical (see chapter 14 below) and both contemptuous of rural ‘backwardness’ and unappreciative of country problems, the peasantry might still be full of suspicion and hostility towards it.
The rural success of the militantly anti-Christian anarchists in Spain or republicans in France was exceptional.
Yet in this period, at least in Europe, the old-fashioned rural insurrection for church and king against the godless and liberal cities became scarce.
Even the second Carlist War in Spain (1872–6) was a much less widespread affair than the first one had been in the 1830s, and virtually confined to the Basque provinces.
As the great boom of the 1860s and early 1870s gave way to the agrarian depression of the late 1870s and 1880s, the peasantry could  no longer be taken for granted as a conservative element in politics.
Yet how far was the fabric of life in the countryside torn by the forces of the New World?
It is not easy to judge from the vantage-point of the late twentieth century, for in the second half of this century rural life has been more profoundly transformed than at any time since the invention of agriculture.
Looking backwards, the ways of the men and women of the countryside in the mid-nineteenth century seem fixed in an ancient tradition changing, if at all, at no more than a snail's pace.
Of course this is an illusion, but the exact nature of the change is now difficult to discern, except perhaps among such essentially novel agriculturalists as the settlers in the American West, ready to change farm and crop according to the prospects of prices or speculative profits, equipped with machinery and already buying the city's products through the new-fangled device of the mail-order catalogue.
Yet there were changes in the countryside.
There was the railway.
There was, with increasing frequency, the elementary school, teaching the national language (a new and second language for most peasant children) and, in conjunction with national administration and national politics, splitting their personality.
By 1875, it is reported, the use of those nicknames by which people were known and identified in the villages of the Bray country in Normandy, and even the informal local versions of their first names, had virtually disappeared.
This was ‘due entirely to the schoolmasters who will not permit that children in their schools use any but the proper names’.
Probably they had not so much disappeared as retreated, with the local dialect, into the private and unofficial underworld of non-literate culture.
And yet the very division between the literate and the non-literate in the countryside was a powerful force for change.
For while, in the oral world of non-literacy, ignorance of letters, the national language or national institutions is no handicap, except to those whose business (which is rarely that of agriculture) makes such knowledge necessary, in a literate society the illiterate is by definition inferior, and has a strong incentive to remove that inferiority, at least from his or her children.
In 1849 it was natural that peasant politics in Moravia should take the form of a rumour that the Hungarian revolutionary leader Kossuth was the son of the ‘peasant emperor’ Joseph II, close kin of the ancient king Svatopluk, and about  to invade the country at the head of a great army.
By 1875 politics in the Czech countryside was conducted in more sophisticated terms, and those who expected national salvation from supposed kinsmen of ‘people's emperors’, ancient or modern, would probably feel a little embarrassed to admit it.
That sort of thinking was now increasingly confined to quite non-literate countries which even central European peasants would regard as behind the times, such as Russia, where indeed the populist revolutionaries at this very time attempted — unsuccessfully — to organise a peasant revolution by means of a ‘people's pretender’ to the tsar's throne.
Relatively few country people were as yet literate, outside parts of western and central Europe (notably the protestant parts) and North America.
But even among the backward and traditional, two kinds of country people were the major pillars of the ancient ways — the old and the women, whose ‘old wives’ tales' passed them on to new generations, and occasionally, for the benefit of city men, to collectors of folklore and folksong.
And yet it is a paradox of the period that change came into country life as often as not through the women.
Sometimes, as in England, country girls became more literate than country boys — this seems to have happened in the 1850s.
Certainly in the United States it was the women who represented ‘civilised ways’— book learning, hygiene, ‘nice’ houses and furnishings on the city model and sobriety — against the rough, violent and drunken ways of the menfolk; as Huckleberry Finn (1884) found to his cost.
Those who pushed sons to ‘better themselves’ were more likely to be mothers than fathers.
But perhaps the most powerful agency of such ‘modernisation’ was the migration of young peasant girls into domestic service with the urban middle and lower middle classes.
Indeed, both for men and women, the great process of uprooting was inevitably a process of undermining ancient ways and learning new ways.
To this we must now turn.
Eleven
Men Moving
We asked her where her husband was.
‘He's in America.’
‘What does he do there?’
‘He's got a job as Tsar.’
‘But how can a Jew be Tsar?’
‘Everything's possible in America’, she answered.
Scholem Alejchem, c. 1900
The Irish, I am told, are everywhere beginning to drive out the Negroes from domestic service…
Here it is universal; there is hardly a servant anywhere who is not Irish
A. H. Clough to Thomas Carlyle, Boston, 1853
I
The middle of the nineteenth century marks the beginning of the greatest migration of peoples in history.
Its exact details can hardly be measured, for the official statistics, such as they were then, fail to capture all the movements of men and women within countries or even between states: the rural exodus towards the cities, the migration between regions and from town to town, the crossing of oceans and the penetration of frontier zones, the flux of men and women moving back and forth in ways even more difficult to specify.
Still, one dramatic form of this migration can be approximately documented.
Between 1846 and 1875 considerably more than 9 million people left Europe, by far the greater part of these for the United States.
This was the equivalent of more than four times the population of London in 1851.
In the previous half-century it could not have been more than a million and a half in all.
Population movements and industrialisation go together, for the modern economic development of the world both required substantial shifts of people, made it technically easier and cheaper by means of new and improved communications, and of course enabled the world to maintain a much larger population.
The mass uprooting  of our period was neither unexpected nor without more modest precedents.
It was certainly predictable in the 1830s and 1840s (see The Age of Revolution, pp. 169–70).
Still, what had previously been an increasingly lively stream, seemed suddenly to become a torrent.
Before 1845 only in one year had more than 100,000 foreign passengers arrived in the United States.
But between 1846 and 1850 an annual average of more than a quarter of a million left Europe, in the next five years an annual average of almost 350,000; in 1854 alone no less than 428,000 arrived in the United States.
And though the numbers fluctuated, according to economic conditions in both the countries of origin and the receiving countries, it continued on a far larger scale than ever before.
However, enormous as these migrations were, they were still modest by later standards.
Thus in the 1880s between 700,000 and 800,000 Europeans emigrated on average every year, in the years after 1900 between 1 and 1.4 million a year.
Thus between 1900 and 1910 considerably more people migrated to the United States than during the entire period with which this book is concerned.
The most obvious limitation on migration was geographical.
Leaving aside the relics of the African slave-trade (now illegal and rather effectively strangled by the British navy), the bulk of international migrants were Europeans, or more accurately in this period western Europeans and Germans.
The Chinese were certainly already on the move into the northern and central borderlands of their empire beyond the native region of the Han people, and from the southern coastal regions into the peninsulas and islands of south-east Asia, in what numbers we cannot say.
Probably they were modest.
In 1871 there were perhaps 120,000 in the Straits Settlements (Malaya).
The Indians began after 1852 to migrate in moderate numbers into neighbouring Burma.
The void left by the banning of the slave-trade was to some extent being filled by transports of ‘indentured’ labour, mainly from India and China, whose conditions were scarcely better.
One hundred and twenty-five thousand Chinese arrived in Cuba between 1853 and 1874.
They were to create the Indian diasporas of Guyana and Trinidad, of the Indian Ocean islands and the Pacific, and the smaller Chinese colonies in Cuba, Peru and the British Caribbean.
Adventurous Chinese were already attracted (see chapter 3 above) in some numbers to the pioneer regions of the American  Pacific, to provide local journalists with jokes about laundrymen, cooks (they invented the Chinese restaurant in San Francisco during the gold rush ), and local demagogues during slumps with slogans of racial exclusiveness.
The rapidly growing merchant fleets of the world were already largely manned by ‘lascar’ seamen who left a deposit of small coloured populations in the major international ports.
The recruitment of colonial troops, mainly by the French who hoped by this means to offset the demographic superiority of the Germans (a subject anxiously discussed in the 1860s), brought some others for the first time into a European environment.
Even among the Europeans mass intercontinental migration was confined to the people of relatively few countries, in this period overwhelmingly to the British, the Irish and the Germans, and, from the 1860s on, the Norwegians and Swedes — the Danes never emigrated to the same extent — whose small numbers conceal the enormous relative size of their demographic drain.
Thus Norway sent two-thirds of its population increase to the United States, surpassed only by the unfortunate Irish who sent more than their entire increase abroad: the country lost population consistently in every decade after the Great Famine of 1846–7.
Still, though the English and the Germans sent hardly more than 10 per cent of their net demographic increase abroad, in absolute numbers this was a very large contingent.
Between 1851 and 1880 about 5.3 million left the British Isles (3.5 million of them to the United States, 1 million to Australia, half a million to Canada)— by far the greatest body of trans-oceanic emigrants in the world.
The south Italians and Sicilians, who were to flood into the big cities of the Americas, had hardly yet begun to stir from their native slum villages, the east Europeans, Catholic or Orthodox, remained largely sedentary, only the Jews seeping or flooding into provincial towns from which they had hitherto been excluded and thence into larger cities.
–The Russian peasants hardly began to migrate into the open spaces of Siberia before 1880, though they moved in large numbers  into the steppes of European Russia, whose settlement was more or less complete by the 1880s.
The Poles hardly began to populate the mines of the Ruhr before 1890 though the Czech were moving south into Vienna.
The great period of Slav, Jewish and Italian migration to the Americas began in the 1880s.
By and large the British Isles, Germany and Scandinavia provided the international migrants, except for specially footloose minorities such as the Galicians and Basques, ubiquitous in the Hispanic world.
Since most Europeans were rural, so were most migrants.
The nineteenth century was a gigantic machine for uprooting countrymen.
Most of them went to the cities, or at any rate out of traditional rural pursuits, to find their way as best they could in strange, frightening, but at best boundlessly hopeful new worlds, where the city pavements were said to be paved with gold, though immigrants rarely picked up more than some copper.
It is not quite true that the currents of migration and urbanisation were the same.
A few groups of migrants, notably among Germans and Scandinavians, who went to the Great Lakes area of the United States, or the earlier Scots settlers in Canada, exchanged a poor agricultural milieu for a better one: only 10 per cent of the foreign immigrants in the United States in 1880 were in agriculture, mostly not as farmers ‘possibly’, as an observer claimed ‘on account of the capital required to purchase and stock a farm’,’ the equipment of which alone was reckoned to cost $900 in the early 1870s.
Still, if the redistribution of countrymen across the face of the globe is not to be neglected, it was less striking than their exodus from agriculture.
Migration and urbanisation went together, and in the second half of the nineteenth century the countries chiefly associated with it (the United States, Australia, Argentina) had a rate of urban concentration unsurpassed anywhere except in Britain and the industrial parts of Germany.
(By 1890 the twenty largest cities in the western world included five in the Americas and one in Australia.)
Men and women moved into cities, though perhaps (in Britain certainly) increasingly from other cities.
If they moved within their own country, this raised no novel problems of technique.
In most cases they did not go far or, if they did, the paths from their region to the city had been well-trodden by kinsmen and neighbours, like the hawkers and seasonal building  workers who had long been in the habit of coming up to Paris from central France, whose numbers grew with the constructional work of Paris until, after 1870, they turned from seasonal into permanent migrants.
New routes were sometimes opened up by technology, such as the railway which brought the Bretons to Paris, to lose their faith (as the proverb had it) at the gates of the Gare Montparnasse, and to supply the brothels of the city with their most characteristic inhabitants.
Breton girls replaced those from Lorraine as its most familiar prostitutes.
The women migrants within countries became overwhelmingly domestic servants, until they married some fellow-countryman, or passed into some other urban occupation.
The migration of families or even married couples was uncommon.
The men followed the traditional trades of their region in the city — the Cardiganshire Welsh became dairymen wherever they went, the Auvergnats dealers in fuel — or, if skilled, their own craft, if enterprising, some form of small commerce, mainly in the food and drink trades.
Otherwise they found employment above all in those two great occupations which required no special skills unfamiliar to countrymen, building and transport.
In Berlin in 1885 81 per cent of men engaged in food supply, 83–5 per cent of builders, and over 85 per cent of those in transport had been born outside the city.
If they rarely had much chance in the more skilled manual jobs, unless apprenticed to some craft at home, they were probably better off than the poorest of the city-born.
The worst of the slimy pools of sweated and casual poverty were more likely to be filled by the native than the immigrant.
In our period there was not yet much in the way of factory production in most of the major capital cities.
Most of such strictly industrial production was to be found in the middling-sized though rapidly growing cities or even — notably in mining and some kinds of textiles — in villages and small towns.
Here there was no comparable demand for women immigrants, except in textiles, and the jobs for immigrant men were, almost by definition, unskilled or low-paid.
Migration across frontiers and oceans raised more complex problems, and not by any means because it was often — though in our period not primarily — entry into a country whose language the migrant did not understand.
In fact the largest body of migrants, those from the British Isles, had no significant linguistic difficulties, whereas quite a few internal migrants had, e.g. in the multi-national empires of central and eastern Europe.
However, language aside, emigration undoubtedly raised in an acute form the question of where a man or woman belonged (see also chapter 5 above).
If one remained in the new country, was one obliged to break one's ties with the old, and if so did one want to?
The question did not arise for those settling in their state's colonies, who could continue to remain Englishmen or Frenchmen in New Zealand or Algeria, thinking of the old country as ‘home’.
It arose most acutely in the United States which welcomed immigrants but also put pressure on them to turn themselves into English-speaking American citizens as soon as possible, since any rational citizen would wish to be an American.
In fact, most did so.
A change of citizenship did not of course imply a divorce from the old country.
Quite the contrary.
The typical emigrant, huddled together with his like in the strange new environment which received him coldly enough — the militant xenophobia of the ‘Know-Nothings’ was a native American response to the influx of starving Irish in the 1850s — fell back naturally on the only human setting that was familiar and could provide help, the company of his countrymen.
The America which taught him, as the first formal sentences of English, ‘I hear the whistle.
I must hurry’ was not a society but a means of making money.
The first-generation immigrant, however zealously he or she tried to learn the techniques of the new life, lived in a self-imposed ghetto, drawing support from the old ways, the men of his kind, the memories of the old country which he had so  readily abandoned.
Not for nothing did smiling Irish eyes make the fortunes of the bohemian hacks who were just about to create the modern popular music business in the cities of the United States.
Even the wealthy New York Jewish financiers, the Guggenheims, Kuhns, Sachs, Seligmanns and Lehmanns, who had all that money could buy in the United States, which was very nearly everything, were not yet Americans in the way in which the Wertheimsteins in Vienna considered themselves Austrian, the Bleichroeders in Berlin Prussians, even the international Rothschilds in London and Paris, English and French.
They remained Germans as well as Americans.
They spoke, wrote and thought in German, often sent their children to be educated in the old country, joined and sponsored German associations.
But emigration raised much more elementary material difficulties.
Men had to discover where to go and what to do once they got there.
They had to get to Minnesota from some remote Norwegian fjord, to Green Lake county, Wisconsin from Pomerania or Brandenburg, to Chicago from some townland in Kerry.
Cost itself was not an insuperable difficulty, though the conditions of steerage travel across the ocean were, especially in the years after the Irish famine, notoriously horrible, if not actually murderous.
In 1885 the emigrant passage from Hamburg to New York cost $7.
(The shipping fares from Southampton to Singapore, which catered to a higher class of trade, had merely been reduced from £110 in the 1850s to £68 in the 1880s.
Fares were low, not only because passengers from the lower orders were not believed to require or deserve much better accommodation than cattle and fortunately needed less space, or even because of improvements in communications, but for economic reasons.
Emigrants were useful bulk cargo.
Probably for most people the cost of the journey to the final port of embarkation — Le Havre, Bremen, Hamburg, above all Liverpool — was far greater than that of the actual crossing.
Even so, the money was not within reach of many of the very poor, though such sums could easily be saved and sent back from America or Australia, with their high wages, to kinsmen in the old country.
In fact such payments formed part of the vast sum of remittances from abroad, for emigrants, unused to the high spending of their new countries, were heavy savers.
The Irish alone sent back between £1  million and £1–7 million a year in the early 1850s.
However, where kinsmen could not help, a variety of intermediary entrepreneurs had a financial interest in doing so.
Where there is a large demand for labour (or land ) on one side, a population ignorant of conditions in the receiving country on the other and a long distance between, the agent or contractor will flourish.
Such men earned their profits by steering human cattle into the holds of shipping companies anxious to fill them, towards public authorities and railroad companies interested in populating their empty territories, mine-owners, iron-masters and other employers of raw labour who needed hands.
They were paid by these, and by the pennies of helpless men and women who might be forced to cross half of a strange continent before even embarking on the Atlantic crossing: from central Europe to Le Havre, or across the North Sea and via the smoky Pennine valleys to Liverpool.
We may assume that very often they exploited ignorance and helplessness, though the extremes of contract labour and debt serfdom were probably un-common in this period, except among the Indians and Chinese shipped abroad for plantation work.
(This does not mean that there were not plenty of Irishmen who paid some ‘friend’ from the old country unnecessarily for the privilege of finding a job in the New World.)
On the whole the entrepreneurs of migration were uncontrolled, except for some supervision of shipping conditions after the terrifying epidemics of the late 1840s.
They had the public opinion of the influential behind them.
The mid-nineteenth-century bourgeoisie still believed that its continent was grossly overpopulated by the poor.
The more of them that were shipped abroad, the better for them (because they would improve their conditions) and for those left behind (because the labour market would be less overstocked).
Benevolent societies, even trade unions, arranged to subsidise the emigration of their clients or members as the only practicable means of dealing with pauperism and unemployment.
And the fact that during our period the most rapidly industrialising countries, like Britain and Germamy, were also the great exporters of men, seemed to justify them.
The argument was, it is now held? mistaken.
On balance the economy  of the dispatching countries would have benefited more by employing its human resources than by expelling them.
Conversely, the economies of the New World benefited immeasurably by the exodus from the old.
So, of course, did the emigrants themselves.
The worst period of their poverty and exploitation in the United States seems to have occurred after the end of our period.
Why did people emigrate?
Overwhelmingly for economic reasons, that is to say because they were poor.
In spite of the political persecutions after 1848, political or ideological refugees formed only a small fraction of mass emigration, even in 1849–54, though at one time the radicals among them controlled half the German-language press of the United States, which they used to denounce their country of refuge.
Their rank-and-file soon settled down abroad like most non-ideological migrants transferring their revolutionary energies to the anti-slavery campaign.
The flight of religious sects seeking greater freedom to pursue their often rather peculiar activities was probably less significant than in the previous  half-century , if only because mid-Victorian governments held no strong views about orthodoxy as such, though probably not displeased to see the heels of the British or Danish Mormons, whose penchant for polygamy created problems.
Even in eastern Europe the active anti-semitic campaigns, which were to stimulate the mass emigration of the Jews, still lay in the future.
Did people emigrate to escape bad conditions at home or to seek better ones abroad?
There has been a long and rather pointless debate on this question.
There is no doubt that poor men were more likely to emigrate than richer ones, and that they were more likely to emigrate if their traditional livelihood had become difficult or impossible.
Thus in Norway handicraftsmen migrated more readily than factory workers, later sailors migrated when sail declined before steam, fishermen when oil-driven craft replaced sailing boats.
There is equally little doubt that at this period, when the idea of tearing out ancient roots was still strange and terrifying to most people, some kind of cataclysmic force was still required to drive them into the unknown.
A Kentish farm-labourer, writing from New Zealand, thanked the farmers for having driven him out by a lockout of the labourers' union, since he now found himself so much better off: he would not have thought of going otherwise.
Nevertheless, as mass migration became part of common people's  experience, and every child in County Kildare had some cousin, uncle or brother already in Australia or the United States, uprooting became a common — and not necessarily irreversible — choice based on an assessment of prospects, and not merely a force of destiny.
If news came that gold had been found in Australia or jobs were plentiful and well paid in the United States, migration increased.
Conversely, it plummeted in the years after 1873, when the economy of the United States was acutely depressed.
Still, there can be no doubt that the first great emigration wave of our period (1845–54) was essentially a flight from hunger or pressure of population on land, basically in Ireland and Germany, which supplied 80 per cent of all transatlantic migrants in these years.
Nor was migration necessarily permanent.
Emigrants — what proportion of them we do not know — dreamed of making their pile abroad and returning home, rich and respected, to their native villages.
A considerable proportion — between 30 and 40 per cent— actually did so, though most commonly for the opposite reason, because they did not like the New World or could not establish themselves there.
Some migrated again.
As communications were revolutionised, the labour market, especially for men with special skills, expanded until it comprised the entire industrial world.
The list of British craft union leaders of this period is filled with men who worked for a spell in the United States or somewhere else overseas, as they might have worked for a spell in Newcastle or Barrow-in-Furness.
Indeed, it now became possible for even the temporary and seasonal migrations of Italian or Irish harvesters or railway builders to extend across the oceans.
In fact, the massive increase in migration contained a considerable quantity of impermanent movement — temporary, seasonal or merely nomadic.
In itself there was nothing new about such movements.
The harvester, the tramping journeymen, the nomadic tinker, hawker, carter and drover were familiar enough before the Industrial Revolution.
Nevertheless the rapid and world-wide extension of the new economy was bound to require, and therefore to create, new types of such travellers.
Consider the symbol of this extension, the railway.
Its entrepreneurs ranged the globe and with them went the cadre of (mostly British and Irish) foremen, skilled workers and elite labour; sometimes  settling down in some foreign country for good, their children becoming the Anglo-Argentines of the next generation, sometimes moving from country to country like the much less numerous oilmen of our days.
Since railways were built anywhere, they could not necessarily rely on a local labour-force, but developed a corps of nomadic labourers (known in Britain as the ‘navvies’), such as still characterises the great construction projects all over the world.
In most industrial countries these were recruited from marginal and footloose men, ready to work hard for good pay in bad conditions and to drink or gamble away their pay equally hard, with little thought for the future.
For, just as for the similar sailors there would always be another ship, so for the mobile diggers there would always be some other great construction project when the present one finished.
Free men on the frontiers of industry, shocking the respectable of all classes, the heroes of an unofficial folklore of masculinity, they played the same sort of role as sailors and frontier miners and prospectors, though earning more than the ones, and lacking the others' hope of making their fortune.
In the more traditional agrarian societies these mobile constructors formed an important bridge between rural and industrial life.
Organised in regular gangs or teams on the model of seasonal harvesters, led by an elected captain who negotiated terms and shared out the proceeds of the contract, poor peasants from Italy, Croatia or Ireland would criss-cross continents or even oceans to provide labour for the builders of towns, factories or railways.
Such migrations developed on the Hungarian plains from the 1850s.
The less organised often resented the superior efficiency and greater discipline (or docility), and the readiness to work for lower wages, of these peasants.
Yet it is not enough merely to draw attention to the growth of what Marx called the ‘light cavalry’ of capitalism, without also observing a significant distinction within the developed countries; or more precisely between the Old and New Worlds.
Economic expansion produced a ‘frontier’ everywhere.
In some senses a mining community such as Gelsenkirchen (in Germany), which grew from 3,500 inhabitants to almost 96,000 in half a lifetime (1858–95), was a  ‘New World’ comparable to Buenos Aires or the Pennsylvanian industrial centres.
But in the Old World, on the whole, the need for a mobile population was met without creating more than a comparatively modest and impermanent floating population, except in the great shipping ports and, as it were, in the traditional centres of the shifting and shiftless population, such as the great cities.
This may be because its members had, or could soon sink roots into, some sort of community belonging to a structured society.
It was in thinly populated regions at or beyond the frontiers of settlement overseas, where shifting bodies of labourers were required, that such groups of genuinely unattached and floating individuals made their presence felt as a group, or were at least more ‘visible’.
The Old World was full of herdsmen and drovers, but none have attracted as much attention as the American ‘cowboys’ of our period, though their equivalent in Australia, the itinerant sheep-shearers and other rural labourers of the hinterland, have also produced a locally powerful myth.
II
The characteristic form of travel for the poor was migration.
For the middle class and the rich it was increasingly tourism, essentially the product of the railway, the steamship and (in so far as that invention of our period, the picture postcard, is still an essential part of it) of the new scale and speed of postal communications.
(These were internationally systematised with the establishment of the International Postal Union in 1869.)
Poor men in towns travelled for necessity but rarely for pleasure, except on foot — the autobiographies of self-improving Victorian artisans are full of titanic country walks — and for short periods.
Poor men in the country did not travel for pleasure at all, combining enjoyment with business at markets and fairs.
The aristocracy travelled much for non-utilitarian purposes, but in ways which have nothing in common with modern tourism.
Noble families moved from town house to country house and back again at regular seasons, with a train of servants and baggage vehicles like a small army.
(Indeed, the father of Prince Kropotkin issued his wife and serfs proper marching orders in military fashion.)
They might establish themselves in some suitable centre of social life for a while, as that Latin-American family did which the Paris Guide of 1867 records  as arriving with eighteen wagons of baggage.
The traditional Grand Tour of the young nobleman had not yet even the Grand Hotel in common with the tourism of the capitalist era, partly because this institution was only now developing — initially as often as not in connection with a railway — partly because noblemen hardly deigned to stop at inns.
Industrial capitalism produced two novel forms of pleasure travel: tourism and summer holidays for the bourgeoisie and mechanised day trips for the masses in some countries such as Britain.
Both were the direct results of the application of steam to transport, since for the first time in history this made possible regular and safe journeys for large numbers of people and luggage over any kind of terrain and water.
Unlike stage-coaches, which could be readily held up by brigands in remoter regions, railways were immune from the start — except in the American West — even in notoriously unsafe areas such as Spain and the Balkans.
The day trip for the masses, if we except steamer excursions, was the child of the 1850s — to be more precise of the Great Exhibition of 1851, which attracted vast numbers of visitors to its marvels in London, a traffic encouraged by the railways with concession fares, and organised by and for the members of innumerable local societies, chapels and communities.
Thomas Cook himself, whose name was to become a by-word for organised tourism in the next twenty-five years, had begun his career arranging such outings and developed it into big business in 1851.
The numerous International Expositions (see chapter 2 above) each brought its army of sightseers and the rebuilding of capital cities encouraged provincials to sample their wonders.
Little more need to said about mass tourism in this period.
It remained confined to short trips, often quite strenuous by modern standards, bringing in its train a flourishing minor industry of ‘souvenirs’.
In general the railways, at all events in Britain, took little interest in third-class travel, though the government forced them to provide a minimum of it.
Not until 1872 did the British ones earn 50 per cent of their passenger receipts from the common herd.
Indeed, as regular third-class traffic increased, the excursion traffic by special train became less important.
The middle class, however, travelled more seriously.
The most important form of such journeys, in quantitative terms, was probably  that to the family summer holiday or (for the more affluent and overfed) to the annual cure at some spa.
The third quarter of the nineteenth century saw a remarkable development of such resorts — at the seaside in Britain, in the mountains on the continent.
(Though Biarritz was already very fashionable in the 1860s, thanks to the patronage of Napoleon III, and Impressionist paintings show a visible interest in the beaches of Normandy, the continental bourgeoisie was as yet uncommitted to salt water and sunshine.)
By the mid-1860s a middle-class holiday boom was already transforming parts of the British coastline with seafront promenades, piers and other embellishments, which enabled landed proprietors to draw unsuspected profits from hitherto uneconomic stretches of cliff and beach.
These were middle- and lower-middle-class phenomena.
On the whole the working-class seaside resort did not become of major significance until the 1880s, and the nobility and gentry would scarcely consider a stay at Bournemouth (where the French poet Verlaine found himself) or Ventnor (where Turgenev and Karl Marx took the air) as a suitable summer activity.
The continental spa (the British ones hardly reached such prominence) were far more stylish, and therefore provided both more luxurious hotels and the entertainments necessary for such a clientele, such as gambling casinos and rather high-class brothels.
Vichy, Spa, Baden-Baden, Aix-les-Bains, but above all the great international spas of the Habsburg monarchy, Gastein, Marienbad, Karlsbad, etc., were to nineteenth-century Europe what Bath had been to eighteenth-century England, fashionable gatherings justified by the excuse of drinking some form of disagreeable mineral waters or immersing oneself in some form of liquid under the control of a benevolent medical dictator.
However, the ailing liver was a great leveller, and the mineral spas attracted a cross-section of the non-aristocratic rich and the professional middle classes, whose tendency to eat and drink too much was reinforced by prosperity.
After all Dr Kugelmann recommended Karlsbad to so untypical a member of the middle class as Karl Marx, who carefully registered himself as a ‘man of private means’ to avoid identification, until he discovered that as Dr Marx he  could save some of the rather steep Kurtaxe.
In the 1840s few such places had emerged from rural simplicity.
As late as 1858 Murray's Guide described Marienbad as ‘comparatively recent’ and noted that Gastein had only two hundred guest-rooms.
But in the 1860s they were in full flower.
Sommerfrische and Kurort were for the normal bourgeois; traditionalist France and Italy still confirm today that annual liverishness was a bourgeois institution.
For the delicate, mild sunshine was indicated, that is to say winters on the Mediterranean.
The Côte d'Azur had been discovered by Lord Brougham, the radical politician whose statue still presides over Cannes, and, though the Russian nobility and gentry became its most lucrative clients, the name ‘Promenade des Anglais’ in Nice still indicates who opened this new frontier of moneyed leisure.
Monte Carlo built its Hôtel de Paris in 1866.
After the opening of the Suez Canal, and especially after the construction of the railway up the Nile, Egypt became the place for those whose health forbade the damp autumns and winters of the north, combining as it did the advantages of climate, exoticism, monuments of ancient culture and (at this stage still informal) European domination.
The indefatigable Baedeker produced his first guidebook to this country in 1877.
To go to the Mediterranean in summer, except in search of art and architecture, was still regarded as madness until well into the twentieth century, that era of the novel worship of sun and brown skins.
Only a few places, such as the Bay of Naples and Capri, already established thanks to the patronage of the Russian Empress, were regarded as tolerable in the hot season.
The modesty of local prices in the 1870s indicates an early stage of tourism.
Rich Americans, of course, whether healthy or ill — or more precisely their wives and daughters — made tracks for the centres of European culture, though by the end of our period the millionaires were already beginning to establish their pattern of summer residence in custom-built Xanadus along the stern coasts of New England.
The rich in hot countries made for the mountains.
We must, however, begin to distinguish between two kinds of holiday: the longer (summer or winter) residence and the tour which became increasingly practical and rapid.
As always the major attractions were romantic landscapes and the monuments of culture, but by  the 1860s the British (pioneers as usual) were exporting their passion for physical exercise on to the mountains of Switzerland, where they were later to found skiing as a winter sport.
The Alpine Club was founded in 1858 and Edward Whymper climbed the Matterhorn in 1865.
For reasons which are obscure, such strenuous activities amid inspiring scenery appealed particularly to Anglo-Saxon intellectuals and professional men of liberal leanings (perhaps the close company of tough and handsome native guides had something to do with it), so that mountaineering joined long country walks as a characteristic activity of Cambridge academics, higher civil servants, public-schoolmasters, philosophers and economists, to the amazement of Latin, though not entirely of Germanic, intellectuals.
As for the less active travellers, their steps were now guided by Thomas Cook and the solid guide-books of the period, the pioneer British Murray's Guides being increasingly overshadowed by those bibles of the tourist, the German Baedekers, now published in several languages.
Such tours were not cheap.
In the early 1870s a six-week round trip for two people from London via Belgium, the Rhine Valley, Switzerland and France — perhaps still the standard tourist itinerary — cost about £85, or roughly 20 per cent of the income of a man earning £8 a week, which would have been a respectable servant-keeping income in those days.
Such a sum would have taken more than three-quarters of the annual income of a well-paid British skilled worker.
It is evident that the tourist whom railway companies, hotels and guide-books had in mind belonged to the comfortably-off middle classes.
These were the men and women who no doubt complained that in Nice the cost of unfurnished houses had risen between 1858 and 1876 from £64 to £100 per year, and that of women servants from £8–10 to a scandalous £24–30 a year.
But these were also the people who, it is safe to say, could afford to pay these prices.
Was the world of the 1870s therefore entirely dominated by migration, travel and demographic flux?
It is easy to forget that the majority of the people living on earth still lived and died where they had been born, or, more precisely, that their movements were no greater or no different from what they would have been before the Industrial Revolution.
There were certainly more people in the world who resembled the French, 88 per cent of whom in 1861 lived in the département of their birth — in the Lot département 97 per cent in the  parish of their birth — than resembled more mobile and migratory populations.
And yet, people were gradually torn from their moorings, grew used to lives in which they saw things their fathers had never done and even they had hardly expected to do.
By the end of our period immigrants formed a substantial majority not only of countries like Australia, and of cities like New York and Chicago, but of Stockholm, Christiania (the present Oslo), Budapest, Berlin and Rome (between 55 and 60 per cent) of Paris and Vienna (c. 65 per cent ).
Cities and the new industrial areas were, by and large, the magnets which attracted them.
What kind of life awaited them there?
Twelve
City, Industry, The Working Class
Now they even bake our daily bread
With steam and with turbine
And very soon, into our gab,
We'll shove it with a machine.
In Trautenau they have two churchyards,
For the poor and for rich people;
Not even in the grave itself
Is the poor devil their equal.
Poem in Trautenau Wochenblatt, 1869
In the old days, if someone had called a journeyman craftsman a ‘worker’, he would have had a fight on his hands…
But now they have told the journeymen the workers are the top rank in the state, they all insist they want to be workers
M. May, 1848
The question of poverty is that of death, disease, winter or that of any other natural phenomenon.
I don't know how either is to stop.
William Makepeace Thackeray, 1848
I
To say that new migrants came, or that new generations were now born, into a world of industry and technology is obvious, but not in itself very illuminating.
What kind of world was it?
It was, in the first place, a world not so much consisting of factories, employers and proletarians as one transformed by the enormous progress of its industrial sector.
However striking the changes produced by the spread of industry itself and by urbanisation, these in themselves are not the measure of the impact of capitalism.
In 1866 Reichenberg (Liberec), the Bohemian textile centre, still produced half its total output on the looms of artisan weavers, admittedly for the most part now dependent on a few large factories.
It was no doubt less advanced in its industrial organisation than Lancashire, where  the last of the surviving handloom weavers were absorbed into other employment in the 1850s, but it would be unrealistic to claim that it was not industrial.
At the peak of the sugar-boom of the early 1870s a mere 40,000 workers were employed in the Czech sugar-factories.
But this measures the impact of the new sugar industry less than the fact that the acreage under sugar-beet in the Bohemian countryside had multiplied more than twentyfold between 1853–4 (4,800 hectares) and 1872–3 (123,800 hectares).
That the number of railway passengers in  Britain almost doubled between 1848 and 1854 — from c. 58 to c. 108 million — while the companies' income from freight traffic multiplied almost two-and-a-half times, is more significant than the precise percentage of industrial goods or business travel concealed within these figures.
Still, industrial work itself, in its characteristic structure and setting, and urbanisation — life in the rapidly growing cities — were certainly the most dramatic forms of the new life; new because even the continuity of some local occupation or town concealed far-reaching changes.
A few years after the end of our period (1887) the German professor Ferdinand Toennies formulated the distinction between Gemeinschaft (community) and Gesellschaft (a society of individuals), two twins now familiar to every student of sociology.
The distinction is similar to others made by contemporaries between what subsequent jargon would call ‘traditional’ and ‘modern’societies — for instance Sir Henry Maine's formula summarising the progress of society as ‘from status to contract’.
The point, however, is that Toennies based his analysis not on the difference between peasant community and urbanised society, but between the old-fashioned town and the capitalist city, ‘essentially a commercial town and, insofar as commerce dominates its productive labour, a factory town’.
This novel environment and its structure is the subject of the present chapter.
The city was indeed the most striking outward symbol of the industrial world, apart from the railway itself.
Urbanisation increased rapidly after 1850.
In the first half of the century only Britain had an annual rate of urbanisation of more than 0–20 points, though Belgium almost reached that level.
But between 1850 and 1890 even  Austro-Hungary, Norway and Ireland urbanised at this rate, Belgium and the United States at between 0.30 and 0.40, Prussia, Australia and Argentina at between 0.40 and 0.50, England and Wales (still leading by a short head) and Saxony at over 0.50 per annum.
To say that the concentration of people in cities was ‘the most remarkable social phenomenon of the present century’ was to state the obvious.
By our standards it was still modest — by the end of the century hardly more than a dozen countries had achieved the rate of urban concentration of England and Wales in 1801.
Still, all (except Scotland and the Netherlands) had achieved this level since 1850.
The typical industrial town was at this period still a medium-sized city, even by contemporary standards, though as it happened in central and eastern Europe some capital cities (which tended to be very large) also became major centres of manufacturing — e.g. Berlin, Vienna and St Petersburg.
Oldham had 83,000 inhabitants in 1871, Barmen 75,000, Roubaix 65,000.
Indeed, the old pre-industrial cities of repute rarely attracted the new kinds of production, so that the typical new industrial region generally took the form of a sort of growing together of separate villages developing into smaller towns and small towns developing into larger ones.
They were hardly yet the vast unbrokenly built-up areas of the twentieth century, though factory chimneys, often strung along river valleys, railway sidings, the monotony of discoloured brick and the pall of smoke which hung above them, gave them a certain coherence.
Few of their inhabitants were as yet beyond walking distance from fields.
Until the 1870s the larger cities of industrial western Germany, such as Cologne and Dusseldorf, were fed by the peasants of the surrounding region bringing their supplies to the weekly market.
In one sense the shock of industrialisation lay precisely in the stark contrast between the black, monotonous, crowded and scarred settlements and the coloured farms and hills immediately adjoining them, as in Sheffield, ‘noisy, smoky, loathsome (but)…surrounded on all sides by some of the most enchanting countryside to be found on this planet’.
This is what made it still possible — though to a rapidly diminishing extent — for workers in the newly industrialising areas to remain half-agricultural.
Until after 1900 the Belgian miners took time off at the right season (if necessary by an annual ‘potato strike’) to look after their potato patches.
Even in northern England the urban unemployed  could easily turn to work on nearby farms in the summer: the striking weavers of Padiham (Lancashire) in 1859 supported themselves by hay-making.
The great city — say at this period a settlement of more than 200,000, including a scattering of metropolitan towns of more than half a million  — was not so much industrial (though it might contain a good many factories) as a centre of commerce, transport, administration and the multiplicity of services which a large concentration of people attracts and which in turn swell their number.
Most of its inhabitants were indeed workers, of one kind or another, including a large number of domestic servants — almost one in every five Londoners (1851), though surprisingly a considerably smaller proportion in Paris.
Still, their very size guaranteed that they also contained a very large number and substantial proportion of the middle and lower middle classes — say between 20 and 23 per cent in both London and Paris.
Such cities grew with extraordinary rapidity.
Vienna increased from over 400,000 in 1846 to 700,000 in 1880, Berlin from 378,000 (1849) to almost one million (1875), Paris from 1 to 1.9 million, London from 2.5 to 3.9 million (1851–81), though these figures pale beside some from overseas: Chicago or Melbourne.
But the shape, image and structure of the city itself changed, both under pressure of politically motivated building and replanning (notably in Paris and Vienna) and of profit-hungry enterprise.
Neither welcomed the presence of the city's poor, the majority of its population, though both recognised their regrettable necessity.
For the city's planners the poor were a public danger, their potentially riotous concentrations to be broken up by avenues and boulevards which would drive the inhabitants of the crowded popular quarters they replaced into some unspecified, but presumably more sanitary and certainly less perilous locations.
This was also the view propagated by the railway companies, driving broad belts of lines and sidings into the town centres, preferably through the slums, where  real estate costs were low and protests negligible.
For building entrepreneurs and property developers the poor were an unprofitable market, compared to the rich pickings from the new specialised business and shopping districts and the solid houses and apartments for the middle class, or the developing suburbs.
In so far as the poor did not crowd into the old central districts abandoned by their betters, their dwellings were built by small speculative builders, often little more than artisans, or by the constructors of those gaunt, overflowing tenement blocks expressively known in German as ‘rent barracks’(Mietskasernen).
Of the dwellings built in Glasgow between 1866 and 1874 three-quarters were of one and two rooms only, and even these were soon overfilled.
Who says mid-nineteenth-century city, therefore says ‘overcrowding’ and ‘slum’, and the more rapidly the city grew, the worse its overcrowding.
In spite of sanitary reform and what little planning there was, urban overcrowding probably increased during this period and neither health nor mortality improved, where they did not actually deteriorate.
The major, striking and henceforth continuous improvement in these conditions only began to occur after the end of our period.
Cities still devoured their populations, though the British, being the oldest of the industrial era, were coming close to reproducing themselves, i.e. to grow without the constant and massive blood transfusion of immigration.
Catering to the needs of the poor would hardly have doubled the number of London architects in twenty years (from just over 1,000 to 2,000 — in the 1830s there had probably been fewer than one hundred), though building and renting slum property could be a very lucrative business, judged by the income per cubic foot of low-cost space.
Indeed, the boom in architecture and property development was so great precisely because nothing whatever diverted the flow of capital from what The Builder in 1848 called ‘one half of the world…on the lookout for investment’ to ‘the other half continually in search of eligible family residences’into serving the urban poor, who clearly did not belong in the world at all.
The third quarter of the nineteenth century was the first world-wide era of urban real-estate and constructional boom — for the bourgeoisie.
Its history has been written for Paris by the novelist Zola.
It was to see houses on expensive sites rise constantly higher, the consequent birth of the ‘lift’ or ‘elevator’, and in the 1880s the construction of the first ‘skyscrapers’in the United States.
It is worth remembering that, at the moment when Manhattan's business thus began to reach for the skies, New York's Lower East side was probably the most overcrowded slum area in the western world with over 520 persons per acre.
Nobody built skyscrapers for them; perhaps fortunately.
Paradoxically, the more the middle class increased and flourished, diverting resources towards its own housing, offices, the department stores which were so characteristic a development of the era, and its prestige buildings, the less went relatively to the working-class quarters, except in the most general form of social expenditure streets, sanitation, lighting and public utilities.
The only form of private enterprise (including building) which aimed primarily at the mass market, apart from the market and small shop, was the tavern which became the elaborate ‘gin-palace’ in the Britain of the 1860s and 1870s — and its offspring the theatre and music-hall.
For as the people became urbanised, the ancient ways and practices they brought with them from the countryside or the pre-industrial town became irrelevant or impracticable.
II
The great city was a portent, though it contained only a minority of the population.
The great industrial enterprise was as yet less significant.
Indeed, by modern standards the size of such enterprises was not unduly impressive, though it tended to increase.
In the 1850s a factory of 300 in Britain could still be considered very large, and as late as 1871 the average British cotton factory employed 180 people, the average works manufacturing machinery a mere eighty-five.
Admittedly the heavy industry which was so characteristic of our period was much larger, and tended to develop concentrations of capital which controlled entire cities and even regions, and mobilised unusually vast armies of labour under its command.
Railway companies were enormous undertakings, even when constructed and managed entirely under conditions of competitive free enterprise, as normally they were not.
By the time the British railway system stabilised itself in the late 1860s, every foot of rail between the Scottish border, the Pennine hills, the sea and the River  Humber was controlled by the North-eastern Railway.
Coalmines were still largely individual undertakings and sometimes quite small, though the size of the occasional great mining disasters gives some idea of the scale on which they operated: 145 killed at Risca in 1860, 178 at Ferndale (also South Wales) in 1867, 140 at Swaithe (Yorkshire) and 110 at Mons (Belgium) in 1875, 200 at High Blantyre (Scotland) in 1877.
Yet increasingly, especially in Germany, vertical and horizontal combination produced those industrial empires which controlled the lives of thousands.
The concern known since 1873 as the Gutehoffnungshütte A.G. was by no means the largest in the Ruhr, but by then it had extended from iron-founding into quarrying and mining iron ore and coal — it produced practically all the 215,000 tons of iron ore and half the 415,000 tons of coal it required — and had diversified into transport, rolling and the construction of bridges, ships, and a variety of machinery.
Small wonder that the Krupp works in Essen rose from seventy-two workers in 1848 to almost 12,000 in 1873, or that Schneider in France had multiplied to 12,500 in 1870, so that more than half the population of the town of Creusot worked in their blast furnaces, rolling-mills, power-hammers and engineering workshops.
Heavy industry produced not so much the industrial region as such as the company town, in which the fate of men and women depended on the fortunes and goodwill of a single master, behind whom stood the force of law and state power, which regarded his authority as necessary and beneficial.
For, large or small, the ‘master’ rather than the impersonal authority of the ‘company’ruled the enterprise, and even the company was identified with a man rather than a board of directors.
In most people's minds, and in reality, capitalism still meant the one-man, or rather one-family, owner-managed business.
Yet this very fact raised two serious problems for the structure of enterprise.
They concerned its supply of capital and its management.
By and large the characteristic enterprise of the first half of the  century had been financed privately — e.g. from family assets — and expanded by reinvesting profits, though this might well mean that, with most of capital tied up in this way, the firm might rely a good deal on credit for its current operations.
But the increasing size and cost of such undertakings as railways, metallurgical and other expensive activities requiring heavy initial outlays, made this more difficult, especially in countries newly entering upon industrialisation and lacking large accumulations of private investment capital.
It is true that in some countries such reservoirs of capital were already available, amply sufficient not only for their own needs but also anxious to be drawn upon (for a suitable rate of interest) by the rest of the world's economy.
The British invested abroad in this period as never before or, relatively speaking — according to some — since.
So did the French, probably at the theoretical expense of their own industries, which grew rather more slowly than their rivals'.
But even in Britain and France new ways of mobilising these savings, of channelling them into the required enterprises, of organising joint-stock rather than privately financed activities, had to be devised.
The third quarter of the century was therefore a fertile period of experiments in the mobilisation of capital for industrial development.
With the notable exception of Britain most of them in one way or another involved the banks, either directly or through the fashionable device of the crédit mobilier, a sort of industrial finance company which regarded the orthodox banks as insufficiently suited to or interested in industrial financing and competed with them.
The brothers Pereire, those dynamic industrialisers inspired by the ideas of Saint-Simon and enjoying some backing from Napoleon III, developed the prototype model of this device.
They spread it all over Europe in competition with their bitter rivals the Rothschilds, who did not like the idea but were obliged to follow suit, and — as so often happens in periods of boom when financiers feel heroic and the money rolls in — it was much imitated, especially in Germany.
Crédits mobiliers were the rage, at least until the Rothschilds won their battle with the Pereires and — as also often happens in boom periods — some operators ventured a little too far across the always hazy frontier between business optimism and fraud.
However, a variety of other devices for similar purposes were also being developed, notably the investment bank or banque d'affaires.
And of course the stock exchanges, by now trading largely in the shares of industrial and transport undertakings, flourished as never before.
In 1856 the Paris Bourse alone listed the share of 33 railway and canal companies, 38 mining companies, 22 metallurgical companies, 11 port and shipping companies, 7 omnibus and road transport undertakings, 11 gas companies and 42 assorted industrial undertakings ranging from textiles to galvanised iron and rubber, to the value of about 5½ million gold francs, or rather more than a quarter of all securities traded.
How far were such new ways of mobilising capital required?
How far were they effective?
Industrialists never liked financiers much, and established industrialists tried to have as little as possible to do with bankers.
‘Lille’, wrote a local observer in 1869, ‘is not a capitalist town, it is first and foremost a great industrial and commercial centre’ where men put their profits back into the business, did not play about with them, and hoped they would never have to borrow.
No industrialist liked to put himself at the mercy of creditors.
Still, he might have to.
Krupp grew so fast between 1855 and 1866 that he ran out of capital.
There is an elegant historical model, according to which the more backward an economy and the later it started upon industrialisation, the greater its reliance on the new large-scale methods of mobilising and directing savings.
In the developed western countries private resources and the capital market were quite adequate.
In central Europe the banks and similar institutions had to act much more systematically as ‘developers’ of history.
Further east, south and overseas, governments had to step in themselves, generally with the aid of foreign investment, either to secure capital at all or, more likely, to see that investors were guaranteed — or at least thought they were guaranteed — the dividends that would alone mobilise their money, or alternatively to undertake economic activities themselves.
Whatever the validity of this theory, there is no doubt that in our period the banks (and similar institutions) played a much greater role as developers and directors of industry in Germany, the great industrial newcomer, than in the west.
Whether they meant to — as the crédits mobiliers did — or whether they were much good at it, is a more obscure question.
Probably they were not particularly expert until big industrialists, now recognizing the need for much more elaborate financing than in the simple old days, colonised the big banks themselves, as they increasingly did in Germany after 1870.
Finance did not much affect the organisation of businesses, though it might influence their policy.
The problem of management was more difficult.
For the basic model of the individually or family-owned and managed enterprise, the patriarchal family autocracy, was increasingly irrelevant to the industries of the second half of the nineteenth century.
‘The best instruction’, wrote a German handbook of 1868, ‘is by word of mouth.
Let it be given by the entrepreneur himself, all-seeing, omnipresent and ever available, whose personal orders are reinforced by the personal example which his employees have constantly before their eyes.’
This advice, suited to small craft-masters or farmers, might still make some sense in the moderately small counting houses of even quite large bankers and merchants, and remained valid in as much as instruction was an essential aspect of management in newly industrialising countries.
There even men with the basic training of craft workers (preferably in metals) had still to be taught the specific skills of the skilled factory worker.
The great majority of Krupp's skilled men, and indeed of all German machine-building enterprises, seem to have been trained on the job in this way.
Only in Britain could employers already rely on a ready-made, indeed on a largely self-made, supply of skilled men with industrial experience.
The paternalism of so many large continental undertakings owed something to this long association of workers with the firm with which they, as it were, grew up and on which they depended.
But the lords of rail, mine and steel-mill cannot really have expected to look paternally over their workers' shoulders at all times, and they certainly did not do so.
The alternative and complement to instruction was command.
But neither the autocracy of the family nor the small-scale operations of craft industry and merchant business provided much guidance for really large capitalist organisation.
So, paradoxically, private enterprise in its most unrestricted and anarchic period tended to fall back on the only available models of large-scale management, the military and bureaucratic.
The railway companies, with their pyramid of uniformed and disciplined workers, possessing job security, often promotion by seniority and even pensions, are an extreme example.
The appeal of military titles, which occur freely among the early British railway executives and managers of large port undertakings, did not rest on pride in the hierarchies of soldiers and officials, such as the Germans felt, but on the inability of private enterprise as yet to devise a specific form of management for big business.
It clearly had advantages from the organisational point of view.
Yet it did not generally solve the problem of keeping labour itself at work, loyally, diligently and modestly.
It was all very well for countries where uniforms were fashionable — as they certainly were not in Britain and the United States — to encourage among the labourers the soldierly virtues, not the least of which was to be poorly paid.
I am a soldier a soldier of industry
And like you, I have my flag.
My labour has enriched the fatherland.
I'd have you know, my destiny is glorious.
Thus sang a poetaster in Lille (France).
But even there patriotism was hardly enough.
The age of capital found it difficult to come to terms with this problem.
The bourgeoisie's insistence on loyalty, discipline and modest contentment could not really conceal that its real views about what made workers labour were quite different.
But what were they?
In theory they should labour in order to stop being workers as soon as possible, thus entering the bourgeois universe.
As ‘E.B.’ put it in the Songs for English Workmen to Sing in 1867:
Work, boys, work and be contented
So long as you've enough to buy a meal;
The man you may rely
Will be wealthy by and by 
If he'll only put his shoulder to the wheel.
But though this hope might be enough for some who were actually to lift themselves out of the working class, and perhaps also for a greater number who never got beyond dreaming of success as they read Samuel Smiles's Self-Help (1859) or similar handbooks, it was perfectly evident that most workers would remain workers all their lives, and indeed that the economic system required them to do so.
The promise of the field-marshal's baton in every private's knapsack was never intended as a programme for promoting all soldiers to field-marshals.
If promotion was not an adequate incentive, was money?
But it was an axiom of mid-nineteenth-century employers that wages must  be kept as low as possible, though intelligent entrepreneurs with international experience, like Thomas Brassey, the railway builder, were beginning to point out that the labour of the well-paid British workman was in fact cheaper than that of the abysmally paid coolie, because his productivity was so much higher.
But such paradoxes were unlikely to convince businessmen brought up on the economic theory of the ‘wage-fund’, which they believed to be a scientific demonstration that raising wages was impossible and trade unions were therefore doomed to failure.
‘Science’ became rather more flexible around 1870, when organised labour looked like becoming a permanent actor on the industrial scene, rather than appearing in an occasional brief walk-on part.
The great pundit of economics, John Stuart Mill (1806–73)(he happened personally to sympathise with labour), modified his position on the question in 1869, after which the ‘wage-fund’ theory no longer enjoyed canonical authority.
Still, there was no change in business principles.
Few employers were willing to pay more than they had to.
Moreover, economics apart, in the countries of the Old World the middle class believed that workers should be poor, not only because they had always been, but also because economic inferiority was a proper index of class inferiority.
If, as happened very occasionally — for instance in the great boom of 1872–3 — some workers actually earned enough to afford for a brief moment the luxuries which employers regarded as their right, indignation was sincere and heartfelt.
What business had coal-miners with grand pianos and champagne?
In countries of labour shortage, undeveloped social hierarchy and a truculent and democratic working population, things might be different; but in Britain and Germany, France and the Habsburg Empire, unlike Australia or the United States, the suitable maximum for the labouring class was a sufficiency of good decent food (preferably with less than a sufficiency of strong drink), a modestly crowded dwelling, and clothing adequate to protect morals, health and comfort without risking improper emulation of the costume of their betters.
It was to be hoped that capitalist progress would eventually bring the labourers nearer to this maximum, and regrettable (though not inconvenient for keeping wages down) that so many were still so far below it.
However, it was unnecessary, undesirable and dangerous for wages to rise beyond this.
In fact, the economic theories and the social assumptions of middle-class liberalism were at odds with each other.
In one sense the theories triumphed.
Increasingly, during our period, the wage-relationship was transformed into a pure market-relationship, a cash nexus.
Thus we have seen that British capitalism in the 1860s abandoned non-economic compulsion of labour (such as the Master and Servant Acts which punished breaches of contract by workers with jail), long-term hiring contracts (such as the ‘annual bond’ of the northern coalminers), and truck payments, while the average length of hiring was shortened, the average period of payment gradually reduced to a week, or even a day or an hour, thus making the market bargain more sensitive and flexible.
On the other hand, the middle classes would have been shocked and appalled if the workers had actually asked for the sort of life they themselves took for granted, and even more if they had looked like achieving it.
Inequality of life and expectations was built into the system.
This limited the economic incentives they were prepared to provide.
They were willing to tie wages to output by various systems of ‘piecework’, which seem to have spread during our period, and to point out that the workers had best be thankful to have work at all, since there was a large reserve army outside, waiting for their jobs.
Payment by results had some obvious advantages: Marx called it the most suitable form of wage-payment for capitalism.
It provided a genuine incentive for the worker to intensify his labour and thus raise his productivity, a guarantee against slacking, an automatic device for reducing the wage-bill in times of depression, as well as a convenient method — by the cutting of piece-rates — to reduce labour costs and to prevent wages from rising higher than was thought necessary or proper.
It divided workers from one another, since their earnings might vary widely even within the same establishment, or different types of labour might be paid in entirely different ways.
Sometimes the skilled were actually a species of sub-contractor, paid by output, who hired their unskilled assistants at a flat time-wage and saw to it that they kept up the pace.
The trouble was that (where it was not already part of tradition) the introduction of piece-work was often resisted, especially by the skilled men, and that it was complex and obscure not only for the workers, but for employers who often had only the haziest idea of what production-norms to set.
Also, it was  not easily applicable in certain occupations.
The workers attempted to remove these disadvantages by reintroducing the concept of an incompressible and predictable basic wage of ‘standard rate’, through trade unions or through informal practices.
The employers were about to remove theirs by what its American champions were to call ‘scientific management’, but in our period they were still groping for this solution.
Perhaps this led to a greater emphasis on the other economic incentive.
If any single factor dominated the lives of nineteenth-century workers it was insecurity.
They did not know at the beginning of the week how much they would bring home at the end.
They did not know how long their present work would last or, if they lost it, when they would get another job or under what conditions.
They did not know when accident or sickness would hit them, and though they knew that some time in middle age — perhaps in the forties for unskilled labourers, perhaps in the fifties for the more skilled — they would become incapable of doing a full measure of adult physical labour, they did not know what would happen to them between then and death.
Theirs was not the insecurity of peasants, at the mercy of periodic — and to be honest, often more murderous — catastrophes such as drought and famine, but capable of predicting with some accuracy how a poor man or woman would spend most days of their lives from birth to the graveyard.
It was a more profound unpredictability, in spite of the fact that probably a good proportion of workers were employed for long periods of their lives by a single employer.
There was no certainty of work even for the most skilled: during the slump of 1857–8 the number of workers in the Berlin engineering industry fell by almost a third.
There was nothing that corresponds to modern social security, except charity and relief from actual destitution, and sometimes little of either.
For the world of liberalism insecurity was the price paid for both progress and freedom, not to mention wealth, and was made tolerable by continuous economic expansion.
Security was to be bought — at least sometimes — but not for free men and women but, as the English terminology put it clearly, for ‘servants’— whose liberty was strictly constrained: domestic servants, ‘railway servants’, even ‘civil servants’(or public officials).
In fact, the greatest body even of these, the urban domestic servants, did not enjoy the security of the favoured  family retainers of the traditional nobility and gentry, but constantly faced insecurity in its most terrible form: instant dismissal ‘without a character’, i.e. a recommendation to future employers from the former master, or more likely mistress.
For the world of the established bourgeois was also considered to be basically insecure, a state of war in which they might at any moment become the casualties of competition, fraud or economic slump, though in practice the businessmen who were thus vulnerable probably formed only a minority of the middle classes, and the penalty of failure was rarely manual labour, let alone the workhouse.
The most serious risk which faced them was that to their involuntarily parasitic women-folk — the unexpected death of the male breadwinner.
Economic expansion mitigated this constant insecurity.
There is not much evidence that real wages in Europe began to go up significantly until the later part of the 1860s, but even before then the general feeling that times were improving was unmistakable in the developed countries, the contrast with the disturbed and desperate 1830s and 1840s was palpable.
Neither the continent-wide surge in the cost of living in 1853–4 nor the dramatic and world-wide slump of 1858 brought any serious social unrest.
The truth is that the great economic boom provided employment — at home and for emigrants abroad-on a quite unprecedented scale.
Bad though they were, dramatic cyclical slumps in the developed countries now looked less like proofs of economic breakdown than as temporary interruptions of growth.
There was evidently no absolute labour shortage, if only because the reserve armies of the rural population (at home and abroad) were now for the first time advancing en masse upon the industrial labour markets.
Yet the fact that their competition did not reverse what all scholars agree to be a distinct, if modest, improvement in all but the environmental conditions of the working classes suggests the scale and impetus of economic expansion.
Yet, unlike the middle class, the worker was rarely more than a hair's breadth removed from the pauper, and insecurity was therefore constant and real.
He had no significant reserves.
Those who could live on savings for a few weeks or months were ‘that rare class’.
The wages of even the skilled were at best modest.
In normal times that overlooker in a Preston spinning mill who, with his seven employed children, earned £4 a week in a week of full employment, would have  been the envy of his neighbours.
But it did not take many weeks of the Lancashire cotton famine (due to the interruption of raw material supplies by the American Civil War) to reduce even such a family to charity.
The normal or even inevitable road of life passed across chasms into which the worker and his family might and probably would fall: the birth of children, old age and retirement.
In Preston, 52 per cent of all working-class families with children below working age, working full-time in a year of memorably good trade (1851), could be expected to live below the poverty line.
As for old age, it was a catastrophe to be stoically expected, a decline in earning power from the forties as physical strength ebbed — especially for the less skilled — followed by poverty, and as like as not charity and poor relief.
For the middle class the mid-nineteenth century was the golden era of the middle-aged, when men reached the peak of their careers, earnings and activity and physiological decline had not yet become obvious.
Only for the oppressed — labouring people of both sexes and women of all classes — did the flower of life bloom in youth.
Neither economic incentives nor insecurity therefore provided a really effective general mechanism for keeping labour hard at work; the former, because their scope was limited, the latter because much of it was or seemed as unavoidable as the weather.
The middle class found this hard to understand.
Why should the best, soberest and ablest workers be the ones most likely to form trade unions, since they were the very ones who were worth the highest wages and the most regular employment?
But unions were in fact composed of and certainly led by such men, though the bourgeois mythology saw them as mobs of the stupid and misled, instigated by agitators who could not otherwise have earned a comfortable living.
There was of course no mystery.
The workers for whom employers competed were not merely the ones with the bargaining strength to make unions practicable, but also those most aware that ‘the market’ alone guaranteed them neither security nor what they thought they had a right to.
Nevertheless, so long as they did not organise — and sometimes even when they did — the workers themselves provided their employers with a solution to the problem of labour management: by and large they liked to work, and their expectations were remarkably modest.
The unskilled or raw immigrants from the countryside were proud of their strength, and came from an environment where hard  labour was the criterion of a person's worth and wives were chosen not for their looks but for their work-potential.
‘My experience has shown’, said an American steelmill superintendent in 1875, ‘that Germans, Irish, Swedes and what I denominate ‘Buckwheats’— young American country boys — judiciously mixed, make the most effective and tractable force you can find'; in fact, anything was better than ‘Englishmen, who are great sticklers for high wages, small production and strikes’.
On the other hand, the skilled were moved by the uncapitalist incentive of craft knowledge and craft pride.
The very machines of this period, iron and brass filed and polished with the hand of love, in perfect working order after a century (in so far as they still survive), are a visual demonstration of this.
The endless catalogue of objects displayed in the international expositions, however awful aesthetically, are monuments to the pride of those who made them.
Such men did not take kindly to orders and supervision, and were indeed often beyond effective control, except by the collective of their workshop.
They also often resented piece-wages or any other method of speeding up complex and difficult tasks, and thereby lowering the quality of self-respecting work.
But if they would work no more and no faster than the job required, they would work no slower and no less: nobody had to give them a special incentive to give of their best.
‘A fair day's work for a fair day's pay’ was their motto and, if they expected the pay to satisfy them, they also confidently expected the work to satisfy everybody, including themselves.
In fact, of course, this essentially non-capitalist approach to work benefited employers rather than workers.
For the buyers in the labour market operated on the principle of buying in the cheapest market and selling in the dearest, though sometimes ignorant of proper cost-accounting methods.
But the sellers were not normally asking the maximum wage which the traffic would bear and offering in return the minimum quantity of labour they could get away with.
They were trying to earn a decent living as human beings.
They were perhaps trying to ‘better themselves’.
In brief, though naturally not insensitive to the difference between lower and higher wages, they were engaged in human life rather than in an economic transaction.
III
But can we speak of ‘the workers’ as a single category or class at all?
What was there in common between groups of people often so distinct in their environment, their social origins, their formation, their economic situation, and sometimes even their language and customs?
Not even poverty, for though by the standards of the middle classes all of them had modest incomes — except in such a paradise of labour as Australia in the 1850s where newspaper compositors could earn up to £18 a week  — by the standards of the poor there was a vast difference between the well-paid and more or less regularly employed skilled ‘artisan’, who wore a copy of respectable middle-class costume on Sundays or even on the way to and from work, and the ragged starveling who hardly ever knew where his, still less his family's, next meal was to come from.
They were indeed all united by a common sense of manual labour and exploitation, and increasingly by the common fate of wage-earning.
They were united by their growing segregation from a bourgeoisie whose wealth increased dramatically while their own situation remained precarious, a bourgeoisie which became increasingly self-contained and impervious to would-be entrants from below.
For there was all the difference between the modest hillocks of comfort which the successful worker or ex-worker might reasonably hope to climb and the really impressive accumulations of wealth.
The workers were pushed into a common consciousness not only by this social polarisation but, in the cities at least, by a common style of life — in which the tavern (‘the workman's church' as a bourgeois liberal called it) played a central role — and by a common style of thought.
The least conscious tended to be tacitly  secularised, the most conscious were radicalised, the supporters of the International in the 1860s and 1870s, the future followers of the socialists.
The two phenomena were linked, for traditional religion had always been a bond of social unity through the ritual assertion of community.
But the common processions and ceremonies atrophied in Lille during the Second Empire.
The small craft workers of Vienna, whose simple piety and naïve joy in Catholic pomp and spectacle Le Play noted in the 1850s, became indifferent to these things.
Within less than two generations they had transferred their faith to socialism.
The heterogeneous groups of ‘the labouring poor’ undoubtedly tended to become part of a ‘proletariat’in cities and industrial regions.
The growing importance of trade unions in the 1860s registered this, the very existence — not to mention the strength — of the International would have been impossible without it.
Yet ‘the labouring poor’ had not been a mere assembly of disparate groups.
They had, especially in the hard hopeless times of the first half of the century, been fused into a homogeneous mass of the discontented and the oppressed.
This homogeneity was now being lost.
The era of a flourishing and stable liberal capitalism offered ‘the working class’ the possibility of improving its collective lot through collective organisation.
But those who merely remained the miscellaneous ‘poor’ could make little use of the trade unions and even less use of Mutual Aid Societies.
Unions were, by and large, organisations of favoured minorities, though mass strikes could occasionally mobilise the masses.
Moreover, liberal capitalism offered the individual worker distinct prospects of improvement on bourgeois terms, which large bodies of the labouring population were unable or unwilling to seize.
A fissure therefore ran through what was increasingly becoming ‘the working class’.
It separated ‘the workers’ from ‘the poor’, or alternatively ‘the respectable’from the ‘unrespectable’.
In political terms (see chapter 6 above) it separated people like ‘the intelligent artisan’, to whom British middle-class radicals were anxious to give the vote, from the dangerous and ragged masses whom they were still determined to exclude.
No term is harder to analyse than ‘respectability’ in the mid-nineteenth-century working class, for it expressed simultaneously the penetration of middle-class values and standards, and also the attitudes without which working-class self-respect would have been  difficult to achieve, and a movement of collective struggle impossible to build: sobriety, sacrifice, the postponement of gratification.
If the movement of the workers had been clearly revolutionary, or at least sharply segregated from the middle-class world (as it had been before 1848 and was to be again in the era of the second International), the distinction would have been clear enough.
Yet in the third quarter of the nineteenth century the line between personal and collective improvement, between imitating the middle class and, as it were, defeating it with its own weapons, was often impossible to draw.
Where do we place William Marcroft (1822–94)?
He could easily be presented as a modest example of Samuel Smiles's self-help — the illegitimate son of a farm-servant and a weaver, totally lacking in formal education, who advanced from Oldham textile-worker to foreman in an engineering works, until in 1861 he set up independently as a dentist, dying worth almost £15,000, which was by no means negligible: a lifelong radical Liberal and temperance advocate.
And yet his modest place in history is due to an equally lifelong passion for co-operative production (i.e. socialism through self-help), to which he devoted his days.
Conversely, William Allan (1813–74) was unquestionably a believer in the class struggle and, in the words of his obituary, ‘on social questions he inclined to Robert Owen's school’.
Yet this radical worker, formed in the revolutionary school of before 1848, was to make his mark on labour history as the cautious, moderate and above all efficient administrator of the greatest of the ‘new model’ skilled unions, the Amalgamated Society of Engineers; and was both a practising Anglican churchman and ‘in politics a sound and consistent liberal, not given to political quackery in any form’.
The fact is that the capable and intelligent workman, especially if skilled, at this time provided both the main prop of middle-class social control and industrial discipline and also the most active cadres of the workers' collective self-defence.
He provided the first, because a stable, prosperous and expanding capitalism needed him, offered him prospects of modest improvement, and in any case now seemed inescapable.
It no longer looked provisional and temporary.
Conversely, the great revolution seemed less a first instalment of an even greater change than the last instalment of a past era: at best a splendid highly coloured memory, at worst a proof that there were no  dramatic shortcuts to progress.
But he also provided the second, because — with the possible exception of the United States, that land which appeared to promise the poor a personal way out of lifelong poverty, the worker a private exit from the working class, and every citizen equality with every other — the working classes knew that the liberal free market alone would not give them their rights and their needs.
They had to organise and fight.
The British ‘aristocracy of labour’, a stratum peculiar to that country where the class of independent small producers, shopkeepers, etc., was relatively insignificant, as was the lower middle class of white-collar workers and minor bureaucrats, helped to turn the Liberal Party into a party with genuine mass appeal.
At the same time it formed the core of the unusually powerful organised trade-union movement.
In Germany even the most ‘respectable’ workers were pressed into the ranks of the proletariat by the distance which separated them from the bourgeoisie, and the strength of intermediate classes.
Here the men who streamed into the new ‘self-improvement’ associations (Bildungsvereine) in the 1860s — there were 1,000 such clubs in 1863, no less than 2,000 in Bavaria alone by 1872 — rapidly drifted away from the middle-class liberalism of these bodies, though perhaps not sufficiently from the middle-class culture they inculcated.
They were to become the cadres of the new social-democratic movement, especially after the end of our period.
But they were self-improving workmen none the less, ‘respectable’ because self-respecting, and carried the bad as well as the good sides of their respectability into the parties of Lassalle and Marx.
Only where revolution still seemed the only plausible solution for the conditions of the labouring poor, or where — as in France — the tradition of insurrection and the revolutionary social republic was the dominant political tradition of the working people, was ‘respectability’ a relatively insignificant factor, or confined to the middle classes and those who wished to be identified with them.
What of the others?
Though they were the subjects of much more inquiry than the ‘respectable’ working classes (but in this generation distinctly less so than before 1848 or after 1880), we really know very little about anything except their poverty and squalor.
They did not express public opinions and were rarely touched by even those organisations, trade unionist, political or otherwise, which bothered to  appeal to them.
Even the Salvation Army, formed specifically with the ‘unrespectable’ poor in mind, hardly succeeded in becoming more than a welcome addition to free public entertainment (with its uniforms, bands and lively hymns), and a useful source of charity.
Indeed, for many of the unskilled or sweated trades the sort of organisations which were beginning to make the strength of labour movements were quite impracticable.
Great surges of political movement, such as Chartism in the 1840s, could recruit them: the London costermongers (small market traders) described by Henry Mayhew were all Chartists.
Great revolutions could, though perhaps only briefly, inspire even the most oppressed and a-political: the prostitutes of Paris were strong supporters of the Commune of 1871.
But the age of bourgeois triumph was precisely not one of revolutions nor even popular mass political movements.
Bakunin was perhaps not entirely wrong in supposing that in such a time the spirit of at least potential insurrection was most likely to smoulder among the marginal and sub-proletariat, though he was quite mistaken in believing that they would be the base of revolutionary movements.
The miscellaneous poor supported the Paris Commune, but its activists were the more skilled workers and craftsmen; and that most marginal section of the poor-the adolescents — were under-represented among them.
Adult men, especially those old enough still to have a memory, however faint, of 1848, were the characteristic insurrectionaries of 1871.
The line which divided the labouring poor into the potential militants of labour movement and the rest was not sharp, and yet it existed.
‘Association’— the free and conscious formation of voluntary democratic societies for social defence and improvement — was the magic formula of the liberal era; through it even the labour movements which were to abandon liberalism were to develop.
Those who wanted to and could effectively ‘associate’ might at best shrug their shoulders at, and at worst despise, those who neither could nor wanted to, not least the women, who were virtually excluded from the world of club formalities, points-of-order and proposals for membership.
The boundaries of that part of the working classes — it might overlap with the independent craftsmen, shopkeeper and even the small entrepreneur — which was coming to be recognised as a social and political force pretty well coincided with those of the world  of clubs — Mutual Aid Societies, fraternal benevolent orders (generally with strong rituals), choirs, gymnastic or sports clubs, even voluntary religious organisations at one extreme, labour unions and political associations at the other.
That covered a varying, though substantial, part of the working class — perhaps by the end of our period some 40 per cent in Britain.
But it left a great many out.
They were the objects and not the subjects of the liberal era.
The others expected and got little enough: they got even less.
It is difficult, looking back, to form a balanced view of the condition of all these working people.
For one thing, the range of countries in which there were modern cities and modern industry was now much wider, and so was the range of stages in industrial development which they represented.
Generalisation is therefore not easy, and its value is limited, even if we confine it — as we must — to the relatively developed countries as distinct from the backward, to the urban working classes as distinct from the agrarian and peasant sectors.
The problem is to strike a balance between, on the one hand, the harsh poverty which still dominated the lives of most working folk, the repulsive physical environment and the moral void which surrounded so many of them, and, on the other, the undoubted general improvement of their conditions and prospects since the 1840s.
Self-satisfied spokesmen for the bourgeoisie were inclined to overstress the improvement, though none would deny what Sir Robert Giffen (1837–1900), looking back on the British half-century before 1883, tactfully called ‘a residuum still unimproved’, nor that the improvement ‘even when measured by a low ideal, is far too small’, nor that ‘no one can contemplate the condition of the masses of the people without desiring something like a revolution for the better’.
Less self-satisfied social reformers, while not denying improvement — in the case of the elite of workers whose relative scarcity of qualifications put them into a fairly continuous sellers' market, the substantial improvement — gave a less rose-tinted picture:
‘There remain [wrote Miss Edith Simcox, again in the early 1880s],…some ten millions of town workers, including all mechanics and labourers whose life is not normally overshadowed by the fear of ‘coming on the parish’.
No hard and fast line can be drawn between the workers who are and those who are not to be counted amongst ‘the poor’; there is a constant flux, and besides those who suffer from chronic underpayment, artisans, as well as tradesmen and  rustics, are constantly sinking, with or without their own fault, into the depth of misery.
It is not easy to judge how many of the ten millions do or might belong to the prosperous aristocracy of the working classes, that section with which politicians come into contact, and from whence come those whom society is rather over-hasty to welcome as ‘representative working men’…
I confess I should hardly venture to hope that more than two millions of skilled workers, representing a population of five millions, are living habitually in a state of ease and comparative security of the modest sort…
The other five millions include the labourers and less skilled workers, male and female, whose maximum wages only suffice for the necessities and barest decencies of existence, and for whom therefore any mischance means penury, passing swiftly into pauperism.’
But even such informed and well-meaning impressions were somewhat too sanguine, for two reasons.
First, because (as the social surveys which become available from the late 1880s make clear) the poor workers — who formed almost 40 per cent of the London working class — hardly enjoyed the ‘barest decencies of existence’, even by the austere standards then applied to the lower orders.
Second, because the ‘state of ease and comparative security of the modest sort’ amounted to little enough.
The young Beatrice Potter, anonymously living among the textile workers of Bacup, had no doubt that she shared the lives of the ‘comfortable working class’— dissenters and co-operators, a tight community without the casual, marginal or ‘unrespectable’, surrounded by ‘the general well-being of well-earned and well-paid work’, ‘the cottages comfortable and well-furnished, and the teas excellent’.
And yet this acute observer would describe the very same people — almost unaware of what she was observing — as physically overworked during times of busy trade, as eating and sleeping too little, as too physically exhausted for intellectual effort, at the mercy of ‘the many chances of breakdown and failure meaning absence of physical comfort’.
The deep and simple puritan piety of these men and women was, she saw, a response to the fear of ‘worn-out and failed lives’.
‘Life in Christ’ and hope in another world bring ease and refinement into a mere struggle for existence, calming the restless craving after the good things of this world by an ‘other worldliness’and making failure a ‘means of grace’instead of a despicable want of success
This is not the picture of starvelings about to arise from their slumbers, but neither is it a picture of men and women ‘better, immensely better, than they were fifty years ago’, still less of a class that ‘had almost all the material benefit of the last fifty years’(Giffen) as self-satisfied and ignorant liberal economists maintained.
It is a picture of self-respecting and self-reliant people whose expectations were pitifully modest, who knew they could be worse off, who perhaps remembered times when they had been even poorer, but who were always haunted by the spectre of poverty (as they understood the term).
The standards of the middle-class life would never be for such as these, but pauperism was always near.
‘One mustn't take too much of a good thing, for money is easily spent’, said one of Beatrice Potter's hosts, putting the cigarette she had offered him on the mantelpiece after one or two puffs, for the next night.
Anyone who forgets that this is how men and women thought of the goods of life in those days will never be competent to judge the small but genuine improvement which the great capitalist expansion brought to a substantial part of the working classes in the third quarter of the  nineteenth century.
And the gap which separated them from the bourgeois world was wide — and unbridgeable.
Thirteen
The Bourgeois World
You know that we belong to a century when men are only valued for what is in them.
Every day some master, insufficiently energetic or serious, is forced to descend from the ranks in society which seemed to be permanently his, and some intelligent and plucky clerk takes his place.
Mme Motte-Bossut to her son, 1856
Behold his little ones around him, they bask in the warmth of his smile.
And infant innocence and joy lighten their happy faces.
He is holy and they honour him, he is loving, and they love him,
He is consistent and they esteem him, he is firm and they fear him
His friends are the excellent among men
He goeth to the well-ordered home.
Martin Tupper, 1876
I
We must now look at that bourgeois society.
The most superficial phenomena are sometimes the most profound.
Let us begin our analysis of that society, which reached its apogee at this period, with the appearance of the clothes its members wore, the interiors which surrounded them.
‘Clothes make man’ said the German proverb, and no age was more aware of it than one in which social mobility could actually place numerous people into the historically novel situation of playing new (and superior) social roles and therefore having to wear the appropriate costumes.
It was not long since the Austrian Nestroy had written his entertaining and embittered farce The Talisman (1840), in which the fortunes of a poor red-haired man are dramatically changed by the acquisition, and subsequent loss, of a black wig.
The home was the quintessential bourgeois world, for in it, and only in it, could the problems and contradictions of his society be forgotten or artificially eliminated.
Here and here alone the bourgeois and even more the petty bourgeois family could maintain the illusion of a harmonious, hierarchic happiness, surrounded by the   material artefacts which demonstrated it and made it possible, the dream-life which found its culminating expression in the domestic ritual systematically developed for this purpose, the celebration of Christmas.
The Christmas dinner (celebrated by Dickens), the Christmas tree (invented in Germany, but rapidly acclimatised through royal patronage in England), the Christmas song — best known through the Germanic Stille Nacht — symbolised at one and the same time the cold of the outside world, the warmth of the family circle within, and the contrast between the two.
The most immediate impression of the bourgeois interior of the mid-century is overcrowding and concealment, a mass of objects, more often than not disguised by drapes, cushions, cloths and wallpapers, and always, whatever their nature, elaborated.
No picture without a gilded, a fretted, a chased, even a velvet-covered frame, no seat without upholstery or cover, no piece of textile without tassel, no piece of wood without some touch of the lathe, no surface without some cloth or object on it.
This was no doubt a sign of wealth and status: the beautiful austerity of Biedermayer interiors had reflected the straitness of Germanic provincial bourgeois finances more than their innate taste, and the furnishings of servants' rooms in the bourgeois houses were bleak enough.
Objects express their cost and, at a time when most domestic ones were still produced largely by manual crafts, elaboration was largely an index of cost together with expensive materials.
Cost also bought comfort, which was therefore visible as well as experienced.
Yet objects were more than merely utilitarian or symbols of status and achievement.
They had value in themselves as expressions of personality, as both the programme and the reality of bourgeois life, even as transformers of man.
In the home all these were expressed and concentrated.
Hence its internal accumulations.
Its objects, like the houses which contained them, were solid, a term used, characteristically, as the highest praise for a business enterprise.
They were made to last, and they did.
At the same time they must express the higher and spiritual aspirations of life through their beauty, unless they represented these aspirations by their very existence, as did books and musical instruments, which remained surprisingly functional in design, apart from fairly minor surface flourishes, or unless they belonged to the realm of pure utility such as kitchenware and luggage.
Beauty meant decoration, since the mere  construction of the houses of the bourgeoisie or the objects which furnished them was seldom sufficiently grandiose to offer spiritual and moral sustenance in itself, as the great railways and steamships did.
Their outsides remained functional; it was only their insides, in so far as they belonged to the bourgeois world like the newly devised Pullman sleeping-cars (1865) and the first-class steamer saloons and state-rooms, which had décor.
Beauty therefore meant decoration, something applied to the surface of objects.
This duality between solidity and beauty thus expressed a sharp division between the material and the ideal, the bodily and the spiritual, highly typical of the bourgeois world; yet spirit and ideal in it depended on matter, and could be expressed only through matter, or at least through the money which could buy it.
Nothing was more spiritual than music, but the characteristic form in which it entered the bourgeois home was the piano, an exceedingly large, elaborate and expensive apparatus, even when reduced, for the benefit of a more modest stratum aspiring to true bourgeois values, to the more manageable dimensions of the upright (pianino).
No bourgeois interior was complete without it; no bourgeois daughter, but was obliged to practise endless scales upon it.
The link between morality, spirituality and poverty, so obvious to non-bourgeois societies, was not entirely snapped.
It was recognised that the exclusive pursuit of higher things was very likely to be unremunerative except in certain of the more saleable arts, and even then prosperity would come only in mature years: the poor student or young artist, as private tutor or guest at the Sunday dinner-table, was a recognised subaltern part of the bourgeois family, at any rate in those parts of the world in which culture was highly respected.
But the conclusion drawn was not that there was a certain contradiction between the pursuit of material and mental achievement, but that one was the necessary basis for the other.
As the novelist E. M. Forster was to put it in the Indian summer of the bourgeoisie: ‘In came the dividends, up went the lofty thoughts.’
The most suitable fate for a philosopher was to be born the son of a banker, like George Lukacs.
The glory of German learning, the Privatgelehrter (or private scholar) rested on the private income.
It was right that the poor Jewish scholar should marry the daughter of the richest local merchant, because it was unthinkable that a community which respected  learning should reward its luminaries with nothing more tangible than praise.
This duality of matter and spirit implied a hypocrisy which unsympathetic observers considered to be not merely all-pervasive but a fundamental characteristic of the bourgeois world.
Nowhere was this more obvious, in the literal sense of being visible, than in the matter of sex.
This is not to imply that the mid-nineteenth-century (male) bourgeois (or those who aspired to be like him) was merely dishonest, preaching one morality while deliberately practising another, though patently the conscious hypocrite is more often to be found where the gap between official morality and the demands of human nature is unbridgeable, as in this period it often was.
Plainly Henry Ward Beecher, the great New York preacher of puritanism, should either have avoided having tumultuous extra-marital love-affairs or chosen a career which did not require him to be quite such a prominent advocate of sexual restraint; though one cannot entirely fail to sympathise with the bad luck which linked him in the mid-1870s with the beautiful feminist and advocate of free love, Victoria Woodhull, a lady whose convictions made privacy difficult.
But it is pure anachronism to suppose, as several recent writers on ‘The Other Victorians’ have done, that the official sexual morality of the age was mere window-dressing.
In the first place, its hypocrisy was not simply a lie, except perhaps among those whose sexual tastes were as powerful as they were publicly inadmissible, e.g. prominent politicians depending on puritan voters or respectable homosexual businessmen in provincial cities.
It was hardly hypocritical at all in the countries (e.g. most Roman Catholic ones) in which a frankly dual standard was accepted: chastity for unmarried bourgeois women and fidelity for married ones, the free pursuit of all women (except perhaps marriageable daughters of the middle and upper classes) by all young bourgeois men, and a tolerated infidelity for the married ones.
Here the rules of the game were perfectly understood, including the need for a certain discretion  in cases where the stability of the bourgeois family or property would otherwise have been threatened: passion, as every Italian of the middle class still knows, is one thing, ‘the mother of my children’ quite another.
Hypocrisy entered this pattern of behaviour only in so far as the bourgeois women were supposed to remain entirely outside the game, and therefore in ignorance of what the men, and women other than themselves, were up to.
In Protestant countries the morality of sexual restraint and fidelity was supposed to be binding on both sexes, but the very fact that it was felt to be so even by those who broke it, led them not so much into hypocrisy as into personal torment.
It is quite illegitimate to treat a person in such a situation as a mere swindler.
Moreover, to a very great extent bourgeois morality was actually applied; indeed it may have become increasingly effective as the masses of the ‘respectable’ working classes adopted the values of the hegemonic culture, and the lower middle classes, which followed it by definition, grew in numbers.
Such matters resisted even the intense interest of the bourgeois world in ‘moral statistics’, as a late-nineteenth-century reference book sadly admitted, dismissing all the attempts to measure the extent of prostitution as failures.
The only comprehensive attempt to measure venereal infection, which plainly had a strong connection with some kinds of extra-marital sex, revealed little except that in Prussia, not unexpectedly, it was much higher in the megalopolis Berlin than in any other province (tending normally to diminish with the size of cities and villages), and that it reached its maximum in towns with ports, garrisons and institutes of higher education, i.e. with heavy concentrations of unmarried young men away from their homes.
There is no reason to suppose that the average Victorian member of the middle class, lower middle class or ‘respectable’ working class in, say, Victorian England and the United States failed to live up to his or her standards of sexual morality.
The young American girls who surprised cynical men-about-town in the Paris of Napoleon III by the freedom with which they were allowed by their parents to go about alone and in the company of young American men are as strong evidence about sexual morals as journalistic  exposés of haunts of vice in mid-Victorian London: probably stronger.
It is entirely illegitimate to read post-Freudian standards into a pre-Freudian world or to assume that sexual behaviour then must have been like ours.
By modern standards those lay monasteries, the Oxford and Cambridge colleges, look like case books of sexual pathology.
What would we think today of a Lewis Carroll whose passion was to photograph little girls naked?
By Victorian standards their worst vices were almost certainly gluttony rather than lust, and the sentimental taste of so many dons for young men — almost certainly (the very term is revealing)‘platonic’— among the natural crotchets of inveterate bachelors.
It is our age which has turned the phrase ‘to make love’(in the English language) into a simple synonym for sexual intercourse.
The bourgeois world was haunted by sex, but not necessarily sexual promiscuity: the characteristic nemesis of the bourgeois folk-myth, as the novelist Thomas Mann saw so clearly, followed a single fall from grace, like the tertiary syphilis of the composer Adrian Leverkuehn in Dr Faustus.
The very extremism of its fears reflects a prevailing naivety, or innocence.
This very innocence, however, allows us to see the powerful sexual element in the bourgeois world very clearly in its costume, an extraordinary combination of temptation and prohibition.
The mid-Victorian bourgeois was swathed in garments, leaving little publicly visible except the face, even in the tropics.
In extreme cases (as in the United States) even objects reminiscent of the body (the legs of tables) might be hidden away.
At the same time, and never more so than in the 1860s and 1870s, every secondary sexual characteristic was grotesquely overemphasised: men's hair and beards, women's hair, breasts, hips and buttocks, swelled to enormous size by means of false chignons, culs-de-Paris, etc.
The shock effect of Manet's famous Déjeuner sur l'Herbe (1863) derives precisely from the contrast between the utter respectability of the dress of the men and the  nakedness of the woman.
The very shrillness with which bourgeois civilisation insisted that woman was essentially a spiritual being implied both that men were not, and that the obvious physical attraction between the sexes could not be fitted into the system of values.
Achievement was incompatible with enjoyment, as the folklore of championship sport still assumes by sentencing sportsmen to temporary celibacy before the big match or fight.
More generally, civilisation rested on the repression of instinctive urges.
The greatest of bourgeois psychologists, Sigmund Freud, made this proposition the cornerstone of his theories, though later generations read into him a call for the abolition of repression.
But why was an in itself not implausible view held with a passionate, indeed a pathological, extremism which contrasted so notably (as Bernard Shaw was to observe with his usual wit) with the ideal of moderation and the juste milieu which had traditionally defined middle-class social ambitions and roles?
On the lower rungs of the ladder of middle-class aspiration, the answer is easy.
Heroic efforts alone could lift a poor man and woman, or even their children, out of the slough of demoralisation on to the firm plateau of respectability and, above all, define his position there.
As for the member of Alcoholics Anonymous, there could be no compromise solution: it was either total abstinence or total relapse.
Indeed, the movement for total abstinence from alcohol, which also flourished at this time in Protestant and puritan countries, illustrates this clearly.
It was not effectively designed as a movement to abolish, still less to limit, mass alcoholism, but to define and set apart the class of those individuals who had demonstrated by their personal force of character that they were distinct from the unrespectable poor.
Sexual puritanism fulfilled the same function.
But this was a ‘bourgeois’ phenomenon only in so far as it reflected the hegemony of bourgeois respectability.
Like the reading of Samuel Smiles or the practice of other forms of ‘self-help’ and ‘self-improvement’it replaced bourgeois success more often than it prepared for it.
At the level of the ‘respectable’ artisan or clerk, abstinence had often to be its own reward.
In material terms it gave only modest returns.
The problem of bourgeois sexual puritanism is more complex.
The belief that mid-nineteenth-century bourgeois were unusually full-blooded and therefore obliged to build unusually impenetrable  defences against physical temptation is unconvincing: what made the temptations so great was precisely the extremism of the accepted moral standards, which also made the fall correspondingly more dramatic, as in the case of the Catholic-puritan Count Muffat in Emile Zola's Nana, the novel of prostitution in the Paris of the 1860s.
Of course the problem was to some extent economic, as we shall see.
The ‘family’ was not merely the basic social unit of bourgeois society but its basic unit of property and business enterprise, linked with other such units through a system of exchanges of women-plus-property (the ‘marriage portion’) in which the women were by strict convention deriving from pre-bourgeois tradition virgines intactae.
Anything which weakened this family unit was impermissible, and nothing more obviously weakened it than uncontrolled physical passion, which introduced ‘unsuitable’(i.e. economically undesirable) suitors and brides, split husbands from wives, and wasted common resources.
But the tensions were more than economic.
They were particularly great during our period, when the morality of abstinence, moderation and restraint conflicted dramatically with the realities of bourgeois success.
The bourgeois no longer lived either in a family economy of scarcity or in a rank of society remote from the temptations of high society.
Their problem was spending rather than saving.
Not only did the non-working bourgeois become increasingly frequent — in Cologne the number of rentiers paying income tax grew from 162 in 1854 to almost 600 in 1874  — but how else except by spending was the successful bourgeois, whether or not he held political power as a class, to demonstrate his conquest?
The word parvenu (newly-rich) automatically became a synonym of the lavish spender.
Whether these bourgeois tried to ape the life style of the aristocracy or, like class-conscious Krupp and his fellow-magnates of the Ruhr, built themselves castles and industrial-feudal empires parallel to and more impressive than those of the Junkers whose titles they refused, they had to spend, and in a manner which inevitably brought their life style closer to that of the unpuritan aristocracy, and that of their womenfolk even more so.
Before the 1850s this had been a problem of a relatively few families; in some countries, such as Germany, of hardly any.
Now it became the problem of a class.
The bourgeoisie as a class found enormous difficulty in combining  getting and spending in a morally satisfactory manner, just as it failed to solve the equivalent material problem, how to secure a succession of equally dynamic and capable businessmen within the same family, a fact which increased the role of daughters, who could introduce new blood into the business complex.
Of the four sons of the banker Friedrich Wichelhaus in Wuppertal (1810–86) only Robert (b. 1836) remained a banker.
The other three (b. 1831, 1842 and 1846) ended as landowners and an academic, but both daughters (b. 1829 and 1838) married industrialists, including a member of the Engels family.
The very thing for which the bourgeoisie strove, profit, ceased to be an adequate motivation once it had brought sufficient wealth.
Towards the end of the century the bourgeoisie discovered at least a temporary formula for combining getting and spending, cushioned by the acquisitions of the past.
These final decades before the catastrophe of 1914 were to be the ‘Indian summer’, the belle époque of bourgeois life, retrospectively lamented by its survivors.
But in the third quarter of the nineteenth century the contradictions were perhaps at their most acute: effort and enjoyment coexisted, but clashed.
And sexuality was one of the victims of the conflict, hypocrisy the victor.
II
Buttressed by clothes, walls and objects, there was the bourgeois family, the most mysterious institution of the age.
For, if it is easy to discover or to devise connections between puritanism and capitalism, as a large literature bears witness, those between nineteenth-century family structure and bourgeois society remain obscure.
Indeed the apparent conflict between the two has rarely even been noticed.
Why should a society dedicated to an economy of profit-making competitive enterprise, to the efforts of the isolated individual, to equality of rights and opportunities and freedom, rest on an institution which so totally denied all of these?
Its basic unit, the one-family household, was both a patriarchal autocracy and a microcosm of the sort of society which the bourgeoisie as a class (or its theoretical spokesmen) denounced and destroyed: a hierarchy of personal dependence.
‘There in firm wisdom ruleth well the father, husband, master.
Heaping it with prosperities, as guardian, guide and judge.’
Below him — to continue quoting the Proverbial Philosopher Martin Tupper, there flitted ‘the good angel of the house, the mother, wife and mistress’ whose work, according to the great Ruskin, was:
’
I
To please people
II
To feed them in dainty ways
III
To clothe them
IV
To keep them orderly
V
To teach them,
‘
a task for which, curiously, she was required to show, or to possess, neither intelligence nor knowledge (‘Be good sweet maid and let who will be clever’, as Charles Kingsley put it).
This was not merely because the new function of the bourgeois wife, to show off the capacity of the bourgeois husband to keep her in leisure and luxury, conflicted with the old functions of actually running a household, but also because her inferiority to the man must be demonstrable:
‘Hath she wisdom?
It is precious, but beware that thou exceed:
For woman must be subject and the true mastery is of the mind.’
However, this pretty, ignorant and idiotic slave was also required to exercise mastery; not so much over the children, whose lord was once again the pater familias, as over the servants, whose presence distinguished the bourgeois from his social inferiors.
A ‘lady’ was definable as someone who did no work, hence who ordered someone else to do it, her superiority being established by this relationship.
Sociologically the difference between working and middle classes was that between servant-keepers and potential servants, and was so used in Seebohm Rowntree's pioneer social survey of York at the end of the century.
The servants themselves were increasingly and overwhelmingly women — between 1841 and 1881 the percentage of men in domestic offices and personal services in Britain fell from about 20 to about 12 — so that the ideal bourgeois household consisted of a male lord dominating a number of hierarchically graded females, all the more so as male children tended to leave the home as they grew up, or even — among the British upper classes — as soon as they reached the age of boarding school.
But the servant, though receiving wages, and therefore a domestic analogue to the worker whose employment defined the male bourgeois in the economy, was essentially quite different, since her (or more rarely his) main link with the employer was not the cash nexus, but personal, and indeed for practical purposes total, dependence.
Everything about her life was strictly prescribed, and, because she lived in some meagrely furnished attic of the household, controllable.
From the apron or uniform she wore to the testimonial of good behaviour or ‘character’, without which she became unemployable, everything about her symbolised a relation of power and subjection.
This did not exclude close if unequal personal relations any more than it did in slave societies.
Indeed it probably encouraged them, though it must never be forgotten that for every nursemaid or gardener who lived out their lives in the service of one family there were a hundred country girls who passed briefly through the household to pregnancy, marriage or another job, being treated merely as yet another instance of that ‘servant problem’ which filled the conversations of their mistresses.
The crucial point is that the structure of the bourgeois family flatly contradicted that of bourgeois society.
Within it freedom, opportunity, the cash nexus and the pursuit of individual profit did not rule.
It could be argued that this was so because the individualist Hobbesian anarchism which formed the theoretical model of the bourgeois economy provided no basis for any form of social organisation, including that of the family.
And indeed, in one respect, it was a deliberate contrast to the outside world, an oasis of peace in a world of battle, le repos du guerrier.
‘You know [wrote a French industrialist's wife to her sons in 1856]that we live in a century when men have value only by their own efforts.
Every day the brave and clever assistant takes over from the master, whose slackness and lack of seriousness demotes him from the rank which seemed to be permanently his.’
‘What a battle,’ wrote her husband, locked in competition with British textile manufacturers.
‘Many will die in the struggle, even more will be cruelly wounded.’
The metaphor of war came as naturally to the lips of men who discussed their ‘struggle for existence’ or the ‘survival of the fittest’, as the metaphor of peace came to  them when they described the home: ‘the dwelling place of joy’, the place where ‘the satisfied ambition of the heart rejoiced’, as it could never rejoice outside, since it could never be satisfied, or afford to admit itself satisfied.
But it may also be that in the bourgeois family the essential inegalitarianism on which capitalism rested found a necessary expression.
Precisely because it was not based on collective, institutionalised, traditional inequalities, dependence had to be an individual relationship.
Because superiority was so uncertain for the individual, it had to have one form that was permanent and secure.
Because its essential expression was money, which merely expresses the relationship of exchange, other forms of expression which demonstrated the domination of persons over persons had to supplement it.
There was of course nothing new in a patriarchal family structure based on the subordination of women and children.
But where we might have expected a bourgeois society logically to break it up or transform it — as indeed it was to be disintegrated later — the classic phase of bourgeois society reinforced and exaggerated it.
How far this ‘ideal’ bourgeois patriarchy actually represented reality is quite another matter.
An observer summed up the typical bourgeois of Lille as a man who ‘fears God, but above all his wife, and reads the Echo du Nord’, and this is at least as likely a reading of the facts of bourgeois family life as the male-formulated theory of female helplessness and dependence, sometimes pathologically exaggerated into the masculine dream, and occasional practice, of the child-wife selected and formed by the future husband.
Still, the existence and even reinforcement of the ideal-type bourgeois family in this period is significant.
It is sufficient to explain the beginnings of a systematic feminist movement among middle-class women in this period, at all events in the Anglo-Saxon or Protestant countries.
The bourgeois household, however, was merely the nucleus of the larger family connection within which the individual operated: ‘the Rothschilds’, ‘the Krupps’, or for that matter ‘the Forsytes’, who make so much of nineteenth-century social and economic history an essentially dynastic affair.
But though an enormous amount of material about such families has been accumulated over the past century, neither the social anthropologists nor the compilers of genealogical handbooks (an aristocratic occupation) have taken  sufficient interest in them to make it easy to generalise with any confidence about such family groups.
How far were they newly promoted from the lower social ranks?
Not to any substantial extent, it would seem, though in theory nothing prevented social ascent.
Out of the British steelmasters in 1865,89 per cent came from middle-class families, 7 per cent from the lower middle class (including small shopkeepers, independent artisans, etc.) and a mere 4 per cent from workers, skilled or — more improbably — unskilled.
The bulk of the textile manufacturers in northern France at the same period were similarly children of what could already be considered the middle strata; the bulk of the mid-nineteenth-century Nottingham hosiery manufacturers had similar origins, two-thirds of them actually coming from the hosiery trade.
The founding fathers of capitalist enterprise in south-western Germany were not always rich, but the number of those with long family experience in business, and often in the industries they were to develop, is significant: Swiss-Alsatian Protestants like the Koechlin, Geigy or Sarrasin, Jews grown up in the finance of small princelings, rather than technically innovating craftsmen-entrepreneurs.
Educated men — notably sons of Protestant pastors or civil servants — modified but did not change their middle-class status by capitalist enterprise.
The careers of the bourgeois world were indeed open to talent, but the family with a modest amount of education, property and social connections among others of the middle rank undoubtedly started with a relatively enormous advantage; not least the capacity to intermarry with others of the same social status, in the same line of business or with resources which could be combined with their own.
The economic advantages of a large family or an interlocking connection of families were of course still substantial.
Within the business it guaranteed capital, perhaps useful business contacts, and above all reliable managers.
The Lefebvres of Lille in 1851 financed the wool-combing enterprise of a brother-in-law, Amedée Prouvost.
Siemens and Halske, the famous electrical firm set up in 1847, got its first capital from a cousin; a brother was the first salaried employee and nothing was more natural than that the three brothers Werner, Carl and William should take charge respectively of the Berlin, St Petersburg and London branches.
The famous Protestant clans of Mulhouse relied on one another: André Koechlin, son-in-law of the Dollfus  who founded Dollfus-Mieg (both he and his father had married into the Miegs), took over the firm until his four brothers-in-law were old enough to manage it, while his uncle Nicholas ran the Koechlin family firm ‘with which he associated exclusive]y his brothers and brothers-in-law as well as his old father’.
Meanwhile another Dollfus, great-grandson of the founder, entered another local family firm, Schlumberger et Cie.
The business history of the nineteenth century is full of such family alliances and interpenetrations.
They required a large number of available sons and daughters, but there was no shortage of these, and hence — unlike among the French peasantry which required one and only one heir to take over the family holding — no strong incentive to birth control, except among the poor and struggling lower middle class.
But how were such clans organised?
How did they operate?
At what point did they cease to represent family groups and turn into a coherent social group, a local bourgeoisie, or even (as perhaps in the case of Protestant and Jewish bankers) a more widespread network, of which family alliances form merely one aspect?
We cannot answer such questions as yet.
III
What, in other words, do we mean by the ‘bourgeoisie’ as a class in this period?
Its economic, political and social definitions differed somewhat, but were still sufficiently close to each other to cause relatively little difficulty.
Thus, economically, the quintessential bourgeois was a ‘capitalist’(i.e. either the possessor of capital, or the receiver of an income derived from such a source, or a profit-making entrepreneur, or all of these things).
And, in fact, the characteristic ‘bourgeois’ or member of the middle class in our period included few people who did not fit into one or other of these pigeon-holes.
The top 150 families of Bordeaux in 1848 included ninety businessmen (merchants, bankers, shopowners, etc., though in this town as yet few industrialists), forty-five owners of property and rentiers and fifteen members of the liberal professions, which were, of course, in those days, varieties of private enterprise.
There was among them a total absence of the higher and (at least nominally) salaried business executive who  formed the largest single group in the top 450 Bordeaux families in 1960.
We might add that, though  property from land or, more commonly, from urban real-estate, remained an important source of bourgeois income, especially among the middle and lower bourgeoisie in areas of lagging industrialisation, it was already diminishing somewhat in importance.
Even in non-industrial Bordeaux (1873) it formed only 40 per cent of the wealth left at death in 1873 (23 per cent of the biggest fortunes), while in industrial Lille at the same time it formed only 31 per cent.
The personnel of bourgeois politics was naturally somewhat different, if only because politics is a specialised and time-consuming activity which does not attract all equally, or for which not all are equally fitted.
Nevertheless during this period the extent to which bourgeois politics was actually conducted by practising (or retired) bourgeois was quite striking.
Thus in the second half of the nineteenth century between 25 and 40 per cent of the members of the Swiss Federal Council consisted of entrepreneurs and rentiers (20–30 per cent of the Council members being the ‘federal barons’ who ran the banks, railways and industries), a rather larger percentage than in the twentieth century.
Another 15–25 per cent consisted of practising members of the liberal professions, i.e. lawyers — though 50 per cent of all members had law degrees, this being the standard educational qualification for public life and administration in most countries.
Another 20–30 per cent consisted of professional ‘public figures’(prefects, rural judges, and other so-called Magistrates).
The Liberal group in the Belgian Chamber at mid-century had an 83 per cent bourgeois membership: 16 per cent of its members were businessmen, 16 per cent proprietaires, 15 per cent rentiers, 18 per cent professional administrators and 42 per cent liberal professions, i.e. lawyers and a few medical men.
This was equally, and perhaps more, marked in local politics in the cities, dominated as these naturally were by the bourgeois (i.e. normally Liberal) notables of the place.
If the upper echelons of power were largely occupied by older groups, traditionally established there, from 1830 (in France), from 1848 (in Germany) the bourgeoisie ‘assaulted and conquered the lower levels of political power’, such as municipal councils, mayoralties, district councils, etc., and kept them under control until the rise of mass politics in the last decades of the century.
From 1830 Lille was run by  mayors who were prominent businessmen.
In Britain the big cities were notoriously in the hands of the oligarchy of local businessmen.
Socially the definitions were not so clear, though the ‘middle class’ obviously included all the above groups, provided they were wealthy and established enough: businessmen, property-owners, liberal professions and the upper echelons of administration, which were, of course, numerically quite a small group outside the capital cities.
The difficulty lay both in defining the ‘upper’ and ‘lower’limits of the stratum within the hierarchy of social status, and in allowing for the marked heterogeneity of its membership within those limits: there was always, at least, an accepted internal stratification into grande moyenne and petite bourgeoisie, the latter shading off into strata which would be de facto outside the class.
At the top end the bourgeoisie was more or less distinct from the aristocracy (high or low), depending partly on the legal and social exclusiveness of that group or on its own class-consciousness.
No bourgeois could become a real aristocrat in, say, Russia or Prussia, and even where patents of low nobility were freely distributed, as in the Habsburg Empire, no Count Chotek or Auersperg, however ready to join the board of directors of a business enterprise, would consider a Baron von Wertheimstein as anything except a middle-class banker and a Jew.
Britain was almost alone in systematically, though at this period still modestly, absorbing businessmen into the aristocracy — bankers and financiers rather than industrialists.
On the other hand, until 1870, and even thereafter, there were still German industrialists who refused to allow their nephews to become reserve-officers, as being unsuitable for young men of their class, or whose sons insisted on doing their military service in the infantry or engineers rather than the socially more exclusive cavalry.
But it must be added that as the profits rolled in — and they were very substantial in our period — the temptation of decorations, titles, intermarriage with the nobility and in general an aristocratic life style was not often resisted by the rich.
English non-conformist manufacturers would transfer to the Church of England, and in the north of France the ‘barely concealed Voltaireanism’ of before 1850 turned into increasingly fervent Catholicism after 1870.’
At the bottom the dividing-line was much more clearly economic, though businessmen — at least in Britain — might draw a sharp qualitative  line between themselves and those social outcasts who actually sold goods directly to the public, such as shopkeepers; at least until retail trade had shown that it could also make millions for its practitioners.
The independent artisan and small shopkeeper clearly belonged to a lower middle class or Mittelstand which had little in common with the bourgeoisie except aspiration to its social status.
The rich peasant was not a bourgeois, and neither was the white-collar employee.
Nevertheless, there was in the mid-nineteenth century a sufficiently large reservoir of the older type of economically independent petty commodity producer or seller, and even of the skilled worker and foreman (who still often took the place of the modern technological cadre), for the dividing-line to be hazy: some would prosper and, at least in their localities, become accepted bourgeois.
For the main characteristic of the bourgeoisie as a class was that it was a body of persons of power and influence, independent of the power and influence of traditional birth and status.
To belong to it a man had to be ‘someone’, a person who counted as an individual, because of his wealth, his capacity to command other men, or otherwise to influence them.
Hence the classical form of bourgeois politics was, as we have seen, entirely different from the mass politics of those below them, including the petty-bourgeoisie.
The classical recourse of the bourgeois in trouble or with cause for complaint was to exercise or ask for personal influence: to have a word with the mayor, the deputy, the minister, the old school or college comrade, the kinsman or business contact.
Bourgeois Europe was or grew full of more or less informal systems for protection or mutual advancement, old-boy networks, or mafias (‘friends of friends’), among which those arising from common attendance at the same educational institutions were naturally very important, especially the institutions of higher learning, which produced national rather than merely local linkages.
One among these types of network, freemasonry, served an even more important purpose in certain countries, notably Roman Catholic Latin ones, for it could actually serve as the ideological cement for the liberal bourgeoisie in its political dimension, or indeed, as in  Italy, as virtually the only permanent and national organisation of the class.
The individual bourgeois who felt called upon to comment on public matters knew that a letter to The Times or the Neue Freie Presse would not merely reach a large part of his class and the decision makers, but, what was more important, that it would be printed on the strength of his standing as an individual.
The bourgeoisie as a class did not organise mass movements but pressure groups.
Its model in politics was not Chartism but the Anti-Corn-Law League.
Of course the degree to which the bourgeois was a ‘notable’ varied enormously, from the grande bourgeoisie whose range of action was national or even international, to the more modest figures who were persons of importance in Aussig (Ustí nad Labem) or Groningen.
Krupp expected and received more consideration than Theodor Boeninger of Duisburg, whom the regional administration merely recommended for the title of Commercial Counsellor (Kommerzienrat) because he was wealthy, a capable industrialist, active in public and church life and had supported the government in elections and on both municipal and district councils.
Yet both in their various ways were people ‘who counted’.
If armour-plates of internal snobbishness divided millionaires from the rich, and these in turn from the merely comfortable, which was natural enough in a class whose very essence was to climb higher by individual effort, it did not destroy that sense of group consciousness which turned the ‘middle rank’ of society into the ‘middle class’or ‘bourgeoisie’.
It rested on common assumptions, common beliefs, common forms of action.
The bourgeoisie of the third quarter of the nineteenth century was overwhelmingly ‘liberal’, not necessarily in a party sense (though as we have seen Liberal parties were prevalent), as in an ideological sense.
They believed in capitalism, in competitive private enterprise, technology, science and reason.
They believed in progress, in a certain amount of representative government, a certain amount of civil rights and liberties, so long as these were compatible with the rule of law and with the kind of order which kept the poor in their place.
They believed in culture in addition to, and sometimes as an alternative to religion, in extreme cases substituting the ritual attendance at opera, theatre or concert for that at church.
They believed in the career open to enterprise and talent, and that their own lives  proved its merits.
As we have seen, by this time the traditional and often puritan belief in the virtues of abstemiousness and moderation was finding it hard to resist the reality of achievement, but they were still regretted.
If ever German society was to collapse, argued a writer in 1855, it would be because the middle classes had begun to pursue appearance and luxury ‘without seeking to counterbalance it with the simple and hard-working (competent) sense of the bourgeois [Buergersinn], with respect for the spiritual forces of life, with the effort to identify science, ideas and talent with the progressive development of the Third Estate’.
Perhaps that pervasive sense of a struggle for existence, a natural selection in which, after all, victory or even survival proved both fitness and the essentially moral qualities which could alone achieve fitness, reflects an adaptation of the old bourgeois ethic to the new situation.
Darwinism, social or otherwise, was not merely science but ideology, even before it was formulated as such.
To be a bourgeois was not merely to be superior, but also to have demonstrated moral qualities equivalent to the old puritan ones.
But more than anything else, it meant superiority.
The bourgeois was not merely independent, a man to whom no one(save the state or God) gave orders, but one who gave orders himself.
He was not merely an employer, entrepreneur or capitalist but socially a ‘master’, a ‘lord’(Fabrikherr), a ‘patron’ or ‘chef ‘.
The monopoly of command — in his house, in his business, in his factory — was crucial to his self-definition, and its formal assertion, whether nominal or real, is an essential element in all industrial disputes of the period: ‘But I am also the Director of the Mines, that is to say the head [chef]of a large population of workers…
I represent the principle of authority and am bound to make it respected in my person: such has always been the conscious object of my relations with the working class.’
Only the member of the liberal professions, or the artist and intellectual who was not essentially an employer or someone with subordinates, was not primarily a ‘master’.
Even here the ‘principle of authority’ was far from absent, whether from the comportment of the traditional continental university professor, the autocratic medical man, the orchestral conductor or the capricious painter.
If Krupp commanded his armies of workers, Richard Wagner expected total subservience from his audience.
Dominance implies inferiority.
But the mid-nineteenth-century bourgeoisie was divided on the nature of that inferiority of the lower classes about which there was no substantial disagreement, though attempts had to be made to distinguish, within the subaltern mass, between those who might be expected to rise into, at least, the respectable lower middle class and those who were beyond redemption.
Since success was due to personal merit, failure was clearly due to personal lack of merit.
The traditional bourgeois ethic, puritan or secular, had ascribed this to moral or spiritual feebleness rather than to lack of intellect, for it was evident that not much in the way of brains was needed for success in business, and conversely that mere brains did not guarantee wealth and still less ‘sound’ views.
This did not necessarily imply anti-intellectualism, though in Britain and the United States it was pervasive, because the triumphs of business were pre-eminently those of poorly educated men using empiricism and common sense.
Even Ruskin reflected the common view when he argued that ‘busy metaphysicians are always entangling good and active people, and weaving cobwebs among the finest wheels of the world's business’.
Samuel Smiles put the matter more simply:
‘The experience to be gathered from books, though often valuable, is but of the nature of learning; whereas the experience gained from actual life is of the nature of wisdom; and a small store of the latter is worth vastly more than a stock of the former.’
But a simple classification into the morally superior and inferior, though adequate to distinguish the ‘respectable’ from the drunken and licentious labouring mass, was plainly no longer adequate, except for the striving lower middle class, if only because the ancient virtues were no longer visibly applicable to the successful and wealthy bourgeoisie.
The ethic of abstinence and effort could hardly be applied to the success of the American millionaires of the 1860s and 1870s, or even to the wealthy manufacturer, retired to a life of country-house leisure, still less to his rentier relatives; to those whose ideal was, in Ruskin's words:
‘that [life]should be passed in a pleasant undulating world with iron and coal everywhere beneath it.
On each pleasant bank of this world is to be a beautiful mansion…a moderately sized park; a large garden and hothouses; and pleasant carriage drives through the shrubberies.
In this mansion are to live…the English gentleman with his gracious wife and his beautiful family; he always able to have the boudoir and the jewels for the wife, and the beautiful ball dresses for the daughters, and hunters for the sons, and a shooting in the Highlands for himself.’
Hence the growing importance of the alternative theories of biological class superiority, which pervade so much of the nineteenth-century bourgeois Weltanschauung.
Superiority was the result of natural selection, genetically transmitted (see chapter 14 below).
The bourgeois was, if not a different species, then at least the member of a superior race, a higher stage in human evolution, distinct from the lower orders who remained in the historical or cultural equivalent of childhood or at most adolescence.
From master to master-race was thus only a short step.
Yet the right to dominate, the unquestioned superiority of the bourgeois as a species, implied not only inferiority but ideally an accepted, willing inferiority, as in the relation between man and woman (which once again symbolises much about the bourgeois world view).
The workers, like women, ought to be loyal and contented.
If they were not, it must be due to that crucial figure in the social universe of the bourgeoisie, the ‘outside agitator’.
Though nothing was more obvious to the naked eye than that the members of craft unions were likely to be the best, the most intelligent, the most skilled workers, the myth of the work-shy outsider exploiting simple-minded but basically sturdy operatives was indestructible.
‘The conduct of the workers is deplorable,’ wrote a French mining manager in 1869, in the process of ferociously repressing the sort of strike of which Zola's Germinal has given us a vivid picture, ‘but one must recognise that they have been merely the savage instruments of agitators’.
To be more precise: the active working-class militant or potential leader must be by definition an ‘agitator’, since he could not be fitted into the stereotype of obedience, dullness and stupidity.
When in 1859 nine of the most upright miners from Seaton Delaval —‘every man a teetotaller, six of them Primitive Methodists, and two of the six local preachers’— were sent to jail for two months after a strike which they had opposed, the mine manager was quite clear on this point.
‘I know they are respectable men, and that is why I put them in prison.
It is no use sending to jail those who cannot feel.’
Such an attitude reflected the determination to decapitate the lower  classes, in so far as they did not shed their potential leaders spontaneously by absorption into the lower middle class.
But it also reflected a considerable degree of confidence.
We are a long way from those factory-owners of the 1830s, living in constant fear of something like slave insurrections (see The Age of Revolution, epigraph to chapter 11).
When master-manufacturers talked of the danger of communism which lurked behind any limitation of the absolute right of employers to hire and fire at will, they meant not social revolution but merely that the right of property and the right of domination were indistinguishable, and a bourgeois society must go to the dogs once interference with property rights was permitted.
Hence the reaction of fear and hatred was all the more hysterical when the spectre of social revolution once again irrupted into a confident capitalist world.
The massacres of the Paris Communards (see chapter 9 above) testify to its force.
IV
A class of masters: yes.
A ruling class?
The answer is more complex.
The bourgeoisie was evidently not a ruling class in the sense in which the old-style landowner was, whose position gave him, de jure or de facto, the effective state power over the inhabitants of his territory.
He normally operated within a functioning framework of state power and administration which was not his own, at least outside the actual buildings he occupied (‘my home is my castle’).
Only in areas remote from this authority, as in isolated mining settlements, or where the state was itself weak, as in the United States, could bourgeois masters exercise that sort of direct rule, whether by command over the local forces of public authority, by private armies of Pinkerton men, or by banding together in armed groups of ‘vigilantes’ to maintain ‘order’.
Moreover, in our period the case of states in which the bourgeoisie had won formal political control, or did not have to share it with older political elites, was still quite exceptional.
In most countries the bourgeoisie, however defined, plainly did not control or exercise political power, except perhaps at the subaltern or municipal level.
What it did exercise was hegemony, and what it increasingly determined was policy.
There was no alternative to capitalism as a method of economic development, and at this period this implied both the  realisation of the economic and institutional programme of the liberal bourgeoisie (with local variations), and the crucial position in the state of that bourgeoisie itself.
Even for the socialists the road to proletarian triumph ran through a fully developed capitalism.
Before 1848 it had seemed for a moment that its crisis of transition (see The Age of Revolution, p. 304) might also prove to be its final crisis, at least in England, but in the 1850s it became clear that its major period of growth was only just beginning.
It was unshakable in its main bastion, Britain, and elsewhere the prospects of social revolution paradoxically seemed to depend more than ever on the prospect of the bourgeoisie, domestic or foreign, creating that triumphant capitalism which would make possible its own overthrow.
In a sense both Marx, who hailed the British conquest of India and the American conquest of half Mexico as historically progressive at this time, and the progressive elements in Mexico or India, who looked to alliance with the United States or the British Raj against their own traditionalists (see chapter 7 above), were recognising the same global situation.
As for the rulers of conservative, anti-bourgeois and anti-liberal regimes in Europe, whether in Vienna, Berlin or St Petersburg, they recognised, however reluctantly, that the alternative to capitalist economic development was backwardness, and consequent weakness.
Their problem was how to foster capitalism and with it the bourgeoisie without also acquiring bourgeois-liberal political regimes.
The simple rejection of bourgeois society and its ideas was no longer viable.
The only organisation which frankly undertook to resist it without qualification, the Catholic Church, merely isolated itself.
The Syllabus of Errors of 1864 (see p. 131 above) and the Vatican Council demonstrated, by the very extremism of their rejection of everything that characterised the mid-nineteenth century, that they were entirely on the defensive.
From the 1870s on this virtual monopoly of the bourgeois programme (in its ‘liberal’ forms) began to crumble.
But, by and large, in the third quarter of the nineteenth century it was pretty well unchallengeable.
In economic affairs even the absolutist rulers of central and eastern Europe found themselves abolishing serfdom and dismantling the traditional apparatus of economic state controls and corporate privileges.]
n political affairs they found themselves calling upon, or at least coming to terms with, bourgeois liberals of the more  moderate sort and, however nominally, their kind of representative institutions.
Culturally it was the bourgeois life style which prevailed over the aristocratic, if only by a fairly general withdrawal of the old aristocracy from the world of culture (as that word was now understood): they became, in so far as they were not already, the ‘barbarians’ of Matthew Arnold (1822–88).
After 1850 it is difficult to think of any kings who were great patrons of the arts, except mad ones like Ludwig II of Bavaria (1864–86), any noble magnates who were great collectors of art, except eccentrics.
Before 1848 the certainties of the bourgeoisie had still been qualified by the fear of social revolution.
After 1870 they were once again to be undermined, not least by the fear of the growing movements of the working classes.
But in the intervening period their triumph seemed beyond doubt or challenge.
The age, judged Bismarck, who had no sympathy for a bourgeois society, was one of ‘material interests’.
Economic interests were an ‘elementary force’.
‘I believe that the advance of economic questions in domestic development is progressing and cannot be halted.’
But what represented that elementary force at this period, if not capitalism and the world made by and for the bourgeoisie?
Fourteen
Science, Religion, Ideology
Our aristocracy is handsomer (more hideous according to Chinese or Negro) than the middle classes, from [having the]pick of the women; but oh, what a shame is primogeniture for destroying Natural Selection!
Charles Darwin, 1864
It is almost as though people want to show how intelligent they think they are by the degree of their emancipation from Bible and Catechism
F. Schaubach on popular literature, 1863
John Stuart Mill cannot help claiming the suffrage for the Negro — and the woman.
Such conclusions are the inevitable results of the premises whence he started…[and their]reductio ad absurdum 
Anthropological Review, 1866
I
The bourgeois society of the third quarter of the nineteenth century was self-confident and proud of its achievements.
In no field of human endeavour was this more so than in the advancement of knowledge, in ‘science’.
Educated men of this period were not merely proud of their sciences, but prepared to subordinate all other forms of intellectual activity to them.
In 1861 the statistician and economist Cournot observed that ‘the belief in philosophic truth has cooled off to such an extent that neither the public nor the academies any longer like to receive or to welcome works of this kind, except as products of pure scholarship or historical curiosity.’
It was not, indeed, a happy period for the philosophers.
Even in their traditional home, Germany, there was nobody of comparable stature to succeed the great figures of the past.
Hegel himself, regarded as one of the ‘deflated balloons’ of German philosophy by his former French admirer, Hippolyte Taine (1828–93), went out of fashion in his native country, and the way in which ‘the tiresome, conceited and mediocre epigones who set the tone among the educated German public’treated him moved Marx in the 1860s ‘to declare myself publicly a disciple of that  great thinker’.
The two dominant trends in philosophy subordinated themselves to science: French positivism, associated with the school of the curious Auguste Comte, and British empiricism, associated with John Stuart Mill, not to mention the mediocre thinker whose influence was then greater than any other anywhere in the world, Herbert Spencer (1820–1903).
The double base of Comte's ‘positive philosophy’ was the immutability of the laws of nature and the impossibility of all infinite and absolute knowledge.
In so far as it reached out beyond the rather eccentric sect of the Comtist ‘Religion of Humanity’, positivism became little more than a philosophical justification of the conventional method of the experimental sciences, and similarly for most contemporaries Mill was, again in the words of Taine, the man who had opened up ‘the good old road of induction and experiment’.
Yet this view implied, or rather was explicitly based in Comte and Spencer, on a historical view of evolutionary progress.
The positive or scientific method was (or would be) the triumph of the last of the stages through which mankind must pass — in Comte's terms, the theological, the metaphysical and the scientific; each with its own institutions, of which Mill and Spencer at least agreed that liberalism (in the broadest sense) was the suitable expression.
One might say with little exaggeration that in this view the progress of science made philosophy redundant, except as a sort of intellectual laboratory assistant to the scientist.
Moreover, with such confidence in the methods of science it is not surprising that educated men of the second half of the century were immensely impressed with its achievements.
Indeed, they sometimes came close to thinking that these achievements were not merely impressive but final.
William Thompson, Lord Kelvin, the celebrated physicist, thought that all the basic problems of physics had been solved, though a number of relatively minor problems remained to be cleared up.
He was, as we know, quite startlingly mistaken.
Nevertheless, the mistake was both significant and comprehensible.
In science as in society there are revolutionary and non-revolutionary periods and, whereas the twentieth century is revolutionary in both, to an extent even greater than the ‘age of revolution’(1789–1848), the period with which this book deals was (with certain exceptions) revolutionary in neither.
This does not mean that conventional men of intelligence and ability thought that either science or society had  solved all problems, though in some respects, such as those which concerned the basic pattern of an economy and the basic pattern of the physical universe, some very able ones felt that all substantial ones had been solved.
It does, however, mean that such men had no serious doubts about the direction in which they were going and ought to go, and the methods, intellectual or practical, of getting there.
Nobody doubted the fact of progress, both material and intellectual, since it seemed too obvious to be denied.
It was, indeed, the dominant concept of the age, though there was a rather fundamental division between those who thought that progress would be more or less continuous and linear, and those (like Marx) who knew that it must and would be discontinuous and contradictory.
Doubts could arise only about matters of, as it were, taste, such as manners and morals, where simple quantitative accumulation provided no guidance There could be no question that men in 1860 knew more than ever before, but whether they were ‘better’ could not be demonstrated in the same way.
But these were matters which preoccupied theologians (whose intellectual reputation was not high), philosophers and artists (who were admired but somewhat in the manner in which wealthy men admire the diamonds they can afford to buy their women) and social critics, of the left or right, who did not like the kind of society they lived in or found themselves forced into.
Among articulate and educated persons in 1860 these were a distinct minority.
Though massive progress was visible in all branches of knowledge, it seemed evident that some were further advanced, some more fully formed, than others.
Thus it seemed that physics was more mature then chemistry, and had already left behind the stage of effervescent and explosive progress in which that science was still so visibly engaged.
Chemistry in turn, even ‘organic chemistry’, was considerably more advanced than the life-sciences, which just seemed to be taking off into an era of exciting progress.
Indeed, if any single scientific theory is to represent the advances of natural science in our period, and was recognised as crucial, it was the theory of evolution, and if any one figure dominated the public image of science it was the craggy and somewhat ape-like one of Charles Darwin (1809–82).
The strange, abstract and logically fantastic world of the mathematicians remained somewhat isolated both from the general and the scientific public, perhaps more so than before, since its main contact with both, physics (through physical technology), appeared at this stage to have less use for its most advanced and adventurous abstractions than in the great days of the construction of a celestial mechanics.
The calculus, without which the achievements of engineering and communications of the period would have been impossible, was by now far behind the moving frontier of mathematics.
This was perhaps best represented by the greatest mathematician of the period, Georg Bernhard Riemann (1826–66), whose university teacher's thesis of 1854 ‘On the hypotheses which underlie geometry’(published 1868) can no more be omitted from a discussion of nineteenth-century science than Newton's Principia can from that of the seventeenth century.
It laid the foundations of topology, the differential geometry of manifolds and the theory of space-time and gravitation.
Riemann even envisaged a theory of physics compatible with modern quantum theory.
Yet these and other highly original mathematical developments did not come into their own until the new revolutionary age of physics which began at the end of the century.
However, in none of the natural sciences did there seem to be serious uncertainty about the general direction in which knowledge was advancing, or the basic conceptual or methodological framework of its advance.
Discoveries were plentiful, theories sometimes novel but not, as it were, unexpected.
Even the Darwinian theory of evolution was impressive, not because the concept of evolution was new — it had been familiar for decades — but because it provided for the first time a satisfactory explanatory model for the origin of species, and did so in terms which were entirely familiar even to non-scientists, since they echoed the most familiar concept of the liberal economy, competition.
Indeed, an unusual number of great scientists wrote in terms which allowed them to be readily popularised — sometimes excessively so — Darwin, Pasteur, the physiologists Claude Bernard (1813–78) and Rudolf Virchow (1821–1902) and Helmholtz (1821–94)(see p. 315), not to mention physicists like William Thompson, Lord Kelvin.
The basic models or ‘paradigms’ of scientific theories seemed firm, though great scientists like James Clerk Maxwell (1831–79) formulated their versions with the instinctive caution which made them compatible with later theories based on very different models.
Within the natural sciences there was little of that passionate and puzzled confrontation which occurs when there is a clash, not of  different hypotheses, but of different ways of looking at the same problem, i.e. when one party proposes not merely a different answer, but one which the other party considers to be impermissible or ‘unthinkable’.
Such a clash occurred in the remote little world of mathematics when H. Kronecker (1839–1914) savaged K. Weierstrass (1815–97), R. Dedekind (1831–1916) and G. Cantor (1845–1918) on the issue of the mathematics of infinity.
Such Methodenstreite (battles of methods) divided the world of the social scientists, but in so far as they entered the natural sciences — even the biological ones on the sensitive issue of evolution — they reflected an intrusion of ideological preferences rather than professional debate.
There is no convincing scientific reason why they did not occur.
Thus that most typical mid-Victorian scientist William Thompson, Lord Kelvin (typical in his combination of great if conventional theoretical power, quite enormous technological fertility  and consequent business success), was clearly not happy about the mathematics of Clerk Maxwell's electromagnetic theory of light, which is regarded by many as the point of departure for modern physics.
However, as he found it possible to reformulate it in terms of his own engineering type of mathematics (which is not), he did not challenge it.
Again, Thompson demonstrated to his satisfaction that, on the basis of known physical laws, the sun could not be older than 500 million years, and that therefore the time-scale required for geological and biological evolution on the earth was impossible.
(As he was an orthodox Christian, he welcomed this conclusion.)
In fact, according to the physics of 1864, he was correct: it was only the discovery of then unknown sources of nuclear energy which allowed physicists to suppose a much longer life-span for the sun and consequently the earth.
But Thompson did not wonder whether his physics might be incomplete, if they conflicted with accepted geology, and the geologists merely went ahead irrespective of physics.
The debate might as well not have taken place, so far as the further development of both sciences is concerned.
So the world of science moved along its intellectual railway tracks, and its further progress seemed, like that of the railways themselves, to offer the prospect of the laying-down of more tracks of the same  kind through new territory.
The skies appeared to contain little that would have startled older astronomers, apart from a host of new observations by means of more powerful telescopes and measuring instruments (both largely German developments) and the use of the new technique of photography, as well as spectroscopic analysis, first applied to the light of the stars in 1861, which was to turn out to be an enormously powerful tool of research.
The physical sciences had developed quite dramatically in the previous half-century, when such apparently disparate phenomena as heat and energy were unified by the laws of thermodynamics, while electricity, magnetism and even light itself converged towards a single analytical model.
Thermodynamics made no major advances during our period, though Thompson completed the process of reconciling the new doctrines of heat with the older ones of mechanics in 1851 (The Dynamical Equivalent of Heat).
The remarkable mathematical model of the electromagnetic theory of light, formulated by that ancestor of modern theoretical physics, James Clerk Maxwell, in 1862, was indeed both profound and open-ended.
It left the way open for the discovery of the electron.
Yet Maxwell, perhaps because he never achieved an adequate exposition of what he described as his ‘somewhat awkward theory’(this was not made until 1941!) failed to convince such leading contemporaries as Thompson and Helmholtz, or even the brilliant Austrian Ludwig Boltzmann (1844–1906), whose memoir of 1868 virtually launched statistical mechanics as a subject.
Probably the physics of the mid-nineteenth century was not as spectacular as that of the preceding and following period, but its theoretical advances were indeed very impressive.
And yet, the electromagnetic theory and the laws of thermodynamics between them seemed, to quote Bernal, ‘to imply a certain finality’.
At all events the British (headed by Thompson), and indeed other physicists who had done their creative work in thermodynamics, were strongly tempted by the view that man had now acquired a definitive understanding of the laws of nature (though a Helmholtz or Boltzmann was  rightly unconvinced).
Perhaps the remarkable technological fertility of the physics of mechanical model-building made the illusion of finality more tempting.
There was evidently no such finality about the second great natural science, perhaps the most flourishing of all in the nineteenth century, chemistry.
Its expansion was dramatic, especially in Germany, not least because its industrial uses were so multifarious: from bleaches, dye-stuffs and fertilisers to medical products and explosives.
Chemists were well on the way to forming over half the total of persons professionally engaged in science.
The foundations of chemistry as a mature science had been laid in the last third of the eighteenth century.
It had blossomed ever since, and went on developing in an exciting overflowing fountain of ideas and discoveries during our period.
The basic elementary processes of chemistry were understood and the essential analytical tools were already available; the existence of a limited number of chemical elements, composed of different numbers of basic units (atoms), and compounds of elements composed of basic multi-atomic units of molecules, and some idea of the rules of these combinations was familiar, as indeed it had to be for the great advances in the essential activity of chemists, the analysis and synthesis of various substances.
The special field of organic chemistry was already flourishing, though this was still confined to the properties — mainly the properties useful in production — of materials derived from sources that had once been alive, such as coal.
It was still a long way from biochemistry, i.e. the understanding of how these substances functioned in the living organism.
Nevertheless, the models of chemistry remained rather imperfect, and substantial advances in understanding them were made in the third quarter of the nineteenth century.
They illuminated the structure of chemical compounds, which had hitherto been seen simply in quantitative terms (i.e. the number of atoms in a molecule).
It became possible to determine the correct numbers of each kind of atom in a molecule by means of the already available Avogadro's Law of 1811, which a patriotic Italian chemist drew to the attention of an international symposium on the question in 1860, the year of Italian unity.
Moreover — another fruitful borrowing from physics — Pasteur discovered in 1848 that chemically identical substances could  be physically distinct, e.g. rotating or not rotating the plane of polarised light.
From this it followed, among other things, that molecules had a shape in three-dimensional space, and the brilliant German chemist Kekule (1829–96), in the very Victorian situation of a passenger sitting on top of a London bus in 1865, imagined the first of the complex structural molecular models, the famous benzene ring of six carbon atoms to each of which a hydrogen atom was attached.
One might say that the architect's or engineer's conception of a model replaced what had hitherto been the accountant's model — C6H6, the mere counting of atoms — in the chemical formula.
Perhaps even more remarkable was the major generalisation in the field of chemistry produced by this period, Mendeleev's (1834–1907) Periodic Table of Elements (1869).
Thanks to the solution of the problems of atomic weight and valency (the number of links the atom of an element possesses with other atoms), the atomic theory, somewhat neglected after its flowering in the early nineteenth century, came into its own again after 1860, and simultaneously technology in the shape of the spectroscope (1859) allowed various new elements to be discovered.
Moreover, the 1860s were a great period of standardisation and measurement.
(They saw, among other things, the fixing of the familiar units of electrical measurement, the volt, ampere, watt and ohm.)
Various attempts to reclassify the chemical elements according to valency and atomic weight were therefore made.
That by Mendeleev and the German Lothar Meyer (1830–95) rested on the fact that the properties of elements varied in a periodic manner with their atomic weights.
Its brilliance lay in the assumption that, according to this principle, certain places in the periodic table of all the ninety-two elements were still empty, and in predicting the properties of the as yet undiscovered elements which were to fill them.
The Mendeleev Table appeared at first sight to conclude the study of the atomic theory by setting a limit to the existence of fundamentally different kinds of matter.
In actual fact ‘it was to find its full interpretation in a new concept of matter no longer made of immutable atoms but by relatively impermanent associations of a few fundamental particles, themselves liable to change and transformation’.
But at the time Mendeleev, like Clerk Maxwell, looked like the last word in an old discussion rather than the first in a new one.
Biology remained a long way behind the physical sciences, held  back not least by the conservatism of the two major bodies of men concerned with its practical application, the farmers and especially the doctors.
Retrospectively the greatest of the early physiologists is Claude Bernard, whose work provides the basis of all modern physiology and biochemistry, and who, moreover, wrote one of the finest analyses of the processes of science ever written in his Introduction to the Study of Experimental Medicine (1865).
However, though honoured, especially in his native France, his discoveries were not immediately applicable and his contemporary influence therefore less than that of his fellow-countryman Louis Pasteur, who became, with Darwin, perhaps the mid-nineteenth-century scientist most widely known to the general public.
Pasteur was drawn into the field of bacteriology, of which he became the great pioneer (together with Robert Koch [1843–1910], a German country doctor), through industrial chemistry, more precisely the analysis of why beer and vinegar sometimes go bad, for reasons which chemical analysis could not reveal.
Both the techniques of bacteriology — the microscope, the preparation of cultures and slides, etc. — and its immediate applicability — the eradication of the diseases of animals and humans — made the new discipline accessible, understandable and appealing.
Techniques like antisepsis (developed by Lister [1827–1912]around 1865), ‘pasteurisation’ or other methods of safeguarding organic products from the intrusions of microbes, and inoculation were at hand, and the arguments and results sufficiently palpable to break down even the entrenched hostility of the medical profession.
The study of bacteria was to provide biology with an enormously useful approach to the nature of life, but at this period it raised no theoretical questions which the most conventional scientist would not immediately recognise.
The most significant and dramatic advance in biology was one which had only marginal relevance at the time to the study of the physical and chemical structure and mechanism of life.
The theory of evolution by natural selection reached out far beyond biology, and therein lies its significance.
It ratified the triumph of history over all the sciences, though ‘history’ in this connection was generally confused by contemporaries with ‘progress’.
Moreover, by bringing man himself into a scheme of biological evolution, it abolished the sharp line between natural and human or social sciences.
Henceforth the  whole cosmos or at least the whole solar system must be conceived as a process of constant historical change.
The sun and the planets were in the midst of such a history and so, as the geologists had already established (see The Age of Revolution, chapter 15), was the earth.
Living things were now also included in this process, though the question whether life itself had evolved from non-life still remained unsolved and, mainly for ideological reasons, extremely sensitive.
(The great Pasteur believed that he had shown that it could not so evolve.)
Darwin brought not only animals but man himself into the evolutionary scheme.
The difficulty for mid-nineteenth-century science lay not so much in admitting such a historisation of the universe — nothing was easier to conceive in an era of such overwhelmingly obvious and massive historic changes — as to combine it with uniform, continuous and non-revolutionary operations of unchanging natural laws.
A distrust of social revolutions was not absent from their considerations, any more than a distrust of traditional religion whose sacred texts committed it to discontinuous change (‘creation’) and interference with the regularity of nature (‘miracles’).
However, it also seemed at this stage that science depended on uniformity and invariance.
Reductionism seemed essential to it.
Only revolutionary thinkers like Marx found it easy to conceive of situations in which, as it were, 2 + 2 no longer equalled 4 but might equal something else instead or also.
It had been the great achievement of the geologists to explain how, given enough time, the operation of exactly the same forces visible today could explain the enormous variety of what could be observed on the inanimate earth, past and present.
It was the great achievement of natural selection to explain the even greater variety of living species, including man.
This success was to tempt, and still tempts, thinkers to deny or underestimate the very different and novel processes which govern historic change and reduce the changes in human societies to the rules of biological evolution — with important political consequences and, sometimes, intentions (‘social-Darwinism’).
The society in which western scientists lived — and all scientists belonged to the western world, even those situated on its margins as in Russia  combined stability and change, and so did their evolutionary theories.
They were, nevertheless, dramatic or rather traumatic, because for the first time they came into deliberate and militant confrontation with the forces of tradition, conservatism and especially religion.
They abolished the special status of man as hitherto conceived.
The violence with which evolution was resisted was ideological.
How could man, created in God's image, be no more than a modified monkey?
Given the choice between apes and angels, the opponents of Darwin took the side of the angels.
The strength of this resistance demonstrates the force of traditionalism and organised religion even among the most emancipated and educated groups of the western populations, for the discussion was confined to the highly literate.
Yet what is equally, and perhaps more, striking is the readiness of the evolutionists publicly to challenge the forces of tradition — and their comparatively rapid triumph.
There had been plenty of evolutionists in the first half of the century, but the biologists among them had handled the subject with caution and some personal fear.
Darwin himself held back the views he had already formed until 1859.
This was not due to the fact that the evidence for the descent of man from animals now became too overwhelming to resist, though, as it happened, it accumulated rapidly in the 1850s.
The ape-like skull of Neanderthal man (1856) could no longer be argued away.
Still the evidence had been strong enough before 1848.
It was due to the happy conjuncture of two facts, the rapid advance of a liberal and ‘progressive’ bourgeoisie and the absence of revolution.
The challenge to the forces of tradition grew stronger, but it no longer seemed to imply social upheaval.
Darwin himself illustrates this combination.
A bourgeois, a man of the moderate liberal left, and unquestionably ready to confront the forces of conservatism and religion from the late 1850s (though not before), he politely rejected the offer of Karl Marx to dedicate the second volume of Capital to him.
He was not, after all, a revolutionary.
The fortunes of Darwinism thus depended, not so much on its success in convincing the scientific public, i.e. on the evident merits of The Origin of Species, but on the political and ideological conjuncture of time and country.
It was, of course, immediately adopted by the extreme left, which had, indeed, long provided a powerful component of evolutionary thinking.
Alfred Russel Wallace (1823–1913), who  actually discovered the theory of natural selection independently of Darwin and shared its glory with him, came from that tradition of artisan science and radicalism which played so important a part in the early nineteenth century and which found ‘natural history’ so congenial.
Formed in the milieu of Chartism and Owenite ‘Halls of Science’, he remained a man of the extreme left who returned late in life to a militant support of land nationalisation and even socialism, while maintaining his belief in those other characteristic theories of heterodox and plebeian ideology, phrenology and spiritualism (see p. 319 below).
Marx immediately hailed the Origin as ‘the basis in natural science for our views’, and social democracy became strongly — and with some of Marx's disciples such as Kautsky excessively Darwinian.
This evident affinity of the socialists for biological Darwinism did not prevent dynamic and progressive liberal middle classes from welcoming, indeed championing, it.
It triumphed rapidly in England and in the self-confident liberal atmosphere of Germany during the decade of unification.
In France, where the middle class preferred the stability of the Napoleonic Empire and intellectuals of the left felt no need of ideas imported from non-French and therefore backward foreigners, Darwinism did not advance rapidly until after the end of the Empire and the defeat of the Paris Commune.
In Italy its champions were more nervous of its social-revolutionary implications than of papal thunderbolts, but nevertheless confident enough.
In the United States it not only triumphed rapidly, but was very soon turned into an ideology of militant capitalism.
Conversely, opposition to Darwinian evolution, even among scientists, came from the socially conservative.
II
Evolution links the natural sciences to the human or social sciences, though the latter term is anachronistic.
Still, the need for a specific and general science of society (as distinct from the various relevant special disciplines already dealing with human affairs) was for the first time seriously felt.
The British Association for the Promotion of Social Science (1857) merely had the modest object of applying scientific methods to social reforms.
However, sociology, a term invented  by Auguste Comte in 1839 and popularised by Herbert Spencer (who wrote a premature book on the principles of this as of numerous other sciences [1876]), was much talked about.
At the end of our period it had produced neither a recognised discipline nor an academic teaching subject.
On the other hand, the wider but cognate field of anthropology was emerging rapidly as a recognised science out of law, philosophy, ethnology and travel literature, the study of language and folklore and the medical sciences (via the then popular subject of ‘physical anthropology’ which led to a fashion for measuring and collecting the skulls of various peoples).
The first person to teach it officially was probably Quatrefages in 1855, in the professorship which existed in this subject at the Musée National in Paris.
The foundation of the Paris Anthropological Society (1859) was followed by a remarkable outburst of interest in the 1860s, when similar associations were formed in London, Madrid, Moscow, Florence and Berlin.
Psychology (another recent coinage, this time by John Stuart Mill) was still linked with philosophy — A. Bain's Mental and Moral Science (1868) still combined it with ethics — but was increasingly given an experimental orientation with W. Wundt (1832–1920), who had been assistant to the great Helmholtz.
It was unquestionably an accepted discipline by the 1870s, at all events in German universities.
It also reached out into the social and anthropological fields, and indeed a special journal linking it with linguistics was founded as early as 1859.
By the standards of the ‘positive’ and especially the experimental sciences, the record of these new social sciences was not impressive, though three could already claim genuine and systematic achievement as sciences before 1848: economics, statistics and linguistics (see The Age of Revolution, chapter 15, pp. 283–7).
The link between economics and mathematics now became close and direct (with A. A. Cournot [1801–77]and L. Walras [1834–1910], both Frenchmen), and the application of statistics to social phenomena was already sufficiently advanced to stimulate their application to the physical sciences.
At least so it has been held by students of the origins of the statistical mechanics pioneered by Clerk Maxwell.
Certainly social statistics flourished as never before, their practitioners finding plentiful public employment.
International statistical congresses came to be held at intervals from 1853 on, and the scientific standing of the subject  was recognised by the election of the celebrated and admirable Dr William Farr (1807–83) to the Royal Society.
Linguistics, as we shall see, followed a different line of development.
And yet, on the whole, except methodologically, these results were not outstanding.
The marginal utility school of economics, developed simultaneously in Britain, Austria and France around 1870, was formally elegant and sophisticated, but unquestionably considerably narrower than the old ‘political economy’(or even the recalcitrant Germans' ‘historical school of economics’), and to this extent a less realistic approach to economic problems.
Unlike the natural sciences, in a liberal society the social ones did not even have the stimulus of technological progress.
Since the basic model of the economy seemed perfectly satisfactory, it left no great problems to solve, such as those of growth, possible economic breakdown or the distribution of incomes.
In so far as these matters were not already solved, the automatic operations of market economics (on which the analysis therefore concentrated henceforward) would solve them, to the extent that they were not beyond human solution.
In any case, things were obviously improving and progressing, a situation which was unlikely to concentrate the minds of economists on the more profound aspects of their science.
The reservations bourgeois thinkers had about their world were social and political rather than economic, especially where the danger of revolution was unforgotten, as in France, or emerging with the rise of a labour movement, as in Germany.
But if the German thinkers, who never swallowed extreme liberal theory wholesale, were, like conservatives everywhere, worried that the society produced by liberal capitalism would prove dangerous and unstable, they had little to propose except preventive social reforms.
The basic image of the sociologist was the biological one of the ‘social organism’, the functional co-operation of all groups in society, so different from the class struggle.
It was ancient conservatism dressed up in nineteenth century costume and, incidentally, hard to combine with that other biological image of the century which stood for change and progress, namely ‘evolution’.
It was in fact a better basis for propaganda than for science.
Hence the only thinker of the period who developed a comprehensive theory of social structure and social change which still commands  respect was the social-revolutionary Karl Marx, who enjoys the admiration, or at least the respect, of economists, historians and sociologists.
This is a remarkable achievement, for his contemporaries (except for some economists) are now forgotten, even by highly educated men and women, or else they have weathered the intervening century so badly that intellectual archaeologists can once more discover forgotten merits in their writings.
But what is striking is not so much the fact that Auguste Comte or Herbert Spencer were, after all, persons of some intellectual stature, than that men who were once regarded as the Aristotles of the modern world have practically vanished from sight.
They were in their time incomparably more famous and influential than Marx, whose Capital was described in 1875 by an anonymous German expert as the work of a self-educated man ignorant of the progress of the past twenty-five years.
For at this time in the west Marx was taken seriously only within the international labour movement and especially the growing socialist movement of his own country, and his intellectual influence even there was as yet slight.
However, the intellectuals of an increasingly revolutionary Russia immediately read him avidly.
The first German edition of Capital (1867)— a thousand copies — took five years to sell out, but in 1872 the first thousand copies of the Russian edition sold out in less than two months.
The problem Marx set himself was the same as that which other social scientists tried to confront: the nature and mechanics of the transition from a pre-capitalist to a capitalist society and its specific modes of operation and tendencies of future development.
Since his answers are relatively familiar, we need not recapitulate them here, though it is worth noting that Marx resisted the tendency, which elsewhere grew constantly more powerful, to separate economic analysis from its historic social contexts.
The problem of the historic development of nineteenth-century society led both theorists and even practical men deep into the remoter past.
For, both within capitalist countries and at the points where expanding bourgeois society encountered — and destroyed — other societies, the living past and the emerging present came into open conflict.
German thinkers saw the hierarchical order of ‘estates’ in their own country give way to a society of conflicting classes.
British lawyers, especially those with experience in India, contrasted the ancient society of ‘status’ with the new one of ‘contract’and saw the transition from the first to the second as the principal pattern of historical development.
Russian writers actually lived simultaneously in the two worlds — the ancient communalism of the peasantry, which so many of them knew from the long summers on their seignorial estates, and the world of the westernised and much-travelled intellectual.
For the mid-nineteenth-century observer all history coexisted at the same time, except for that of the ancient civilisations and empires such as classical antiquity, which had been (literally) buried, awaiting the spades of H. Schliemann (1822–90) in Troy and Mycenae or Flinders Petrie (1853–1942) in Egypt.
One might have expected the discipline most closely connected with the past to make a peculiarly important contribution to the development of the social sciences, but in fact history as an academic specialisation was of peculiarly little help to them.
Its practitioners were overwhelmingly concerned with rulers, battles, treaties, political events or politico-legal institutions, in a word with retrospective politics, if not actually with current politics in historical fancy-dress.
They elaborated the methodology of research on the basis of the documents in the now admirably ordered and preserved public archives, and they increasingly (following the lead of the Germans) organised their publications round the two poles of the academic thesis and the specialist scholarly journal: the Historische Zeitschrift was first published in 1858, the Revue Historique in 1876, the English Historical Review in 1886 and the American Historical Review in 1895.
But what they produced were at best permanent monuments of erudition on which we still draw, and at worst giant-sized pamphlets which are now read, if at all, only for their interest as literature.
Academic history, in spite of the moderate liberalism of some of its practitioners, had a natural bias towards preserving the past and suspecting, if not deploring, the future.
The social sciences at this stage had the opposite bias.
Nevertheless, if the academic historians followed their by-way of scholarship, history remained the main constituent of the new social sciences.
This was particularly obvious in the enormously flourishing — and like so many other scientific disciplines, pre-eminently German — field of linguistics, or rather, to use the contemporary term, philology.
Its main interest lay in the reconstruction of the historical  evolution of the Indo-European languages which, perhaps because in Germany they were known as ‘Indo-German’, attracted national, if not nationalist, attention in that country.
Efforts to establish a much broader evolutionary typology of languages, i.e. to discover the origins and historic development of speech and language, were also made — e.g. by H. Steinthal (1823–99) and A. Schleicher (1821–68)— but the family trees of language thus constructed remained highly speculative and the relations between the various ‘genera’ and ‘species’extremely doubtful.
In fact, with the exception of Hebrew and cognate semitic languages which attracted Jewish or biblical scholars and some work on Finno-Ugrian languages (which happened to have a central-European representative in Hungary), not much outside the Indo-European languages had been systematically studied in the countries in which mid-nineteenth-century philology flourished.
On the other hand, the fundamental insights of the first half of the century were now systematically applied and developed in Indo-European evolutionary linguistics.
The regular patterns of sound change discovered by Grimm for German were now investigated and specified more closely, methods of reconstructing earlier unwritten forms of words and constructing models of linguistic ‘family trees’ were established, other models of evolutionary change (like Schmidt's ‘wave-theory’) were suggested and the use of analogy — especially grammatical analogy — were developed; for philology was nothing if not comparative.
By the 1870s the leading school of the Junggrammatiker (Young Grammarians) believed itself capable of actually reconstructing the original Indo-European from which so many languages between Sanskrit in the east and Celtic in the west were descended, and the redoubtable Schleicher actually wrote texts in this reconstructed language.
Modern linguistics has taken an entirely different road, rejecting the historicist and evolutionist interests of the mid-nineteenth century perhaps with excessive violence, and to this extent the main development of philology in our period worked out known principles rather than anticipating new ones.
But it was very typically an evolutionist social science, and by contemporary standards a highly successful one, both among scholars and the general public.
Unfortunately, among the latter (and in spite of the  specific disclaimers of scholars like F. Max-Muller [1823–1900]of Oxford), it encouraged the belief in racism, the speakers of Indo-European languages (a purely linguistic concept) being identified with ‘the Aryan race’.
Racism played a distinctly central role in another rapidly developing social science, anthropology, a merger of two originally quite distinct disciplines, ‘physical anthropology’(chiefly deriving from anatomical and similar interests) and ‘ethnography’ or the description of various — generally backward or primitive — communities.
Both inevitably confronted, and were indeed dominated by, the problem of the differences between different human groups and (as they were drawn into the evolutionist model), the problem of the descent of man and of different types of society, of which the bourgeois world appeared unquestionably the highest.
Physical anthropology automatically led to the concept of ‘race’, since the physical differences between white, yellow or black peoples, Negroes, Mongols, Caucasians (or whatever other classifications might be used) were undeniable.
This did not in itself imply any belief in racial inequality, superiority or inferiority, though when married to the study of the evolution of man on the basis of the pre-historic fossil record, it did.
For man's earliest identifiable ancestors — notably Neanderthal man — were clearly both more ape-like and culturally inferior to their discoverers.
But if some existing races could be shown to be closer to the apes than others, would this not prove their inferiority?
The argument is feeble, but made a natural appeal to those who wanted to prove racial inferiority, e.g. of blacks to whites — or for that matter of anyone to whites.
(The shape of the monkey could be discerned by the eye of prejudice even in the Chinese and Japanese, as witness many a modern cartoon.)
But if Darwinian biological evolution suggested a hierarchy of races, so did the comparative method as applied in ‘cultural anthropology’, of which E. B. Tylor's Primitive Culture (1871) was the leading landmark.
For E. B. Tylor (1832–1917), as for so many believers in ‘progress’ who observed communities and cultures which, unlike fossil man, had not died out these were not so much inferior by nature as representatives of an earlier stage of evolution on the road to modern civilisation.
They were analogous to infancy or childhood in the life of individual man.
This implied a theory of stages — Tylor was influenced by Comte's — which  he applied (with the usual caution of respectable men touching on this still explosive subject) to religion.
From the primitive ‘animism’(a word invented by him) the road led to the higher monotheistic religions, and eventually the triumph of science which, capable of explaining increasingly large areas of experience without reference to spirit, would ‘in one department after another substitute for independent voluntary action the working out of systematic law’.
Meanwhile, however, historically modified ‘survivals’ of earlier stages of civilisation could be discerned everywhere, even in the evidently ‘backward’parts of civilised nations, e.g. in the superstitions and customs of the countryside.
Thus the peasant became a link between savage man and civilised society.
Tylor, who thought of anthropology as ‘essentially a reformer's science’, did not, of course, believe that this indicated any incapacity of peasants to become fully paid-up members of civilised society.
But what was easier than to assume that those who represented the stage of childhood or adolescence in the development of civilisation were themselves ‘child-like’ and had to be treated like children by their mature ‘parents’?
As the type of the Negro [wrote the Anthropological Review]is foetal, so that of the Mongol is infantile.
And in strict accordance with this, we find that their government, literature and art are infantile also.
They are beardless children whose life is a task and whose chief virtue consists in unquestioning obedience
Or, as a Captain Osborn put it in a bluff naval way in 1860: ‘Treat them as children.
Make them do what we know is for their benefit as well as our own, and all difficulties in China are at an end.’
Other races were therefore ‘inferior’, either because they represented an earlier stage of biological evolution or of socio-cultural evolution, or both.
And their inferiority was proved because in fact the ‘superior race’ was superior by the criteria of its own society: technologically more advanced, militarily more powerful, richer and more ‘successful’.
The argument was both flattering and convenient — so convenient that the middle classes were inclined to take it over from the aristocrats (who had long fancied themselves a superior race) for internal as well as international purposes: the poor were poor because they were biologically inferior and conversely, if citizens belonged to ‘lower races’, it was no wonder that they stayed poor and backward.
The argument was not yet clothed in the garments of  modern genetics, which had virtually not yet been invented: the now celebrated experiments of the monk Gregor Mendel (1822–84) on the sweet peas in his Moravian monastery garden (1865) passed completely unnoticed until they were rediscovered about 1900.
But in a primitive way the view that the upper classes were a higher type of humanity, developing its superiority by endogamy, and threatened by mixture with the lower orders and even more by the more rapid increase of the inferior, was widely held.
Conversely, as the (mainly Italian) school of ‘criminal anthropology’ purported to prove, the criminal, the anti-social, the socially underprivileged, belonged to a different and inferior human strain from the ‘respectable’, and could be recognised as such by measuring the skull or in other simple ways.
Racism pervades the thought of our period to an extent hard to appreciate today, and not always easy to understand.
(Why, for instance, the widespread horror of miscegenation and the almost universal belief among whites that ‘half-breeds’ inherited precisely the worst features of their parents' races?)
Apart from its convenience as a legitimation of the rule of white over coloured, rich over poor, it is perhaps best explained as a mechanism by means of which a fundamentally inegalitarian society based upon a fundamentally egalitarian ideology rationalised its inequalities, and attempted to justify and defend those privileges which the democracy implicit in its institutions must inevitably challenge.
Liberalism had no logical defence against equality and democracy, so the illogical barrier of race was erected: science itself, liberalism's trump card, could prove that men were not equal.
But of course the science of our period did not prove this, though some scientists might wish it to.
The Darwinian tautology (‘survival of the fittest', the proof of fitness being survival) could not prove that men were superior to earthworms, since both survived successfully.
‘Superiority’ was read into the record by means of the assumption of equating evolutionary history with ‘progress’.
And even though the evolutionary history of man quite correctly discerned progress in certain important matters — notably science and technology — though paying no attention to others, it did not, and indeed could not, make ‘backwardness’ permanent and irreparable.
For it was based on the assumption that human beings, at least since the emergence of homo sapiens, were the same, their behaviour obeying the same uniform  laws, though in different historical circumstances.
English was different from the original Indo-European, but not because modern Englishmen operated in a linguistically different manner from the ancestral tribes in, as was then commonly believed, central Asia.
The basic paradigm of the ‘family tree’, which appears both in philology and anthropology, implies the opposite of genetic or other permanent forms of inequality.
The kinship systems of Australian aborigines, Pacific islanders and Iroquois Indians, which the ancestors of modern social anthropology like Lewis Morgan(1818–81) now began to study seriously — though the subject was still primarily studied in the library rather than in the field — were seen as ‘survivals’ of earlier stages in the evolution of what had become the nineteenth-century family.
But the point about them was that they were comparable: different, but not necessarily inferior.
‘Social Darwinism’ and racist anthropology or biology belong not to the science of the nineteenth century but to its politics.
If we look back upon both the natural and social sciences of the period we shall be struck most vividly with their self-confidence.
It was less obviously unjustified in the natural than in the social sciences, but equally marked.
The physicists who felt they had left their successors with little more to do than to clean up a few minor problems expressed the same mood as August Schleicher, who was sure that ancient Aryans had talked exactly the putative language which he had reconstructed for them.
This sentiment was not so much based on results — those of the evolutionist disciplines were hardly capable of experimental falsification — as on a belief in the infallibility of the ‘scientific method’.
‘Positive’ science, operating on objective and ascertained facts, connected by rigid links of cause and effect, and producing uniform, invariant general ‘laws’beyond query or wilful modification, was the master-key to the universe, and the nineteenth century possessed it.
More than this: with the rise of the world of the nineteenth century the early and infantile stages of man characterised by superstition, theology and speculation were over, Comte's ‘third stage’ of positive science had arrived.
It is now easy to make fun of that confidence, both in the adequacy of the method and the  permanence of the theoretical models, but it was no less powerful for being, as some of the old philosophers might have pointed out, misplaced.
And if the scientists felt that they could speak with certainty, how much more so the lesser publicists and ideologists who were all the more certain of the experts' certainties, because they could understand most of what the experts said, at least in so far as it could still be said without the use of higher mathematics.
Even in physics and chemistry they still appeared to be within the grasp of the ‘practical man’— say a civil engineer.
Darwin's Origin of Species was totally accessible to the educated laymen.
Never again was it to be so easy for blunt common sense, which knew in any case that the triumphant world of liberal capitalist progress was the best of all possible worlds, to mobilise the universe on behalf of its prejudices.
The publicists, popularisers and ideologists were now to be found throughout the western world and wherever there was a local elite attracted by ‘modernisation’.
The original scientists and scholars — at any rate those who enjoyed, and still enjoy, a reputation outside their own countries — were more unevenly distributed.
In fact, they were virtually confined to parts of Europe and North America.
Work of considerable quality and international interest was now produced in significant quantities in central and eastern Europe, and most notably in Russia, and this was probably the most striking change in the ‘academic’ map of the western world in our period, though no history of science in this period can be written without reference to some eminent North Americans, notably the physicist Willard Gibbs (1839–1903).
Still, it would be hard to deny that in, say, 1875 what went on in the university of Kazan and Kiev was more significant than what went on in Yale and Princeton.
But mere geographical distribution cannot sufficiently bring out what was increasingly the dominant fact about the academic life of our period, namely the hegemony of the Germans, backed as it was by the numerous universities using their language (which included those in most of Switzerland, most of the Habsburg Empire and the Baltic regions of Russia), and by the powerful attraction exercised by German culture in Scandinavia, eastern and south-eastern Europe.
Outside the Latin world and Britain, and even to some extent within  both, the German model of the university was generally adopted.
The German predominance was above all quantitative: in our period probably more new scientific journals were published in this language than in French and English combined.
Outside certain fields of natural science like chemistry and probably mathematics, which they clearly dominated, their extremely high qualitative achievement was perhaps less obvious, because (unlike the early nineteenth century) there was not at this time a specifically German genre of natural philosophy.
While the French, probably for nationalist reasons, stuck to their own style — with a consequent isolation of French natural science (though not of French mathematics)— except for a few celebrated individuals, the Germans did not.
Perhaps their own style, which became dominant in the twentieth century, did not emerge as such until sciences moved into the phase of theory and systematising which (for rather obscure reasons) suited them admirably.
At all events the much more narrowly based British natural sciences — which admittedly enjoyed the benefit of an impressive public forum of both specialists and lay bourgeois, and even artisans — continued to produce scientists of enormous renown, like Thompson and Darwin.
Except in academic history and linguistics, there was no such German dominance in the social sciences.
Economics was still largely British, though in retrospect we may detect major analytical work in France, Italy and Austria.
(The Habsburg Empire, though in some senses part of the German cultural area, followed a very different intellectual trajectory.)
Sociology, for what little that is worth, was primarily associated with France and Britain, and enthusiastically taken up in the Latin world.
In anthropology the world-wide connections of the British gave them a notable advantage.
‘Evolution’ in general— that bridge between the natural and social sciences — had its centre of gravity in Britain.
The truth is that the social sciences reflected the pre-conceptions and problems of bourgeois liberalism in its classic form, which was not found in Germany, where bourgeois society inserted itself into the Bismarckian framework of aristocrats and bureaucrats.
The most eminent social scientist of the period, Karl Marx, worked in Britain, derived the framework of his concrete analysis from the un-German science of economics, and the empirical basis of his work from the ‘classic’ though by this time no longer unchallenged form of bourgeois society — the British.